A Counterblast to Tobacco
by
King James VI of Scotland and I of England

To the reader

As every human body (dear countrymen) how wholesome soever, is
notwithstanding subject, or at least naturally inclined to
some sorts of diseases, or infirmities: so is there no
commonwealth, or body-politic, how well governed, or peaceable
soever it be, that lacks the own popular errors, and naturally
inclined corruptions: and therefore is it no wonder, although
this our country and commonwealth, though peaceable, though
wealthy, though long flourishing in both, be amongst the rest,
subject to the own natural infirmities. We are of all nations
the people most loving and most reverently obedient to our
prince, yet are we (as time hath often borne witness) too easy
to be seduced to make rebellion, upon very slight grounds. Our
fortunate and oft proved valour in wars abroad, our hearty and
reverent obedience to our princes at home, hath bred us a
long, and a thrice happy peace: our peace hath bred wealth:
and peace and wealth hath brought forth a general
sluggishness, which makes us wallow in all sorts of idle
delights, and soft delicacies, the first seeds of the
subversion of all great monarchies. Our clergy are become
negligent and lazy, our nobility and gentry prodigal, and sold
to their private delights, our lawyers covetous, our common
people prodigal and curious; and generally all sorts of people
more careful for their private ends, than for their mother the
commonwealth.

For remedy whereof, it is the king's part (as the proper
physician of his politic-body) to purge it of all those
diseases, by medicines meet for the same: as by a certain
mild, and yet just form of government, to maintain the public
quietness, and prevent all occasions of commotion: by the
example of his own person and court, to make us all ashamed of
our sluggish delicacy, and to stir us up to the practice again
of all honest exercises, and martial shadows of war; as
likewise by his, and his courts moderateness in apparel, to
make us ashamed of our prodigality. By his quick admonitions
and careful overseeing of the clergy, to waken them up again,
to be more diligent in their offices: by the sharp trial, and
severe punishment of the partial, covetous and bribing
lawyers, to reform their corruptions: and generally by the
example of his own person, and by the due execution of good
laws, to reform and abolish, piece and piece, these old and
evil grounded abuses. For this will not be opus unius diei,["a
work of one day only"] but as every one of these diseases,
must from the king receive the own cure proper for it, so are
there some sorts of abuses in commonwealths, that though they
be of so base and contemptible a condition, as they are too
low for the law to look on, and too mean for a king to
interpose his authority, or bend his eye upon: yet are they
corruptions, as well as the greatest of them. So is an ant an
animal, as well as an elephant: so is a wren avis,["a bird"]
as well as a swan, and so is a small dint of the toothache, a
disease as well as the fearful plague is. But for these base
sorts of corruption in commonwealths, not only the king, or
any inferior magistrate, but quilibet e populo ["whoever of
the people may please"] may serve to be a physician, by
discovering and impugning the error, and by persuading
reformation thereof.

And surely in my opinion, there cannot be a more base, and yet
hurtful, corruption in a country, than is the vile use (or
rather abuse) of taking tobacco in this kingdom, which hath
moved me, shortly to discover the abuses thereof in this
following little pamphlet.

If any think it a light argument, so is it but a toy that is
bestowed upon it. And since the subject is but of smoke, I
think the fume of an idle brain, may serve for a sufficient
battery against so fumous and feeble an enemy. If my grounds
be found true, it is all I look for; but if they carry the
force of persuasion with them, it is all I can wish, and more
than I can expect. My only care is, that you, my dear
countrymen, may rightly conceive even by this smallest trifle,
of the sincerity of my meaning in greater matters, never to
spare any pain, that may tend to the procuring of your weal
and prosperity.

A Counterblast to Tobacco

That the manifold abuses of this vile custom of tobacco taking,
may the better be espied, it is fit, that first you enter into
consideration both of the first original thereof, and likewise
of the reasons of the first entry thereof into this country. For
certainly as such customs, that have their first institution
either from a godly, necessary, or honourable ground, and are
first brought in, by the means of some worthy, virtuous, and
great personage, are ever, and most justly, holden in great and
reverent estimation and account, by all wise, virtuous, and
temperate spirits: so should it by the contrary, justly bring a
great disgrace into that sort of customs, which having their
original from base corruption and barbarity, do in like sort,
make their first entry into a country, by an inconsiderate and
childish affectation of novelty, as is the true case of the
first invention of tobacco taking, and of the first entry
thereof among us. For tobacco being a common herb, which (though
under divers names) grows almost everywhere, was first found out
by some of the barbarous Indians, to be a preservative, or
antidote against the pox, a filthy disease, whereunto these
barbarous people are (as all men know) very much subject, what
through the uncleanly and adust constitution of their bodies,
and what through the intemperate heat of their climate: so that
as from them was first brought into Christendom, that most
detestable disease, so from them likewise was brought this use
of tobacco, as a stinking and unsavoury antidote, for so
corrupted and execrable a malady, the stinking suffumigation
whereof they yet use against that disease, making so one canker
or venom to eat out another.

And now good countrymen let us (I pray you) consider, what
honour or policy can move us to imitate the barbarous and
beastly manners of the wild, godless, and slavish Indians,
especially in so vile and stinking a custom? Shall we that
disdain to imitate the manners of our neighbour France (having
the style of the first Christian kingdom) and that cannot
endure the spirit of the Spaniards (their king being now
comparable in largeness of dominions, to the great emperor of
Turkey) shall we, I say, that have been so long civil and
wealthy in peace, famous and invincible in war, fortunate in
both, we that have been ever able to aide any of our
neighbours (but never deafed any of their ears with any of our
supplications for assistance) shall we, I say, without
blushing, abase ourselves so far, as to imitate these beastly
Indians, slaves to the Spaniards, refuse to the world, and as
yet aliens from the holy covenant of God? Why do we not as
well imitate them in walking naked as they do? In preferring
glasses, feathers, and such toys, to gold and precious stones,
as they do? Yea why do we not deny God and adore the devil, as
they do?

Now to the corrupted baseness of the first use of this
tobacco, doth very well agree the foolish and groundless first
entry thereof into this kingdom. It is not so long since the
first entry of this abuse amongst us here, as this present age
cannot yet very well remember, both the first author, and the
form of the first introduction of it amongst us. It was
neither brought in by king, great conqueror, nor learned
doctor of physic.

With the report of a great discovery for a conquest, some two
or three savage men, were brought in, together with this
savage custom. But the pity is, the poor wild barbarous men
died, but that vile barbarous custom is yet alive, yea in
fresh vigour: so as it seems a miracle to me, how a custom
springing from so vile a ground, and brought in by a father so
generally hated, should be welcomed upon so slender a warrant.
For if they that first put it in practice here, had remembered
for what respect it was used by them from whence it came, I am
sure they would have been loath, to have taken so far the
imputation of that disease upon them as they did, by using the
cure thereof. For sanis non est opus medico,["the healthy
person is not the concern of the doctor"] and counterpoisons
are never used, but where poison is thought to precede.

But since it is true, that divers customs slightly grounded,
and with no better warrant entered in a commonwealth, may yet
in the use of them thereafter, prove both necessary and
profitable; it is therefore next to be examined, if there be
not a full sympathy and true proportion, between the base
ground and foolish entry, and the loathsome, and hurtful use
of this stinking antidote.

I am now therefore heartily to pray you to consider, first
upon what false and erroneous grounds you have first built the 
general good liking thereof; and next, what sins towards God,
and foolish vanities before the world you commit, in the
detestable use of it.

As for these deceitful grounds, that have specially moved you
to take a good and great conceit thereof, I shall content
myself to examine here only four of the principals of them;
two founded upon the theoric of a deceivable appearance of
reason, and two of them upon the mistaken practic of general
experience.

First, it is thought by you a sure aphorism in the physic,
that the brains of all men, being naturally cold and wet, all
dry and hot things should be good for them; of which nature
this stinking suffumigation is, and therefore of good use to
them. Of this argument, both the proposition and assumption
are false, and so the conclusion cannot but be void of itself.
For as to the proposition, that because the brains are cold
and moist, therefore things that are hot and dry are best for
them, it is an inept consequence: for man being compounded of
the four complexions, (whose fathers are the four elements)
although there be a mixture of them all in all the parts of
his body, yet must the divers parts of our microcosm or little
world within ourselves, be diversely more inclined, some to
one, some to another complexion, according to the diversity of
their uses, that of these discords a perfect harmony may be
made up for the maintenance of the whole body.

The application then of a thing of a contrary nature, to any
of these parts, is to interrupt them of their due function,
and by consequence hurtful to the health of the whole body. As
if a man, because the liver is hot (as the fountain of blood)
and as it were an oven to the stomach, would therefore apply
and wear close upon his liver and stomach a cake of lead; he
might within a very short time (I hope) be sustained very good
cheap at an ordinary, beside the clearing of his conscience
from that deadly sin of gluttony. And as if, because the heart
is full of vital spirits, and in perpetual motion, a man would
therefore lay a heavy pound stone on his breast, for staying
and holding down that wanton palpitation, I doubt not but his
breast would be more bruised with the weight thereof, then the
heart would be comforted with such a disagreeable and
contrarious cure. And even so is it with the brains. For if a
man, because the brains are cold and humid, would therefore
use inwardly by smells, or outwardly by application, things of
hot and dry quality, all the gain that he could make thereof,
would only be to put himself in a great forwardness for
running mad, by over-watching himself, the coldness and
moistness of is our brain being the only ordinary means that
procure our sleep and rest. Indeed I do not deny, but when it
falls out that any of these, or any part of our body grows to
be distempered, and to tend to an extremity, beyond the
compass of nature's temperate mixture, that in that case cures
of contrary qualities, to the intemperate inclination of that
part, being wisely prepared and discreetly ministered, may be
both necessary and helpful for strengthening and assisting
nature in the expulsion of her enemies: for this is the true
definition of all profitable physic.

But first these cures ought not to be used, but where there is
need of them, the contrary whereof, is daily practised in this
general use of tobacco by all sorts and complexions of people.

And next, I deny the minor of this argument, as I have already
said, in regard that this tobacco, is not simply of a dry and
hot quality; but rather hath a certain venomous faculty joined
with the heat thereof, which makes it have an antipathy
against nature, as by the hateful smell thereof doth well
appear. For the nose being the proper organ and convoy of the
sense of smelling to the brains, which are the only fountain
of that sense, doth ever serve us for an infallible witness,
whether that odour which we smell, be healthful or hurtful to
the brain (except when it falls out that the sense itself is
corrupted and abused through some infirmity, and distemper in
the brain.) And that the suffumigation thereof cannot have a
drying quality, it needs no further probation, then that it is
a smoke, all smoke and vapour, being of itself humid, as
drawing near to the nature of the air, and easy to be resolved
again into water, whereof there needs no other proof but the
meteors, which being bred of nothing else but of the vapours
and exhalations sucked up by the sun out of the earth, the
sea, and waters yet are the same smoky vapours turned, and
transformed into rains, snows, dews, hoar frosts, and such
like watery meteors, as by the contrary the rainy clouds are
often transformed and evaporated in blustering winds.

The second argument grounded on a show of reason is, that this
filthy smoke, as well through the heat and strength thereof,
as by a natural force and quality, is able and fit to purge
both the head and stomach of rheums and distillations, as
experience teacheth, by the spitting and voiding phlegm,
immediately after the taking of it. But the fallacy of this
argument may easily appear, by my late preceding description
of the meteors. For even as the smoky vapours sucked up by the
sun, and stayed in the lowest and cold region of the air, are
there contracted into clouds and turned into rain and such
other watery meteors: so this stinking smoke being sucked up
by the nose, and imprisoned in the cold and moist brains, is
by their cold and wet faculty, turned and cast forth again in
watery distillations, and so are you made free and purged of
nothing, but that wherewith you wilfully burdened yourselves:
and therefore are you no wiser in taking tobacco for purging
you of distillations, then if for preventing the colic you
would take all kind of windy meats and drinks, and for
preventing of the stone, you would take all kind of meats and
drinks that would breed gravel in the kidneys, and then when
you were forced to void much wind out of your stomach, and
much gravel in your urine, that you should attribute the thank
thereof to such nourishments as bred those within you, that
behoved either to be expelled by the force of nature, or you 
to have burst at the broadside, as the proverb is.

As for the other two reasons founded upon experience, the
first of which is, that the whole people would not have taken
so general a good liking thereof, if they had not by
experience found it very sovereign and good for them: for
answer thereunto how easily the minds of any people, wherewith
God hath replenished this world, may be drawn to the foolish
affectation of any novelty, I leave it to the discreet
judgement of any man that is reasonable.

Do we not daily see, that a man can no sooner bring over from
beyond the seas any new form of apparel, but that he cannot be
thought a man of spirit, that would not presently imitate the
same? And so from hand to hand it spreads, till it be
practised by all, not for any commodity that is in it, but
only because it is come to be the fashion. For such is the
force of that natural self-love in every one of us, and such
is the corruption of envy bred in the breast of every one, as
we cannot be content unless we imitate everything that our
fellows do, and so prove ourselves capable of everything
whereof they are capable, like apes, counterfeiting the
manners of others, to our own destruction. For let one or two
of the greatest masters of mathematics in any of the two
famous universities, but constantly affirm any clear day, that
they see some strange apparition in the skies: they will I
warrant you be seconded by the greatest part of the students
in that profession: so loath will they be, to be thought
inferior to their fellows, either in depth of knowledge or
sharpness of sight: and therefore the general good liking and
embracing of this foolish custom, doth but only proceed from
that affectation of novelty, and popular error, whereof I have
already spoken.

The other argument drawn from a mistaken experience, is but
the more particular probation of this general, because it is
alleged to be found true by proof, that by the taking of
tobacco divers and very many do find themselves cured of
divers diseases as on the other part, no man ever received
harm thereby. In this argument there is first a great
mistaking and next a monstrous absurdity. For is it not a very
great mistaking, to take non causam pro causa, ["mistaking
something which is not the cause, for the cause"] as they say
in the logics? Because peradventure when a sick man hath had
his disease at the height, he hath at that instant taken
tobacco, and afterward his disease taking the natural course
of declining, and consequently the patient of recovering his
health, Oh then the tobacco forsooth, was the worker of that
miracle. Beside that, it is a thing well known to all
physicians, that the apprehension and conceit of the patient
hath by wakening and uniting the vital spirits, and so
strengthening nature, a great power and virtue, to cure divers
diseases. For an evident proof of mistaking in the like case,
I pray you what foolish boy, what silly wench, what old doting 
wife, or ignorant country clown, is not a physician for the
toothache, for the colic, and divers such common diseases?
Yea, will not every man you meet withal, teach you a sundry
cure for the same, and swear by that mean either himself, or
some of his nearest kinsmen and friends was cured? And yet I
hope no man is so foolish as to believe them. And all these
toys do only proceed from the mistaking non causam pro causa,
as I have already said, and so if a man chance to recover one
of any disease, after he hath taken tobacco, that must have
the thanks of all. But by the contrary, if a man smoke himself
to death with it (and many have done) so then some other
disease must bear the blame for that fault. So do old harlots
thank their harlotry for their many years, that custom being
healthful (say they) ad purgandos renes,["for purifying the
loins"] but never have mind how many die of the pox in the
flower of their youth. And so do old drunkards think they
prolong their days, by their swinelike diet, but never
remember how many die drowned in drink before they be half
old.

And what greater absurdity can there be, then to say that one
cure shall serve for divers, nay, contrarious sorts of
diseases? It is all undoubted ground among all physicians,
that there is almost no sort either of nourishment or
medicine, that hath not something in it disagreeable to some
part of man's body, because, as I have already said, the
nature of the temperature of every part, is so different from
another, that according to the old proverb, that which is good
for the head, is evil for the neck and the shoulders. For even
as a strong enemy, that invades a town or fortress, although
in his siege thereof, he do belay and compass it round about,
yet he makes his breach and entry, at some one or few special
parts thereof, which he hath tried and found to be weakest and
least able to resist; so sickness doth make her particular
assault, upon such part or parts of our body, as are weakest
and easiest to be overcome by that sort of disease, which then
doth assail us, although all the rest of the body by sympathy
feel itself, to be as it were belayed, and besieged by the
affliction of that special part, the grief and smart thereof
being by the sense of feeling dispersed through all the rest
of our members. And therefore the skilful physician presses by
such cures, to purge and strengthen that part which is
afflicted, as are only fit for that sort of disease, and do
best agree with the nature of that infirm part; which being
abused to a disease of another nature, would prove as hurtful
for the one, as helpful for the other. Yea, not only will a
skilful and wary physician be careful to use no cure but that
which is fit for that sort of disease, but he will also
consider all other circumstances, and make the remedies
suitable thereunto: as the temperature of the clime where the
patient is, the constitution of the planets, the time of the
moon, the season of the year, the age and complexion of the
patient, and the present state of his body, in strength or
weakness. For one cure must not ever be used for the self-same
disease, but according to the varying of any of the foresaid
circumstances, that sort of remedy must be used which is
fittest for the same. Whereby the contrary in this case, such
is the miraculous omnipotency of our strong tasted tobacco, as
it cures all sorts of diseases (which never any drug could do
before) in all persons, and at all times. It cures all manner
of distillations, either in the head or stomach (if you
believe their axioms) although in very deed it do both corrupt
the brain, and by causing over quick digestion, fill the
stomach full of crudities. It cures the gout in the feet, and
(which is miraculous) in that very instant when the smoke
thereof, as light, flies up into the head, the virtue thereof,
as heavy, runs down to the little toe. It helps all sorts of
agues. It makes a man sober that was drunk. It refreshes a
weary man, and yet makes a man hungry. Being taken when they
go to bed, it makes one sleep soundly, and yet being taken
when a man is sleepy and drowsy, it will, as they say, awake
his brain, and quicken his understanding. As for curing of the
pox, it serves for that use but among the poxy Indian slaves.
Here in England it is refined, and will not deign to cure here
any other than cleanly and gentlemanly diseases. O omnipotent
power of tobacco! And if it could by the smoke thereof chase
out devils, as the smoke of Tobias' fish did (which I am sure
could smell no stronglier) it would serve for a precious
relic, both for the superstitious priests, and the insolent
Puritans, to cast out devils withal.

Admitting then, and not confessing that the use thereof were
healthful for some sorts of diseases; should it be used for
all sicknesses? Should it be used by all men? Should it be
used at all times? Yea should it be used by able, young,
strong, healthful men? Medicine hath that virtue, that it
never leaveth a man in that state wherein it findeth him: it
makes a sick man whole, but a whole man sick. And as medicine
helps nature being taken at times of necessity, so being ever
and continually used, it doth but weaken, weary, and wear
nature. What speak I of medicine? Nay let a man every hour of
the day, or as oft as many in this country use to take
tobacco, let a man I say, but take as oft the best sorts of
nourishments in meat and drink that can be devised, he shall
with the continual use thereof weaken both his head and his
stomach: all his members shall become feeble, his spirits
dull, and in the end, as a drowsy lazy belly-God, he shall
evanish ["waste away"] in a lethargy.

And from this weakness it proceeds, that many in this kingdom
have had such a continual use of taking this uusavoury smoke,
as now they are not able to forbear the same, no more than an
old drunkard can abide to be long sober, without falling into
an uncurable weakness and evil constitution: for their
continual custom hath made to them, habitum, alteram
naturam:["habit is second nature"] so to those that from their
birth have been continually nourished upon poison and things
venomous, wholesome meats are only poisonable.

Thus having, as I trust, sufficiently answered the most
principal arguments that are used in defence of this vile
custom, it rests only to inform you what sins and vanities you
commit in the filthy abuse thereof. First, are you not guilty
of sinful and shameful lust? (for lust may be as well in any
of the senses as in feeling) that although you be troubled
with no disease, but in perfect health, yet can you neither be
merry at an ordinary, nor lascivious in the stews, if you lack
tobacco to provoke your appetite to any of those sorts of
recreation, lusting after it as the children of Israel did in
the wilderness after quails? Secondly it is, as you use or
rather abuse it, a branch of the sin of drunkenness, which is
the root of all sins: for as the only delight that drunkards
take in wine is in the strength of the taste, and the force of
the fume thereof that mounts up to the brain: for no drunkards
love any weak, or sweet drink: so are not those (I mean the 
strong heat and the fume) the only qualities that make tobacco
so delectable to all the lovers of it? And as no man likes
strong heady drink the first day (because nemo repente fit
turpissimus["No man ever became extremely wicked all at
once"]) but by custom is piece and piece allured, while in the
end, a drunkard will have as great a thirst to be drunk, as a
sober man to quench his thirst with a draught when he hath
need of it: so is not this the very case of all the great
takers of tobacco? Which therefore they themselves do
attribute to a bewitching quality in it. Thirdly, is it not
the greatest sin of all, that you the people of all sorts of
this kingdom, who are created and ordained by God to bestow
both your persons and goods for the maintenance both of the
honour and safety of your king and commonwealth, should
disable yourselves in both? In your persons having by this
continual vile custom brought yourselves to this shameful
imbecility, that you are not able to ride or walk the journey
of a Jews' Sabbath, but you must have a reeky coal brought you
from the next poor house to kindle your tobacco with? Whereas
he cannot be thought able for any service in the wars, that
cannot endure oftentimes the want of meat, drink and sleep,
much more then must he endure the want of tobacco. In the
times of the many glorious and victorious battles fought by
this nation, there was no word of tobacco. But now if it were
time of wars, and that you were to make some sudden cavalcado
upon your enemies, if any of you should seek leisure to stay
behind his fellow for taking of tobacco, for my part I should
never be sorry for any evil chance that might befall him. To
take a custom in anything that cannot be left again, is most
harmful to the people of any land. Mollicies["effeminacy"] and
delicacy were the wrack and overthrow, first of the Persian,
and next of the Roman empire. And this very custom of taking
tobacco (whereof our present purpose is) is even at this day
accounted so effeminate among the Indians themselves, as in
the market they will offer no price for a slave to be sold,
whom they find to be a great tobacco taker.

Now how you are by this custom disabled in your goods, let the
gentry of this land bear witness, some of them bestowing
three, some four hundred pounds a year upon this precious
stink, which I am sure might be bestowed upon many far better
uses. I read indeed of a knavish courtier, who for abusing the
favour of the emperor Alexander Severus his master by taking
bribes to intercede, for sundry persons in his masters ear
(for whom he never once opened his mouth) was justly choked
with smoke, with this doom, fumo pereat, qui fumum
vendidit:["may he die from smoke, who sold smoke"] but of so
many smoke-buyers, as are at this present in this kingdom, I
never read nor heard.

And for the vanities committed in this filthy custom, is it
not both great vanity and uncleanness, that at the table, a
place of respect, of cleanliness, of modesty, men should not
be ashamed, to sit tossing of tobacco pipes, and puffing of
the smoke of tobacco one to another, making the filthy smoke
and stink thereof, to exhale athwart the dishes, and infect
the air, when very often, men that abhor it are at their
repast? Surely smoke becomes a kitchen far better than a
dining chamber, and yet it makes a kitchen also oftentimes in
the inward parts of men, soiling and infecting them, with an
unctuous and oily kind of soot, as hath been found in some
great tobacco takers, that after their death were opened. And
not only meal time, but no other time nor action is exempted
from the public use of this uncivil trick: so as if the wives
of Dieppe list to contest with this nation for good manners
their worst manners would in all reason be found at least not
so dishonest (as ours are) in this point. The public use
whereof, at all times, and in all places, hath now so far
prevailed, as divers men very sound both in judgement, and
complexion, have been at last forced to take it also without
desire, partly because they were ashamed to seem singular,
(like the two philosophers that were forced to duck themselves
in that rain water, and so become fools as well as the rest of
the people) and partly, to be as one that was content to eat
garlic (which he did not love) that he might not be troubled
with the smell of it, in the breath of his fellows. And is it
not a great vanity, that a man cannot heartily welcome his
friend now, but straight they must be in hand with tobacco? No
it is become in place of a cure, a point of good fellowship,
and he that will refuse to take a pipe of tobacco among his
fellows, (though by his own election he would rather feel the
savour of a sink) is accounted peevish and no good company,
even as they do with tippling in the cold eastern countries.
Yea the mistress cannot in a more mannerly kind, entertain her
servant, then by giving him out of her fair hand a pipe of
tobacco. But herein is not only a great vanity but a great
contempt of God's good gifts, that the sweetness of man's
breath, being a good gift of God, should be wilfully corrupted
by this stinking smoke, wherein I must confess, it hath too
strong a virtue: and so that which is an ornament of nature,
and can neither by any artifice be at the first acquired, nor
once lost, be recovered again, shall be filthily corrupted
with an incurable stink, which vile quality is as directly
contrary to that wrong opinion which is holden of the
wholesomeness thereof, as the venom of putrefaction is
contrary to the virtue preservative.

Moreover, which is a great iniquity, and against all humanity,
the husband shall not be ashamed, to reduce thereby his
delicate, wholesome, and clean complexioned wife, to that
extremity, that either she must also corrupt her sweet breath
therewith, or else resolve to live in a perpetual stinking
torment.

Have you not reason then to be ashamed, and to forbear this
filthy novelty, so basely grounded, so foolishly received and
so grossly mistaken in the right use thereof? In your abuse
thereof sinning against God, harming yourselves both in
persons and goods, and raking also thereby the marks and notes
of vanity upon you: by the custom thereof making yourselves to
be wondered at by all foreign civil nations, and by all
strangers that come among you, to be scorned and contemned. A
custom loathsome to the eye, hateful to the nose, harmful to
the brain, dangerous to the lungs, and in the black stinking
fume thereof, nearest resembling the horrible Stygian smoke of
the pit that is bottomless.
Source: https://archive.org/details/essayesofprentis00jamerich

