The Herbal
Or
General History of Plants
By
John Gerard
And
Thomas Johnson

Published by the EX-Classics Project, 2018

Introduction
By The Ex-Classics Project

	The Herbal, or General History of Plants was first published in
1597, and in a new edition revised and expanded by Thomas Johnson, in
1633. The revised version is a magnificent work; over 1600 folio pages
illustrated with nearly 2,000 woodcuts. Described by Edmund Gosse as "the
noblest of all the English Herbals," it covers virtually every plant known
to western botany at the time. Each is described and illustrated, with
notes on the places where it may be found, when it flowers, its names in
various languages, and its medicinal uses. Interspersed with these, are
various charming anecdotes and quotations from ancient and modern authors.
 The illustrations are extremely accurate and modern botanists can easily
identify the plant from them. The medicinal uses are detailed and very
numerous; so much so that one wonders how in those days anyone was ever
ill at all. There are even cures for diseases with no modern treatment,
such as "pestilential botch", "unprofitable blood", and "hardening of the
matrix."


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL AND EDITORIAL NOTE

This edition of the Gerard's Herbal is taken from the 1633 edition,
expanded and edited by Thomas Johnson. The references to "the author" are
Johnson's comments on Gerard's original text.

The following changes have been made for this edition:
- The spelling has been modernised and obsolete words standardised as the
primary spelling used by the OED.
- An introduction and some poems in Latin have been omitted.
- Greek has for the most part been omitted; when included, it has been
transliterated.
- A translation of Latin sentences and phrases, if not translated in the
original, follows each one in square brackets


Volume 1



Title Page




Introduction by Edmund Gosse

The proverb says that a door must be either open or shut. The
bibliophile is apt to think that a book should be either little or
big. For my own part, I become more and more attached to "dumpy
twelves"; but that does not preclude a certain discreet fondness for
folios. If a man collects books, his library ought to contain a
Herbal; and if he has but room for one, that should be the best. The
luxurious and sufficient thing, I think, is to possess what
booksellers call "the right edition of Gerard"; that is to say, the
1633 edition. There is no handsomer book to be found, none more
stately or imposing, than this magnificent folio of sixteen hundred
pages, with its close, elaborate letterpress, its innumerable
plates, and John Payne's fine frontispiece in compartments, with
Theophrastus and Dioscorides facing one another, and the author
below them, holding in his right hand the new-found treasure of the
potato plant.

This edition of 1633 is the final development of what had been a
slow growth. The sixteenth century witnessed a great revival, almost
a creation of the science of botany. People began to translate the
great Materia Medica of the Greek physician, Dioscorides of
Anazarba, and to comment upon it. The Germans were the first to
append woodcuts to their botanical descriptions, and it is Otto
Brunfelsius, in 1530, who has the credit of being the originator of
such figures. In 1554 there was published the first great Herbal,
that of Rembertus Dodonaeus, body-physician to the Emperor
Maximilian II., who wrote in Dutch. An English translation of this,
brought out in 1578, by Henry Lyte, was the earliest important
Herbal in our language. Five years later, in 1583, a certain Dr.
Priest translated all the botanical works of Dodonaeus, with much
greater fullness than Lyte had done, and this volume was the germ of
Gerard's far more famous production. John Gerard was a Cheshire man,
born in 1545, who came up to London, and practised there as a
surgeon.

According to his editor and continuator, Thomas Johnson, who speaks
of Gerard with startling freedom, this excellent man was by no means
well equipped for the task of compiling a great Herbal. He knew so
little Latin, according to this too candid friend, that he imagined
Leonard Fuchsius, who was a German contemporary of his own, to be
one of the ancients. But Johnson is a little too zealous in
magnifying his own office. He brings a worse accusation against
Gerard, if I understand him rightly to charge him with using Dr.
Priest's manuscript collections after his death, without giving that
physician the credit of his labours. When Johnson made this
accusation, Gerard had been dead twenty-six years. In any case it
seems certain that Gerard's original Herbal, which, beyond question,
surpassed all its predecessors when it was printed in folio in 1597, 
was built up upon the ground-work of Priest's translation of
Dodonaeus. Nearly forty years later, Thomas Johnson, himself a
celebrated botanist, took up the book, and spared no pains to
reissue it in perfect form. The result is the great volume before
us, an elephant among books, the noblest of all the English Herbals.
Johnson was seventy-two years of age when he got this gigantic work
off his hands, and he lived eleven years longer to enjoy his
legitimate success.

The great charm of this book at the present time consists in the
copious woodcuts. Of these there are more than two thousand, each a
careful and original study from the plant itself. In the course of
two centuries and a half, with all the advance in appliances, we
have not improved a whit on the original artist of Gerard's and
Johnson's time. The drawings are all in strong outline, with very
little attempt at shading, but the characteristics of each plant are
given with a truth and a simplicity which are almost Japanese. In no
case is this more extraordinary than in that of the orchids, or
"satyrions," as they were called in the days of the old herbalist.
Here, in a succession of little figures, each not more than six
inches high, the peculiarity of every portion of a full-grown
flowering specimen of each species is given with absolute
perfection, without being slurred over on the one hand, or
exaggerated on the other. For instance, the little variety called
"ladies' tresses" [Spiranthes], which throws a spiral head of pale
green blossoms out of dry pastures, appears here with small bells
hanging on a twisted stem, as accurately as the best photograph
could give it, although the process of woodcutting, as then
practised in England, was very rude, and although almost all other
English illustrations of the period are rough and inartistic. It is
plain that in every instance the botanist himself drew the form,
with which he was already intelligently familiar, on the block, with
the living plant lying at his side.

The plan on which the herbalist lays out his letterpress is
methodical in the extreme. He begins by describing his plant, then
gives its habitat, then discusses its nomenclature, and ends with a
medical account of its nature and virtues. It is, of course, to be
expected that we should find the fine old names of plants enshrined
in Gerard's pages. For instance, he gives to the deadly nightshade
the name, which now only lingers in a corner of Devonshire, the
"dwale." As an instance of his style, I may quote a passage from
what he has to say about the virtues, or rather vices, of this
plant:

"Banish it from your gardens and the use of it also, being a
plant so furious and deadly; for it bringeth such as have
eaten thereof into a dead sleep wherein many have died, as
hath been often seen and proved by experience both in England
and elsewhere. But to give you an example hereof it shall not
be amiss. It came to pass that three boys of Wisbeach, in the
Isle of Ely, did eat of the pleasant and beautiful fruit
hereof, two whereof died in less than eight hours after they
had eaten of them. The third child had a quantity of honey and
water mixed together given him to drink, causing him to vomit
often. God blessed this means, and the child recovered.
Banish, therefore, these pernicious plants out of your
gardens, and all places near to your houses where children do
resort. "

Gerard has continually to stop his description that he may repeat to
his readers some anecdote which he remembers. Now it is how "Master
Cartwright, a gentleman of Grey's Inn, who was grievously wounded
into the lungs," was cured with the herb called "Saracen's
Compound," "and that, by God's permission, in short space." Now it
is to tell us that he has found yellow archangel growing under a
sequestered hedge "on the left hand as you go from the village of
Hampstead, near London, to the church," or that "this amiable and
pleasant kind of primrose" (a sort of oxlip) was first brought to
light by Mr. Hesketh, "a diligent searcher after simples," in a
Yorkshire wood. While the groundlings were crowding to see new plays
by Shirley and Massinger, the editor of this volume was examining
fresh varieties of auricula in "the gardens of Mr. Tradescant and
Mr. Tuggie." It is wonderful how modern the latter statement sounds,
and how ancient the former. But the garden seems the one spot on
earth where history does not assert itself, and, no doubt, when Nero
was fiddling over the blaze of Rome, there were florists counting
the petals of rival roses at Paestum as peacefully and
conscientiously as any gardeners of to-day.

The herbalist and his editor write from personal experience, and
this gives them a great advantage in dealing with superstitions. If
there was anything which people were certain about in the early part
of the seventeenth century, it was that the mandrake only grew under
a gallows, where the dead body of a man had fallen to pieces, and
that when it was dug up it gave a great shriek, which was fatal to
the nearest living thing. Gerard contemptuously rejects all these
and other tales as "old wives' dreams." He and his servants have
often digged up mandrakes, and are not only still alive, but
listened in vain for the dreadful scream. It might be supposed that
such a statement, from so eminent an authority, would settle the
point, but we find Sir Thomas Brown, in the next generation,
battling these identical popular errors in the pages of his
Pseudodoxia Epidemica. In the like manner, Gerard's botanical
evidence seems to have been of no use in persuading the public that
mistletoe was not generated out of birdlime dropped by thrushes into
the boughs of trees, or that its berries were not desperately
poisonous. To observe and state the truth is not enough. The ears of
those to whom it is proclaimed must be ready to accept it.

Our good herbalist, however, cannot get through his sixteen hundred
accurate and solemn pages without one slip. After accompanying him
dutifully so far, we double up with uncontrollable laughter on p.
1587, for here begins the chapter which treats "of the Goose Tree,
Barnacle Tree, or the Tree bearing Geese." But even here the habit
of genuine observation clings to him. The picture represents a group
of stalked barnacles—those shrimps fixed by their antennae, which
modern science, I believe, calls Lepas anatifera; by the side of
these stands a little goose, and the suggestion of course is that
the latter has slipped out of the former, although the draughtsman
has been far too conscientious to represent the occurrence. Yet the
letterpress is confident that in the north parts of Scotland there
are trees on which grow white shells, which ripen, and then,
opening, drop little living geese into the waves below. Gerard
himself avers that from Guernsey and Jersey he brought home with him
to London shells, like limpets, containing little feathery objects,
"which, no doubt, were the fowls called Barnacles." It is almost
needless to say that these objects really were the plumose and
flexible cirri which the barnacles throw out to catch their food
with, and which lie, like a tiny feather-brush, just within the
valves of the shell, when the creature is dead. Gerard was plainly
unable to refuse credence to the mass of evidence which presented
itself to him on this subject, yet he closes with a hint that this
seems rather a "fabulous breed" of geese.

With the Barnacle Goose Tree the Herbal proper closes, in these
quaint words:
"And thus having, through God's assistance, discoursed
somewhat at large of grass, herbs, shrubs, trees and mosses,
and certain excrescences of the earth, with other things more,
incident to the history thereof, we conclude, and end our
present volume with this wonder of England. For the which
God's name be ever honoured and praised. "

And so, at last, the Goose Tree receives the highest sanction.



Dedication to William Cecil, Lord Burghley

TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
HIS SINGULAR GOOD LORD & MASTER,
SIR WILLIAM CECIL
Knight, Baron of Burghley, Master of the Court of Wards & Liveries,
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, Knight of the most noble
Order of the Garter, one of the Lords of her Majesty's most
honourable Privy Council, and Lord High Treasurer of England.

AMONG the manifold creatures of God (right Honourable, and my
singular good Lord) that have all in all ages diversly entertained
many excellent wits, and drawn them to the contemplation of the
divine wisdom, none have provoked men's studies more, or satisfied
their desires so much as plants have done, and that upon just and
worthy causes: for if delight may provoke men's labour, what greater
delight is there than to behold the earth apparelled with plants, as
with a robe of embroidered work, set with Orient pearls and
garnished with great diversity of rare and costly jewels? If this
variety and perfection of colours may affect the eye, it is such in
herbs and flowers, that no Apelles, no Zeuxis ever could by any art
express the like: if odours or if taste may work satisfaction, they
are both so sovereign in plants, and so comfortable that no
confection of the apothecaries can equal their excellent virtue. But
these delights are in the outward senses: the principal delight is
in the mind, singularly enriched with the knowledge of these visible
things, setting forth to us the invisible wisdom and admirable
workmanship of Almighty God. The delight is great, but the use
greater, and joined often with necessity. In the first ages of the
world they were the ordinary meat of men, and have continued ever
since of necessary use both for meats to maintain life, and for
medicine to recover health. The hidden virtue of them is such, that
(as Pliny noteth) the very brute beasts have found it out: and
(which is another use that he observes) from thence the dyers took
the beginning of their art.

Furthermore, the necessary use of those fruits of the earth doth
plainly appear by the great charge and care of almost all men in
planting & maintaining of gardens, not as ornaments only, but as a
necessary provision also to their houses. And here beside the fruit,
to speak again in a word of delight, gardens, especially such as
your Honour hath, furnished with many rare simples, do singularly
delight, when in them a man doth behold a flourishing show of summer
beauties in the midst of winter's force, and a goodly spring of
flowers, when abroad a leaf is not to be seen. Besides these and
other causes, there are many examples of those that have honoured
this science: for to pass by a multitude of the philosophers, it may
please your Honour to call to remembrance that which you know of
some noble princes, that have joined this study with their most
important matters of state: Mithridates the great was famous for his
knowledge herein, as Plutarch noteth. Euax also King of Arabia, the
happy garden of the world for principal simples, wrote of this
argument, as Pliny showeth. Diocletian likewise, might have had his
praise, had he not drowned all his honour in the blood of his
persecution. To conclude this point, the example of Solomon is
before the rest, and greater, whose wisdom and knowledge was such,
that he was able to set out the nature of all plants from the
highest cedar to the lowest moss. But my very good Lord, that which
sometime was the study of great philosophers and mighty princes, is
now neglected, except it be of some few, whose spirit and wisdom
hath carried them among other parts of wisdom and counsel, to a care
and study of special herbs both for the furnishing of their gardens,
and furtherance of their knowledge: among whom I may justly affirm
and publish your Honour to be one, being myself one of your
servants, and a long time witness thereof: for under your Lordship I
have served, and that way employed my principal study and almost all
my time, now by the space of twenty years. To the large and singular
furniture of this noble island I have added from foreign places all
the variety of herbs and flowers that I might any way obtain, I have
laboured with the soil to make it fit for plants, and with the
plants, that they might delight in the soil, that so they might live
and prosper under our climate, as in their native and proper
country: what my success hath been, and what my furniture is, I
leave to the report of they that have seen your Lordship's gardens,
and the little plot of mine own especial care and husbandry. But
because gardens are private, and many times finding an ignorant or a
negligent successor, come soon to ruin, there be that have solicited
me, first by my pen, and after by the press to make my labours
common, and to free them from the danger whereunto a garden is
subject: wherein when I was overcome, and had brought this History
or report of the nature of plants to a just volume, and had made it
(as the reader may by comparison see) richer than former herbals, I
found it no question unto whom I might dedicate my labours; for
considering your good Lordship, I found none of whose favour and
goodness I might sooner presume, seeing I have found you ever my
very good lord and master. Again, considering my duty and your
Honour's merits, to whom may I better recommend my labours, than to
him unto whom I owe myself, and all that I am able in your service
or devotion to perform? Therefore under hope of your honourable and
accustomed favour I present this Herbal to your Lordship's
protection; and not as an exquisite work (for I know my meanness)
but as the greatest gift and chiefest argument of duty that my
labour and service can afford: whereof if there be no other fruit,
yet this is of some use, that I have ministered matter for men of
riper wits and deeper judgements to polish, and to add to my large
additions where anything is defective, that in time the work may be
perfect. Thus I humbly take my leave, beseeching God to grant you
yet many days to live to his glory, to the support of this state
under her Majesty our dread sovereign, and that with great increase
of honour in this world, and all fullness of glory in the world to
come.

Your Lordship's most humble and obedient Servant,
JOHN GERARD.



Stephen Bredwell to the Reader
To the well affected Reader and peruser of this
book, St. Bredwell physician,
greeting.

Open is the camp of glory and honour for all men, saith the younger
Pliny: not only men of great birth and dignity, or men of office
endued with public charge and titles, are seen therein, and have the
garland of praise and preferment waiting to crown their merits, but
even the common soldier likewise: so as he, whose name and note was
erst all obscure, may by egregious acts of valour obtain a place
among the noble. The school of science keepeth semblable proportion:
whose amplitude, as not always, nor only, men of great titles and
degrees, labour to illustrate; so whosoever doth, may confidently
account of, at the least, his name to be immortal. What is he then
that will deny his voice of gracious commendation to the authors of
this book: to every one, no doubt, there is due a condign measure. 
The first gatherers out of the ancients, and augmenters by their own
pains, have already spread the odour of their good names, through
all the Lands of learned habitations. Dr. Priest, for his
translation of so much as Dodonæus, hath thereby left a tomb for his
honourable sepulture. Mr. Gerard coming last, but not the least,
hath many ways accommodated the whole work unto our English nation:
for this History of plants, as it is richly replenished by those
fine men's labours laid together, so yet could it full ill have
wanted that new accession he hath made unto it. Many things hath he
nourished in his garden, and observed in our English fields, that
never came into their pens to write of. Again, the greatest number
of these plants, having never been written of in the English tongue,
would have wanted names for the vulgar sort to call them by: in
which defect he hath been curiously careful, touching both old and
new names to make supply. And lest the Reader should too often
languish with frustrate desire, to find some plant he readeth, of
rare virtue, he spareth not to tell (if himself have seen it in
England) in what wood, pasture or ditch the same may be seen and
gathered. Which when I think of, and therewithal remember, with what
cheerful alacrity, and resolute attendance he hath many years tilled
this ground, and now brought forth the fruit of it, whether I should
more commend his great diligence to attain this skill, or his large
benevolence in bestowing it on his country, I cannot easily
determine. This book-birth thus brought forth by Gerard, as it is in
form and disposition fair and comely, every species being referred
to his likeliest genus, of whose stock it came: so is it
accomplished with surpassing variety, unto such spreading growth and
strength of every limb, as that it may seem some heroical imp of
illustrious race, able to draw the eyes and expectation of every man
unto it. Somewhat rare it will be here for a man to move a question
of this nature, and depart again without some good satisfaction.
Manifold will be the use both to the physician and others: for every
man delighteth in knowledge naturally, which (as Aristotle said) is
in prosperity an ornament, in adversity a refuge. But this book
above many others will suit with the most, because it both
plenteously ministreth knowledge, which is the food of the mind, and
cldoth it also with a familiar and pleasing taste to every capacity.
Now as this commodity is communicated to all, and many shall receive
much fruit thereof, so I with some may have the mind to return a
benefit again; that it might not be true in all that Juvenal saith,
Scire volunt omnes, mercedem solvere nemo (i. e.) All desire to
know, none to yield reward. Let men think, that the perfection of
this knowledge is the high advancement of the health of man; that
perfection is not to be attained, but by strong endeavour: neither
can strong endeavour be accomplished without free maintenance. This
hath not he, who is forced to labour for his daily bread: but if he,
who from the first hours of his daily and necessary travail,
stealing as it were some, for the public behoof, and setting at
length those pieces together, can bring forth so comely a garment as
this, meet to cover or put away the ignorance of many: what may be
thought he would do, if public maintenance did free him from that
private care, and unite his thoughts to be wholly intent to the
general good. Reader, if such men as this stick not to rob
themselves of such wealth as thou hast to enrich thee, with that
substance thou wantest, detract not to share out of thine abundance
to merit and encourage their pains: that so flexible riches, and
permanent sciences, may the one become a prop unto the other.
Although praise and reward joined as companions to fruitful
endeavours, are (in part) desired of all men, that undertake losses,
labours, or dangers for the public behoof: because they add sinews
(as it were) unto reason, and able her more and more to refine
herself: yet do they not embrace that honour in respect of itself,
nor in respect of those that conferred it upon them, but as having
thereby an argument in themselves, that there is something in them
worthy estimation among men: which then doubleth their diligence to
deserve it more abundantly. Admirable and for the imitation of
princes, was that act of Alexander, who setting Aristotle to compile
commentaries of the brute creatures, allowed him for the better
performance thereof, certain thousands of men, in all Asia and
Greece, most skilful observers of such things, to give him
information touching all beasts, fishes, fowls, serpents, and flies.
What came of it? A book written, wherein all learned men in all ages
since do exercise themselves principally, for the knowledge of the
creatures. Great is the number of those that of their own private
have laboured in the same matter, from his age down to our present
time, which all do not in comparison satisfy us. Whereas if in those
ensuing ages there had risen still new Alexanders, there (certainly)
would not have wanted Aristotles to have made the evidence of those
things an hundredfold more clear unto us, than now they be. Whereby
you may perceive the unequal effects that follow those unsuitable
causes of public and private maintenances unto labours and studies.
Now that I might not despair in this my exhortation, I see examples
of this munificence in our age to give me comfort: Ferdinand the
Emperor and Cosmos Medici Prince of Tuscany are herein registered
for furthering this science of plants, in following of it themselves
and becoming skilful therein: which course of theirs could not be
holden without the supporting and advancing of such as were studious
to excel in this kind. Bellonius likewise (whom for honour's cause I
name) a man of high attempts in natural science, greatly extolleth
his King's liberality, which endued him with free leisure to follow
the study of plants, seconded also herein by Montmorency the
Constable, the Cardinals Castilion and Lorraine, with Oliverius the
Chancellor; by whose means he was enabled to perform those his
notable peregrinations in Italy, Africa and Asia: the sweet fruit
whereof, as we have received some taste by his observations, so we
should plenteously have been filled with them, if violent death by
most accursed robbers had not cut him off. And as I find these
examples of comfort in foreign nations, so we are (I confess) much
to be thankful to God, for the experience we have of the like things
at home. If (nevertheless) unto that physic lecture lately so well
erected, men who have this world's goods shall have hearts also of
that spirit, to add some ingenious labourer in the skill of simples,
they shall mightily augment and adorn the whole science of physic.
But if to that likewise they join a third, namely the art of
chemical preparation; that out of those good creatures which God
hath given man for his health, pure substances may be procured for
those that be sick, (I fear not to say it, though I see how Momus
scorneth) this present generation would purchase more to the
perfection of physic, than all the generations passed since Galen's
time have done: that I say, nothing of this one fruit that would
grow thereof, to wit, the discovering and abolishing of these
pernicious impostures and sophistications, which mount-promising
Paracelsians everywhere obtrude, through want of true and constant
light among us to discern them by. In which behalf, remembering the
mournful speech of grave Hippocrates; The art of physic truly
excelleth all arts, howbeit, through the ignorance partly of those
that exercise it, and partly of those that judge rashly of
physicians, it is accounted of all arts the most inferior: I say in
like manner, the art of chemistry is in itself the most noble
instrument of natural knowledges; but through the ignorance &
impiety, partly of those that most audaciously profess it without
skill, and partly of them that impudently condemn that they know
not, it is of all others most basely despised and scornfully
rejected. A principal remedy to remove such contumelious disgrace
from these two pure virgins of one stock and lineage, is this that I
have now insinuated, even by erecting the laboratory of an
industrious chemist, by the sweet garden of flourishing simples. The
physic reader by their means shall not only come furnished with
authorities of the ancients, and sensible probabilities for that he
teacheth, but with real demonstrations also in many things, which
the reason of man without the light of the furnace would never have
reached unto. I have uttered my heart's desire, for promoting first
the perfection of my profession, and next by necessary consequence,
the healthier lives of men. If God open men's hearts to provide for
the former, it cannot be but that the happy fruits shall be seen in
the latter. Let the ingenious learned judge whether I have reason on
my side; the partial addicted sect I shun, as men that never meant
good to posterity.



George Baker to the Reader
George Baker, one of her Majesty's chief Surgeons in ordinary, and
M. of the Surgeons of the City of London, to the Reader.

Aristotle, a Prince amongst the Philosophers, writing in his
Metaphysics of the nature of mankind, saith, that man is naturally
inclined and desirous of science. The which sentence doth teach us,
that all creatures (being virtuously given) do strive to attain to
perfection, and draw near in what they can to the Creator; and this
knowledge is one of the principal parts which doth concern the
perfection of understanding: for of the same doth follow, that all
such are generally inclined to know the means by the which they may
conserve their life, health, and reputation. And although it be
necessary for man to learn and know all sciences, yet nevertheless
the knowledge of natural philosophy ought to be preferred, as being
the most necessary; and moreover it doth bring with it a singular
pleasure and contentment. The first inventor of this knowledge was
Chiron the Centaur, of great renown, son to Saturn and Philyra and
others say that it was invented of Apollo: & others of Æsculapius
his son; esteeming that so excellent a science could never proceed
but from the gods immortal, and that it was impossible for man to
find out the nature of plants, if the great worker, which is God,
had not first instructed and taught him. For, as Pliny saith, if any
think that these things have invented by man, he is ungrateful for
the works of God. The first that we can learn of among the Greeks
that have diligently written of herbs, have been Orpheus, Musæus,
and Hesiod, having been taught by the Egyptians: then Pythagoras of
great renown for his wisdom, which did write books of the nature of
plants, and did acknowledge to learn the same from Apollo and
Æsculapius. Democritus also did compose books of plants, having
first travelled over all Persia, Arabia, Ethiopia, and Egypt. Many
other excellent spirits have taken great pleasure in this science,
which to accomplish have hazarded their lives in passing many
unknown regions, to learn the true knowledge of Helleborus, and
other medicaments: of which number were Hippocrates, Crateuas,
Aristotle, Theophrastus, Diocles Caristius, Pamphylus, Montius,
Hierophilus, Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, and many others, which I
leave to name, fearing to be too long. And if I may speak without
partiality of the author of this book, his great pains, his no less
expenses in travelling far and near for the attaining of his skill
have been extraordinary. For he was never content with the knowledge
of those simples which grow in those parts, but upon his proper cost
and charges hath had out of all parts of the world all the rare
simples which by any means he could attain unto, not only to have
them brought, but hath procured by his excellent knowledge to have
them growing in his garden, which as the time of the year doth serve
may be seen: for there shall you see all manner of strange trees,
herbs, roots, plants, flowers, and other such rare things, that it
would make a man wonder, how one of his degree, not having the purse
of a number, could ever accomplish the same. I protest upon my
conscience, I do not think for the knowledge of plants, that he is
inferior to any: for I did once see him tried with one of the best
strangers that ever came into England, and was accounted in Paris
the only man, being recommended unto me by that famous man Master
Amb. Pareus; and he being here was desirous to go abroad with some
of our herbarists, for the which I was the mean to bring them
together, and one whole day we spent therein, searching the rarest
simples: but when it came to the trial, my French man did not know
one to his four. What doth this man deserve that hath taken so much
pains for his country, in setting out a book, that to this day never
any in what language soever did the like? First for correcting their
faults in so many hundred places, being falsely named, mistaken the
one for the other; and then the pictures of a great number of plants
now newly cut. If this man had taken this pains in Italy and
Germany, where Matthiolus did write, he should have sped as well as
he did: For (saith he) I had so great a desire ever to finish my
Book, that I never regarded anything in respect of the public good,
not so much as to think how I should finish so great a charge, which
I had never carried out, but that by God's stirring up of the
renowned Emperor Ferdinand of famous memory, and the excellent
princes had not helped me with great sums of money, so that the
Commonwealth may say, That this blessing doth rather proceed of them
than from me. There have been also other princes of Almaine which
have been liberal in the preferring of this book, and the most
excellent Elector of the Empire the Duke of Saxony, which sent me by
his post much money toward my charges: the liberality of the which
and the magnificence toward me I cannot commend sufficiently. They
which followed in their liberality were the excellent Frederick
Count Palatine of the Rhine, and the excellent Joachim Marquess of
Brandenburg, which much supplied my wants: and the like did the
reverend Cardinal and Prince of Trent, and the Excellent Archbishop
of Salzburg, the Excellent Dukes of Bavaria and Cleeves, the duke of
Megapolensis Prince of Vandalis, the State Republic of Nuremberg,
the liberality of whom ought to be celebrated for ever: and it doth
much rejoice me that I had the help and reward of Emperors, Kings,
Electors of the Roman Empire, Arch-dukes, Cardinals, Bishops, Dukes
and Princes, for it giveth more credit to our labours than anything
that can be said. Thus far Matthiolus his own writing of the
liberality of Princes towards him. What age do we live in here that
will suffer all virtue to go unrewarded? Master Gerard hath taken
more pains than ever Matthiolus did in his Commentaries, and hath
corrected a number of faults that he passed over; and I dare affirm
(in reverence be it spoken to that excellent man) that Master Gerard
doth know a great number of simples that were not known in his time:
and yet I doubt whether he shall taste of the liberality of either
Prince, Duke, Earl, Bishop, or public estate. Let a man excel never
so much in any excellent knowledge, nevertheless many times he is
not so much regarded as a jester, a boaster, a quacksalver or
mountebank; for such kind of men can flatter, dissemble, make of
trifles great matters, in praising of this rare secret, or that
excellent spirit, or this elixir or quintessence; which when it
shall come to the trial, nothing shall be found but boasting words.

VALE.



John Gerard to the Reader
To the courteous and well willing Readers.

Although my pains have not been spent (courteous reader) in the
gracious discovery of golden mines, nor in the tracing after silver
veins, whereby my native country might be enriched, with such
merchandise as it hath most in request and admiration yet hath my
labour (I trust) been otherwise profitably employed, in descrying of
such harmless treasure of herbs, trees and plants, as the earth
frankly without violence offereth unto our most necessary uses.
Harmless I call them, because they were such delights, as man in the
perfectest estate of his innocence did erst enjoy; and treasure I
may well term them, seeing both kings and princes have esteemed them
as jewels; sith wise men have made their whole life as a pilgrimage,
to attain to the knowledge of them. By the which they have gained
the hearts of all, and opened the mouths of many, in commendation of
those rare virtues, which are contained in these terrestrial
creatures. I confess blind Pluto is nowadays more sought after, than
quick sighted Phœbus, and yet this dusty metal, or excrement of the
earth (which was first deeply buried, least it should be an eyesore
to grieve the corrupt heart of man) by forcible entry made into the
bowels of the earth, is rather snatched at of man to his own
destruction, than directly sent of God, to the comfort of this life.
And yet behold in the compassing of this worldly dross, what care,
what cost, what adventures, what mystical proofs, and chemical
trials are set abroach; when as notwithstanding the chiefest end is
but uncertain wealth. Contrariwise, in the expert knowledge of
herbs, what pleasure still renewed with variety? what small expense?
what security? and yet what an apt and ordinary means to conduct man
to that most desired benefit of health? Which as I devoutly wish
unto my native country, and to the careful nursing mother of the
same; so having bent my labours to the benefiting of such as are
studiously practised in the conservation thereof, I thought it a
chief point of my duty, thus out of my poor store, to offer up these
my far-fetched experiments, together with mine own country's unknown
treasure, combined in this compendious Herbal (not unprofitable,
though unpolished) unto your wise constructions and courteous
considerations. The drift whereof is a ready introduction to that
excellent art of simpling, which is neither so base nor
contemptible, as (perhaps) the English name may seem to intimate;
but such is it, as altogether hath been a study for the wisest, an
exercise for the noblest, a pastime for the best. From whence there
spring flowers, not only to adorn the garlands of the Muses, to deck
the bosoms of the beautiful, to paint the gardens of the curious, to
garnish the glorious crowns of Kings; but also such fruit as learned
Dioscorides long travelled for; and princely Mithridates reserved as
precious in his own private closet: Mithridates I mean, better known
by his sovereign mithridate, than by his sometime speaking two and
twenty languages. But what this famous prince did by tradition, Euax
King of the Arabians did deliver in a discourse written of the
virtues of herbs, and dedicated unto the Emperor Nero. Every green
herbarist can make mention of the herb Lysimachia, whose virtues
were found out by King Lysimachus, and his virtues no less eternized
in the self-same plant than the name of Phydias, quaintly beaten
into the shield of Pallas, or the first letters of Ajax or
Hyacinthus (whether you please) registered in that beloved flower of
Apollo. As for Artemisia, first called ???`?????, [Par'denis]
whether the title thereof sprang from ???????, [Artemis] Diana
herself, or from the renowned Queen of Caria, which disclosed the
use thereof unto posterity, it surviveth as a monument to revive the
memories of them both for ever. What should we speak of Gentiana,
bearing still the cognisance of Gentius? or of divers other herbs,
taking their denomination of their princely inventors? What should I
say of those royal personages, Iuba, Attalus, Climenus, Achilles,
Cyrus, Masynissa, Semiramis, Diocletian: but only thus, to bespeak
their princely loves to Herbarism, & their everlasting honours
(which neither old Pliny dead, nor young Lipsia living, will permit
to die?) Crescent herbæ, crescetis amores: crescent herbæ crescetis
honores [The plants flourish, love flourishes: The plants flourish,
honours flourish]. But had this wonted faculty wanted the
authorisement of such a royal company: one King Solomon, excelling
all the rest for wisdom, of greater royalty than they all (though
the lilies of the field outbraved him) he only (I say) might yield
hereunto sufficient countenance and commendation, in that his lofty
wisdom thought no scorn to stoop unto the lowly plants. I list not
seek the common colours of antiquity; when notwithstanding the world
can brag of no more ancient monument than Paradise, and the garden
of Eden: and the fruits of the earth may contend for seniority,
seeing their mother was the first creature that conceived, and they
themselves, the first fruit she brought forth. Talk of perfect
happiness or pleasure, and what place was so fit for that, as the
garden place where Adam was set, to be the herbarist? Whither did
the poets hunt for their sincere delights, but into the gardens of
Alcinous, of Adonis, and the orchards of Hesperides? Where did they
dream that heaven should be, but in the pleasant garden of Elysium?
Whither do all men walk for their honest recreation but thither,
where the earth hath most beneficially painted hit face with
flourishing colours? And what season of the year more longed for,
than the spring? Whose gentle breath enticeth forth the kindly
sweets, and makes them yield their fragrant smells? Who would
therefore look dangerously up at planets, that might safely look 
down at plants? And if true be the old proverb, Quæ supra nos, nihil
ad nos [What lies above us is none of our business]. I suppose this
new saying cannot be false, Quæ infra nos, ea maxime ad nos [What
lies below us is our most important business]. Easy therefore is
this treasure to be gained, and yet precious. The science is nobly
supported by wise and kingly favourites: the subject thereof so
necessary and delectable, that nothing can be confected, either
delicate for the taste, dainty for smell, pleasant for sight,
wholesome for body, conservative or restorative for health, but it
borroweth the relish of an herb, the savour of a flower, the colour
of a leaf, the juice of a plant, or the decoction of a root: and
such is the treasure that this my treatise is furnished withal,
wherein though mine art be not able to countervail nature in her
lively portraitures; yet have I counterfeited likeness for life,
shapes and shadows for substance, being ready with the bad painter,
to explain the imperfections of my pencil with my pen, choosing
rather to score upon my pictures such rude marks, as may describe my
meaning, than to let the beholder to guess at random and miss. I
have here therefore set down not only the names of sundry plants,
but also their natures, their proportions and properties, their
affects and effects, their increase and decrease, their flourishing
and fading, their distinct varieties and several qualities, as well
of those which our own country yieldeth, as of others which I have
fetched further, or drawn out by perusing divers herbals, set forth
in other languages, wherein none of our countrymen hath to my
knowledge taken any pains, since that excellent work of Master
Doctor Turner; after which time Master Lyte a worshipful gentleman,
translated Dodonæus out of French into English; and since that
Doctor Priest, one of our London College, hath (as I heard)
translated the last edition of Dodonæus, which meant to publish the
same; but being prevented by death, his translation likewise
perished: lastly, myself one of the least among many, have presumed
to set forth unto the view of the world, the first fruits of these
mine own labours, which if they be such as may content the reader, I
shall think myself well rewarded, otherwise there is no man to be
blamed but myself, being a work, I confess, for greater clerks to
undertake, yet may my blunt attempt serve as a whetstone to set an
edge upon some sharper wits, by whom I wish this my coarse discourse
might he both fined and refined. Faults I confess have escaped, some
by the printer's oversight, some through defects in myself to
perform so great a work, and some by means of the greatness of the
labour, and that I was constrained to seek after my living, being
void of friends to bear some part of the burden. The rather
therefore accept this at my hands (loving countrymen) as a token of
my good will, trusting that the best and well minded will not rashly
condemn me, although some thing have passed worthy reprehension. But
as for the slanderer or envious, pass not for them, but return upon
themselves, anything they shall without cause either murmur in
corners, or jangle in secret. Farewell.

From my House in Holborn, within the Suburbs of London, this first
of December, 1597.
Thy sincere and unfeigned Friend,
JOHN GERARD.



Thomas Johnson to the Reader

courteous READER,
	There are many things which I think needful to impart unto
thee, both concerning the knowledge of plants in general, as also
for the better explaining of some things pertinent to this present
History, which I have here set forth much amended and enlarged. For
the general differences, affections, &c. of plants, I hold it not
now so fitting nor necessary for me to insist upon them; neither do
I intend in any large discourse to set forth their many and great
uses and virtues: give me leave only to tell you, That God of his
infinite goodness and bounty hath by the medium of plants, bestowed
almost all food, clothing, and medicine upon man. And to this
offspring we also owe (for the most part) our houses, shipping, and
infinite other things, though some of them Proteus-like have run
through divers shapes, as this paper whereon I write, that first
from seed became flax; then after much vexation thread, then cloth,
where it was cut and mangled to serve the fashions of the time: but
afterwards rejected and cast aside, yet unwilling so to forsake the
service of man for which God had created it, again it comes (as I
may term it) to the hammer, from whence it takes a more noble form
and aptitude to be employed to sacred, civil, foreign and domestic
uses. I will not speak of the many and various objects of delight
that these present to the senses, nor of sundry other things, which
I could plentifully in this kind deliver: but rather acquaint you
from what fountains this knowledge may be drawn, by showing what
authors have delivered to us the history of plants, and after what
manner they have done it; and this will be a means that many
controversies may be the more easily understood by the less learned
and judicious reader.

He whose name we first find upon record (though doubtless some had
treated thereof before) that largely writ of plants, was the wisest
of men, even King Solomon, who certainly would not have meddled with
this subject, if he in his wisdom had not known it worthy himself,
and exceeding fitting: first for the honour of his Creator, whose
gifts and blessings these are: secondly for the good of his
subjects, whereof without doubt, he in this work had a special
regard in the curing of their diseases and infirmities. But this
kingly work being lost, I will not insist upon it, but come to such
as are yet extant, of which (following the course of antiquity) that
of Theophrastus first takes place.

Now Theophrastus succeeded Aristotle in the government of the school
at Athens, about the 114 Olymp. which was some 322 years before
Christ. He among many other things writ a History of plants in ten
books, and of the causes of them, eight books; of the former ten
there are nine come to our times reasonable perfect; but there now
remain but six of the eight of the causes of plants. Some looking
upon the catalogue of the books of Theophrastus his writing, set
forth in his life, written by Diogenes Laertius, may wonder that
they find no mention of these books of plants, amongst there he
reckons up, and indeed I thought it somewhat strange, and so much
the more, because this his life is set forth by Daniel Heinsius
before his edition of Theophrastus, and there also no mention
neither in the Greek nor Latin of those works. Considering this, I
thinking to have said something thereof, I found the doubt was long
since cleared by the learned Causabone in his notes upon Laertius.
Thus being certain of the author, let me say somewhat of the work,
which though by the injury of time it hath suffered much, yet is it
one of the chief pieces of Antiquity, from whence the knowledge of
plants is to be drawn. Theophrastus as he followed Aristotle in the
school, so also in his manner of writing, for according as Aristotle
hath delivered his Historia Animalium, so hath he set forth this of
plants, not by writing of each species in particular, but of their
differences and nature, by their parts, affections, generations and
life. Which how hard a thing it was he tell you in his second
Chapter, and renders you this reason, because there is nothing
common to all plants as the mouth and belly is to other living
creatures, &c. Now by this manner of writing you may learn the
general differences and affections of plants, but cannot come to the
particular knowledge of any without much labour: for you must go to
many places to gather up the description of one plant: neither doth
he (nor is it necessary for any writing in this manner) make mention
of any great number, and of many it may be but once. His works being
in Greek were translated into Latin by Theodore Gaza, who did them
but Græca fide, [with Greek faithfulness i.e. unfaithfully] for he
omitted some things, otherwhiles rendered them contrary to the mind
of the author: but above all he took to himself too much liberty in
giving of names in imitation of the Greek, or of his own invention,
when it had been better by much for his Reader to have had them in
the Greek. The learned Julius Scaliger hath set forth
Animadversiones upon these books, wherein he hath both much
explained the mind of Theophrastus, and showed the errors of Gaza.
Some since his time have promised to do something to this author, as
Daniel Heinsius, and Spigelius, but twenty years are past since, and
I have not yet heard of anything done in this kind by either of
them. Thus much for Theophrastus.

Let me not pass over Aristotle in silence, though his books writ of
this subject were but two, and these according to the conjecture of
Julius Scaliger (who hath made a large and curious examination of
them) have either perished, or come to us not as they were
originally written by Aristotle, but as they have been by some later
man put into Greek. Amongst other things Scaliger hath these
concerning those two books Reor e textrina Theophrasti detracta fila
quædam iisq, clavos additos, tamet si neque aereos, neque purpureos
quod si protinus autorem tibi dare vis ad Arabum diligentiam propius
accedis. And afterwards thus Attribuere viri docti, alius alii, at
quidem qui aliorem viderem nihil planudem autorem facienti malim
assentiri; extant enim illius aliis in libris similis vestigia
semilatini etatis, &c. Thus much for Aristotle, whom as you see I
have placed after his scholar, because there is such doubt of these
books carried about in his name, and for that Scaliger as you see
thinks them rather taken out of Theophrastus, than written by his
Master.

The next that orderly follows is Pedacius Dioscorides Anazarbeus,
who lived (according to Suidas) in the time of Cleopatra, which was
some few years before the birth of our Saviour. Now Suidas hath
confounded Dioscorides Anazarbeus with Dioscorides Phocas, but by
some places in Galen you may see they were different men: for our
Anazarbean Dioscorides was of the Emperic sect, but the other was a
follower of Herophilos and of the Rational sect. He writ not only of
plants, but de tota materia medico to which study he was addicted
even from his childhood, which made him travel much ground, and lead
a military life, the better to accomplish his ends: and in this he
attained to that perfection, that few or none since his time have
attained to, of the excellency of his work, which is as it were the
foundation and ground-work of all that hath been since delivered in
this nature. Hear what Galen one of the excellentest of physicians,
and one who spent no small time in this study, affirms: But, saith
he, the Anazarbean Dioscorides in five books hath written of the
necessary matter of medicine, not only making mention of herbs, but
also of trees, fruits, liquors and juices, as also of all minerals,
and of the parts of living creatures: and in mine opinion he hath
with the greatest perfection performed this work of the matter of
Medicine: for although many before him have written well upon this
subject, yet none have writ so well of all. Now Dioscorides follows
not the method of Theophrastus, but treats of each kind of herb in
particular, first giving the names, then the description, and then
the place where they usually grow, and lastly their virtues. Yet of
some, which then were as frequently known with them, as Sage,
Rosemary, an Ash or Oak tree are with us, he hath omitted the
descriptions, as not necessary, as indeed at that time when they
were so vulgarly known, they might seem so to be: but now we know
the least of these, and have no certainty, but some probable
conjectures do direct us to the knowledge of them. He was not
curious about his words nor method, but plainly and truly delivered
that whereof he had certain and experimental knowledge, concerning
the description and nature of plants. But the general method he
observed you may find set forth by Bauhin in his edition of
Matthiolus, immediately after the preface of the 1st book, whereto I
refer the curious, being too long for me in this place to insist
upon. His works that have come to us are five books De Materia
Medica. One De letalibus venenus, corumq. præcautione et curatione:
another De Cane rabido, deq; notis quæ morsus ictusve animalium
venenum reliquentium sequuntur a third De corum curatione. These
eight books within these two last centuries of years have been
translated out of Greek into Latin, and commented upon by divers, as
Hermolaus Barbarus, Iohannes Ruellius, Marcellus Virgilus, &c. But
of these and the rest, as they offer themselves, I shall say
somewhat hereafter. There is also another work which goes under his
name, and may well be his. It is Geri Thyporison sive de facile
parabilibus, divided into two books, translated and confirmed with
the consent of other Greek physicians, by the great labour of John
Moibane a physician of Augsburg, who lived not to finish it, but
left it to be perfected and set forth by Conrad Gesner.

The next that takes place is the laborious Caius Plinius Secundus,
who lived in the time of Vespasian, and was suffocated by the
sulphurous vapours that came from Mount Vesuvius, falling at that
time on fire; he through overmuch curiosity to see and find out the
cause thereof approaching too nigh, and this was Anno Domini, 79. He
read and writ exceeding much, though by the injury of time we have
no more of his than 37 books De Historia Mundi, which also have
received such wounds, as have tried the best skill of our critics,
and yet in my opinion in some places require medicas manus. From the
twelfth to the end of the twenty-seventh of these books he treats of
plants, more from what he found written in other authors than from
any certain knowledge of his own, in many places following the
method and giving the words of Theophrastus, and in other places
those of Dioscorides, though he never makes mention of the later of
them. He also mentions, and no question followed many other authors,
whose writings have long since perished. Sometimes he is pretty
large, and otherwhiles so brief, that scarce anything can thence be
gathered. From the seventeenth unto the twenty-seventh he variously
handles them, what method you may quickly see by his Elenchus
contained in his first book, but in the twenty seventh he handles
those whereof he had made no, or not sufficient mention, after an
alphabetical order, beginning with Æthyopis, Ageratum, Aloe, &c. so
going on to the rest.

I must not pass over in silence, neither need I long insist upon
Galen, Paulus Ægineta, and Aetius, for they have only alphabetically
named plants and other simple medicines, briefly mentioning their
temperature and faculties, without descriptions (some very few, and
those brief ones, excepted) and other things pertinent to their
history.

The next that present themselves are two counterfeits, who abuse the
world under feigned titles, and their names have much more antiquity
than the works themselves: the first goes under the title of Æmilius
Macer a famous Poet, of whom Ovid makes mention in these verses;
Saepe suases volucres legit mihi grandior ævo
Quaeq; nocet Serpens, quæ ivuat herba Macer.
[Often old Macer read to me about those birds of his,
the snakes that harm you, and the herbs that heal. Ovid,
Sorrows Bk.4.10 l. 43-44]

Pliny also makes mention of this Macer: he in his poems imitated
Nicander, but this work that now is carried about under his name, is
written in a rude, and somewhat barbarous verse, far different from
the style of those times wherein Macer lived, and no way in the
subject imitating Nicander. It seems to have been written about 400
or 500 years ago.

The other also is of an unknown author, to whom the printers have
given the title of Apuleius Madaurensis, and some have been so
absurdly bold of late, as to put it unto the works of Apuleius; yet
the uncurious style and method of the whole book will convince them
of error, if there were no other argument. I have seen some four
manuscripts of this author, and heard of a fifth, and all of them
seem to be of good antiquity: the figures of them all for the most
part have some resemblance each of other: the first of these I saw
some nine years age with that worthy lover and storer of
antiquities, Sir Robert Cotton: it was in a fair Saxon hand, and as
I remember in the Saxon tongue; but what title it carried, I at that
time was not curious to observe. I saw also another after that,
which seemed not to be of any small standing, but carelessly
observed not the title. But since I being informed by my friend
Master Goodyer (as you may find in the chapter of Saxifrage of the
ancients) that his manuscript which was very ancient, acknowledged
no such author as Apuleius, I begun a little to examine some other
manuscripts, so procured a very fair one of my much honoured friend
Sir. Theod. Mayern: in the very beginning of this is writ, In hoc
continentur libri quatuor medicinæ Ypocratis, Platonis Apoliensis
urbis de diversis herbis; Sexti Papiri placiti ex animalibus, &c.
["This book contins four books of medicine by Hippocrates, Of
Various Herbs by Plato Apoliensis, six papers about animals, &c."] A
little after in the same page at the beginning of a table which is
of the virtues, are these words, In prima libro sunt herba
descriptæ, quas Apoliensis Plato descripsit, &c. ["In the first book
are descriptions of herbs, as described by Plato Apoliensis"] and
thus also he is named in the title of the Epistle or Proem; but at
the end of the work is Explicit liber Platonis de herbis masculinis,
&c. [The end of Plato's bok of masculine herbs &c."] With this in
all things agrees that of Mr. Goodyer, as he hath affirmed to me.
Betides these, I found one with Mr. John Tradescant, which was
written in a more ignorant and barbarous time, as one may conjecture
by the title, which is thus at the very beginning. In nomine Domini
incipit Herboralium Apolei Platonis quod accepit a Scolapio, &
Chirone Centauro magistro. ["In God's name here begins the herbal of
Plato Apoliensis, which re recieved from Scolapius and Master Chiron
the centaur"] Then follows (as also in the former, and in the
printed books) the tract ascribed to Antonius Musa, De herba
Betonica: after that are these words, Liber Medicinæ Platonis
herbaticus explicit. ["The end of Plato the herbarist's book of
medicine"] By this it seems the author of this work either was
named, or else called himself Plato, a thing not without example in
these times. This work was first printed at Basel, 1528, amongst
some other works of physic, and one Albanus Torinus set it forth by
the help of many manuscripts, of whose imperfections he much
complains, and I think not without cause: after this, Gabriel
Humelbergius of Ravensburg in Germany set it forth with a comment
upon it, who also complains of the imperfections of his copies, and
thinks the work not perfect: indeed both the editions are faulty in
many places: and by the help of these manuscripts I have seen they
might be mended (if any thought it worth their labour) in some
things, as I observed in cursorily looking over them. One thing I
much marvel at, which is, that I find not this author mentioned in
any writer of the middle times, as Platearius, Bartholomæus Anglus,
&c. Now I conjecture this work was originally written in Greek; for
these reasons first because it hath the Greek names in such plenty,
and many of them proper, significant, and in the first place:
Secondly some are only named in Greek, as Hierobulbon, Artemisia
Leptophyllos, and Artemesia tagantes, Batrachion, Gryas (which I
judge rather Greek than Latin) &c. Besides in both the written books
in very many places amongst the names I find this word Omoeos, but
diversly written; for I conjecture the Greek names were written in
the Greek character, and ?????? amongst them and then also when the
rest of the work was translated, which afterwards made the
transcribers who understood it not to write it variously, for in the
one book it is always written Amoeos, and in the other Omoeos, and
sometimes Omeos, as in the Chapter of Brittanica, the one hath it
thus, Nomen herbæ istius Britanica, Amoeos dicant eam Damasinium,
&c. The other thus: Nomen herbæ Brittanica, Omeos Damasinius, &c. &
in the chap. of Althea the one hath it thus: Nomen huius herbæ Altea
Amoeos vocant hoc herbam Moloche, &c. The other Nomen herba Ibiscus
omoeos Moloce, &c. If it be certain which Philip Ferrarius affirms
in his Lexicon Geographicum, that the city Apoley is Constantinople,
then have I found Apoliensis urbus, of which I can find no mention
in any ancient or modern Geographer besides; and then it is more
than probable that this was written in Greek, and it may be thought
differently translated, which occasions sych diversity in the
copies, as you shall find in same places. Now I conjecture this work
was written about some 600 years ago.

From these ancients have sprung all, or the greatest part of the
knowledge, that the middle or later times have had of plants; and
all the controversies that of late have so stuffed the books of such
as have writ of this subject, had their beginning by reason that the
carelessness of the middle times were such, that they knew little
but what they transcribed out of these ancients, never endeavouring
to acquire any perfect knowledge of the things themselves: so that
when as learning (after a long winter) began to spring up again, men
began to be somewhat more curious, and by the notes and descriptions
in these ancient authors they have laboured to restore this lost
knowledge; making inquiry, first whether it were known by
Theophrastus, Dioscorides, or any of the ancients, then by what
name. But to return to my authors.

About An. Dom. 1100, or a little after, lived the Arabians Avicenna,
Averroes, Mesve, Rhasis and Serapio; most of these writ but briefly
of this subject; neither have we their works in the Arabic wherein
they were written, but barbarously translated into Latin, and most
part of these works were by them taken out of the Greeks, especially
Dioscorides and Galen; yet so as they added somewhat of their own,
and otherwhiles confounded other things with those mentioned by the
Greeks, because they did not well know the things whereof they writ.
Avicenna, Averroes, and Rhasis alphabetically and briefly (following
the method of Galen) give the names, temperature, and virtues, of
the chiefest simple medicines. But Serapio, after a particular tract
of the temperature and qualities of simple medicines in general,
comes to treat of them in particular, and therein follows chiefly 
Dioscorides, Galen, and Paulus, and divers Arabians that went before
him. This is the chief work in this kind of the Arabians, which have
come to us; he himself tells us his method in his preface, which is
(when he comes to particulars) first of medicines temperate, then of
those that are hot and dry in the first degree; then those cold and
dry in the same degree: after that, those hot and dry in the second
degree, &c. and in each of these tracts he follows the order of the
Arabic Alphabet.

In or after the times of the Arabians until about the year 1400,
there were divers obscure and barbarous writers, who by sight knew
little whereof they writ, but took out of the Greeks, Arabians, and
one another, all that they writ, giving commonly rude figures,
seldom setting down any descriptions: I will only name the chief of
them that I have seen, and as near as I can guess in that order that
one of them succeeded another. For the particular times of their
living is somewhat difficult to be found out. One of the ancientest
of them seems to be Isidore; then Platearius whose work is
alphabetical and entitled Circa instans; the next Matthæus
Sylvaticus, who flourished about the year 1319; his work is called
Pandectæ: a little after him was Bartholomæus Anglus, whose works
(as that of Isidore, and most of the rest of those times) treat of
divers other things besides plants, as beasts, birds, fishes, &c.
His work is called De proprietatibus rerum: the author's name was
Bartholomew Glanvill, who was desended of the noble family of the
Earls of Suffolk; and he wrote this work in Edward the third's time,
about the year of our Lord, 1397. After all these, and much like
them is the Hortus sanitatis whose author I know not. But to leave
these obscure men and their writings, let me reckon some of later
time, who with much more learning and judgement have endevoured to
illustrate this part of physic.

About some 200 year ago learning again beginning to flourish, divers
begun to leave and loathe the confused and barbarous writings of the
middle times, and to have recourse to the ancients, from whence
together with purity of language, they might acquire a more certain
knowledge of the things treated of, which was wanting in the other.
One of the first that took pains in this kind was Hermolaus Barbarus
Patriarch of Aquileia, who not only translated Dioscorides, but writ
a commentary upon him in five books, which he calls his Corollarium;
in this work he hath showed himself both judicious and learned.

After him Marcellus Virgilius secretary to the state of Florence, a
man of no less learning and judgement than the former, set forth
Dioscorides in Greek and Latin with a Comment upon him.

Much about their time also John Ruellius a French physician, who
flourished in the year 1480, translated Dioscorides into Latin,
whose translation hath been the most followed of all the rest.
Moreover he set forth a large work, De natura Stirpium, divided into
three books, wherein he hath accurately gathered all things out of
sundry writers, especially the Greeks and Latins; for first having
(after the manner of Theophrastus) delivered some common precepts
and advertisements pertaining to the form, life, generation,
ordering, and other such accidents of plants; he then comes to the
particular handling of each species.

Much about this time, the Germans began to beautify this so
necessary part of physic; and amongst them Otho Brunselslus, a
physician of good account, writ of plants, and was the first that
gave the lively figures of them; but he treated not in all of above
288 plants. He commonly observes this method in his particular
chapters: First the figure (yet he gives not the figures of all he
writes of) then the Greek, Latin, and German names; after that, the
description and history out of most former authors; then the
temperature and virtues, and lastly, the authors' names that had
treated of them. His work is in three parts or tomes, the first was
printed in 1530, the second in 1531, and the third in 1536.

Next after him was Hieronymus Tragus a learned, ingenious, and
honest writer, who set forth his works in the German tongue, which
were shortly after translated into Latin by David Kiber. He treats
of most of the plants commonly growing in Germany, & I can observe
no general method he keeps, but his particular one is commonly this
he first gives the figure with the Latin and high Dutch name; then
commonly a good description; after that the names, then the
temperature, and lastly the virtues, first inwardly, then outwardly
used. He hath figured some 567, and described some 800. His figures
are good, (and so are most of the rest that follow.) His works were
set forth in Latin, An. 1552.

In his time lived Leonhartus Fuchsius, a German physician, being
also a learned and diligent writer, but he hath taken many of his
descriptions as also virtues word for word out of the ancients, and
to them hath put figures; his general method is after the Greek
alphabet, and his particular one thus: First the names in Greek and
Latin, together oft-times with their etymologies, as also the German
and French names, then the kinds, after that the form, the place,
time, temperature then the virtues: first out of the ancients, as
Dioscorides, Galen, Pliny, &c. and sometimes from the late writers,
whom he doth not particularize, but expresses in general ex
recentioribus. His work was set forth at Basel, 1542, in Fol.
containing 516 figures; also they were set forth in octavo, the
history first, with all the figures by themselves together at the
end with the Latin and high Dutch names.

About this time, and a little after, flourished Conrad Gesner also a
German physician, who set forth divers things of this nature, but
yet lived not to finish the great and general work of plants, which
he for many years intended, and about which he had taken a great
deal of pains, as may be gathered by his Epistles. He was a very
learned, painful, honest and judicious writer, as may appear by his
many & great works; whereof those of plants were first a brief
alphabetical history of plants without figures, gathered out of
Dioscorides, Theophrastus, Pliny, &c. with the virtues briefly, and
for the most part taken out of Paulus Ægineta, with their names in
Greek and French put in the margin: this was printed at Venice,
1541, in a small form. He set forth a catalogue of plants, in Latin,
Greek, high-Dutch and French, printed at Zurich, 1542. Also another
tract De Lunarii & noctu lucentibus cum montis fracti, sive Pilati
Lucernatum descriptione, An. 1552, in quarto. He also set forth the
four Books of Valerius Cordus (who died in his time) and his Sylva 
observationum at Strasbourg, 1561, in fol. and to these he added a
Catalogue of the German Gardens with an Appendix and Corollarium to
Cordus his History. Also another treatise of his De stirpium
collectione, was set forth at Zurich by Wolphius, An. 1587, in
Octavo.

At the same time lived Adam Lonicerus a physician of Frankfurt,
whose Natural History was there printed, An. 1551, and the first
part thereof is of plants;and four years after he added another part
thereto, treating also of plants. I find no general method observed
by him, but his particular method usually is this: first he gives
the figure, then the names in Latin and Dutch, then the temperature,
&c. as in Tragus, from whom & Cordus, he borrows the most part of
his first tome, as he doth the 2nd from Matth. & Amatanus Lusit.

In his time the Italian physician Petrus Andreas Matthiolus set
forth his Commentaries upon Dioscorides, first in Italian with 957
large and very fair figures, and then afterwards in Latin at Venice,
with the same figures, An. 1568. After this he set forth his Epitome
in Quarto, with 921 smaller figures. Now these his Commentaries are
very large; and he hath in them delivered the history of many plants
not mentioned by Dioscorides; but he is justly reprehended by some,
for that he everywhere taxes and notes other writers, when as he
himself runs into many errors, and some of them wilful ones, as when
he gives figures framed by his own fancy, as that of Dracontium
maius, Rhabarbarum, &c. and falsified other some in part, the better
to make them agree with Dioscorides his description, as when he
pictures Arbor Iudæ with prickles, and gives it for the true Acacia:
and he oft-times gives bare figures without description of his own,
but saith, it is that described by Dioscorides, Nullis reclamantibus
notis [with no further information], for which the authors of the
Adversaria much declaim against him. It had been fit for him, or any
one that takes such a work in hand, to have showed by describing the
plant he gives, and conferring it with the description of his
author, that there is not any one note wanting in the description,
virtues, or other particulars which his author sets down; and if he
can show that his is such, then will the contrary opinions of all
others fall of themselves, and need no confutation.

Amatus Lusitanus also about the same time set forth Commentaries
upon Dioscorides, adding the names in divers languages but without
figures, at Strasbourg, An. 1554, in Quarto: he dissented from
Matthiolus in many things; whereupon Matthiolus writ an Apology
against him. He hath performed no great matter in his Enarrations
upon Dioscorides, but was an author of the honesty of Matthiolus,
for as the one deceived the world with counterfeit figures, so the
other by feigned cures to strengthen his opinion, as Crato judges of
his Curationes Medicinales (another work of his) which he thinks,
potius fictæ, quam factæ [More fiction than fact].

Rembertus Dodonæus a physician born at Mechlin in Brabant, about
this time begun to write of plants. He first set forth a History in
Dutch, which by Clusius was turned into French, with some additions,
Anno Domini, 1560. And this was translated out of French into
English by Master Henry Lite, and set forth with figures, Anno Dom.
1578, and divers times since printed, but without figures. In the
year 1552, Dodonæus set forth in Latin his Frugum Historia, and
within a while after his Florum, purgantium, & deleteriorum
Historia. Afterwards he put them all together, his former, and those
his later works, and divided them into thirty books, and set them
forth with 1305 figures, in fol. An. 1583. This edition was also
translated into English, which became the foundation of this present
work, as I shall show hereafter. It hath since been printed in
Latin, with the addition of some few new figures: and of late in
Dutch, Anno 1618, with the addition of the same figures; and most of
these in the Exotics of Clusius, and great store of other additions.
His general method is this: first he divides his works into six
pentads or fives: the fifth pentad or five books of these contain
plants in an alphabetical order, yet so as that other plants that
have affinity with them are comprehended with them, though they fall
not into the order of the alphabet. The second pent. contains Flores
Coronarii, plantæ odorata & umbelliferæ. The third is De Radicibus,
Purgantibus Herbis, convolvulis, deleteriis ac perniciosis plantis,
Filicibus, Muscis et Fungis. The fourth is De Frumentis,
Leguminibus, palustribus & aquatilibus. The fifth, De Oleribus &
Carduis. The sixth, de Fruticibus & Arboribus. The particular method
is the same used by our author.

In the year 1570, Peter Pena and Matthias Lobel did here at London
set forth a work, entitled Stirpium Adversaria nova; the chief end
and intention whereof being to find out the Materia medica of the
ancients. The general method is the same with that of our author,
which is, putting things together as they have most resemblance one
with another in external form, beginning with Grass, Corns, &c. They
give few figures, but sometimes refer you to Fuchsius, Dodonæus, and
Matthiolus: but where the figure was not given by former authors,
then they commonly give it; yet most part of these figures are very
small and unperfect, by reason (as I conjecture) they were taken
from dried plants. In this work they insist little upon the virtues
of plants, but succinctly handle controversies, and give their
opinions of plants, together with their descriptions and names,
which sometimes are in all these languages, Greek, Latin, French,
high and low Dutch, and English: otherwhiles in but one or two of
them. Some writers for this work call them Doctissimi Angli; yet
neither of them were borne here, for Pena (as I take it) was a
Frenchman, and Lobel was borne at Lille in Flanders, yet lived most
part of his later time in this Kingdom; and here also ended his
days. In the year 1576 he set forth his Observations, and joined
them with the Adversaria, by them two to make one entire work: for
in his Observations he gives most part of the figures and virtues
belonging to those herbs formerly described only in the Adversaria;
and to these also adds some new ones not mentioned in the former
work. After which he set forth an Herbal in Dutch, wherein he
comprehended all those plants that were in the two former works, and
added divers other to them, the work containing some 2116 figures;
which were printed afterwards in a longish form, with the Latin
names, and references to the Latin and Dutch books. After all these,
at London, Anno 1605, he again set forth the Adversaria, together
with the second part thereof, wherein is contained some forty
figures, being most of them of Grass and Flowers; but the
descriptions were of some 100 plants, varieties and all. To this he
added a Treatise of Balsam (which also was set forth alone in
Quarto, Anno 1598) and the Pharmacopæa of Rondeletius, with
Annotations upon it. He intended another great work, whose title
should have been Stirpium Illustrationes, but was prevented by
death.

Some six years after the edition of the Adversaria, Anno 1576, that
learned, diligent, and laborious herbarist Carol. Clusius set forth
his Spanish Observations, having to this purpose travelled over a
great part of Spain; and being afterwards called to the Imperial
Court by Maximilian the second, he viewed Austria and the adjacent
provinces, and set forth his there Observation, Anno 1583. He also
translated out of Spanish the works of Garcias ab Orta and
Christopher Acosta, treating of the simple medicines of the East
Indies, and Nicolas Monardus, who writ of those of the West Indies.
After this he put into one body both his Spanish and Pannonic
Observations, with some other, and those he comprehends in six
books, entitled Rariorum plantarum Historia: whereto he also adds an
Appendix, a treatise of Mushrooms, six Epistles treating of plants,
from Honourius Bellus an Italian physician living at Cydonia in
Candy; as also the description of mount Baldus, being a catalogue
with the description and figures of some rare and not before written
of plants there growing, written by John Pona an apothecary of
Verona (This Description of Pona's was afterwards with some new
descriptions and thirty-six figures set forth alone in Quarto, An.
1608.) This first Volume of Clusius was printed in Antwerp, Anno
1601, in folio: and in the year 1605 he also in folio set forth in
another volume six books of exotics containing various matter, as
plants, or some particles of them, as Fruits, Woods, Barks, &c. as
also the forenamed translations of Garcias, Acosta, and Monardus:
Three Tracts besides of the same Monardus; the first, De lapide
Bezoar, & Herba Scorsonera. The second, De Ferro & eius
facultatibus: The third, De nive & eius commodis. To these he also
added Bellonius his Observations or Singularities, and a tract of
the same author, De neglecta stirpium cultura, both formerly
translated out of French into Latin by him. He was borne at Atrebas
or Arras, the chief city of Artois, Anno 1526, and died at Leyden, 
Ann. 1609. After his death, by Everard Vorstius, Peter Paw, or some
others, were set forth some additions and emendations of his former
works, together with his funeral oration made by Vorstius, his
epitaph, &c. in quarto, Anno 1611, by the name of his Cura
Posteriores.

In the year 1583, Andreas Cæsalpinus an Italian physician, and
professor at Pisa, set forth an history of plants, comprehended in
sixteen books: his work is without figures, and he oft times gives
the Tuscan names for Latin; wherefore his work is the more difficult
to be understood, unless it be by such as have been in Tuscany, or
else are already well exercised in this study. He commonly in his
own words diligently for the most part describes each plant, and
then makes enquiry whether they were known by the ancients. He
seldom sets down their faculties, unless of some, to which former
writers have put down none. In the first book he treats of plants in
general, according as Theophrastus doth: but in the following books
he handles them in particular: he maketh the chief affinity of
plants to consist in the similitude of their seeds and seed vessels.

Joachimus Camerarius a physician of Nuremberg flourished about this
time: He set forth the Epitome of Matthiolus, with some additions
and accurate figures, in quarto, at Frankfurt, 1586: in the end of
which work (as also in that set forth by Matthiolus himself) is Iter
Baldi, or a journey from Verona to Mount Baldus, written by Franco
Calceolarius an apothecary of Verona. Another work of Camerarius was
his Hortus Medicus, being an alphabetical enumeration of plants,
wherein is set forth many things concerning the names, ordering,
virtues, &c. of plants. To this he annexed Hyrcinia Saxonothuringica
Iohannis Thalii, or an alphabetical catalogue written by John
Thalius of such plants as grew in Harkwald a part of Germany between
Saxony and Thuringia. This was printed also at Frankfurt in quarto,
An. 1588.

In the year 1587 came forth the great history of plants printed at
Lyons, which is therefore vulgarly termed Historia Lugdunensis: it
was begun by Dalechampius: but he dying before the finishing
thereof, one John Molinæus set it forth, but put not his name
thereto. It was intended to comprehend all that had written before,
and so it doth, but with a great deal of confusion; which occasioned
Bauhin to write a treatise of the errors committed therein, in which
he shows there are about four hundred figures twice or thrice over.
The whole number of the figures in this work are 2686. This History
is divided into eighteen books, and the plants in each book are put
together either by the places of their growings, as in woods,
copses, mountains, watery places, &c. or by their external shape, as
umbelliferous, bulbous, &c. or by their qualities, as purging,
poisonous, &c. Herein are many places of Theophrastus and other
ancient Writers explained. He commonly in each chapter gives the
names, place, form, virtue, as most other do. And at the end thereof
there is an Appendix containing some Indian plants, for the most
part out of Acosta; as also divers Syrian and Egyptian plants
described by Reinold Rawolfe a physician of Augsburg.

At this time, to wit Anno 1588, Jacobus Theodorus Tabernamontanus
set forth an History of Plants in the German tongue, and some twelve
years after his figures being in all 2087, were set forth in a long
form, with the Latin and High-Dutch names put unto them; and with
these same figures was this work of our author formerly printed.

Prosper Alpinus a physician of Padua in Italy, in the year 1592 set
forth a Treatise of some Egyptian Plants, with large yet not very
accurate figures: he there treats of some 46 plants, and at the end
thereof is a Dialogue or Treatise of Balsam. Some six years agone,
Anno 1627, his son set forth two books of his father's, De plantis
Exoticis, with the figures cut in brass: this work contains some 136
plants.

Fabius Columna a gentleman of Naples, of the house of Columna of
Rome, An. 1592 set forth a Treatise called Phytobasanos, or an
examination of plants; for therein he examines and asserts some
plants to be such and such of the ancients: and in the end of this
work he gives also the history of some not formerly described
plants. He also set forth two other books, De minus cognitis, or of
less known plants: the first of which was printed at Rome, Anno
1606; and the other 1616. He in these works, which in all contain
little above two hundred thirty six plants, shows himself a man of
an exquisite judgment, and very learned and diligent, duly examining
and weighing each circumstance in the writings of the ancients.

Caspar Bauhin, a physician and Professor of Basel, besides his
anatomical works, set forth divers of plants. Anno 1596 he set forth
his Phytopinax, or Index of Plants wherein he follows the best
method that any yet found: for according to Lobel's method (which
our author followed) he begins with Grass, Rushes, &c. but then he
briefly gives the Etymology of the name in Greek and Latin, if any
such be, and tells you who of the ancients writ thereof, and in what
part of their works: and lastly (which I chiefly commend him for) he
gives the synonyms or several names of each plant given by each late
writer, and quoteth the pages. Now there is nothing more troublesome
to such as newly enter into this study, than the diversity of names,
which sometimes for the same plant are different in each author;
some of them not knowing that the plant they mention was formerly
written of, name it as a new thing; others knowing it writ of, yet
not approving of the name. In this work he went but through some
half of the history of plants. After this, Anno 1598, he set forth
Matthiolus his Commentaries upon Dioscorides, adding to them 330
Figures, and the descriptions of fifty new ones not formerly
described by any; together with the synonyms of all such as were
described in the work. He also Anno 1613 set forth Tabernamontanus
in Dutch, with some addition of history and figures. In Anno 1620 he
set forth the Prodromus, or fore-runner of his Theatrum Botanicum,
wherein he gives a hundred and forty new figures, and describes some
six hundred plants, the most not described by others. After this,
Anno 1623, he set forth his Pinax Theatri Botanici, whose method is
the same with his Phytopinax, but the quotations of the pages in the
several authors are omitted. This is indeed the Index and summa of
his great and general work, which should contain about six thousand
plants, and was a work of forty years: but he is dead some nine
years agone, and yet this his great work is not in the press, that I
can hear of.

Basil Besler an apothecary of Nuremberg, Anno 1623 set forth the
garden of the Bishop of Eichstätt in Bavaria, the figures being very
large, and all curiously cut in brass, and printed upon the largest
paper: he only gives the synonyms and descriptions, and divideth the
work first into four parts, according to the four seasons of the
year; and then again he subdivides them, each into three, so that
they agree with the months, putting in each class the plants that
flourish at that time.

These are the chief and greatest part of those that either in Greek
or Latin (whose works have come to our hands) have delivered to us
the history of plants; yet there are some who have used great
diligence to help forward this knowledge, whose names I will not
pass over in silence. The first and ancientest of there was Aloysius
Anguillara a physician of Padua, and president of the public garden
there: his opinions of some plants were set forth in Italian at
Venice, 1561.

Melchior Guillandinus, who succeeded Anguillara in the garden at
Padua, writ an Apology against Matthiolus, some Epistles of plants,
and a commentary upon three chapters of Pliny, De Papyro.

Ferantes Imperatus an apothecary of Naples also set forth a Natural
History divided into twenty-eight books, printed at Naples Anno
1599. In this there is something of plants: but I have not yet seen
the opinions of Anguillara, nor this Natural History: yet you shall
find frequent mention of both these in most of the forementioned
authors that writ in their time, or since, wherefore I could not
omit them.

Let me now at last look home, and see who we have had that have
taken pains in this kind. The first that I find worthy of mention is
Dr. William Turner, the first of whose works that I have seen, was a
little book of the names of herbs, in Greek, Latin, English, Dutch,
and French, &c. printed at London Anno 1548. In the year 1551 he set
forth his Herbal or History of Plants, where he gives the figures of
Fuchsius, for the most part: he gives the names in Latin, Greek,
Dutch, and French: he did not treat of many plants; his method was
according to the Latin alphabet. He was a man of good judgment and
learning, and well performed what he took in hand.

After this, Dodonæus was translated into English by Mr. Lyte, as I
formerly mentioned. And some years after, our author set forth this
work, whereof I will presently treat, having first made mention of a
work set forth between that former edition, and this I now present
you withal.
Mr. John Parkinson an apothecary of this city (yet living and
labouring for the common good) in the year 1629 set forth a work by
the name of Paradisus terrestris, wherein he gives the figures of
all such plants as are preserved in gardens, for the beauty of their
flowers, for use in meats or sauces; and also an orchard of all
trees bearing fruit, and such shrubs as for their rarity or beauty
are kept in orchards and gardens, with the ordering, planting and
preserving of all these. In this work he hath not superficially
handled these things, but accurately descended to the very varieties
in each species: wherefore I have now and then referred my Reader
addicted to these delights, to this work especially in flowers and
fruits, wherein I was loth to spend too much time, especially seeing
I could add nothing to what he had done upon that subject before. He
also there promised another work, the which I think by this time is
fit for the Press.

Now am I at length come to this present work, whereof I know you
will expect I should say somewhat; and I will not frustrate your
expectation, but labour to satisfy you in all I may, beginning with
the author, then his work, what it was, and lastly what it now is.

For the author Mr. John Gerard I can say little, but what you also
may gather out of this work; which is, he was born in the year 1545
in Cheshire, at Nantwich, from whence he came to this city, and
betook himself to surgery, wherein his endeavours were such, as he
therein attained to be a Master of that worthy profession: he lived
some ten years after the publishing of this work, and died about the
year 1607. His chief commendation is, that he out of a propense good
will to the public advancement of this knowledge, endeavoured to
perform therein more than he could well accomplish; which was partly
through want of sufficient learning, as (besides that which he
himself saith of himself in the chapter of Water Dock)may be
gathered by the translating of divers places out of the Adversaria;
as this for one in the description of Aster Atticus, Caules pedales
terni aut quaterni [Three or four stalks a foot long] which is
rendered, A stalk four or five foot long. He also by the same defect
called burnt Barley, Hordeum distichon; and divided the titles of
honour from the name of the person whereto they did belong, making
two names thereof, beginning one clause with Julius Alexandrinus
saith, &c. and the next with, Cæsarius Archiater saith. He also was
very little conversant in the writings of the ancients, neither, as
it may seem by divers passages, could he well distinguish between
the ancient and modern writers: for he in one place saith, Neither
by Dioscorides, Fuchsius, or any other ancient writer once
remembered. Divers such there are, which I had rather pass over in
silence, than here set down: neither should I willingly have touched
hereon, but that I have met with some that have too much admired
him, as the only learned and judicious writer. But let none blame
him for these defects, seeing he was neither wanting in pains nor
good will, to perform what he intended; and there are none so simple
but know, that heavy burdens are with most pains undergone by the
weakest men: and although there were many faults in the work, yet
judge well of the author; for as a late writer well saith, Falli &
hallucinari humanum est; solitudinem quærat oportet, qui vult cum
perfectis vivere. Pensanda vitiis bona cuiusque sunt, & qua maior
pars ingenii stetit, ea iudicandum de homine est.

Now let me acquaint you how this work was made up. Dodonæus his
Pentades coming forth Anno 1583, were shortly after translated into
English by Dr. Priest a physician of London, who died either
immediately before or after the finishing of his translation. This I
had first by the relation of one who knew Dr. Priest and Mr. Gerard:
and it is apparent by the work itself, which you shall find to
contain the Pentades of Dodonaus translated, so that divers chapters
have scarce a word more or less than what is in him. But I cannot
commend my author for endeavouring to hide this thing from us,
cavilling (though commonly unjustly) with Dodonæus, wheresoever he
names him, making it a thing of hearsay, that Dr. Priest translated
Dodonæus: when in the Epistle of his friend Mr. Bredwell, prefixed
before this work, are these words: The first gatherers out of the
ancients, and augmenters by their own pains, have already spread the
odour of their good names through all the lands of learned
habitations: Dr. Priest for translating so much as Dodonæus, hath
hereby left a tomb for his honourable sepulture. Mr. Gerard coming
last, but not the least, hath many ways accommodated the whole work
unto our English Nation, &c. But that which may serve to clear all
doubts, if any can be in a thing so manifest, is a place in Lobel's
Annotations upon Rondeletius his Pharmacopeia, where, page 59, he
finds fault with Dodonæus, for using barbarously the word Seta for
Sericum and with Dr. Priest, who (saith he) at the charges of Mr.
Norton translated Dodonæus, and deceived by this word Seta,
committed an absurd error in translating it a bristle, when as it
should have been silk. This place so translated is to be seen in the
chapter of the Scarlet Oak, at the letter F. And Lobel well knew
that it was Dr. Priest that committed this error, and therefore
blames not Mr. Gerard, to whom he made show of friendship, and who
was yet living: but yet he covertly gave us to understand, that the
work wherein that error was committed, was a translation of
Dodonæus, and that made by Dr. Priest, and set forth by Mr. Norton.
Now this translation became the ground-work whereupon Mr. Gerard
built up this work: but that it might not appear a translation, he
changes the general method of Dodonæus, into that of Lobel, and
therein almost all over follows his Icones both in method and names,
as you may plainly see in the Grass and Orchids To this translation
he also added some plants out of Clusius, and other some out of the
Adversaria, and some fourteen of his own not before mentioned. Now
to this history figures were wanting, which all so Mr. Norton
procured from Frankfurt, being the same wherewith the works of
Tabernamontamus were printed in Dutch: but this fell cross for my
author, who (as it seems) having no great judgement in them,
frequently put one for another: and besides, there were many plants
in those authors which he followed, which were not in
Tabernamontanus, and divers in him which they wanted, yet he put
them all together, and one for another; and oft times by this means
so confounded all, that none could possibly have set them right,
unless they knew this occasion of these errors. By this means, and
after this manner was the work of my author made up, which was
printed at the charges of Mr. Norton, An. 1597.

Now it remains I acquaint you with what I have performed in this
Edition, which is either by mending what was amiss, or by adding
such as formerly were wanting: some places I helped by putting out,
as the kinds in the chapter of Stonecrop, where there was but one
mentioned. I have also put out the kinds in divers places else where
they were not very necessary, by this means to get more room for
things more necessary as also divers figures and descriptions which
were put in two or three places, I have put them out in all but one,
yet so, as that I always give you notice where they were, and of
what. Some words or passages are also put out here and there, which
I think needless to mention. Sometimes I mended what was amiss or
defective, by altering or adding one or more words, as you may
frequently observe if you compare the former edition with this in
some few chapters almost in any place. But think I shall best
satisfy you if I briefly specify what is done in each particular,
having first acquainted you with what my general intention was: I
determined, as well as the shortness of my time would give me leave,
to retain and set forth whatsoever was formerly in the book
described, or figured without descriptions (some varieties that were
not necessary excepted) and to these I intended to add whatsoever
was figured by Lobel, Dodonæus, or Clusius, whose figures we made
use of; as also such plants as grow either wild, or usually in the
gardens of this kingdom, which were not mentioned by any of the
forenamed authors; for I neither thought it fit nor requisite for
me, ambitiously to aim at all that Bauhin in his Pinax reckons up,
or the Exotics of Prosper Alpinus containe not mentioned in the
former. This was my general intention. Now come I to particulars,
and first of figures: I have, as I said, made use of those wherewith
the works of Dodonæus, Lobel, and Clusius were formerly printed,
which, though some of them be not so sightly, yet are they generally
as truly expressed, and sometimes more. Such as were formerly
figured in the book, though put for other things; and so having no
description therein, I have caused to be new cut and put into their
fit places, with descriptions to them. The next are the
Descriptions, which I have in some places lightly amended, in others
much altered, or new written. The next is the Place, which I have
seldom altered, yet in some places supplied, and in others I have
put doubts, & do suspect other some to be false, which because I had
not yet viewed, I left as I found. The Time was a thing of no such 
moment, for any matter worth mentioning to be performed upon,
wherefore I will not insist upon it. Names are of great importance,
and in them I should have been a little more curious if I had had
more time, as you may see at the first have been; but finding it a
troublesome work, I have only afterwards where I judged it most
needful insisted upon it: Bauhin in his Pinax may supply what you in
this kind find wanting. In many places of this work you shall find
large discourses and sometimes controversies handled by our author
in the names; these are for the most part out of Dononæus, & some of
them were so abbreviated, and by that means confounded, that I
thought it not worth my pains to mend them, so I have put them out
in some few places, and referred you to the places in Dodonæus out
of which they were taken, as in the chapter of Ale-hoof: it may be
they are not so perfect as they should be in some very few other
places, (for I could not compare all) but if you suspect any such 
thing, have recourse to that author, and you shall find full
satisfaction.

Now come I to the Temper and Virtues. These commonly were taken
forth of the fore-mentioned author, and here and there out of
Lobel's Observations, and Camerarius his Hortus Medicus. To these he
also added some few receipts of his own: these I have not altered,
but here and there showed to which they did most properly belong; as
also if I found them otherwise than they ought, I noted it; or if in
unfit places, I have transferred them to the right place, and in
divers things whereof our author hath been silent, I have supplied
that defect.

Further, I must acquaint you how there were the descriptions of a
few plants here and there put in unfitting places, which made me
describe them as new added, as Saxifraga maior Matthioli, Persicaria
siliquosa, of which in the chapter of Persicaria there was an ill
description, but a reasonable good one in the chapter of Astrantia
nigra. Papaver spinosum, was figured and described amongst the
Cardui; now all these (as I said) I added as new in the most fitting
places: yet found them afterwards described, but put them out all,
except the last, whose history I still retaining, with a reference
to the preceding figure and history. Note all so, wheresoever my
author formerly mentioned Clusius, according to his Spanish or
Pannonic Observations, I have made it, according to his History,
which contains them both with additions.

Also I must certify you, (because I know it is a thing that some
will think strange, that the number of the pages in this book do no
more exceed that of the former, considering there is such a large
accession of matter and figures) the cause hereof is, each page
contains divers lines more than the former, the lines themselves
also being longer; and by the omission of descriptions and figures
put twice or thrice over, and the kinds unnecessarily put in some
places, I gained as much as conveniently I could, being desirous
that it might be bound together in one volume.

Thus have I showed what I have performed in this work, entreating
you to take this my labour in good part; and if there be any defect
therein (as needs there must in all human works) ascribe it in part 
to my haste and many businesses, and in some places to the want of
sufficient information, especially in exotic things, and in other
some, to the little conversation I formerly had with this author,
before such time as (overcome by the importunity of some friends,
and the general want of such a work) I took this task upon me.
Furthermore I desire, that none would rashly censure me for that
which I have here done; but they that know in what time I did it,
and who themselves are able to do as much as I have here performed,
for to such alone I shall give free liberty, and will be as ready to
yield further satisfaction if they desire it, concerning anything I
have here asserted, as I shall be apt to neglect and scorn the
censure of the ignorant and unlearned, who I know are still forward
to verify our English proverb A fool's bolt is soon shot.

I must not in silence pass over those from whom I have received any
favour or encouragement, whereby I might be the better enabled to
perform this task. In the first place let me remember the only
assistant I had in this work, which was Mr. John Goodyer of Maple
Durham in Hampshire, from whom I received many accurate
descriptions, and some other observations concerning plants; the
which (desirous to give every man his due) I have caused to be so
printed, as they may be distinguished from the rest: and thus you
shall know them; in the beginning is the name of the plant in Latin
in a line by itself, and at the end his name is inserted; so that
the Reader may easily find those things that I had from him, and I
hope together with me will be thankful to him, that he would so
readily impart them for the further increase of this knowledge.

Mr. George Bowles of Chislehurst in Kent must not here be forgot,
for by his travails and industry I have had knowledge of divers
plants, which were not thought nor formerly known to grow wild in
this kingdom, as you shall find by divers places in this book. My
loving friends and fellow travailers in this study (Thomas Hickes,
John Buggs, William Broad, Job Weale, Leonard Buckner, James Clarke,
Robert Lorkin), and of the same profession, whose company I have
formerly enjoyed in searching over a great part of Kent, and who are
still ready to do the like in other places, are here also to be
remembered: and that the rather, because this knowledge amongst us
in this city was almost lost, or at least too much neglected,
especially by those to whom it did chiefly belong, and who ought to
be ashamed of ignorance, especially in a thing so absolutely
necessary to their profession. They should indeed know them as
workmen do their tools, that is readily to call them by their names,
know where to fetch, and whence to procure the best of each kinds
and lastly, how to handle them.

I have already much exceeded the bounds of an epistle, yet have
omitted many things of which I could further have informed thee
reader, but I will leave them until such time as I find a grateful 
acceptance or some other occasion that may again invite me to set
pen to paper; which, that it may be for my country's good and God's
glory, shall ever be the prayers and endeavours of thy well-wisher.

From my house on Snow-hill,
Octob. 22. 1633.
THOMAS JOHNSON



THE FIRST BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF PLANTS.
Containing Grass, Rushes, Reeds, Corn, Flags, and Bulbous, or Onion-
rooted plants.


In this History of plants it would be tedious to use by way of
introduction any curious discourse upon the general division of
plants, contained in Latin under Arbor, Frutex, Suffrutex, Herba: or
to speak of the differing names of their several parts, more in
Latin than our vulgar tongue can well express. Or to go about to
reach thee, or rather to beguile thee by the smell or taste, to
guess at the temperature of plants when as all and every of these in
their place shall have their true face and note, whereby thou mayest
both know and use them.

In three books therefore, as in three gardens, all our plants are
bestowed; sorted as near as might be in kindred and neighbourhood.

The first book hath grass, rushes, corn, reeds, flags, bulbous or
onion-rooted plants.

The second, most sorts of herbs used for meat, medicine, or sweet
smelling.

The third hath trees, shrubs, bushes, fruit-bearing plants, rosins,
gums, roses, heaths, mosses, mushrooms, coral, and their several
kinds.

Each book hath Chapters, as for each herb a bed: and every plant
presents thee with the Latin and English name in the title, placed
over the picture of the plant.

Then followeth the kinds, description, place, time, names, natures,
and virtues, agreeing with the best received opinions.

And thus having given thee a general view of this garden, now with
our friendly labours we will accompany thee and lead thee through a
grass-plot, little or nothing of many herbarists heretofore touched;
and begin with the most common or best known grass, which is called
in Latin Gramen pratense; and then by little and little conduct thee
through most pleasant gardens and other delightful places, where any
herb or plant may be found fit for meat or medicine.



CHAP 1. Of Meadow Grass.


Fig. 1. Meadow Grass (1)
Fig. 2. Small Meadow Grass (2)
	There be sundry and infinite kinds of Grass not mentioned by
the ancients, either as unnecessary to be set down, or unknown to
them: only they make mention of some few, whose wants we mean to
supply, in such as have come to our knowledge, referring the rest to
the curious searcher of simples.
The Description

1. Common Meadow Grass hath very small tufts or roots, with thick
hairy threads depending upon the highest turf, matting and creeping
on the ground with a most thick and apparent show of wheaten leaves,
lifting up long thin jointed and light stalks, a foot or a cubit
high, growing small and sharp at the top, with a loose ear hanging
downward, like the tuft or top of the common Reed.

2. Small Meadow Grass differeth from the former in the variety of
the soil; for as the first kind groweth in meadows, so doth this
small grass clothe the hilly and more dry grounds untilled, and
barren by nature; a grass more fit for sheep than for greater
cattle. And because the kinds of Grass do differ apparently in root,
tuft, stalk, leaf, sheath, ear, or crest, we may assure ourselves
that they are endowed with several virtues, formed by the Creator
for the use of man, although they have been by a common negligence
hidden and unknown. And therefore in this our labour we have placed
each of them in their several bed, where the diligent searcher of
nature, may if so he please, place his learned observations.

The Place

Common Meadow-Grass groweth of itself unset or unsown, everywhere;
but the small Meadow-Grass for the most part groweth upon dry and
barren grounds, as partly we have touched in the description

The Time

Concerning the time when Grass springeth and seedeth, I suppose
there is none so simple but knoweth it, and that it continueth all
the whole year, seeding in June and July. Neither needeth it any
propagation or replanting by seed or otherwise; no not so much as
the watery Grass, but that they recover themselves again, although
they have been drowned in water all the winter long, as may appear
in the wild fens in Lincolnshire, and such like places.

The Names

Grass is called in Latin, Gramen, as it is thought a gradiendo, quod
geniculatis internodiis serpat crebroque novas spargat radices: for
it groweth, goeth, or spreadeth itself unset or unsown naturally
over all fields or grounds, clothing them with a fair and perfect
green. It is yearly mowed, in some places twice, and in some rare
places thrice. Then is it dried and withered by the heat of the sun,
with often turning it; and then is it called Foenum, nescio a
foenere aut foetu. In English, Hay: in French, Le herb du praiz.

The Nature

The roots and seeds of Grass are of more use in physic than the
herb, and are accounted of writers moderately to open obstructions,
and provoke urine.

The Virtues

A. The decoction of Grass with the roots of Parsley drunk, helpeth
the dysury, and provoketh urine.

B. The roots of Grass, according to Galen, do glue and consolidate
together new and bleeding wounds.

C. The juice of grass mixed with honey and the powder of
Southernwood taken in drink, killeth worms in children, but if the
child be young, or tender of nature, it shall suffice to mix the
juice of Grass, and the gall of an ox or bull together, and
therewith anoint the child's belly, and lay a clout wet therewith
upon the navel.

D. Fernelius saith, that grass doth help the obstructions of the
liver, reins and kidneys and the inflammation of the reins called
nephritis.

E. Hay sodden in water till it be tender, and applied hot to the
chaps of beasts that be chap-fallen, through long standing in pound
or stable without meat, is a present remedy.



CHAP. 2. Of Red Dwarf-Grass.
 

Fig. 3. Red Dwarf Grass (1)
Fig. 4. White Dwarf grass (2)

The Description.

1. Dwarf Grass is one of the least of Grasses. The root consists of
many little bulbs, covered with a reddish film or skin, with very
many small hairy and white strings: the tuft or ear is of a reddish
colour, and not much differing from the grass called Ischæmon,
though the ear be softer, broader and more beautiful.

2. This kind of Grass hath small hairy roots; the leaves are small
and short, as also the stalk, which on the top thereof bears a
panicle not much unlike the small meadow Grass, but less: the colour
thereof is sometimes white, and otherwhiles reddish; whence some
have given two figures, which I thinking needless, have only
retained the later, and for the former given the figure of another
Grass, intended by our author to be comprehended in this Chapter.


Fig. 5. Small Hard Grass (3)
Fig. 6. Rush Grass (4)


3. Small Hard Grass hath small roots compact of little strings or
threads, from which come forth many sour rushy leaves of the length
of an inch and a half: the tuft or ear is compact of many panicles
or very little ears, which to your feeling are very hard or harsh.
This Grass is unpleasant, and no wholesome food for cattle.

4. Rush-Grass is a small plant some handful high, having many small
rushy leaves tough and pliant, as are the common Rushes: whereupon
do grow small leafy or chaffy husks, instead of flowers, like those
of Rushes, but smaller. The root is thready like the former. There
is a variety of this to be found in bogs, with the seeds bigger, and
the leaves and whole plant lesser.

The Place

1. The Dwarf-Grass doth grow on heathy rough and dry barren grounds
in most places of England.

2. The white Dwarf-Grass is not so common as the former, yet doth it
grow very plentifully among the hop gardens in Essex and many other
places.

3. Small Hard-Grass groweth in moist fresh marshes, and such like
places.

4. Rush-Grass groweth in salt marshes near unto the sea, where the
marshes have been overflown with salt water. It also groweth in many
wet woods, lanes, and such places, as in the lane going by Tottenham
Court towards Hampstead. The lesser variety hereof grows on the bogs
upon Hampstead Heath.

The Time.

These kinds of Grass do grow, flower, and flourish when the common
Meadow-Grass doth.

The Names.

It sufficeth what hath been said of the names in the description, as
well, in English as Latin; only that some have deemed White Dwarf-
Grass to be called Xerampelinum.

Rush-Grass hath been taken for Holosteum Mathioli.

The Names in particular.

1. This I here give you in the first place is the Gramen minimum
Xerampelinum of Lobel: it is the Gramen of Matthiolus, and Gramen
bulbosum of Dalechampius. Our author did not understand what
Xerampelinus signified, when as he said the white Dwarf-Grass was so
termed; for the word imports red, or murrey, such a colour as the
withered leaves of Vines are of.

2. Tabernamontanus calls this, Gramen panniculatum minus.

3. Lobel calls this, Exile Gramen durius.

4. This by Matthiolus was called Holostium: by Thalius, Gramen
epigonatocaulon: by Tabernamontanus, Gra. Busonium, that is, Toad-
Grass.

The Nature and Virtues.

These kinds of Grass do agree as it is thought with the common
Meadow-Grass, in nature and virtues, notwithstanding they have not
been used in physic as yet, that I can read of.



CHAP. 3. Of Corn-Grass.


Fig. 7. Corn Grass (1)
Fig. 8. Reed Grass (2)

The Description.

1. Corn-Grass hath many grassy leaves resembling those of Rye, or
rather Oats, amongst the which cometh up slender benty stalks, kneed
or jointed like those of corn, whereupon groweth a fair tuft or
panicle not much unlike to the feather-like tuft of common Reed, but
rounder, compact together like unto Millet. The root is thready like
those of Oats.

2. Reed-Grass hath many thin grassy leaves like the former: the
bushy top, with his long feather-like panicles do resemble the
common Reed; which is lightly shaken with the wind, branched upon a
long slender reeden stalk, kneed or jointed like corn. The root is
small and fibrous.

The Place and Time.

These kinds of Grass grow for the most part near hedges, & in fallow
fields in most places. Their time of springing, flowering, and
fading may be referred to the common Meadow-Grass.

The Names.

1. The first is called in English, Corn-Grass. Lobel calls this,
Segetum gramen pannicula speciosa latiore: others term it Gramen
segetale, for that it usually groweth among corn; the which I have
not as yet seen.

2. The second is called in English, Reed-Grass: of Lobel in Latin,
Gramen agrorum latiore, arundinacea, & comosapannicula, for that his
tuft or panicles do resemble the Reed: and Spica venti agrorum, by
reason of his feather-top, which is easily shaken with the wind.
Some in English, much agreeable to the Latin name, call these,
Windle-straws. Now I take this last to be the Grass with which we in
London do usually adorn our chimneys in summer time: and we commonly
call the bundle of it handsomely made up for our use, by the name of
Bents.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These Grasses are thought to agree with common Grass, as well in
temperature as virtues, although not used in physic.



CHAP. 4. Of Millet grass.


Fig. 9. Millet Grass (1)
Fig. 10. Great Water Grass (2)

The Description.

1. Millet Grass is but a slender Grass, bearing a tuft or ear like
unto the common Meadow-Grass, but consisting of small seeds or
chaffy heads like to Milium, or Millet, whereof it took the name.
The stalk or leaves do resemble the Bent, wherewith country people
do trim their houses.

2. The Great Water-Grass in root, leaf, tuft, and reeden stalk doth
very well resemble the Grasse called in Latin, Gramen sulcatum, or
Pictium: and by our English women, Lady-laces, because it is striped
or furrowed with white and green streaks like silk laces, but yet
differs from that, that this Water-Grass doth get unto itself some
new roots from the middle of the stalks and joints, which the other
doth not. This is a large Grass, having stalks almost as thick as
one's little finger, with the leaves answerable unto them, and a
little roughish: the tuft is somewhat like a reed, but less, and
whitish coloured.

The Place, Names, Nature, and Virtues.

The former grows in meadows, and about hedges, and the later is to
be found in most fenny and watery places, and have their virtues and
natures common with the other Grass, for anything that we can find
in writing. The reason of their names may be gathered out of



CHAP. 5. Of Darnel Grass.


Fig. 11. Darnel Grass (1)
Fig. 12. Wild Reed (2)
The Description

1. Darnel Grass, or Gramen Sorghinum, as Lobel hath very properly
termed it, hath a brownish stalk thick and knotty, set with long
sharp leaves like unto the common Dog's Grass: at the top whereof
groweth a tuft or ear of a grayish colour, somewhat like Sorghum,
whereof it took his name.

2. Wild Reed, or Gramen harundinaceum panniculatum, called also
Calamogrostis, is far bigger than Couch grass, or Dog's grass, and
in stalks and leaves more rough, rugged, and cutting. It is bad food
for cattle, though they want, or be very hungry; and deadly to
sheep, because that, as the husbandman saith, it is a cause of
leanness in them, thirst, and consumption; it cutteth their tongue,
straiteneth the gullet or throat, and draweth down blood into the
stomach or maw; whereof ensueth inflammation, and death for the most
part. And not only this Calamogrostis is hurtful, but also all other
kinds of shearing leaved reeds, flags, sedge, or the like, which
have as it were edges;and cut on both tides like knives as well
men's fingers, as cattles' mouths. This herb is in a mean between
reed & grass. The root is white, creeping downwards very deep. The
spike or ear is like unto the reed, being soft and cottony, somewhat
resembling Panic.

Fig. 13. Lesser Reed Grass (3)

3. This in root, stalks, and leaves is like to the last described,
but that they are lesser: the top or head is a long single spike or
ear, not severed or parted into many ears like the top of the
precedent, and by this and the magnitude it may chiefly be
distinguished from it.

The Place.

The first grows in fields and orchards almost everywhere; the other
grow in fenny waterish places.

The Names.

2. This in Lincolnshire is called Sheer-Grass, or Hen: in other
parts of England, wild Reed: in Latin, Calamogrostis. As for their
natures and virtues we do not find any great use of them worth the
setting down.



CHAP. 6. Of Feather-top, Fern, and Wood-Grass.

 
Fig. 14. Feather-top (1)
Fig. 15. Fern-Grass (2)

The Descripton.

1. This might fitly have been put to those mentioned in the
foregoing chapter, but that our author determined it for this, as
may appear by the mention made of it in the names, as also by the
description hereof, framed from the figure we here give you. This
Grass is garnished with chaffy and downy tufts, set upon a long
benty stalk of two cubits high or somewhat more, naked without any
blades or leaves, for the most part. His root is tough and hard. The
top is commonly of a red or murrey colour, and the leaves soft and
downy.

2. This is a very pretty and elegant grass: it in roots and leaves
is not unlike to the usual Meadow Grass; the stalk riseth to the
height of a foot, and at the top thereof it beareth a beautiful
panicle, (whence the French and Spanish nations call it Amourettes,
that is, the Lovely Grass.) This head consists of many little ears,
shaped much like those of the ordinary Quaking Grass, longer and
flatter, being composed of more scales, so that each of them
somewhat resembles the leaf of a small Fern, whence I have called it
Fern-Grass. These tops when they are ripe are white and are gathered
where they grow naturally to beautify garlands.

Fig. 16. Greater Wood-Grass (3)

3. Wood-Grass hath many small and thready roots, compact together in
manner of a tuft; from which spring lmmediately out of the earth
many grey leaves, among the which are sundry benty stalks, naked and
without leaves or blades like the former, bearing at the top a soft
spiky tuft or ear much like unto a fox-tail, of a brownish colour.

4. This in leaves, stalks, roots, manner and place of growing is
like the last described; the only difference between them is, that
this hath much less, yet sharper or rougher ears or tufts. Because
the difference between the last described and this is so small, we
have spared the figure, to make room for others more different and
note-worthy.

The Time and Place.

1. This kind of grass grows in fertile fields and pastures.

2. The second grows in divers places of Spain and France.

The other two grow in woods.

The Names.

1. Lobel in Latin calls this Gramen tomentosum & Acerosum. Some have
taken it for the second kind of Calamogrostis; but most commonly it
is called Gramen plumosum: and in English, a Bent, or Feather-top
Grass.

2. Gramen panniculatum is called by some Heragrostis in Greek. Lobel
calls this Gramen panniculosum phalaroides. And it is named in the
Hist. Lugd. Gramen filiceum, seu polyanthos: that is, Fern, or many-
flowered Grass.

3. Gramen sylvaticum, or as it pleaseth others, Gramen nemorosum, is
called in our tongue, wood Grass, or shadow Grass.



CHAP. 7. Of Great Fox-tail grass.


Fig. 17. Great Fox-tail Grass
(1)
Fig. 18. Small Fox-tail Grass
(2)

The Description.

1. The Great Fox-tail Grass hath many thready roots like the common
Meadow Grass, and the stalk riseth immediately from the root, in
fashion like unto Barley, with two or three leaves or blades like
Oats; but is nothing rough in handling, but soft and downy, and
somewhat hoary, bearing one ear or tuft on the top, and never more;
fashioned like a Fox-tail, whereof it took his name. At the approch
of winter it dieth, and recovereth itself the next year by falling
of his seed.

2. The lesser Fox-tail Grass hath a tough and hard root compact of
many small strings, yielding a strawy stalk like the former, though
somewhat lesser, with the like top or crest, but of a whitish
colour.


Fig. 17. Great Bastard Fox-tail
grass (3)
Fig. 18. Small Bastard Fox-tail
grass (4)
	3. Great Bastard Fox-tail Grass hath a strawy stalk or stem,
which riseth to the height of a cubit and an half, having a small
root consisting of many fibres. His leaf is small and grassy, and on
his top one tuft or spike, or ear of a hard chaffy substance, some
three inches long, composed of longish seeds, each having a little
beard or awn.

4. Small Bastard Fox-tail Grass doth resemble the former, saving
that this kind doth not send forth such large stalks and ears as the
other, but smaller, and not so close packed together, neither having
so long beards or awns.

The Place and Time.

These wild Bastard Fox-tail Grasses do grow in the moist furrows of
fertile fields, towards the later end of summer.

The Names.

The first by Lobel and Tabernamontanus is called Gramen phalaroides.
The other Lobel calleth 2. Gramen Alopecuroides. 3. Minus. 4. Minus
alterum.



CHAP. 8. Of Cat's-tail Grass.

Fig. 21. Small Cat's-Tail Grass

The Description.

1. Great Cat's-tail Grass hath very small roots, compact of many
small skins or threads, which may easily be taken from the whole
root. The stalk riseth up in the midst, and is somewhat like unto
wild Barley, kneed and jointed like corn, of a foot high or
thereabout; bearing at the top a handsome round close compact ear
resembling the cat's tail.

2. The small Cat's-tail grass is like unto the other, differing
chiefly in that it is lesser than it. The root is thick and cloved
like those of Rush Onions, or Chives, with many small strings or
hairy threads annexed unto it.

3. There is another that grows plentifully in many places about
London, the which may fitly be referred to this classis. The root
thereof is a little bulb, from whence ariseth a stalke some two foot
or better high, set at each joint with long grassy leaves: the spike
or ear is commonly four or five inches long, closely and handsomely
made in the fashion of the precedent, which in the shape it doth
very much resemble.

The Place and Time.

These kinds of Grass do grow very well near watery places, as Gramen
Cyperoides doth, and flourish at the same time that all the others
do.

The latter may be found by the bridge entering into Chelsea field,
as one goeth from Saint James to little Chelsea.

The Names.

The Latins call it Gramen Typhinum, of Typha, a Cat's tail: and it
may in English as well be called Round Bent-Grass, as Cat's-tail
Grass.

The last described is by Bauhin, who first gave the figure and
description thereof in his Prodomus, pag. 10, called Gramen
Typhoides maximum spica longissima; that is, the largest Fox-tail
Grass with a very long ear.



CHAP. 9. Of Cyperus Grass.


Fig. 22. Cyperus Grass (1)
Fig. 23. Rushy Water-Grass. (2)

The Description.

1. Cyperus Grass hath roots somewhat like Cyperus, whereof it took
his name: his leaves are long and large like unto the common reed:
the stalk doth grow to the height of a cubit in some places, upon
which groweth little scaly knobs or ears, spike fashion, somewhat
like unto Cat's-tail, or Reed-mace, very chaffy, rough, and rugged.

2. Rushy Water-Grass hath his roots like the former, with many
fibres or strings hanging at them; and creepeth along upon the
uppermost face of the earth, or rather mud, wherein it groweth,
bearing at each joint one slender benty stalk, set with a few small
grassy blades or leaves, bringing forth at the top in little hoods,
small feather-like tufts or ears.

The Place, Time, and Names.

They grow, as I have insinuated, in miry and muddy grounds, in the
same season that others do. And concerning their names there hath
been said enough in their titles.



CHAP. 10. Of Water-Grass.


Fig. 24. Water-Grass. (1)
Fig. 25. Spiked Water-Grass. (2)

The Description.

1. Water-Grass, or as we term it, Water Bur-Grass, hath a few
slender and long jointed leaves: among which riseth up a stalk of
two foot high, bearing on his small and tender branches, certain
little rough knobs, or brownish sharp pointed seeds made up into
cornered heads; his root is small and thready.

The figure of this plant is not well expressed, for it should have
had the leaves made narrower, and joints expressed in them, like as
you may see in the Gramen juncum sylvaticum, which is the ninth in
the sixteenth chapter; for that and this are so like, that I know no
other difference between them, but that this hath leaves longer and
narrower than that, and the heads smaller and whiter. There is a
reasonable good figure of this in the Historia Lugd. p. 1001, under
the name of Arundo minima.

2. Spiked Water-Grass hath long narrow leaves: the stalk is small,
single, and naked, without leaves or blades, bearing alongst the
same toward the top an ear or spike made of certain small buttons,
resembling the buttony flowers of Sea Wormwood. His root is thick &
tough, full of fibres or threads.

The Place and Time.

They differ not from the former kinds of Grass in place and time:
and their names are manifest.

The Nature and Virtues.

Their nature and virtues are referred unto Dog's Grass, whereof we
will speak hereafter.



CHAP. 11. Of Float-Grass.

Fig. 26. Float-Grass (1 above, 2 below)

The Description.

1. Float-Grass hath a long and round root somewhat thick, like unto
Dog's-Grass, set on even joints with small strings or threads; from
the which rise up long and crooked stalks, crossing, winding, and
folding one within another with many flaggy leaves, which horses eat
greedily of. At the top of these stalks, and somewhat lower, there
come forth very many little ears of a whitish colour, composed of
two ranks of little chaffy seeds set alternately, each of these
small ears being almost an inch in length.

2. Spike Float-Grass, or Spiked Float-Grass beareth at the top of
each slender creeping stalk one spiked ear and no more, and the
other many, which maketh a difference betwixt them; otherwise they
are one like the other. His root is compact, tufted, and made of
many thrummy threads.

The Place.

The first of these grows everywhere in waters. The second is harder
to be found.

The Names.

1. The first is called Gramen fluviatile, and also Gramen aquis
innatans: in English, Float-Grass. Tragus calls it, Gramen Anatum,
Duck's-Grass.

2. The second is called Gramen fluviatile spicatum, and fluviatile
album by Tabernamontanus. Likewise in English it is called Float-
Grass, and Floater-Grass, because they swim and float in the water.



CHAP. 12. Of Kneed-Grass.


Fig. 27. Kneed-Grass (1)
Fig. 28 Water Kneed-Grass (2)

The Description.

1. Kneed-Grass hath straight and upright strawy stalks, with joints
like to the straw of corn, and beareth small grassy leaves or blades
spiked at the top like unto Panic, with a rough ear of a dark brown
colour. His roots are hairy and thready, and the joints of the straw
are very large and conspicuous.

2. Water Kneed-Grass hath many long and slender stems, jointed with
many knobby and gouty knees like unto Reed, set with broad flaggy
leaves somewhat sharp pointed; bearing at the top a tuft or panicle
divided into sundry small branches, of a duskish colour. His root is
thready like the other.

The Place, Time, and Names.

These grasses do grow in fertile moist meadows, not differing in
time from others. And they are called Geniculata, because they have
large joints like as it were knees.

We have nothing delivered us of their nature and properties.



CHAP. 13. Of Bearded Panic Grass.

Fig. 29. Bearded Panic Grass (1)

1. Bearded Panic Grass hath broad and large leaves like Barley,
somewhat hoary, or of an overworn russet colour. The stalks have two
or three joints at the most, and many ears on the top, without
order; upon some stalks more ears; on others fewer, much like unto
the ear of wild Panic, but that this hath many beards or awns, which
the other wants.


Fig. 30. Small Panic Grass (2)

2. Small Panic Grass, as Lobel writeth, in roots, leaves, joints,
and stalks is like the former, saving that the ear is much less,
consisting of fewer rows of seed, contained in small chaffy blackish
husks. This, as the former, hath many ears upon one stalk.


Fig. 31. Single Eared Panic Grass (3)

3. This small Panic Grass from a thready root sendeth forth many
little stalks, whereof some are one handful, other-some little more
than an inch high, and each of these stalks on the top sustains one
single ear, in shape very like unto the ear of wild Panic, but about
half the length. The stalks of this are commonly crooked, and set 
with grassy leaves like to the rest of this kind.

The Place and Time.

The first of these two doth grow near unto mud walls, or such like
places not manured, yet fertile or fruitful.

The second groweth in shallow watery plashes of pastures, and at the
same time with others. I have not as yet observed any of these three
growing wild.

The Names and Virtues.

They are called Panic Grass, because they are like the Italian corn
called Panic. Their nature and virtues are not known.



CHAP. 14. Of Hedgehog Grass.


Fig. 32. Hedgehog Grass (1)
Fig. 33. Hairy Grass (2)

The Description.

Hedgehog Grass hath long stiff flaggy leaves with stalks proceeding
from a thick spreading root; and at the top of every stalk grow
certain round and pricking knobs fashioned like an Hedgehog.

2. The second is rough and hairy: his roots do spread and creep
under the mud and mire as Cyperus doth; and at the top of the stalks
are certain round soft heads, their colour being brown, intermixed
with yellow, so that they look prettily when as they are in their
prime.

Fig. 34. Round-headed Silver-Grass (3)

3. This Grass hath a small and fibrous root, from which rise leaves
like those of Wheat, but with some long white hairs upon them like
those of the last described: at the tops of the stalks (which are
some foot or better high) there grow two or three round heads
consisting of soft and white downy threads. These heads are said to
shine in the night, and therefore they in Italy call it (according
to Cæsalpinus) Luciola, quia noctu lucet.

4. To this I may add another growing also in Italy, and first
described by Fabius Columna. It hath small creeping jointed roots,
out of which come small fibres, and leaves little and very narrow at
the first, but those that are upon the stalks are as long again,
encompassing the stalks, as in Wheat, Dog's-Grass, and the like.
These leaves are crested all along, and a little forked at the end:
the straw or stalk is very slender, at the top whereof grows a sharp
prickly round head, much after the manner of the last described:
each of the seed-vessels whereof this head consists ends in a
prickly stalk having five or seven points, whereof the uppermost
that is in the middle is the longest. The seed that is contained in
these prickly vessels is little and transparent, like in colour to
that of Cow-Wheat. The flowers (as in others of this kind) hang
trembling upon yellowish small threads.

The Place and Time.

1 & 2. They grow in watery meadows and fields, as you may see in
Saint George's fields and such like places.

3 & 4. Both these grow in divers mountainous places of Italy; the
later whereof flowers in May.

The Names.

1. The first is called Hedgehog Grass, and in Latin, Gramen
Echinatum, by reason of those prickles which are like unto a
Hedgehog.

2. The second hairy Grass is called Gramen exile hirsutum
Cyperoides, because it is small and little, and rough or hairy like
a goat: and Cyperoides, because his roots do spring and creep like
the Cyperus.

3. This by Anguillara is thought to be Combretum of Pliny; it is
Gram. lucidum of Tabernamontanus; and Gramen hirsutum capitolo
globoso, of Bauhin, Pin. pag. 7.

4. Fabius Columna calls this, Gramen montanum Echinatum tribuloides
capitatum and Bauhin nameth it, Gramen spica subrotunda echinata. We
may call it in English, Round-headed Caltrop Grass.

The Virtues

3. The head of this (which I have thought good to call Silver-Grass) 
is very good to be applied to green wounds, and effectual to stay
bleeding, Cæsalp.



CHAP. 15. Of Hairy Wood-Grass.


Fig. 35. Hairy Wood-Grass (1)
Fig. 36. Cyperus Wood-Grass (2)

The Description.

1. Hairy Wood-Grass hath broad rough leaves somewhat like the
precedent, but much longer, and they proceed from a thready root,
which is very thick, and full of strings, as the common Grass, with
small stalks rising up from the same roots; but the top of these
stalks is divided into a number of little branches, and on the end
of every one of them standeth a little flower or husk like the top
of Allium ursinum, or common Ramsons, wherein the seed is contained
when the flower is fallen.

2. Cyperus Wood-Grass hath many sheary grassy leaves, proceeding
from a root made of many hairy strings or threads: among which there
riseth up sundry straight and upright stalks, on whose tops are
certain scaly and chaffy husks, or rather spiky blackish ears, not
much unlike the catkins or tags which grow on Nut-trees, or Alder
trees.

The Place, Time, and Names.

There two grow in woods or shadowy places, and may in English be
called Wood-Grass. Their time is common with the rest.
Their Nature and Virtues.

There is nothing to be said of their nature and virtues, being as
unknown as most of the former.



CHAP. 16. Of Sea Spike-Grass.


Fig. 37. Sea Spike-Grass (1)
Fig. 38. Salt-marsh Spike-Grass
(2)

The Description.

1. Sea Spike-Grass hath many small hollow round leaves about six
inches long, rising from a bushy thready white fibrous root, which
are very soft and smooth in handling. Among these leaves there do
spring up many small rushy stalks; alongst which are at the first
divers small flowering round buttons; the sides whereof falling
away, the middle part grows into a longish seed-vessel standing
upright.

2. Salt-marsh Spike-Grass hath a woody tough thick root with some
small hairy threads fastened thereunto; out of which arise long and
thick leaves very like those of that Sea-Grass we vulgarly call
Thrift. And amongst these leaves grow up slender naked rushy stalks
which have on one side small knobs or buttons of a greenish colour
hanging on them.


Fig. 39. Sea Rush-Grass (3)
Fig. 40. Marsh Rush-Grass (4)
	3. The third hath many rushy leaves tough and hard, of a brown
colour, well resembling Rushes: his root is compact of many small
tough and long strings. His stalk is bare and naked of leaves unto
the top, on which it hath many small pretty chaffy buttons or heads.

4. The fourth is like the third, saving that it is larger; the stalk
also is thicker and taller than that of the former, bearing at the
top such husks as are in Rushes.


Fig. 41. Great Cypress Grass (5)
Fig. 42. Small Cypress Grass (6)
	5. Great Cypress Grass hath divers long three-square stalks
proceeding from a root compact of many long and tough strings or
threads. The leaves are long and broad, like unto the sedge called
Carex. The spike or ear of it is like the head of Plantain, and very
prickly, and commonly of a yellowish green colour.

6. Small Cypress Grass is like unto the other in root and leaves,
saving that it is smaller. His stalk is smooth and plain, bearing at
the top certain tufts or panicles, like to the last described in
roughness and colour.

Fig. 43. Water Cypress Grass (7)

7. The first of these two kinds hath many crooked and crambling
roots of a woody substance, very like unto the right Cyperus,
differing from it only in smell, because the right Cyperus roots
have a fragrant smell, and these none at all. His leaves are long
and broad, rough, sharp or cutting at the edges like sedge. His
stalk is long, big, and three-square, like to Cyperus, and on his
top a chaffy umbel or tuft like unto the true Cyperus.


Fig. 44. Spike Cypress Grass. (8)

8. The second kind hath many broad leaves like unto those of
Gillyflowers, but of a fresher green: among the which riseth up a
short stalk some handful or two high, bearing at the top three or
four short ears of a reddish murrey colour, and these ears grow
commonly together at the top of the stalk, and not one under
another. There is also another lesser sort hereof, with leaves and
roots like the former, but the stalk is commonly shorter, and it
hath but one single ear at the top thereof. You have the figures of
both these espressed in the same table or piece. This kind of Grass
is the Gramen spicatum foliis Vetonica of Lobel.

Fig. 45. Wood Rushy-Grass (9)

9. This hath long tough and hairy strings growing deep in the earth
like a turf, which make the root, from which rise many crooked tough
and rushy stalks, having toward the top scaly and chaffy knobs or
buttons. This grows some half yard high, with round brownish heads,
and the leaves are jointed as you see them expressed in the figure
we here give you.

The Place, Time, Names, Nature, and Virtues.

All the Grasses which we have described in this chapter do grow in
marsh and watery places near to the sea, or other fenny grounds, or
by muddy and miry ditches, at the same time that the others do grow
and flourish. Their names are easily gathered of the places they
grow in, or by their descriptions, and are of no virtue nor property
in medicine, or any other necessary use as yet known.



CHAP. 17. Of Couch-Grass, or Dog's-Grass.


Fig. 46. Couch-Grass, or Dog's-
Grass (1)
Fig. 47. Knotty Dog's-Grass (2)

The Description.

1. The common or best known Dog's-Grass, or Couch-Grass hath long
leaves of a whitish green colour: the stalk is a cubit and a half
high, with joints or knees like wheaten straw, but these joints are
covered with a little short down or woolliness. The plume or tuft is
like the reed, but smaller and more chaffy, and of a grayish colour:
it creepeth in the ground hither and thither with long white roots,
jointed at certain distances, having a pleasant sweet taste, and are
plaited or wrapped one within another very intricately, insomuch as
where it happeneth in gardens amongst pot-herbs, great labour must
be taken before it can be destroyed, each piece being apt to grow,
and every way to dilate itself.

2. Knotty Dog's-Grass is like unto the former in stalk and leaf, but
that they are of a deeper colour; also the spike or ear is greener,
and about some two handfuls long, much in shape resembling an Oat,
yet far smaller, and is much more dispersed than the figure presents
to you.

The roots of this are somewhat knotty and tuberous, but that is
chiefly about the spring of the year, for afterwards they become
less and less until the end of summer. And these bulbs do grow
confusedly together, not retaining any certain shape or number.

The Place.

1. The first grows in gardens and arable lands, as an infirmity or
plague of the fields, nothing pleasing to husbandmen; for after that
the field is ploughed, they are constrained to gather the roots
together with harrows and rakes, and being so gathered and laid upon
heaps, they set them on fire lest they should grow again.

2. The second grows in ploughed fields and such like places, but not
everywhere as the other. I have found of these in great plenty, both
growing, and plucked up with harrows, as before is rehearsed, in the
fields next to S. James' wall as ye go to Chelsea, and in the fields
as ye go from the Tower-hill of London to Ratcliffe.

The Time.

These Grasses seldom come to show their ear before July.

The Names.

It is called Gramen Caninum, or Sanguinale, and Uniola. The
Countrymen of Brabant name it Peen: others, Ledt grasse: of the
Latins, by the common name, Gramen: in English, Couch-Grass, Quitch-
Grass, and Dog's-Grass.

Gramen Caninum bulbosum, or nodosum, is called in English, Knobby,
or Knotty Couch-Grass.

The Nature.

The nature of Couch-Grass, especially the roots, agreeth with the
nature of common Grass: although that Couch-Grass be an unwelcome
guest to fields and gardens, yet his physic virtues do recompense
those hurts; for it openeth the stoppings of the liver and reins,
without any manifest heat.

The learned Physicians of the College and Society of London do hold
this bulbous Couch-Grass in temperature agreeing with the common
Couch-Grass, but in virtues more effectual.

The Virtues.

A. Couch-Grass healeth green wounds. The decoction of the root is
good for the kidneys and bladder: it provoketh urine gently, and
driveth forth gravel. Dioscorides and Galen do agree, that the root
stamped and laid upon green wounds doth heal them speedily.

B. The decoction thereof serveth against griping pains of the belly,
and difficulty of making water.

C. Marcellus an old author maketh mention in his 26. chapter, That
seven and twenty knots of the herb which is called Gramen, or Grass,
boiled in wine till half be consumed, pressed forth, strained, and
given to drink to him that is troubled with the strangury, hath so
great virtue, that after the patient hath once begun to make water
without pain, it may not be given any more. But it must be given
with water only to such as have a fever. By which words it
appeareth, That this knotted Grass was taken for that which is
properly called Gramen, or Agrostis; and hath been also commended
against the stone and diseases of the bladder.

D. The later physicians do use the roots sometimes of this, and
sometimes of the other indifferently.



CHAP. 18. Of Sea Dog's-Grass.


Fig. 48. Sea Dog's-Grass (1)
Fig. 49. Sea Couch-Grass (2)

The Description.

1. The Sea Dog's-Grass is very like unto the other before named: his
leaves are long and slender, and very thick compact together, set
upon a knotty stalk spiked at the top like the former. Also the root
crambleth and creepeth hither and thither under the earth, occupying
much ground by reason of his great increase of roots.

2. This Grass (whereof Lobel gave the first figure and description,
under the name of Gramen geniculatum Caninum marinum) I conjecture
to be that which grows plentifully upon the banks in the salt
marshes by Dartford in Kent, and most other salt places by the sea;
as also in many banks and orchards about London, and most other
places far from the sea. Now Lobel's figure being not good, and the
description not extant in any of his Latin works; I cannot certainly
affirm anything. Yet I think it fit to give you an exact description
of that I do probably judge to be it; and not only so, but I judge
it to be the same Grass that Bauhin in his Prodromus hath set forth,
Pag. 17. under the name of Gramen latifolium spicatriticea compacta.
This is a very tall grass; for it sends forth a stalk commonly in
good ground to the height of a yard and an half: the leaves are
large, stiff, and green, almost as big as those of white Wheat; the
which it also very much resembles in the ear, which usually is some
handful and an half long, little spokes standing by course with
their flat sides towards the straw. About the beginning of July it
is hung with little whitish yellow flowers such as Wheat hath. The
roots of this are like those of the first described. This sometimes
varies in the largeness of the whole plant, as also in the
greatness, sparsedness, and compactness of the ear.

2. The second Sea Dog's-Grass is according unto Lobel somewhat like
the former: his roots are more spreading and longer, dispersing
themselves under the ground farther than any of the rest. The leaves
are like the former, thick bushed at the top, with a cluster or bush
of short thick leaves one folded within another. The stalk and tuft
is of a middle kind, between Ischæmon and the common Couch-Grass.

The Place, Time, Names, Nature, and Virtues

They grow on the sea shore at the same time that others do; and are
so called because they grow near the seaside. Their nature and
virtues are to be referred unto Dog's-Grass.



CHAP. 19. Of Upright Dog's-Grass.

Fig. 50. Upright Dog's-Grass (1)

The Description.

1. Upright Dog's-Grass, or Quich-Grass, by reason of his long
spreading jointed roots is like unto the former, and hath at every
knot in the root sundry strings of hairy substance, shooting into
the ground at every joint as it spreadeth: the stalks lie creeping,
or rise but a little from the ground, and at their tops have spoky
panicles far smaller than the common Couch-Grass. By which notes of
difference it may easily be discerned from the other kinds of Dog's-
Grass.

Fig. 51. Ladies' Laces (2)

2. Ladies' Laces hath leaves like unto Millet in fashion, rough and
sharp pointed like to the Reed, with many white veins or ribs, and
silver streaks running along through the midst of the leaves,
fashioning the same like to laces or ribbons woven of white and
green silk, very beautiful and fair to behold: it groweth unto the
height of wild Panic, with a spoky top not very much unlike, but
more compact, soft, white, and chaffy. The root is small and hairy,
and white of colour like unto the Meadow-Grass.

The Place.

1. Upright Dog's-Grass groweth in dunged grounds and fertile fields.

2. Ladies' Laces grows naturally in woody and hilly places of Savoy,
and answers common Grass in his time of seeding.

It is kept and maintained in our English gardens, rather for
pleasure than virtue, which is yet known.

The Names.

Lobel calleth the later, Gramen sulcatum, and striatum, or Gramen
pictum: in English, the Furrowed Grass, the white Chameleon Grass,
or streaked Grass; and usually of our English women it is called
Lady-laces, or painted Grass: in French, Aiguillettes d'armes.

The Nature and Virtues.

The virtues are referred unto the Dog's-Grass.



CHAP. 20. Of Dew-Grass.


Fig. 52. Dew-Grass (1)
Fig. 53. Cock's-foot Grass (2)

The Description.

1. Dew-Grass hath very hard and tough roots long and fibrous: the
stalks are great, of three or four cubits high, very rough and
hairy, jointed and kneed like the common Reed: the leaves are large
and broad like unto corn. The tuft or ear is divided into sundry
branches, chaffy, and of a purple colour; wherein is contained seed
like Milium, wherewith the Germans do make pottage and such like
meat, as we in England do with Oatmeal; and it is sent into
Middleborough and other towns of the Low-countries, in great
quantity for the same purpose, as Lobel hath told me.

2. The second kind of Dew-Grass or Ischæmon is somewhat like the
first kind of Meadow-Grass, resembling one the other in leaves and
stalks, saving that the crest or tuft is spread or stretched out
abroad like a cock's foot let down upon the ground, whereupon it was
called Galli crus, by Apuleius. These tops are clear and upright, of
a glistering purple colour, or rather violet; and it is divided into
four or five branches like the former Dew-Grass. The root consists
of a great many small fibres.

3. To these may fitly be added another Grass, which Clusius hath
judged to be the medicinal Grass of the ancients: and Lobel refers
it to the Dog's-grass, because it hath a root jointed thick, and
creeping like as the Dog's-Grass: the stalks are some foot high,
round, and of a purplish colour: but the top is very like to that of
the last described, of a dark purple colour.

The Place and Time.

1. The first groweth naturally in Germany, Bohemia, Italy, and in
the territories of Gorizia and Carinthia, as Matthiolus reporteth.

2. The second groweth near unto rough banks of fields, as I have
seen in the hilly banks near Greenhithe in Kent. It differeth not in
time from those we have spoken of.


Fig, 54. Cock's-foot Grass with Creeping Roots (3)

3. This groweth plentifully in most parts of Spain and France; and
it is probable, that this was the grass that our author found near
Greenhithe in Kent.

The Names.

1. The Germans call it Himeldau: That is to say, Cœli ros; whereupon
it was called Gramen Manna: it seemeth to be Milii sylvestris
spurium quoddam genus, a certain wild or bastard kind of Millet.
Leonicenus and Ruellius name it Capriola, and Sanguinaria: some
would have it to be Gramen aculeatum Plinii, but because the
description thereof is very short, nothing can be certainly
affirmed. But they are far deceived who think it be Coronopus, as
some very learned have set down: but every one in these days is able
to control that error. Lobel calleth it Gramen Manna esculentum, for
that in Germany and other parts, as Bohemia and Italy, they use to
eat the same as a kind of bread corn, and also make pottage
therewith as we do with Oatmeal; for the which purpose it is there
sown as Corn, and sent into the Low-countries, and there sold by the
pound. In English it may be called Manna-Grass, or Dew-Grass; but
more fitly Rice-Grass.

2. This is judged to be Ischæmon of Pliny; and Galli crus of of
Apuleius.

The Nature.

These Grasses are astringent and drying, in taste sweet like the
common Dog's-Grass.

The Virtues.

A. Apuleius saith, if a plaster be made of this grass, hog's grease,
and leaven of household bread, it cureth the biting of mad dogs.

B. As in the description I told you, this plant in his tuft or ear
is divided into sundry branches, some tuft into three, some four,
and some five cloven parts like Cock's toes. Apuleius reporteth, If
ye take that ear which is divided only into three parts, it
wonderfully helpeth the running or dropping of the eyes, and those
that begin to be blear eyed, being bound about the neck, and so used
for certain days together, it turneth the humors away from the weak
part.

C. Manna Grass, or Rice-Grass is said to be very good to be put into
poultices, to discuss hard swellings in women's breasts.

D. The Cocks-foot Dog's-Grass is very good in all cases, as the
other Dog's-Grass are and equally as effectual.



CHAP. 21. Of divers Cyperus Grasses.


Fig. 55. Great Narrow-leaved
Cyperus Grass (1)
Fig. 56. Bastard Cyperus (2)

The Description.

1. The first of there hath reasonable strong fibrous roots, from
whence rise stiff long and narrow leaves like those of other Cyperus
Grasses: the stalks also (as it is proper to all the plants of this
kindred) are three-square, bearing at their tops some three brownish
ears soft and chaffy like the rest of this kind, and standing
upright, and not hanging down as some others do.

2. This hath pretty thick creeping black roots, from whence arise
three-square stalks set with leaves shorter, yet broader than those
of the last described; and from the top of the stalk come forth
three or four foot-stalks, whereupon do hang longish rough scaly and
yellowish heads.


Fig. 57. Long Bastard Cyperus
(3)
Fig. 58. Round Bastard Cyperus
(4)
	3. The roots of this are black, without smell, and somewhat
larger than those of the last described: the 3-square stalk also is
some two cubits high, bearing at the top dispersedly round scaly
heads somewhat like those of the Wood Rush-Grass: the leaves are
somewhat sharp and triangular like those of the other Cyperus.

4. This Cyperus hath creeping black roots, having here and there
knotty tuberous heads for the most part, putting up leaves like
those of the last described, as also a stalk bearing at the top long
chaffy ears like to some others of this kind.

Fig. 59. Millet Cyperus Grass (5)

5. This Cyperus Grass hath pretty thick fibrous and black roots,
from whence ariseth a stalk some cubit high, pretty stiff,
triangular, jointed, set at each joint with a large green leaf which
at the bottom encompasses the stalk, which is omitted in the figure.
At the top of the stalk, as in the true Cyperus, come forth two or
three pretty large leaves, between which rise up many small foot-
stalks very much branched, and bearing many black seeds somewhat
like Millet or rushes.

The Place and Time.

All these grow in ditches and watery places, and are to be found
with their heads about the middle of summer, and some of them
sooner.

The Names.

The first of these by Lobel is called Gramen palustre maius.

2. This by Gesner, Lobel, and Dodonæus is called Pseudocyperus.

3. Lobel names this, Cyperus longus inodorus sylvestris.

4. He also calls this, Cyperus aquaticus septentrionalis.

5. This is the Cyperus graminea miliacea of Lobel and Pena: the
Juncus latus in the Histor. Lugd. Pag. 988. and the Pseudocyperus
polycarpus of Thalius.
The Temper and Virtue.

None of these are made use of in physic; but by their taste they
seem to be of a cold and astringent quality.



CHAP. 22. Of divers other Grasses.


Fig. 60 . Mountain Haver-Grass
(1)
 Fig. 61. Capon-tail Grass (2)

The Description.

1. This Oat or Haver-Grass, described by Clusius, hath small
creeping roots: the stalks are some cubit high, slender jointed, and
set with short narrow leaves: at the top of the stalk grows the ear;
long, slender, and bending, composed of downy husks containing a
seed like to a naked Oat. The seed is ripe in July. It grows in the
mountainous and shadowy woods of Hungary, Austria, and Bohemia.

2. I cannot omit this elegant grass, found by Mr. Goodyer upon the
walls of the ancient city of Winchester, and not described as yet by
any that I know of. It hath a fibrous and stringy root, from which 
arise leaves long and narrow, which growing old become round as
those of Spartum or Mat-weed: amongst these grassy leaves there
grows up a slender stalk some two foot long, scarce standing
upright, but oft times hanging down the head or top of the ear: it
hath some two joints, and at each of these a pretty grassy leaf. The
ear is almost a foot in length, compased of many small and slender
hairy tufts, which when they come to maturity look of a grayish or
whitish colour, and do very well resemble a capon's tail whence my
friend, the first observer thereof, gave it the title of Capon-tail
Grass: by which name I received the seed thereof; which sown, took
root, and flourishes.

3. Next to this I think fit to place the Gramen Cristatum, or
Cock's-comb grass of Bauhin. This Grass hath for the root many white
fibrous threads thick packed together; the leaves are but short,
about the bigness of the ordinary Meadow Grass; the stalks are some
cubit and half high, with some two or three knots apiece: the leaves
of the stalk are some four or five inches long: the ear is small,
longish, of a pale green colour, somewhat bending, so that in some
sort it resembles the comb of a Cock, or the seed-vessel of that
plant which is called Caput Gallinaceum. This is ordinarily to be
found in most meadows about midsummer.

4. There is also commonly about the same time in our meadows to be
found a Grass growing to some cubit high, having a small stalk, at
the top whereof there grows an ear some inch and an half, or two
inches long, consisting as it were of two ranks of corn: it very
much resembles Rye both in shape and colour, and in his short
bearded awns, wherefore it may very fitly be termed Gramen
secalinum, or Rye-Grass. Yet is it not Gramen spica secalina which
Bauhin describes in the fifty seventh place, in his Prodromus pag.
18, for that is much taller, and the ear much larger than this of my
description.

5. In divers places about hedges, in July and August is to be found
a fine large tall Grass, which Bauhin (who also first described it)
hath under the name of Gramen spica Brizæmajus. This hath stalks as
tall as Rye, but not so thick, neither are the leaves so broad at
the top of the stalk grow divers pretty little flattish ears
consisting of two ranks of chaffy husks or seed-vessels, which have
yellowish little flowers like to those of Wheat.

6. There is also commonly to be found about May or the beginning of
June, in meadows and such places that Grass which in the Historia
Lugdun. is set forth under the name of Gramen Lanatum Dalechampii:
the stalks and leaves are much like the common meadow grass, but
that they are more whitish and hairy; the head or panicle is also
soft and woolly and it is commonly of a grey, or else a murrey
colour.

7. There is to be found in some bogs in summer time about the end of
July a pretty rushy grass some foot or better in height, the stalk
is hard and rushy, having some three joints, at each whereof there
comes forth a leaf as in other grasses, and out of the bosom of the
two uppermost of these leaves comes out a slender stalk being some 2
or 3 inches high, and at the top thereof grows as in a little umbel
a pretty white chaffy flower; and at, or nigh to the top of the main
stalk there grow three or some such flowers clustering together upon
little short and slender foot stalks: the leaves are but small, and
some handful or better long; the root I did not observe. This seems
to have some affinity with the Gramen junceum aquaticum, formerly
described in the ninth chapter. I never found this but once, and
that was in the company of Mr. Thomas Smith, and Mr. James Clarke,
apothecaries of London; we riding into Windsor Forest upon the
search of rare plants, and we found this upon a bog near the high
way side at the corner of the great park. I think it may very fitly
be called Gramen junceum leucanthemum: White-flowered Rush-Grass.

8. The last year at Margate in the Isle of Thanet, near to the
seaside and by the chalky cliff I observed a pretty little grass
which from a small white fibrous root sent up a number of stalks of
an unequal height; for the longest, which were those that lay partly
spread upon the ground, were some handful high, the others that grew
straight up were not so much; and of this one inch and half was
taken up in the spike or ear, which was no thicker than the rest of
the stalk, and seemed nothing else but a plain smooth stalk, unless
you looked upon it earnestly, and then you might perceive it to be
like Darnel grass: wherefore in the Journal that I wrote of this
simpling voyage, I called it pag. 3. Gramen parvum marinum spica
Loliacea. I judge it to be the same that Bauhin in his Prodromus,
pag. 19 hath set forth under the name of Gramen Loliaceum minus
spica simplici. It may be called in English, Dwarf Darnel Grass.

9 .The Darnel grass that I compared the ear of this last described
unto, is not the Gramen sorghinum (which our author called Darnel-
Grass) but another grass growing in most places with stalks about
some span high, but they seldom stand upright, the ear is made just
like that which hereafter chap. 58. is called Lolium rubrum, Red
Darnel, of which I judge this a variety, differing little therefrom
but in smallness ofgrowth.

10. Upon Hampstead Heath I have often observed a small grass whose
longest leaves are seldom above two or three inches high, and these
leaves are very green, small, and perfectly round like the Spartum
Austriacum, or Feather-Grass; I could never find any stalk or ear
upon it: wherefore I have brought it into the garden to observe it
better. In the forementioned Journal, pag. 33, you may find it under
the name of Gramen Spartium capillaceo folio minimum. It may be this
is that grass which Bauhin set forth in his Prodromus, pag. 11,
under the title of Gramen sparteum Monspeliacum capillaceo folio
minimum. I have thought good in this place to explain my meaning by
these two names to such as are studious of plants, which may happen
to light by chance (for they were not intended for public) upon our
Journal, that they need not doubt of my meaning.

11. I must not pass over in silence two other Grasses, which for
anything that I know are strangers with us, the one I have seen with
Mr. Parkinson, and it is set forth by Bauhin, pag. 30 of his
Prodromus. The other by Lobel in the second part of his Adversaria,
pag. 468. The first (which Bauhin fitly calls Gramen alopecuriodes
spica aspera, and thinks it to be Gram. Echinatum Dalechampii,
described Hist. Lugd. 432.) hath a fibrous and white root, from
which arises a stiff stalk divided by many knots, or knees: the
leaves are like to the other fox-tail grass, but greener: the ear is
rough, of some inch in length, and grows as it were upon one side of
the stalk: the ear at first is green, and shows yellowish little
flowers in August.

12. This other Grass which Lobel in the quoted place figures and
describes by the name of Gramen Scoparium Ischæmi panniculus
Gallicum, hath roots some cubit long, slender, and very stiff, (for
of these are made the head brushes which are vulgarly used) the
straw is slender, and some cubit high, being here and there jointed
like to other Grass: the top hath four or five ears standing after
the manner of Cock's-foot Grass, whereof it is a kind. It grows
naturally about Orleans, and may be called in English, Brush-Grass.



CHAP. 23. Of Cotton Grass.


Fig. 62. Cotton Grass (1)
Fig. 63. Water Gladiole (2)

The Description.

1. This strange Cotton grass, which Lobel hath comprehended under
the kinds of Rushes; notwithstanding that it may pass with the
Rushes, yet I find in mine own experience, that it doth rather
resemble grass than rushes, and may indifferently be taken for
either, for that it doth participate of both. The stalk is small and
rushy, garnished with many grassy leaves alongst the same, bearing
at the top a bush or tuft of most pleasant down or cotton like unto
the most fine and soft white silk. The root is very tough, small and
thready.

2. This Water Gladiole, or grassy Rush, of all others is the fairest
and most pleasant to behold, and serveth very well for the decking
and trimming up of houses, because of the beauty and bravery
thereof: consisting of sundry small leaves of a white colour mixed
with carnation, growing at the top of a bare and naked stalk, five
or six foot long, and sometime more. The leaves are long and flaggy,
not much unlike the common reed. The root is thready, and not long.

The Place and Time.

1. Cotton grass groweth upon bogs and such like moorish places, and
it is to be seen upon the bogs on Hampstead Heath. It groweth
likewise in Highgate Park near London.

2. Water Gladiole groweth in standing pools, moats, and water
ditches. I found it in great plenty being in company with a
worshipful gentleman Master Robert Wilbraham, at a village fifteen
miles from London called Bushey. It groweth likewise near Redriffe
by London, and many other places: the season answereth all others.

The Names.

Gramen Tomentosum is called likewise Juncus bombicinus: of Cordus,
Linum pratense, and Gnaphalium Hieronymi Bockii. In English Cotton
Grass.

2. Water Gladiole is called of Lobel, Juncus Cyperoides floridus
paludosus, Flowering Cypress Rush: Juncus, for that his stalk is
like the rush; Cyperoides, because his leaves resemble Cyperus:
Floridus, because it hath on the top of every stalk a fine umbel or
tuft of small flowers, in fashion of the Lily of Alexandria, the
which it is very like, and therefore I had rather call it Lily
grass.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. Cordus saith, That Juncus bombicinus sodden in wine, and so
taken, helpeth the throws and gripings of the belly, that women have
in their childing.

There be also sundry kinds of grass wholly unknown, or at the least
not remembered of the old writers, whereof some few are touched in
name only by the late and new writers: now for as much as they have
only named them, I will refer the better consideration of them to
the industry and diligence of painful searchers of nature, and
prosecute my purposed labour, to unfold the divers sorts and
manifold kinds of Cyperus, Flags, and Rushes: and because that there
is added unto many of the grasses before mentioned, this difference,
Cyperoides, that is to say, resembling Cyperus, I thought it
therefore expedient to join next unto the history of grass, the
discourse of Cyperus, and his kinds, which are as follow.



CHAP. 24. Of English Galingale.


Fig. 64. English Galingale (1)
Fig. 65. Round Galingale (2)

The Description.

1. English Galingale hath leaves like unto the common Reed, but
lesser and shorter. His stalk is three-square, two cubits high: upon
whose top stand sundry branches, every little branch bearing many
small chaffy spikes. The root is black and very long, creeping
hither and thither, occupying much ground by reason of his
spreading: it is of a most sweet and pleasant smell when it is
broken.

2. The common round Cyperus is like the former in leaves and tops,
but the roots are here and there knotty and round, and not
altogether so well smelling as the former.

3. There is also another Cyperus which grows in Syria and Egypt,
whose roots are round, blackish, and large, many hanging upon one
string, and having a quick and aromatic smell: the leaves and
spoken-tufts resemble the former.

4. There is said to be another kind of this last described, which is
lesser, and the roots are blacker, and it grows in Crete, now called
Candia.

Fig. 66. Round Salt-march Cyperus (5)

5. There is also another round Cyperus which grows about ditches and
the banks of Rivers whereas the salt water sometimes comes: the
roots of this are hard and black without smell, many hanging
sometimes upon one string: the stalk and leaves are much like the
former, but the heads unlike, for they are rough and blackish, about
the bigness of a filbert, and hang some six or seven at the top of
the stalk. It flowers in July and August.

The Place and Time.

1 & 2. The first and second of these grow naturally in fenny
grounds, yet will they prosper exceedingly in gardens, as experience
hath taught us.

3 & 4. The former of these grows naturally in Syria and Egypt, the
later in Candia.

5. This grows plentifully in the marshes below Gravesend, in
Sheppey, Thanet, and other places.

The Name in general.

Cyperus is called of the Latins as well Cypirus as Cyperus: of some
Juncus quadratus: of Pliny Juncus Angulosus, and Triangularis: of
others Aspalathum and Erysisceptron. In French Souchet: in Dutch
Galgan: in Spanish Iunco odoroso: By us Cyperus and English
Galingale.

The Names in particular.

1. This is called Cyperus longus, and Cyperus longus Oderatior: in
English, Common Cyperus, and English Galingale.

2. This is called Cyperus rotundus vulgaris, Round English
Galingale.

3. Cyperus rotundas Cyriacus, or Egyptiacus, Syrian or Egyptian
round Cyperus.

4. Cyperus minor Creticus, Candia round Cyperus.

5. Cyperus rotundus inodorus Littoreus, Round Salt-marsh Cyperus, or
Galingale.

The Nature.

Dioscorides saith, That Cyperus hath an heating quality. Galen
saith, The roots are most effectual in medicine, and are of an
heating and drying quality: and some do reckon it to be hot and dry
in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. It maketh a most profitable drink to break and expel gravel, and
helpeth the dropsy.

B. If it be boiled in wine, and drunk, it provoketh urine, driveth
forth the stone, and bringeth down the natural sickness of women.

C. The same taken as aforesaid, is a remedy against the stinging and
poison of Serpents.

D. Fernelius saith, The root of Cyperus used in baths helpeth the
coldness and stopping of the matrix, and provoketh the terms.

E. He writeth also, that it increaseth blood by warming the body,
and maketh good digestion; wonderfully refreshing the spirits, and
exhilarating the mind, comforting the senses, and increasing their
liveliness, restoring the colour decayed, and making a sweet breath.

F. The powder of Cyperus doth not only dry up all moist ulcers
either of the mouth, privy members, and fundament, but stayeth the
humour and healeth them, though they be malign and virulent,
according to the judgement of Fernelius.



CHAP. 25. Of Italian Trasi, or Spanish Galingale.
 	
Figs. 67 & 68. Italian Trasi, or Spanish Galingale

The Description

The Italian Trasi, which is here termed Spanish Galingale, is a
plant that hath many small roots, hanging at stringy fibres like as
our ordinary Dropwort roots do, but they are of the bigness of a
little Medlar, and have one end flat and as it were crowned like as
a Medlar, and it hath also sundry streaks or lines seeming to divide
it into several parts; it is of a brownish colour without, and white
within; the taste thereof is sweet almost like a Chestnut. The
leaves are very like those of the garden Cyperus, and never exceed a
cubit in length. Stalks, flowers, or seed it hath none, as John Pond
an apothecary of Verona, who diligently observed it nigh to that
city whereas it naturally grows, affirms; but he saith there grows
with it much wild Cyperus, which as he judges hath given occasion of
their error who give it the stalks and flowers of Cyperus, or
English Galingale, as Matthiolus and others have done. It is
increased by setting the roots first steeped in water, at the
beginning of November. I have here given you the figure of it
without the stalk, according to Pena, and with the stalk, according
to Matthiolus and others.

The Names.

The Italian Trasi is called by Pliny Anthalium: the later writers
Cyperus Esculentus, and Dulcichinum: The Italians, Trasi, and
Dolzolini, by which names in Italy they are cried up and down the
streets, as oranges and lemons are here.

The temper and Virtues.

A. The milk or cream of these bulbous roots being drunk, mundifies
the breast and lungs, wherefore it is very good for such as are
troubled with coughs. Now you must beat these roots, and macerate
them in broth, and then press out the cream through a linen cloth,
which by four late writers is commended also to be used in venereous
potions.

B. The same cream is also good to be drunk against the heat and
sharpness of the urine, especially if you in making it do add
thereto the seeds of Pumpkins, Gourds, and Cucumbers. The citizens
of Verona eat them for dainties, but they are somewhat windy.



CHAP. 26. Of the true Galingale, the greater and the lesser.

Fig. 69. Greater and lesser Galingale


The affinity of name and nature hath induced me in this place to
insert these two, the bigger and the lesser Galingale; first
therefore of the greater.

The Description

1. The Great Galingale, whose root only is in use, and brought to us
from Java in the East Indies, hath flaggy leaves some two cubits
high, like these of Cat's-tail or Reed-mace: the root is thick and
knotty, resembling those of our ordinary flags, but that they are of
a more whitish colour on the inside, and not so large. Their taste
is very hot and biting, and they are somewhat reddish on the
outside.

2. The lesser growing in China, and commonly in shops called
Galingale, without any addition, is a small root of a brownish red
colour both within and without; the taste is hot and biting, the
smell aromatical, the leaves (if we may believe Garcias ab Horto)
are like those of Myrtles.

The Names.

1. The first is called by Matthiolus, Lobel, and others, Galanga
major. Some think it to be the Acorus of the ancients: and Pena and
Lobel in their Stirp. Advers. question whether it be not the Acorus
Galaticus of Dioscorides. But howsoever, it is the Acorus of the
shops, and by many used in Mithridate instead of the true. The
Indians call it Lancuaz.

2. The lesser is called Galanga, and Galanga minor, to distinguish
it from the precedent. The Chinese call it Lauandon: the Indians
Lancuaz: we in England term it Galingale, without any addition.

Their temper and virtue.

These roots are hot and dry in the third degree, but the lesser are
somewhat the hotter.

A. They strengthen the stomach, and mitigate the pains thereof
arising from cold and flatulencies.

B. The smell, especially of the lesser, comforts the too cold brain;
the substance thereof being chewed sweetens the breath. It is good
also against the beating of the heart.

C. They are useful against the colic proceeding of flatulencies, and
the flatulent affects of the womb; they conduce to venery, and heat
the too cold reins. To conclude, they are good against all cold
diseases.



CHAP. 27. Of Turmeric.

This also challengeth the next place, as belonging to this tribe,
according to Dioscorides: yet the root, which only is brought us,
and in use, doth more on the outside resemble Ginger, but that it is
yellower, and not so flat, but rounder. The inside thereof is of a
saffron colour, the taste hot and bitterish; it is said to have
leaves larger than those of Millet, and a leafy stalk. There is some
variety of these roots, for some are longer, and others rounder, and
the later are the hotter, and they are brought over oft times
together with Ginger.

The Place.

It grows naturally in the East-Indies about Calicut, as also at Goa.

The Names.

This without doubt is the Cyperus Indicus of Dioscorides, Lib. 1,
Cap. 4. It is now vulgarly by most writers, and in shops, called by
the name Terra Merita, and Curcuma; yet some term it Crocus indicus,
and we in English call it Turmeric.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. This root is certainly hot in the third degree, and hath a
quality to open obstructions, and it is used with good success in
medicines against the yellow jaundice, and against the cold
dispempers of the liver and spleen.



CHAP. 28. Of Zedoary.

Fig. 70. Round Zedoary

Zedoary is also a root growing naturally in the woods of Malabar
about Calicut and Cannanore in the Indies; the leaves thereof are
larger than Ginger, and much like them; the root is also as large,
but consisting of parts of different figures, some long and small,
others round; their colour is white, and oft times brownish on the
inside, and they have many fibres coming out of them, but they are
taken away together with the outward rind before they come to us.
These roots have a strong medicine-like smell, and somewhat an
ungrateful taste.

The Names.

Some call the long parts of these roots Zedoaria, and the round
(whose figure we here give you) Zerumbeth, and make them different,
whenas indeed they are but parts of the same root, as Lobel and
others have well observed. Some make Zedoaria and Zerumbeth
different, as Avicenna: others confound them and make them one, as
Rhases and Serapio. It is an aromatic, and therefore chiefly mixed
in ointments: which is as much as if he should have said, That it
was put into ointments for the smell's sake, which in this is no
ways grateful, but rather the contrary.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. It is hot and dry in the second degree; it discusses
flatulencies, and fattens by a certain hidden quality. It also
dissipates and amends the ungrateful smell which Garlic, Onions, or
too much wine infect the breath withal, if it be eaten after them.
It cures the bites and stings of venomous creatures, stops lasks,
resolves the abscesses of the womb, stays vomiting, helps the colic,
as also the pain of the stomach.

B. It kills all sorts of worms, and is much used in antidotes
against the plague, and such like contagious diseases.



CHAP. 29. Of Rushes.

I do not here intend to trouble you with an accurate distinction and
enumeration of Rushes; for if I should, it would be tedious to you,
laborious to me, and beneficial to neither. Therefore I will only
describe and reckon up the chief and more noteworthy of them,
beginning with the most usual and common.

Fig. 71. Rushes (1, 4 & 3)

The Description.

1. The roots of our common Rushes are long and hairy, spreading
largely in the ground from which, as from one entire tuft, proceed a
great company of small rushes; so exceedingly well known, that I
shall not need to spend much time about the description thereof.

2. There be sundry sorts of Rushes betides the former, whose
pictures are not here espressed, and the rather, for that the
general description of Rushes, as also their common use and service,
are sufficiency to lead us to the knowledge of them. This great
Water-Grass or Bull-Rush, instead of leaves bringeth forth many
strait twiggy shoots or springs, which be round, smooth, sharp
pointed, and without knots. Their tuft or flower breaketh forth a
little beneath the top, upon the one side of the Rush, growing upon
little short stem like grape clusters, wherein is contained the seed
after the fashion of a spear's point. The roots be slender and full
of strings. Pliny, and Theophrastus before him, affirm that the
roots of the Rush do die every year, and that, it groweth again of
the seed. And they affirm likewise that the male is barren, and
groweth again of the young shoots; yet I could never observe any
such thing.

3. There grows a Rush to the thickness of a Reed, and to some two
yards and an half, or three yards high, in divers fenny grounds in
this kingdom; it is very porous and light, and they usually make
mats, and bottom chairs therewith. The seeds are contained in
reddish tufts, breaking out at the top thereof. The roots are large
and jointed, and it grows not unless in waters.

4. Juncus acutus, or the sharp Rush, is likewise common and well
known; not much differing from Juncus lævis, but harder, rougher,
and sharper pointed, fitter to straw houses and chambers than any of
the rest; for the others are so soft and pithy, that they turn to
dust and filth with much treading; where contrariwise this rush is
so hard that it will last sound much longer.

5. There is also another pretty small kind of Rush growing to some
foot in height, having smooth stalks which end in a head like to
that of the ordinary Horse-tail. This rush hath also one little
joint towards the bottom thereof. It grows in watery places, but not
so frequently as the former.

The Place

1. Juncus Lævis groweth in fertile fields, and meadows that are
somewhat mist.

2, 3 & 5. Grow in standing pools, and by rivers' sides in sundry
places.

4. Juncus acutus groweth upon dry and barren grounds, especially
near the furrows of ploughed land. I need not speak of their time of
growing, they being so common as they are.

The Names.

The Rush is called in Latin Juncus: in high Dutch Binken: in low
Dutch Biesen; in Italian Giunco: in Spanish Junco; in French Jonc:
in English Rushes.

2 & 3. The greater are commonly in many places termed Bumbles.

4. Juncus acutus is called in Dutch Yseren Biesen

5. This is called by Lobel, Juncus aquaticus minor capitulis
Equiseti: By Dalechampius, Juncus clavatus, or Club-Rush.

The Nature and Virtues.

These Rushes are of a dry nature.

A. The seed of Rushes dried at the fire, and drunk with wine allayed
with water, stayeth the lask and the overmuch flowing of women's
terms.

B. Galen yieldeth this reason thereof, because that their
temperature consisteth of an earthy essence, moderately cold and
watery, and meanly hot, and therefore doth the more easily dry up
the lower parts, and by little and little send up the cold humours
to the head, whereby it provoketh drowsiness and desire to sleep,
but causeth the head-ache; whereof Galen yieldeth the reason as
before.

C. The tender leaves that be next the root make a convenient
ointment against the bitings of the spider called Phalangium.

D. The seed of the Bull-Rush is most soporiferous, and therefore the
greater care musl be had in the administration thereof, lest in
provoking sleep you induce a drowsiness or dead sleep.



CHAP. 30. Of Reeds.
The Kinds.

Of Reeds the ancients have set down many sorts. Theophrastus hath
brought them all first into two principal kinds, and those hath he
divided again into more sorts. The two principal are these,
Auleticæ, or Tibiales Arundines, and Arundo vallatoria. Of these and
the rest we will speak in their proper places.


Fig. 72. Common Reed (1)
Fig. 73. Cyprus Canes (2)

The Description.

1. The common Reed hath long strawy stalks full of knotty joints or
knees like unto corn, whereupon do grow very long rough flaggy
leaves. The tuft or spoky ear doth grow at the top of the stalks,
brown of colour, barren and without seed, and doth resemble a bush
of feathers, which turneth into fine down or cotton which is carried
away with the wind. The root is thick, long, and full of strings,
dispersing themselves far abroad, whereby it doth greatly increase.
Bauhin reports, That he received from D. Cargill a Scottish man a
Reed whose leaves were a cubit long, and two or three inches broad,
with some nerves apparently running alongst the leaf; these leaves
at the top were divided into two three, or four points or parts; as
yet I have not observed it. Bauhin terms it Arundo Anglica foliis in
summitate dissectis.

2. The Cyprus Reed is a great Reed having stalks exceeding long,
sometimes twenty or thirty foot high, of a woody substance, set with
very great leaves like those of Turkey wheat. It carrieth at the top
the like downy tuft that the former doth.

Fig. 74. Reeds and Canes (3-6)

3. These Reeds Lobel hath seen in the Low Countries brought from
Constantinople, where, as it is said, the people of that country
have procured them from the parts of the Adriatic seaside where they
do grow. They are full stuffed with a spongeous substance, so that
there is no hollowness in the same, as in Canes & other Reeds,
except here and there certain small pores or passages of the bigness
of a pin's point; in manner such a pith as is to be found in the
Bull-Rush, but more firm and solid.

4. The second differeth in smallness, and that it will wind open in
flakes, otherwise they are very like, and are used for darts,
arrows, and such like.

5. This great sort of Reeds or Canes hath no particular description
to answer your expectation, for that as yet there is not any man
which hath written thereof, especially of the manner of growing of
them, either of his own knowledge or report from others so that it
shall suffice that ye know that that great cane is used especially
in Constantinople and thereabout, of aged and wealthy citizens, and
also Noblemen and such great personages, to make them walking staves
of, carving them at the top with sundry scutcheons, and pretty toys
of imagery for the beautifying of them; and so they of the better
sort do garnish them both with silver and gold, as the figure doth
most lively set forth unto you.

6. In like manner the smaller sort hath not as yet been seen growing
of any that have been curious in herbarism, whereby they might set
down any certainty thereof; only it hath been used in Constantinople
and thereabout, even to this day, to make writing pens withal, for
the which it doth very fitly serve, as also to make pipes, and such
like things of pleasure.

The Place.

The common Reed groweth in standing waters and in the edges and
borders of rivers almost everywhere: and the other being the angling
cane for fishers groweth in Spain and those hot regions.

The Time.

They flourish and flower from April to the end of September, at what
time they are cut down for the use of man, as all do know.

The Names.

1. The common Reed is called Arundo and Harundo vallatoria: in
French Roseau: in Dutch Riet: in Italian Canne a far siepo: of
Diosc. Phragmitis: in English, Reed.

2. Arundo Cypria, or after Lobel, Arundo Donax: in French Canne: in
Spanish Cana: in Italian, Calami a far Connochia: In English, Pole
reed, and Cane, or Canes.

The Nature.

Reeds are hot and dry in the second degree, as Galen saith.

The Virtues

A. The roots of reed stamped small draw forth thorns and splinters
fixed in any part of man's body.

B. The same stamped with vinegar ease all luxations and members out
of joint.

C. And likewise stamped they heal hot and sharp inflammations. The
ashes of them mixed with vinegar helpeth the scales and scurf of the
head and helpeth the falling of the hair.

D. The great Reed or Cane is not used in physic, but is esteemed to
make flares for Weavers, sundry sorts of pipes, as also to light
candles that stand before images, and to make hedges and pales, as
we do of laths and such like; and also to make certain divisions in
slips to divide the sweet oranges from the sour, the pomecitron and
lemons likewise in sunder, and many other purposes.



CHAP. 31. Of Sugar Cane.

Fig. 75. Sugar Cane

The Description.

1. Sugar Cane is a pleasant and profitable Reed, having long stalks
seven or eight foot high, jointed or kneed like unto the great Cane;
the leaves came forth of every joint on every side of the stalk,
like unto wings, long, narrow, and sharp pointed. The Cane itself,
or stalk is not hollow as other Canes or Reeds are, but full, and
stuffed with a spongeous substance in taste exceeding sweet. The
root is great and long, creeping along within the upper crust of the
earth, which is likewise sweet and pleasant, but less hard or woody
than other Canes or Reeds; from the which there doth shoot forth
many young scions, which are cut away from the main or mother plant,
because they should not draw away the nourishment from the old
stock, and so get unto themselves a little moisture, or else some
substance not much worth, and cause the stock to be barren, and
themselves little the better; which shoots do serve for plants to
set abroad for increase.

The Place.

The Sugar Cane groweth in many parts of Europe at this day, as in
Spain, Portugal, Olbia, and in Provence. It groweth also in Barbary,
generally almost everywhere in the Canary Islands, and in those of
Madiera, in the East and West Indies, and many other places. Myself
did plant some shoots thereof in my garden, and some in Flanders did
the like: but the coldness of our climate made an end of mine, and I
think the Flemings will have the like profit of their labour.

The Time.

This Cane is planted at any time of the year in those hot countries
where it doth naturally grow, by reason they fear no frosts to hurt
the young shoots at their first planting.

The Names.

The Latins have called this plant Arundo Saccharina, with this
additament, Indica, because it was first known or brought from
India. Of some it is called Calamus Saccharatus: in English Sugar
Cane: in Dutch Suyickerriedt.

The Nature and Virtues.

The sugar or juice of this Reed is of a temperate quality; it drieth
and cleanseth the stomach, maketh smooth the roughness of the breast
and lungs, cleareth the voice, and putteth away hoarseness, the
cough, and all sourness and bitterness, as Isaac saith in Dictis.

The Use

Of the juice of this Reed is made the most pleasant and profitable
sweet, called sugar; whereof is made infinite confections,
confectures, syrups, and such like, as also preserving and
conserving of sundry fruits, herbs, and flowers, as Roses, Violets,
Rosemary flowers, and such like, which still retain with them the
name of sugar, as sugar roses, sugar violet, &c., the which to write
of would require a peculiar volume, and not pertinent unto this
history, for that it is not my purpose to make of my book a
confectionery, a sugar baker's furnace, a gentlewoman's preserving
pan, nor yet an apothecary's shop or dispensatory; but only to touch
the chiefest matter that I purposed to handle in the beginning, that
is, the nature, properties, and descriptions of plants.
Notwithstanding I think it not amiss to show unto you the ordering
of these reeds when they be new gathered, as I received it from the
mouth of an Indian my servant: he saith, They cut them in small
pieces, and put them into a trough made of one whole tree, wherein
they put a great stone in manner of a mill-stone, whereunto they tie
a horse, buffalo or some other beast which draweth it round: in
which trough they put those pieces of canes, and so crush and grind
them as we do the barks of trees for Tanners, or apples for cider.
But in some places they use a great wheel, wherein slaves do tread
and walk as dogs do in turning the spit: and some others do feed as
it were the bottom of the said wheel, wherein are some sharp or hard
things which do cut and crush the canes into powder. And some
likewise have found the invention to turn the wheel with water
works, as we do our iron mills. The canes being thus brought into
dust or powder, they put them into great cauldrons with a little
water, where they boil until there be no more sweetness left in the
crushed reeds. Then do they strain them through mats and such like
things, and put the liquor to boil again unto the consistence of
honey, which being cold is like unto sand both in show and handling,
but somewhat softer; and so afterward it is carried into all parts
of Europe, where it is by the sugar bakers artificially purged and
refined to that whiteness as we see.



CHAP. 32. Of Flowering Reed.

Fig. 76. Flowering Reed

The Description.

Flowering Reed hath a thick and fat stalk of four or five foot high,
great below near the ground, and smaller toward the top, taper-wise:
whereupon do grow very fair broad leaves full of ribs or sinews like
unto Plantains, in shape representing the leaves of white Hellebore,
or the great Gentian, but much broader and larger every way: at the
top of which stalks do grow fantastic flowers of a red or vermilion
colour; which being faded, there follow round, rough, and prickly
knobs, like those of Sparganium, or Water-Bur, of a brown colour,
and from the middle of those knobs three small leaves. The seed
contained in those knobs is exceeding black, of a perfect roundness,
of the bigness of the smallest peas. The root is thick, knobby, and
tuberous, with certain small threads fixed thereto. There is a
variety of this, having flowers of a yellow or saffron colour, with
red spots.

The Place.

It groweth in Italy in the garden of Padua, and many other places of
those hot regions. Myself have planted it in my garden divers times,
but it never came to flowering or seeding, for that it is very
impatient to endure the injury of our cold climate. It is a native
of the West Indies.

The Time.

It must be set or sown in the beginning of April, in a pot with fine
earth, or in a bed made with horse-dung, and some earth strawed
thereon, in such manner as Cucumbers and Musk-Melons are.

The Names.

The name Arundo indica is diversely attributed to sundry of the
Reeds, but principally unto this, called of Lobel, Cannacorus: of
others, Arundo florida, and Harundo florida: in English, the
Flowering Reed.

The Nature and values.

There is not anything set down as touching the temperature and
virtues or this Flowering Reed, either of the ancients, or of the
new or later Writers.



CHAP. 33. Of Paper Reed.

Fig. 77. Paper Reed

The Description.

Paper Reed hath many large flaggy leaves somewhat triangular and
smooth, not much unlike those of Cat's-tail, rising immediately from
a tuft of roots compact of many strings, amongst the which it
shooteth up two or three naked stalks, square, and rising some six
or seven cubits high above the water; at the top whereof there
stands a tuft or bundle of chaffy threads set in comely order,
resembling a tuft of flowers, but barren and void of seed.

The Place.

This kind of Reed grows in the Rivers about Babylon, and near the
city Cairo, in the river Nile, and such other places of those
countries.

The Time.

The time of springing and flourishing answereth that of the common
Reed.

The Names.

This kind of Reed which I have Englished Paper Reed, or Paper plant,
is the same (as I do read) that Paper was made of in Egypt, before
the invention of paper made of linen clouts was found out. It is
thought by men of great learning and understanding in the
Scriptures, and set down by them for truth, that this plant is the
same Reed mentioned in the second chapter of Exodus; whereof was
made that basket or cradle, which was daubed within and without with
slime of that country, called Bitumen Iudaicum, wherein Moses was
put being committed to the water, when Pharaoh gave commandment that
all the male children of the Hebrews should be drowned.

The Nature, Virtues, and Use.

A. The roots of Paper Reed do nourish, as may appear by the people
of Egypt, which do use to chew them in their mouths, and swallow
down the juice, finding therein great delight and comfort.

B. The ashes burned assuage and consume hard apostumes, tumors, and
corrosive ulcers in any part of the body, but chiefly in the mouth.

C. The burnt paper made hereof doth perform those effects more
forcibly.

D. The stalks hereof have a singular use and privilege in opening
the chapels or hollow passages of a fistula, being put therein; for
they do swell as doth the pith of Elder, or a tent made of a sponge.

E. The people about Nile do use to burn the leaves and stalks, but
especially the roots.

F. The frails wherein they put raisins and figs are sometimes made
hereof; but generally with the herb Spartum, described in the next
chapter.



CHAP. 34. Of Mat-weed.


Fig. 78. Pliny's Mat-weed (1)
Fig. 79 Hooded Mat-weed (2)

The Kinds.

There be divers kinds of Mat-Weeds, as shall be declared in their
several descriptions.

The Description.

1. The herb Spartum, as Pliny saith, groweth of itself, and sendeth
forth from the root a multitude of slender rushy leaves of a cubit
high, or higher, tough and pliable, of a whitish colour, which in
time draweth narrow together, making the flat leaf to become round,
as is the Rush. The stub or stalk thereof beareth at the top certain
feather-like tufts coming forth of a sheath or husk, among the which
chaffy husks is contained the seed, long and chaffy. The root
consisteth of many strings folding one within another, by means
whereof it cometh to the form of a turf or hassock.

2. The second likewise Pliny describeth to have a long stalk not
much unlike to Reed, but lesser, whereupon do grow many grassy
leaves, rough and pliant, hard in handling as are the Rushes. A
spoky chaffy tuft groweth at the top of the stalk, coming forth of a
hood or sinewy sheath, such as encloseth the flowers of Onions,
Leeks, Narcissus, and such like, before they come to flowering, with
seed and roots like the precedent.


Fig. 80. English Mat-weed (3)
Fig. 81. Small English Mat-weed
(4)
	3. English Mat-weed hath a rushy root, deeply creeping and
growing in heaps of sand and gravel, from the which arise stiff and
sharp pointed leaves a foot and a half long, of a whitish colour,
very much resembling those of Camels' Hay. The stalk groweth to the
height of a cubit or more, whereupon doth grow a spike or ear of
some five or six inches long, somewhat resembling Rye; it is the
thickness of a finger in the midst, and smaller towards both the
ends. The seed is brown, as small as Canary Seed, but round, and
somewhat sharp at the one end. Of this plant neither sheep nor any
other cattle will taste or eat.

4. The other English Mat-Weed is like unto the former, saving that
the roots of this are long, not unlike to Dog's Grass, but do not
thrust deep into the ground, but creep only under the upper crust of
the earth. The tuft or ear is shorter, and more resembling the head
of Canary Seed than than of Rye.

5. Lobel gives a figure of another smaller Rush-leaved Spartum, with
small heads, but he hath not described it in his Latin Works, so
that I can say nothing certainly of it.

Fig. 82. Feathered Grass (6)

6. To this kindred must be added the Feathered Grass, though not
partaking with the former in place of growth. Now it hath many small
leaves of a foot's length round, green, and sharp pointed, not much
in form unlike the first described Mat-weed, but much less: amongst
these leaves rise up many small stalks not exceeding the height of
the leaves, which bear a spike unlike the forementioned Mat-weeds,
having 3 or four seeds ending in or sending up very fine white
feathers, resembling the smaller sort of feathers of the wings of
the Bird of Paradise. The root consists of many small grassy fibres.

The Place.

1 & 2. These two grow in divers places of Spain.

3. I being in company with Mr. Tho. Broad, and three other London
apothecaries besides, in August, 1632, to find out rare plants in
the Island of Thanet, found this bigger English one in great plenty,
as soon as we came to the seaside, going between Margate and
Sandwich.

4 & 5. These it may be grow also upon our coasts; however they grow
near the seaside in divers parts of the Lowb Countries.

6. This elegant plant Clusius first observed to grow naturally in
the mountains nigh to the baths of Baden in Germany, and in divers
places of Austria and Hungary. It is nourished for the beauty in
sundry of our English gardens.

The Time.

These bear their heads in the middle, and some in the later end of
summer.

The Names.

1. This is called Spartum primum Plinii; that is, the first Mat-Weed
described by Pliny: in Spain they call it Sparto: the French in
Provence term it Olpho.

2. This is Spartum alterum Plinii, Pliny his second Mat-Weed, or
Hooded Mat-weed, it is called Albardin in Spain.

3. This is Spartum testium of Clusius, and Gramen Sparteum secundum
Schænanthinum of Tabernamontanus. This the Dutch call Halme; and our
English in Thanet, Helme. Turner calls it Sea-Bent.

4. This is Spartum herba Batavicum of Clusius; Gramen Sparteum, or
Iunci Spartium of Tabernamontanus. Lobel calls it Spartum nostras
alterum.

5. Lobel calls this Spartum nostras parvum.

6. Clusius calls this Spartum Austriacum; Dalechampius, Gramen
pinnatum; we in England call it Gramen plumosum, or Feathered Grass.

The Temperature, Virtues, and Use.

A. These kinds of grassy or rather rushy Reed have no use in physic,
but serve to make Mats, and hangings for chambers, frails, baskets,
and such like, The people of the Countries where they grow do make
beds of them, straw their houses and chambers instead of Rushes, for
which they do excel, as myself have seen. Turner affirmeth, That
they made hats of the English one in Northumberland in his time.

B. They do likewise in sundry places or the Islands of Madeira,
Canary, Saint Thomas, and other of the islands in the tract unto the
West Indies, make of them their boots, shoes, Herd-men's Coats,
fires, and lights. It is very hurtful for cattle, as Sheer-Grass is.

The Feather-Grass is worn by sundry ladies and Gentlewomen instead
of a Feather, the which it exquisitely resembles.



CHAP. 35. Of Camels' Hay.


Fig. 83. Camels' Hay (1)
Fig. 84. Bastard Camels' Hay (2)
The Description

1. Camels' Hay hath leaves very like unto Mat-Weed or Helme; his
roots are many, in quantity mean, full of small hairs or threads
proceeding from the bigger root deeply growing in the ground, having
divers long stalks like Cyperus Grass, set with some smaller leaves
even unto the top, where do grow many small chaffy tufts or panicles
like unto those of the wild Oats, of a reasonable good smell and
savour, when they are broken, like unto a Rose, with a certain
biting and nipping of the tongue.

2. Francis Penny, of famous memory, a good Physician and skilful
herbarist, gathered on the coast of the Mediterranean sea, between
Aigues Mortes and Pescaire, this beautiful plant, whose roots are
creeping, and stalks and leaves resemble Squinanth. The flowers are
soft, pappous, and thick compact, and come five or six inches in
length, like to Fox-tail; they in colour resemble white silk or
silver. Thus much Lobel.

The Place.

1. This grows in Africa, Nabathæa, and Arabia, and is a stranger in
these northern regions.

2. The place of the second is mentioned in the description.

The Time.

Their time answereth the other Reeds and Flags.

The Names.

1 Camels' Hay is called in Latin, Juncus odoratus, and Scænanthum:
in shops Squinanthum, that is, Flos Junci; in French, Pasteur de
Chameau; in English, Camels' Hay, and Squinanth.

2. This Lobel calls Juncus marinus gramineus, and Pseudoschænanthum:
We call it Bastard Squinanth, and Fox-tail Squinanth.

The temper.

This plant is indifferently hot, and a little astrictive.

The Virtues.

A. Camels' Hay provoketh urine, moveth the terms, and breaketh wind
about the stomach.

B. It causeth aching and heaviness of the head, Galen yieldeth this
reason thereof, because it heateth moderately, and bindeth with
tenuity of parts.

C. According to Dioscorides, it dissolves, digests, and opens the
passages of the veins.

D. The flowers or chaffy tufts are profitable in drink for them that
piss blood anyways: It is given in medicines that are ministered to
cure the pains and griefs of the guts, stomach, lungs, liver, and
reins, the fulness, loathsomeness, and other defects of the stomach,
the dropsy, convulsions, or shrinking of sinews, given in the
quantity of a dram, with a like quantity of pepper, for some few
days.

E. The same boiled in wine helpeth the inflammation of the matrix,
if the woman do sit over the fume thereof, and bath herself often
with it also.



CHAP. 36. Of Bur-Reed.


Fig. 85. Branched Bur-reed (1)
Fig. 86. Great Water-Bur (2)

The Description.

1. The first of these plants hath long leaves, which are double-
edged, or sharp on both sides, with a sharp crest in the middle, in
such manner raised up that it seemeth to be triangle or three-
square. The stalks grow among the leaves, and are two or three foot
long, being divided into many branches, garnished with many prickly
husks or knops of the bigness of a nut. The root is full of hairy
strings.

2. The Great Water-Bur differeth not in anything from the first kind
in roots or leaves, save that the first hath his leaves rising
immediately from the tuft or knop of the root; but this kind hath a
long stalk coming from the root, whereupon, a little above the root,
the leaves shoot out round about the stalk successively, some leaves
still growing above others, even to the top of the stalk, and from
the top thereof downward by certain distances. It is garnished with
many round whorls, or rough coronets, having here and there among
the said whorls one single short leaf of a pale green colour.

The Place.

Both these are very common, and grow in moist meadows, and near unto
water-courses. They plentifully grow in the fenny grounds of
Lincolnshire, and such like places; in the ditches about St. George
his fields and in the ditch right against the place of execution, at
the end of Southwark, called St. Thomas Waterings.

The Time.

They bring forth their burry bullets or seedy knots in August.

The Names.

These plants of some are called Sparganium: Theophrastus in his
fourth Book and eighteenth Chapter calleth them Butomus: of some,
Platanaria: I call them Bur-Reed: in the Arabian tongue they are
called Sa farhe Bamon: in Italian Sparganio: of Dodonæus, Carex:
Some call the first Sparganium ramosum, or Branched Bur-Reed. The
second, Sparganium non ramosum, Not-branching Bur-Reed.

The Temperature.

They are cold and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.

A. Some write, that the knops or rough burs of these plants boiled
in wine, are good against the bitings of venomous beasts, if either
it be drunk, or the wound washed therewith.



CHAP. 37. Of Cat's Tail.

Fig. 87. Cat's Tail

The Description.

Cat's Tail hath long and flaggy leaves, full of a spongeous matter,
or pith, among which leaves groweth up a long smooth naked stalk,
without knot, fashioned like a spear, of a fine or solid substance,
having at the top a brown knop or ear, soft, thick and smooth,
seeming to be nothing else but a deal of flocks thick set and thrust
together, which being ripe turneth into a down, and is carried away
with the wind. The roots be hard, thick, and white, full of strings,
and good to burn, where there is plenty thereof to be had.

The Place.

It groweth in pools and such like standing waters, and sometimes in
running streams.

I have found a smaller kind hereof growing in the ditches and marshy
grounds in the Isle of Sheppey, going from Sherland house to
Feversham.

The Time.

They flower and bear their mace or torch in July and August.

The Names.

They are called in Latin Typha: of some Cestrum Morionis: in French
Marteau Masses: in Dutch, Lischdoden, and Donsen: In Italian Mazza
sorda: in Spanish Behordo, and Junco amacorodato: In English, Cat's
Tail, and Reed-Mace. Of this Cat's Tail Aristophanes maketh mention
in his Comedy of Frogs, where he bringeth them forth one talking
with another, being very glad that they had spent the whole day in
skipping and leaping inter Cyperum & Phleum, among Galingale and
Cat's Tail. Ovid seemeth to name this plant Scirpus; for he termeth
the mats made of the leaves, Cat's-tail Mats, as in his sixth Book
Fastorum,

At Dominus, discedite, ait, plaustroque morantes
Sustulit, in plaustro scirpea matta fuit.
[But the master cried: "Away with you!" and packed
The laggards into a wagon lined with rushes.]


The Nature.

It is cold and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.

A. The soft down stamped with swine's grease well washed, healeth
burnings or scaldings with fire or water.

B. Some practitioners by their experience have found, That the down
of the Cat's tail beaten with the leaves of Betony, the roots of
Gladiole, and the leaves of Hippoglosson into powder, and mixed with
the yolks of eggs hard sodden, and so eaten, is a most perfect
medicine against the disease in children called in Greek
Enterochole, which is, when the gut called intestinum caecum is
fallen into the cods. This medicine must be ministered every day
fasting for the space of thirty days, the quantity thereof to be
ministered at one time is 1 drachm. This being used as before is
specified doth not only help children and striplings, but grown men
also, if in time of their cure they use convenient ligature or
trussings, and fit consounding plasters upon the grieved place,
according to art appointed for that purpose in chirurgery.

C. This down in some places of the Isle of Ely, and the low
countries adjoining thereto, is gathered and well sold to make
mattresses of, for ploughmen and poor people.

D. It hath been also often proved to heal kibed or humbled heels (as
they are termed) being applied to them, either before or after the
skin is broken.



CHAP. 38. Of Stitchwort.

Fig. 88. Stitchwort

The Description

1. Stitchwort, or as Ruellius termeth it Holosteum, is of two kinds,
and hath round tender stalks full of joints leaning toward the
ground; at every joint grow two leaves one against another. The
flowers be white, consisting of many small leaves set in the manner
of a star. The roots are small, jointed, and thready. The seed is
contained in small heads somewhat long, and sharp at the upper end,
and when it is ripe it is very small and brown.

2. The second is like the former in shape of leaves and flowers,
which are set in form of a star; but the leaves are orderly placed,
and in good proportion, by couples two together, being of a whitish
colour. When the flowers be faded then follow the seeds which are
enclosed in bullets like the seed of flax, but not so round. The
chives or threads in the middle of the flower are sometimes of a
reddish, or of a blackish colour. There are more differences of this
plant, or rather varieties, as differing little but in the largeness
of the leaves, flowers, or stalks.

The Place.

They grow in the borders of fields upon bank sides and hedges,
almost everywhere.

The Time

They flourish all the summer, especially in May and June.

The Names.

In Latin, Tota ossea; in English, All-Bones; whereof I see no
reason, except it be by the figure Antonomia; as when we say in
English, He is an honest man, our meaning is that he is a knave: for
this is a tender herb having no such bony substance. Dodonæus
questions, whether this plant be not Cratæogonon; and he calls it
Gramen Leucanthemum, or White-flowered Grass. The quality here noted
with B. is by Dioscorides given to Cratæogonon; but it is with Some
say or report so much: which phrase of speech he often useth when as
he writes faculties by hearsay and doubts himself of the truth of
them.

The Nature.

The seed of Stitchwort, as Galen writeth, is sharp and biting to him
that tasteth it, and to him that useth it very like to Mill.

The Virtues.

A. They are wont to drink it in wine with the powder of acorns,
against the pain in the side, stitches, and such like.

B. Divers report, saith Dioscorides, That the seed of Stitchwort
being drunk causeth a woman to bring forth a man child, if after the
purgation of her sickness, before she conceive, she do drink it
fasting thrice in a day, half a dram at a time, in three ounces of
water many days together.



CHAP. 39. Of Spiderwort.


Fig. 89. Branched Spiderwort(1)
Fig. 90. Unbranched
Spiderwort(2)

The Description.

1. The obscure description which Dioscorides and Pliny have set down
for Phalangium, hath bred much contention among late writers. This
plant Phalangium hath leaves much like Couch Grss, but they are
somewhat thicker and fatter, and of a more whitish green colour. The
stalks grow to the height of a cubit. The top of the stalk is beset
with small branches, garnished with many little white flowers,
compact of six little leaves. The threads or thrums in the middle
are whitish, mixed with a fair yellow, which being fallen, there
follow black seeds, enclosed in small round knobs, which be three-
cornered. The roots are many, tough, and white of colour.

2. The second is like the first, but that his stalk is not branched
as the first, and flowereth a month before the other.


Fig. 91. Candy Spiderwort (3)
Fig. 92. True Spiderwort (4)
	3. The third kind of Spiderwort, which Carol Clusius nameth
Asphodelus minor, hath a root of many thready strings, from the
which immediately rise up grassy leaves, narrow and sharp pointed:
among the which come forth divers naked strait stalks divided
towards the top into sundry branches, garnished on every side with
fair star-like flowers, of colour white, with a purple vein dividing
each leaf in the midst: they have also certain chives or threads in
them. The seed followeth enclosed in three-square beads like unto
the kinds of Asphodels.

4. This Spiderwort hath a root consisting of many thick, long, and
white fibers, not much unlike the precedent, out of which it sends
forth some five or six green and firm leaves, somewhat hollowed in
the middle, and mutually involving each other at the root; amongst
these there riseth up a round green stalk, bearing at the top 
thereof some nine or ten flowers, more or less; these consist of six
leaves apiece, of colour white (the three innermost leaves are the
broader, and more curled, and the three outmost are tipped with
green, at the tops). The whole flower much resembles a white lily,
but much smaller. Three-square heads, containing a dusky and unequal
seed, follow after the flower.

Fig. 93. Virginian Spiderwort (5)

5. This plant in my judgement cannot be fitlier ranked with any than
these last described; therefore I have here given him the fifth
place, as the last comer. This plant hath many creeping stringy
roots, which here and there put up green leaves, in shape resembling
those of the last described: amongst these there riseth up a pretty
stiff stalk jointed, and having at each joint one leaf encompassing
the stalk, and out of whose bosom oft times little branches arise:
now the stalk at the top usually divides itself into two leaves,
much after the manner of Cyperus; between which there come forth
many flowers consisting of three pretty large leaves a piece, of
colour deep blue, with reddish chives tipped with yellow standing in
their middle. These fading (as usually they do the same day they
show themselves) there succeed little heads covered with the three
little leaves that sustained the flower. In these heads there is
contained a long blackish seed.

The Place.

1, 2 & 3. These grow only in gardens with us, and that very rarely.

4. This grows naturally in some places of Savoy.

5. This Virginian is in many of our English gardens, as with Mr.
Parkinson, Mr. Tradescant, and others.

The Time.

1, 4 & 5. These flower in June: the second about the beginning of
May: and the third about August.

The Names.

1. The first is called Phalangium ramosum, Branched Spiderwort.

2. Phalangium non ramosum, Unbranched Spiderwort. Cordus calls it
Liliago.

3. This, Clusius calls Asphodelus minor: Lobel, Phalangium Cretæ,
Candy Spiderwort.

4. This is thought to be the Phalangium of the ancients, and that of
Matthiolus: it is Phalanagium Allobrogicum of Clusius, Savoy
Spiderwort.

5. This by Mr. Parkinson (who first hath in writing given the figure
and description thereof) is aptly termed Phalangium Ephemerum
Virginianum, Soon-fading Spiderwort of Virginia, or Tradescant's
Spiderwort, for that Mr. John Tradescant first procured it from
Virginia. Bauhin hath described it at the end of his Pinax, and very
unfitly termed it Allium, sive Moly Virginianum.

The Nature.

Galen saith, Phalangium is of a drying quality, by reason of the
tenuity of parts.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, That the leaves, seed, and flowers, or any of
them drunk in wine, prevaileth against the bitings of Scorpions, and
against the stinging and biting of the Spider called Phalangium, and
all other venomous beasts.

B. The roots tunned up in new ale, and drunk for a month together,
expelleth poison, yea although it have universally spread itself
through the body.



CHAP. 40. Of the Fleur-de-lys.

The Kinds.

There be many kinds of Iris or Fleur-de-lys, whereof some are tall
and great, some little, small, and low; some smell exceeding sweet
in the root, some have no smell at all: some flowers are sweet in
smell, and some without; some of one colour, some of many colours
mixed: virtues attributed to some, others not remembered: some have
tuberous or knobby roots, others bulbous or onion roots, some have
leaves like flags, others like grass or rushes.


Fig. 94. Fleur-de-lys (1)
Fig. 95. Water-flag or Water
Fleur-de-lys (2)

The Description.

1. The common Fleur-de-lys hath long and large flaggy leaves like
the blade of a sword, with two edges, amongst which spring up smooth
and plain stalks two foot long, bearing flowers toward the top,
compact of six leaves joined together, whereof three that stand
upright are bent inward one toward another; and in those leaves that
hang downward there are certain rough or hairy welts, growing or
rising from the nether part of the leaf upward, almost of a yellow
colour. The roots be thick, long, and knobby, with many hairy
threads hanging thereat.

2. The water Fleur-de-lys, or Water Flag, or Bastard Acorus, is like
unto the garden Fleur-de-lys in roots, leaves, and stalks, but the
leaves are much longer, sometimes of the height of four cubits, and
altogether narrower. The flower is of a perfect yellow colour, and
the root knobby like the other; but being cut, it seemeth to be of
the colour of raw flesh.

The Place.

The Water Fleur-de-lys or yellow flag prospereth well in moist
meadows, and in the borders and brinks of rivers, ponds, and
standing lakes. And although it be a water plant of nature, yet
being planted in gardens it prospereth well.

The Names.

Fleur-de-lys is called in Greek by Athenæus and Theophrastus
Consecratrix; by which name it is also called of the Latins Radix
Mario, or rather Radix Naronica, of the river Naron [Neretva], by
which the best and greatest store do grow. Whereupon Nicander in his
Treacles commendeth it thus:

Iridem quam aluit Drilon, & Naronis ripa.

Which may thus be Englished:

Iris, which Drilon water feeds,
And Naron's banks with other weeds.

The Italians, Giglio Azurro: in Spanish, Lilio Cardeno: in French,
Flambe: The Germans, Gilgen, Schwertel: in Dutch, Lisch.

The second is called in Latin, Iris Palustris lutea, Pseudoacorus,
and Acornus palustris: in English, Water-flags, Bastard Fleur-de-
lys, or Water Fleur-de-lys: and in the North they call them Seggs.

The Nature.

1. The roots of the Fleur-de-lys being as yet fresh and green, and
full of juice, are hot almost in the fourth degree. The dried roots
are hot and dry in the third degree, burning the throat and mouth of
such as taste them.

2. The bastard Fleur-de-lys his root is cold and dry in the third
degree, and of an astringent or binding faculty.

The Virtues.

A. The root of the common Fleur-de-lys clean washed, and stamped
with a few drops of rose-water, and laid plaster-wise upon the face
of man or woman, doth in two days at the most take away the
blackness or blueness of any stroke or bruise: so that if the skin
of the same woman or any other person be very tender and delicate,
it shall be needful that ye lay a piece of silk, sindall, or a piece
of fine lawn between the plaster and the skin; for otherwise in such
tender bodies it often causeth heat and inflammation.

B. The juice of the same doth not only mightily and vehemently draw
forth choler, but most especially watery humors, and is a special
and singular purgation for them that have the dropsy, if it be drunk
in whey or some other liquor that may somewhat temper and allay his
heat.

C. The dry roots attenuate or make thin thick and tough humours,
which are hardly and with difficulty purged away.

D. They are good in a lohoch or licking medicine for shortness of
breath, an old cough, and all infirmities of the chest which rise
hereupon.

E. They remedy those that have evil spleens, and those that are
troubled with convulsions or cramps, biting of serpents, and the
running of the reins, being drunk with vinegar, as saith
Dioscorides; and drunk with wine it bringeth down the monthly
courses of women.

F. The decoction is good in women's baths, for it mollifieth and
openeth the matrix.

G. Being boiled very soft, and laid to plaster-wise it mollifieth or
softeneth the king's evil, and old hard swellings.

H. The roots of our ordinary flags are not (as before is delivered)
cold and dry in the third degree, nor yet in the second, as Dodonæus
affirms; but hot and dry, and, that at the least in the second
degree, as any that throughly tastes them will confess. Neither are
the faculties and use (as some would persuade us) to be neglected;
for as Pena and Lobel affirm, though it have no smell nor great
heat, yet by reason of other faculties it is much to be preferred
before the Galanga major, or foreign Acorus of shops, in many
diseases; for it imparts more heat and strength to the stomach and
neighbouring parts than the other, which rather preys upon and
dissipates the innate heat and implanted strength of those parts. It
binds, strengthens, and condenses: it is good in bloody fluxes, and
stays the courses.



CHAP. 41. Of Fleur-de-lys of Florence.

Fig. 96. Fleur-de-Lys (1-3).

The Description.

1. The Fleur-de-lys of Florence, whose roots in shops and generally
everywhere are called ireos, or orris (whereof sweet waters, sweet
powders, and such like are made) is altogether like unto the common
Fleur-de-lys, saving that the flowers of the Ireos is of a white
colour, and the roots exceeding sweet of smell, and the other of no
smell at all.

2. The white Fleur-de-lys is like unto the Florentine Fleur-de-lys
in roots, flaggy leaves, and stalks; but they differ in that, that
this Iris hath his flower of a bleak white colour declining to
yellowness; and the roots have not any smell at all; but the other
is very sweet, as we have said.

3. The great Fleur-de-lys of Dalmatia hath leaves much broader,
thicker, and more closely compact together than any of the other,
and set in order like wings or the fins of a whale fish, green
toward the top, and of a shining purple colour toward the bottom,
even to the ground; amongst which riseth up a stalk of four foot
high, as myself did measure oft times in my garden: whereupon doth
grow fair large flowers of a light blue, or as we term it, a watchet
colour. The flowers do smell exceeding sweet, much like the Orange-
Flower. The seeds are contained in square cods, wherein are packed
together many flat seeds like the former. The root hath no smell at
all.

Fig. 97. Fleur-de-lys (4-7)

4. The small Fleur-de-lys of Dalmatia is in show like to the
precedent, but rather resembling Iris biflora, being both of one
stature, small and dwarf plants in respect of the greater. The
flowers be of a more blue colour. They flower likewise in May as the
others do; but beware that ye never cast any cold water upon them
presently taken out of a well, for their tenderness is such, that
they wither immediately, and rot away, as I myself have proved: but
those which I left unwatered at the same time live and prosper to
this day.

5. This kind of Fleur-de-lys came first from Portugal to us. It
bringeth forth in the springtime flowers of a purple or violet
colour, smelling like a violet, with a white hairy welt down the
middle. The root is thick and short, stubborn or hard to break. In
leaves and show it is like to the lesser Fleur-de-lys of Dalmatia,
but the leaves be more spread abroad, and it commonly hath but one
stalk, which in autumn flowereth again, and bringeth forth the like
flowers; for which cause it was called Iris biflora.

6. Iris violacea is like unto the former, but much smaller, and the
flower is of a more deep violet colour.

7. Carolus Clusius, that excellent and learned Father of herbarists,
hath set forth in his Pannonic Observations the picture of this
beautiful Fleur-de-lys, with great broad leaves, thick and fat, of a
purple colour near unto the ground, like the great Dalmatian Flower-
de-luce, which it doth very well resemble. The root is very sweet
when it is dry, and striveth with the Florentine Iris in sweetness.
The flower is of all the other most confusedly mixed with sundry
colours, insomuch that my pen cannot set down every line or streak,
as it deserveth. The three leaves that stand upright do clasp or
embrace one another, and are of a yellow colour. The leaves that
look downward, about the edges are of a pale colour, the middle part
of white, mixed with a line of purple, and hath many small purple
lines striped over the said white flower, even to the brim of the
pale coloured edge. It smelleth like the Hawthorn flowers being
lightly smelled unto.

Fig. 98. German Fleur-de-lys (8)

8. The German Fleur-de-lys, which Camerarius hath set forth in his
book named Hortus Medicus, hath great thick and knobby roots: the
stalk is thick and full of juice: the leaves be very broad in
respect of all the rest of the Fleur-de-lys. The flower groweth at
the top of the stalk, consisting of six great leaves blue of colour,
welted down the middle, with white tending to yellow; at the bottom
next the stalk it is white of colour, with some yellowness fringed
about the said white, as also about the brims or edges, which
greatly setteth forth his beauties the which Ioachimus Camerarius,
the son of old Camerarius of Nuremberg, had sent him out of Hungary,
and did communicate one of the plants thereof to Clusius; whose
figure he hath most lively set forth with this description,
differing somewhat from that which Ioachimus himself did give unto
me at his being in London. The leaves, saith he, are very large,
twice so broad as any of the others. The stalk is single and smooth;
the flower groweth at the top, of a most bright shining blue colour,
the middle rib tending to whiteness, the three upper leaves somewhat
yellowish. The root is likewise sweet as Ireos.

The Place.

These kinds of Fleur-de-lys do grow wild in Dalmatia, Gorizia, and
Piedmont; notwithstanding our London gardens are very well stored
with every one of them.

The Time.

Their time of flowering answereth the other Fleur-de-lys.

The Names.

The Dalmatian Fleur-de-lys is called in Latin Iris, and in English
Fleur-de-lys. Their several titles do sufficiently distinguish them,
whereby they may be known one from another.

The Nature.

The nature of these Fleur-de-lys are answerable to those of the
common kind; that is to say, the dry roots are hot and dry in the
latter end of the second degree.

The Virtues.

The juice of these Fleur-de-lys doth not only mightily and
vehemently draw forth choler, but most especially watery humors, and
is a singular good purgation for them that have the dropsy, if it be
drunk in sweet wort or whey.

The same are good for them that have evil spleens, or that are
troubled with cramps or convulsions, and for such as are bit with
serpents. It profiteth also much those that have the gonorrhea, or
running of the reins, being drunk with vinegar, as Dioscorides 
saith, and drunk with wine they bring down the monthly terms.



CHAP 42. Of Variable Fleur-de-lys.


Fig. 99. Variable Fleur-de-lys
(1)
Fig. 100. Turkey Fleur-de-lys
(2)

The Description.

1. That which is called the Fleur-de-lys of many colours loseth his
leaves in winter, and in the springtime recovereth them anew. I am
not able to express the sundry colours and mixtures contained in
this flower: it is mixed with purple, yellow, black, white, and a
fringe or black thrum down the middle of the lower leaves, of a
whitish yellow, tipped or frizzed, and as it were a little raised
up; of a deep purple colour near the ground.

2. The second kind hath long and narrow leaves of a blackish green,
like the stinking Gladdon; among which rise up stalks two foot long,
bearing at the top of every stalk one flower compact of six great
leaves: the three that stand upright are confusedly and very
strangely striped, mixed with white and a duskish black colour. The
three leaves that hang downward are like a gaping hood, and are
mixed in like manner, (but the white is nothing so bright as of the
other) and are as it were shadowed over with a dark purple colour
somewhat shining: so that according to my judgement the whole flower
is of the colour of a Guinea hen: a rare and beautiful flower to
behold.

Fig. 101. Variable Fleur-de-lys (3-6)

3. The French, or rather Sea Fleur-de-lys (whereof there is also
another of the same kind altogether lesser) have their roots without
any savour. In show they differ little from the garden Fleur-de-lys,
but that the leaves of these are altogether slenderer, and
unpleasant in smell, growing plentifully in the rough crags of the
rocks under the Alps, and near unto the seaside. The which Pena
found in the grassy gravely grounds of the sea coast near to
Montpellier. The learned Doctor Assatius a long time supposed it to
be Medium Diosc. Matthiolus deceived himself and others, in that he
said, That the root of this plant hath the scent of the peach: but
myself have proved it to be without savour at all. It yieldeth his
flowers in June, which are of all the rest most like unto the grass
Fleur-de-lys. The taste of his root is hot, bitter, and with much
tenuity of parts, as hath been found by physical proof.

4. This Iris Byzantina hath long narrow leaves like those of the
last described; very narrow, sharp pointed, having no ungrateful
smell; the stalks are some cubit and an half in length, and
sometimes more; at the top they are divided into 2 or 3 branches
that have 2 or 3 flowers apiece, like in shape to the flowers of the
broad-leafed variegated bulbous Iris; they have also a good smell:
the ends of the hanging-down leaves are of a dark colour; the other
parts of them are variegated with white, purple, or violet colour.
The three other leaves that stand up are of a deep violet or purple
colour. The root is blackish, slender, hard, knotty.

5. Narrow-leaved Fleur-de-lys hath an infinite number of grassy
leaves much like unto Reed, among which rise up many stalks: on the
ends of the same spring forth two, sometimes three right sweet and
pleasant flowers, compact of nine leaves. Those three that hang
downward are greater than the rest, of a purple colour, striped with
white and yellow; but those three small leaves that appear next, are
of a purple colour without mixture: those three that stand upright
are of an horse-flesh colour, tipped with purple, and under each of
these leaves appear three small brown aglets like the tongue of a
small bird.

6. The Small Grassy Fleur-de-lys differeth from the former in
smallness and in thinness of leaves, and in that the stalks are
lower than the leaves, and the flowers in shape and colour are like
those of the Stinking Gladdon, but much less.

There are many other varieties of the broad-leaved Fleur-de-lys
besides these mentioned by our author; as also of the narrow-leaved,
which here we do not intend to insist upon, but refer such as are
desirous to trouble themselves with these niceties, to Clusius and
others.

Notwithstanding I judge it not amiss to give the figures and brief
descriptions of some more of the Dwarf Fleur-de-lys, as also of one
of the narrow-leaved.

Fig. 102. Narrow-leafed and Dwarf Fleur-de-lys (7-9)

7. This therefore which we give you in the seventh place is Iris
flore cæruleo obsoleto, &c. Lobelii. The leaves of this are small
and long like those of the wild Byzantine Fleur-de-lys; the root
(which is not very big) hath many strong threads or fibres coming
out of it: the stalk (which is somewhat tall) divides itself into
two or three branches, whereon grow flowers in shape like those of
the other Fleur-de-lys, but their colour is of an overworn blue, or
ash colour.


Fig. 103. Yellow Dwarf Iris (10)
Fig. 104. Variegated Dwarf Iris
(11)
	8-11. Many are the differences of the Chamæirides latifoliæ,
or Broad-leaved Dwarf Fleur-de-lys, but their principal distinction
is in their flowers; for some have flowers of violet or purple
colour, some of white, other some are variegated with yellow and
purple, &c. Therefore I will only name the colour, and give you
their figure, because their shapes differ little. This eighth
therefore is Chamæiris nivea aut Candida, White Dwarf Iris: The
ninth, Chamæiris latifolia flore rubello, Red flowered Dwarf Iris:
The tenth, Camæiris lutea, Yellow Dwarf Iris: The eleventh,
Chamæiris variegata, Variegated Dwarf Iris. The leaves and stalks of
these plants are usually about a foot high; the flowers, for the
bigness of the plants, large, and they flower betimes, as in April.
And thus much I think may suffice for the names and descriptions of
these Dwarf varieties of Fleur-de-lys.

The Place.

These plants do grow in the gardens of London, amongst herbarists
and other lovers of plants.

The Times.

They flower from the end of March to the beginning of May.

The Names.

The Turkey Fleur-de-lys is called in the Turkish tongue Alaia
Susiani, with this additament from the Italians, Fiore Belle
pintate: in English, Fleur-de-lys. The rest of the names have been
touched in their titles and history.

Their Nature and Virtues.

The faculties and temperature of these rare and beautiful flowers
are referred to the other sorts of Fleur-de-lys, whereunto they do
very well accord.

A. There is an excellent oil made of the flowers and roots of Fleur-
de-lys, of each a like quantity, called Oleum Irinum, made after the
same manner that oil of roses, lilies, and such like be made:which
oil profiteth much to strengthen the sinews and joints, helpeth the
cramp proceeding of repletion, and the disease called in Greek
Peripneumonia.

B. The flowers of French Fleur-de-lys distilled with Diatrion
sandalon, and Cinnamon, and the water drunk, prevaileth greatly
against the dropsy, as Hollerius and Gesner testify.



CHAP. 43. Of Stinking Gladdon.

Fig. 105. Stinking Gladdon

The Description.

Stinking Gladdon hath long narrow leaves like Iris, but smaller, of
a dark green colour, and being rubbed, of a stinking smell very
loathsome. The stalks are many in number, and round toward the top,
out of which do grow flowers like the Fleur-de-lys, of an overworn 
blue colour, or rather purple, with some yellow and red streaks in
the midst. After the flowers be faded there come great husks or
cods, wherein is contained a red berry or seed as big as a pease.
The root is long, and thready underneath.

The Place.

Gladdon groweth in many gardens: I have seen it wild in many places,
as in woods and shadowy places near the sea.

The Time.

The stinking Gladdon flowereth in August, the seed whereof is ripe
in September.

The Names.

Stinking Gladdon is called in Latin Spatula fœtida among the
apothecaries: it is called also Xyris: in English, stinking Gladdon,
and Spurgewort.

The Nature.

Gladdon is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Such is the faculty of the roots of all the Irides before named,
that being pounding they provoke sneezing, and purge the head:
generally all the kinds have a heating & extenuating quality.

B. They are effectual against the cough; they easily digest and
consume the gross humors which are hardly concocted: they purge
choler and tough phlegm they procure sleep, and help the gripings
within the belly.

C. It helpeth the king's evil, and buboes in the groin, as Pliny
saith. If it be drunk in wine it provoketh the terms, and being put
in baths for women to sit over, it provoketh the like effects most
exquisitely. The root put in manner of a pessary hasteneth the
birth. They cover with flesh bones that be bare, being used in
plasters. The roots boiled soft, and used plasterwise, soften all
old hard tumours, and the swellings of the throat called strumæ,
that is, the king's evil; and emplastered with honey it draweth out
broken bones.

D. The meal thereof healeth all the rifts of the fundament, and the
infirmities thereof called Condilomata; and openeth hæmorrhoids. The
juice sniffed or drawn up into the nose, provoketh sneezing, and
draweth down by the nose great store of filthy excrements, which
would fall into other parts by secret and hidden ways, and
conveyances of the channels.

E. It profiteth being used in a pessary, to provoke the terms, and
will cause abortion.

F. It prevaileth much against all evil affections of the breast and
lungs, being taken in a little sweet wine, with some Spikenard; or 
in whey with a little mastick.

G. The Root of Xyris or Gladdon is of great force against wounds and
fractures of the head; for it draweth out all thorns, stubs, pricks,
and arrow-heads, without grief; which quality it effecteth (as Galen
saith) by reason of his tenuity of parts, and of his attracting,
drying, and digesting faculty, which chiefly consisteth in the seed
or fruit, which mightily provoketh urine.

H. The root given in Wine, called in physic Passum, profiteth much
against convulsions, ruptures, the pain of the huckle bones, the
strangury, and the flux of the belly. Where note, That whereas it is
said that the potion above named stayeth the flux of the belly,
having a purging quality; it must be understood that it worketh in
that manner as Rhabarbarum and Asarum do, in that they concoct and
take away the cause of the lask; otherwise no doubt it moveth unto
the stool, as Rhubarb, Asarum, and the other Irides do. Hereof the
country people of Somersetshire have good experience, who use to
drink the decoction of this root. Others do take the infusion
thereof in ale or such like, wherewith they purge themselves, and
that unto very good purpose and effect

I. The seed thereof mightily purgeth by urine, as Galen saith, and
the country people have found it true.



CHAP. 44. Of Ginger.


Fig. 106. The feigned figure of
Ginger
Fig. 107. The true figure of
Ginger

The Description.

1. Ginger is most impatient of the coldness of these our Northern
Regions, as myself have found by proof, for that there have been
brought unto me at several times sundry plants thereof, fresh,
green, and full of juice, as well from the West Indies, as from
Barbary and other places; which have sprouted and budded forth green
leaves in my garden in the heat of summer, but as soon as it hath
been but touched with the first sharp blast of winter, it hath
presently perished both blade and root. The true form or picture
hath not before this time been set forth by any that hath written;
but the world hath been deceived by a counterfeit figure, which the
reverend and learned herbarist Matthias Lobel did set forth in his
Observations. The form whereof notwithstanding I have here
expressed, with the true and undoubted picture also, which I
received from Lobel his own hands at the impression hereof. The
cause of whose former error, as also the means whereby he got the
knowledge of the true Ginger, may appear by his own words sent unto
me in Latin, which I have here inserted. His words are these:

"How hard and uncertain it is to describe in words the true
proportion of plants, (having no other guide than skilful, but
yet deceitful forms of them, sent from friends, of other
means) they best do know who have deepliest waded in this sea
of simples. About thirty years past or more, an honest and
expert apothecary William Dries, to satisfy my desire, sent me
from Antwerp to London the picture of Ginger, which he held to
be truly and lively drawn: I myself gave him credit easily,
because I was not ignorant, that there had been often Ginger
roots brought green, new, and full of juice, from the Indies
to Antwerp; and further, that the same had budded and grown in
the said Dries' garden. But not many years after, I perceived
that the picture which was sent me by my friend was a
counterfeit, and before that time had been drawn and set forth
by an old Dutch herbarist. Therefore not suffering this error
any further to spread abroad, (which I discovered not many
years past at Flushing in Zeeland, in the garden of William of
Nassau Prince of Orange, of famous memory, through the means
of a worthy person, if my memory fail me not, called Vander
Mill; at what time he opened, and loosed his first young buds
and shoots about the end of summer, resembling in leaves, and
stalks of a foot high, the young and tender shoots of the
common Reed, called Harundo vallatoria) I thought it
convenient to impart thus much unto Master John Gerard, an
expert herbarist, and master of happy success in surgery; to
the end he might let posterity know thus much, in the painful
and long laboured travails which now he hath in hand, to the
great good and benefit of his country. The plant itself
brought me to Middleborough, and set in my garden, perished
through the hardness of the winter."

Thus much have I set down, truly translated out of his own words in
Latin though too favourably by him done to the commendation of my
mean skill.

The Place

Ginger groweth in Spain, Barbary, in the Canary Islands, and the
Azores. Our men which sacked Domingo in the Indies, digged it up
there in sundry places wild.

The Time.

Ginger flourisheth in the hot time of summer, and loseth his leaves
in winter.

The Names.

Ginger is called in Latin Zinziber and Gingiber: In French,
Gigembre.

The Nature.

Ginger heateth and drieth in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Ginger, as Dioscorides reporteth, is right good with meat in
sauces, or otherwise in conditures: for it is of an heating and
digesting quality; it gently looseth the belly, and is profitable
for the stomach, and effectually opposeth itself against all
darkness of the sight; answering the qualities and effects of
Pepper. It is to be considered, that candied, green or condited
Ginger is hot and moist in quality, provoking venery: and being
dried, it heateth and drieth in the third degree.



CHAP. 45. Of Aromatical Reeds.


Fig. 108. True Acorus with
flower (2)
Fig. 109. True Acorus without
flower

The Description.

1. This sweet-smelling Reed is of a dark dun colour, full of joints
and knees, easy to be broken into small splinters, hollow, and full
of a certain pith cobweb-wise, somewhat gummy in eating, and hanging
in the teeth, and of a sharp bitter taste. It is of the thickness of
the little finger, as Lobel affirmeth of some which he had seen in
Venice.

2. Bastard Calamus hath flaggy leaves like unto the Water Fleur-de-
lys or flag, but narrower, three foot long; of a fresh green colour,
and aromatic smell, which they keep a long time, although they be
dried. Now the stalk which bears the flower or fruit is much like
another leaf, but only from the fruit downwards, whereas it is
somewhat thicker, and not so broad; but almost triangular. The
flower is a long thing resembling the Cat's-tails which grow on
Hazels; it is about the thickness of an ordinary Reed, some inch and
half long, of a greenish yellow colour, curiously chequered, as if
it were wrought with a needle with green and yellow silk intermixt.
I have not as yet seen it bear his tuft in my garden, and have read
that it is barren, and by proof have seen it so: yet for all that I
believe Clusius, who saith he hath seen it bear his flower in that
place where it doth grow naturally, although in England it is
altogether barren. The root is sweet in smell, and bitter in taste,
and like unto the common Flag, but smaller, and not so red.

Fig. 110. The true Aromatical Reed of the ancients (3)

3. I think it very fitting in this place to acquaint you with a
plant, which by the conjecture of the most learned (and that not
without good reason) is judged to be the true Calamus of the
ancients. Clusius gives us the history thereof in his Notes upon
Garcias ab Horto, lib. 1. ca. 32., in these words: "Whenas (saith
he) this History was to be the third time printed, I very
opportunely came to the knowledge of the true Calamus Aromaticus;
the which the learned Bernard Paludanus the Frisian, returning from
Syria and Egypt, freely bestowed upon me, together with the fruit
Habhel, and many other rare seeds, about the beginning of the year
1579. Now we have caused a figure to be exactly drawn by the
fragments thereof (for that it seems so exquisitly to accord with
Dioscorides his description.) In mine opinion it is rather to be
judged an umbelliferous plant than a reedy; for it hath a straight
stalk parted with many knots or joints, otherwise smooth, hollow
within, and invested on the inside with a slender film like as a
Reed, and it breaketh into shivers or splinters, as Dioscorides hath
written: it hath a smell sufficiently strong, and the taste is
grateful, yet bitter, and partaking of some astriction: The leaves,
as by remains of them might appear, seem by couples at every joint
to engirt the stalk: the root at the top is somewhat tuberous, and
then ends in fibres. Twenty-five years after Paludanus gave me this
Calamus, the learned Anthony Coline the apothecary (who lately
translated into French these Commentaries the fourth time set forth,
Anno 1593) sent me from Lyons pieces of the like Reed, certifying me
withal, That he had made use thereof in his Composition of Treacle.
Now these pieces, though in form they resembled those I had from
Paludanus, yet had they a more bitter taste than his, neither did
they partake of any astriction; which peradventure was to be
attributed to the age of one of the two." Thus much Clusius.

The Place.

The true Calamus Aromaticus groweth in Arabia, and likewise in
Syria, especially in the moorish grounds between the foot of
Libanus; and another little hill, not the mountain Antilibanus, as
some have thought, in a small valley near to a lake, whose plashes
are dry in summer. Pliny 12. 22.

Bastard or false Calamus grows naturally at the foot of a hill near
to Prusa a city of Bithynia, not far from a great lake. It
prospereth exceeding well in my garden, but as yet it beareth
neither flowers nor stalk. It groweth also in Candia, as Pliny
reporteth: in Galatia likewise, and in many other places.

The Time.

They lose their leaves in the beginning of winter, and do recover
them again in the spring of the year. In May this year 1632, I
received from the worshipful gentleman Mr. Thomas Glynn of
Glynllifon in Caernarvonshire, my very good friend, the pretty
Iulus, or flower of this plant; which I could never see here about
London, though it groweth with us in many gardens, and that in great
plenty.

The Names.

The want of the true Calamus being supplied by Acorus as a
succedaneum, was the cause (as Pena and Lobel probably conjecture)
that of a substitute it took the prime place upon it, and being as
it were made a Viceroy, would needs be King. But the falseness of
the title was discovered by Matthiolus, and others, and so it is
sent back to its due place again; though notwithstanding it yet in
shops retains the title of Calamus.

1. The figure that by our author was given for this, is supposed,
and that (as I think truly) to be but a counterfeit, of Matthiolus
his invention; who therein hath been followed (according to the
custom of the world) by divers others. The description is of a small
Reed called Calamus odoratus Libani, by Lobel in his Observations,
and figured in his Icones, p. 54.

2. This is called in Latin Acorus and Acorum; and in shops, as I
have formerly said, Calamus Aromaticus: for they usually take
Galanga major, (described by me, Chap. 26.) for Acorus. It may
besides the former names be fitly called in English, The sweet
Garden Flag.

3. This is the true Calamus Aromaticus that should be used in
compositions.

The Nature of the true Acorus, or our sweet garden Flag.

Dioscorides saith, the roots have an heating faculty: Galen and
Pliny do affirm, that they have thin and subtle parts, both hot and
dry.

The Virtues of the same.

A. The decoction of the root of Calamus drunk provoketh urine,
helpeth the pain in the side, liver, spleen, and breast;
convulsions, gripings, and burstings; it easeth and helpeth the
pissing by drops.

B. It is of great effect, being put in broth, or taken in fumes
through a close stool, to provoke women's natural accidents.

C. The juice strained with a little honey, taketh away the dimness
of the eyes, and helpeth much against poison, the hardness of the
spleen, and all infirmities of the blood.

D. The root boiled in wine, stamped and applied plasterwise unto the
cods, doth wonderfully abate the swelling of the same, and helpeth
all hardness and collections of humors.

E. The quantity of two scruples and an half of the root drunk in
four ounces of Muscatel, helpeth them that be bruised with grievous
beating, or falls.

F. The root is with good success mixed in counterpoisons. In our age
it is put into eclegmes, that is, medicines for the lungs, and
especially when the lungs and chest are oppressed with raw and cold
humors.

G. The root of this preserved is very pleasant to the taste, and
comfortable to the stomach and heart; so that the Turks at
Constantinople take it fasting in the morning, against the contagion
of the corrupt air. And the Tartars have it in such esteem, that
they will not drink water (which is their usual drink) unless they
have first steeped some of this root therein.

The choice.

The best Acorus, as Dioscorides saith, is that which is substantial,
and well compact, white within, not rotten, full, and well smelling.

Pliny writeth, That those which grow in Candia are better than those
of Pontus, and yet those of Candia worse than those of the Eastern
countries, or those of England, although we have no great quantity
thereof.

The faculties of the true Calamus out of Dioscorides.

H. It being taken in drink moveth urine; wherefore boiled with the
roots of grass or Smallage seeds, it helpeth such as are hydropic,
nephritic, troubled with the strangury, or bruised.

I. It moves the courses, either drunk or otherwise applied. Also the
fume thereof taken by the mouth in a pipe, either alone or with
dried turpentine, helps coughs.

K. It is boiled also in baths for women, and decoctions for
clysters, and it enters into plasters and perfumes for the smell's
sake.



CHAP. 46. Of Corn.

Thus far have I discoursed on Grasses, Rushes, Spartum, Flags, and
Fleur-de-lys: my next labour is to set down for your better
instruction, the history of Corn, and the kinds thereof; under the
name of grain; which the Latins call Cerialia semina, or Bread-corn
of which we purpose to discourse. There belong to the history of
Grain all such things as be made of Corn, as Far, Condus, Alica,
Tragus, Amylum, Ptisana, Polenta, Maza, Byne or Malt, Zythum, and
whatsoever are of that sort. There be also joined unto them many
seeds, which Theophrastus has in his eighth book placeth among the
grains; as Millet, Sorghum, Panic, Indian wheat, and such like.
Galen in his first book of the Faculties of Nourishments, reckoneth
up the diseases of grain, as well those that come of the grain
itself degenerating, or that are changed into some other kind, and
made worse through the fault of the weather, or of the soil; as also 
such as be cumbersome by growing among them, do likewise fitly
succeed the grains. And beginning with corn, we will first speak of
Wheat, and describe it in the first place, because it is preferred
before all other corn.


Fig. 111. White Wheat (1)
 Fig. 112. Bearded or Red Wheat
(2)

The Description.

1. This kind of Wheat which Lobel, distinguishing it by the ear,
calleth Spica Mutica, is the most principal of all other, whose ears
are altogether bare or naked, without awns or chaffy beards. The
stalk riseth from a thready root, compact of many strings, jointed
or kneed at sundry distances; from whence shoot forth grassy blades
and leaves like unto Rye, but broader. The plant is so well known to
many, and so profitable to all, that the meanst and most ignorant
need no larger description to know the same by.

2. The second kind of Wheat, in root, stalks, joints, and blades, is
like the precedent, differing only in ear, and number of grains,
whereof this kind doth abound, having an ear consisting of many
ranks, which seemeth to make the ear double or square. The root and
grain is like the other, but not bare and naked, but bristled or
bearded, with many small and sharp ails or awns, not unlike to those
of Barley.

Fig. 113. Flat Wheat (3) and Double-eared Wheat. (4)

3. Flat Wheat is like unto the other kinds of Wheat in leaves,
stalks, and roots, but is bearded and bordered with rough and sharp
ailes, wherein consists the difference. I know not what our author
means by this flat Wheat, but I conjecture it to be the long rough
eared Wheat, which hath bluish ears when as it is ripe, in other
things resembling the ordinary red wheat.

4. The fourth kind is like the last described, and thus differeth 
from it, in that, that this kind hath many small ears coming forth
of one great ear, & the beards hereof be shorter than of the former
kind.

Fig. 114. Bright Wheat (5)

5. Bright wheat is like the second before described, and differeth
from it in that, that this kind is four-square, somewhat bright and
shining, the other not.

I think it a very fit thing to add in this place a rare observation,
of the transmutation of one species into another, in plants; which
though it have been observed of ancient times, as by Theophrastus,
De caus. plant. lib. 3. cap. 6. whereas amongst others he mentioneth
the change of Spelt into Oats: and by Virgil in these verses;

Grandia sæpe quibus mandavimas Hordea sulcis,
Infelix Lolium, & steriles dominantur avenæ.

That is;

In furrows where great Barley we did sow,
Nothing but Darnel and poor Oats do grow;

yet none that I have read have observed, that two several grains,
perfect in each respect, did grow at any time in one ear: the which
I saw this year 1632, in an ear of white Wheat, which was found by
my very good Friend Master John Goodyer, a man second to none in his
industry and searching of plants, nor in his judgement or knowledge
of them. This ear of wheat was as large and fair as most are, and
about the middle thereof grew three or four perfect Oats in all
respects: which being hard to be found, I held very worthy of
setting down, for some reasons not to be insisted upon in this
place.

The Place.

Wheat groweth almost in all the countries of the world that are
inhabited and manured, and requireth a fruitful and fat soil, and
rather sunny and dry, than watery grounds and shadowy: for in a dry
ground (as Columella reporteth) it groweth harder and better
compact: in a moist and dark soil it degenerateth sometime to be of
another kind.

The Time.

They are most commonly sown in the fall of the leaf, or autumn:
sometime in the spring.

The Names.

Wheat is called of the Latins, Triticum, and the white Wheat Siligo.
Triticum doth generally signify any kind of corn which is threshed
out of the ears, and made clean by fanning or such ordinary means.
The Germans call it Weusen: in low Dutch, Terwe: in Italian, Grano:
the Spaniards, Trigo: the Frenchmen, Blé, ou Fourment: in England we
call the first, White-Wheat, and Flaxen Wheat. Triticum Lucidum is
called Bright Wheat: Red Wheat is called in Kent, Duck-bill Wheat,
and Normandy Wheat.

The Nature.

Wheat (saith Galen) is very much used of men, and with greatest
profit. Those Wheats do nourish most which be hard, and have their
whole substance so closely compact as they can scarcely be bit
asunder; for such do nourish very much: and the contrary but little.

Wheat, as it is a medicine outwardly applied, is hot in the first
degree, yet can it not manifestly either dry or moisten. It hath
also a certain clamminess and stopping quality.

The Virtues.

A. Raw Wheat, saith Dioscorides, being eaten, breedeth worms in the
belly: being chewed and applied, it doth cure the biting of mad
dogs.

B. The flour of wheat being boiled with honey and water, or with oil
and water, taketh away all inflammations, or hot swellings.

C. The bran of Wheat boiled in strong vinegar, cleanseth away scurf
and dry scales, and dissolveth the beginning of all hot swellings,
if it be laid unto them. And boiled with the decoction of Rue, it
slaketh the swellings in women's breasts.

D. The grains of white Wheat, as Pliny writeth in his two and
twentieth book, and seventh chapter, being dried brown, but not
burnt, and the powder thereof mixed with white wine is good for
watering eyes, if it be laid thereto.

E. The dried powder of red Wheat boiled with vinegar, helpeth the
shrinking of sinews.

F. The meal of Wheat mingled with the juice of Henbane, and
plasterwise applied, appeaseth inflammations, as Ignis sacer, or
Saint Anthony's Fire, and such like, staying the flux of humors to
the joints, which the Grecians call Rheumatismata. Paste made of
fine meal, such as book-binders use, helpeth such as do spit blood,
taken warm one spoonful at once. The bran of wheat boiled in sharp
vinegar, and rubbed upon them that be scurvy and mangy, easeth the
party very much.

G. The leaven made of Wheat hath virtue to heat and draw outward, it
resolveth, concocteth, and openeth all swellings, bunches, tumors,
and felons, being mixed with salt.

H. The fine flour mixed with the yolk of an egg, honey, and a little
saffron, doth draw and heal boils and such like sores, in children
and in old people, very well and quickly. Take crumbs of wheaten
bread one pound and an half, barley meal ounces ii, Fenugreek and
Linseed of each an ounce, the leaves of Mallows, Violets, Dwale,
Sengreen, and Cotyledon, ana one handful: boil them in water and oil
until they be tender: then stamp them very small in a stone mortar,
and add thereto the yolks of three eggs, oil of Roses, and oil of
Violets, ana ounces ii. Incorporate them all together; but if the
inflammation grow to an Erysipelas, then add thereto the juice of
Nightshade, Plantain, and Henbane, ana ounces ii. It easeth an
Erysipelas, or Saint Anthony's fire, and all inflammations very
speedily.

I. Slices of fine white bread laid to infuse or steep in Rose water,
and so applied unto sore eyes which have many hot humors falling
into them, doth easily defend the humour, and cease the pain.

K. The oil ofwheat pressed forth between two plates of hot iron,
healeth the chaps and chinks of the hands, feet, and fundament,
which come of cold, making smooth the hands, face, or any other part
of the body.

L. The same used as a balsam doth excellently heal wounds, and being
put among salves or unguents, it causeth them to work more
effectually, especially in old ulcers.



CHAP. 47. Of Rye

Fig. 115. Rye.

The Description.

The leaf of Rye when it first cometh up, is somewhat reddish,
afterward green, as be the other grains. It groweth up with many
stalks, slenderer than those ofwheat, and longer, with knees or
joints by certain distances like unto Wheat: the ears are orderly
framed up in ranks, and compassed about with short beards, not sharp
but blunt, which when it flowereth standeth upright, and when it is
filled up with seed it leaneth and hangeth downward. The seed is
long, blackish, slender, and naked, which easily falleth out of the
husks of itself. The roots be many, slender, and full of strings.

The Place.

Rye groweth very plentifully in the most places of Germany and
Polonia, as appeareth by the great quantity brought into England in
times of dearth, and scarcity of corn, as happened in the year 1596,
and at other times, when there was a general want of corn, by reason
of the abundance of rain that fell the year before; whereby great
penury ensued, as well of cattle and all other victuals, as of all
manner of grain. It groweth likewise very well in most places of
England, especially towards the north.

The Time.

It is for the most part sown in autumn, and sometimes in the spring,
which proveth to be a grain more subject to putrefaction than that
which was sown in the fall of the leaf, by reason the winter doth
overtake it before it can attain to his perfect maturity and
ripeness.

The Names.

Rye is called in high Dutch, Rocken, in Low-Dutch, Rogge: in
Spanish, Centeno: in Italian, Segala: in French, Seigle: which
soundeth after the old Latin name which in Pliny is Secale and
Farrago, lib. 18. cap. 16.

The Temperature.

Rye as a medicine is hotter than wheat, and more forcible in
heating, wasting, and consuming away that whereto it is applied. It
is of a more clammy and obstructing nature than Wheat, and harder to
digest, yet to rustic bodies that can well digest it, it yields good
nourishment.

The Virtues.

A. Bread, or the leaven of Rye, as the Belgian physicians affirm
upon their practice, doth more forcibly digest, draw, ripen, and
break all apostumes, botches, and boils, than the leaven of Wheat.

B. Rye Meal bound to the head in a Linen Cloth, doth asswage the
long continuing pains thereof.



CHAP. 48. Of Spelt corn.

Fig. 116. Spelt corn.

The Description.

Spelt is like to Wheat in stalks and ear: it groweth up with a
multitude of stalks which are kneed and jointed higher than those of
Barley: it bringeth forth a disordered ear, for the most part
without beards. The corns be wrapped in certain dry husks, from
which they cannot easily be purged, and are joined together by
couples in two chaffy husks, out of which when they be taken they
are like unto wheat corns: it hath also many roots as wheat hath,
whereof it is a kind.

The Place.

It groweth in fat and fertile moist ground.

The Time.

It is altered and changed into Wheat itself, as degenerating from
bad to better, contrary to all other that do alter or change;
especially (as Theophrastus saith) if it be cleansed, and so sown,
but that not forthwith, but in the third year.

The Names.

The Latins have called it Spelta: in the German tongue Speltz, and
Sinkel: in low Dutch, Spelte: in French, Espeautre: of most
Italians, Pirra, Farra: of the Tuscans, Biada: of the Millanois,
Alga: in English, Spelt Corn. Dioscorides maketh mention of two
kinds of Spelt: one of which he names aplou, or single: another,
dicoccus, which brings forth two corns joined together in a couple
of husks, as before in the description is mentioned. That Spelt
which Dioscorides calls Dicoccos, is the same that Theophr. and
Galen do name Zea. The most ancient Latins have called Zea or Spelta
by the name of Far, as Dionysius Halicarnassæus doth sufficiently
testify: The old Romans (saith he) did call sacred marriages by the
word Pharrachis, because the bride and bridegroom did eat of that
Far which the Grecians do call Zea. The same thing Asclepiades
affirmeth in Galen, in his ninth Book according to the places
affected writing thus; Farris quod Zea appellant: that is to say,
Far which is called Zea, &c. And this Far is also named of the
Latins, Ador, Adoreum, and Semen adoreum.

The Temperature.

Spelt, as Dioscorides reporteth, nourisheth more than Barley. Galen
writeth in his Books Of the Faculties of simple Medicines, Spelt is
in all his temperature in a mean between Wheat and Barley, and may
in virtue be referred to the kinds of Barley and Wheat, being
indifferent to them both.

The Virtues

A. The flour or meal of Spelt corn boiled in water with the powder
of red Saunders, and a little oil of Roses and Lilies, unto the form
of a poultice, and applied hot, taketh away the swelling of the legs
gotten by cold and long standing.

B. Spelt (saith Turner) is common about Weisenburgh in high Almany,
eight Dutch miles on this side Strasbourg: and there all men use it
for wheat; for there groweth no wheat at all: yet I never saw fairer
and pleasanter bread in any place in all my life, than I have eaten
there, made only of this Spelt. The corn is much less than Wheat,
and somewhat shorter than Rye, but nothing so black.



CHAP. 49. Of Starch Corn.

Fig. 117. Starch Corn

The Description.

This other kind of Spelta or Zea is called of the German herbarists
Amyleum Frumentum, or Starch Corn; and is a kind of grain sown to
that end, or a three months grain; and is very like unto wheat in
stalk and seed; but the ear thereof is set round about, and made up
with two ranks, with certain beards almost after the manner of
Barley, and the seed is closed up in chaffy husks, and is sown in
the Spring.

The Place.

Amil corn, or Starch corn is sown in Germany, Polonia, Denmark, and
other those eastern regions, as well to feed their cattle and pullen
with, as also to make starch; for the which purpose it doth very
fitly serve.

The Time.

It is sown in Autumn; or the fall of the leaf; and oftentimes in the
Spring; and for that cause hath been called Trimestre, or three
months grain: it bringeth his seed to ripeness in the beginning of
August, and is sown in the Low-Countries in the spring of the year.

The Names.

Because the Germans have great use of it to make starch with, they
do call it Amelkorn: We think good to name it in Latin Amyleum
frumentum: in English it may be called Amelcorn, after the German
word; and may likewise be called Starch Corn. Tragus and Fuchsius
took it to be Triticum trimestre, or three months wheat; but it may
rather be referred to the Farra: for Columella speaketh of a grain
called Far Halicastrum, which is sown in the Spring; for that cause
it is named Trimestre or three months Far. If any be desirous to
learn the making of starch, let them read Dodonæus last edition,
where they shall be fully taught; myself not willing to spend time
about so vain a thing, and not pertinent to the story. It is used
only to feed cattle, pullen, and make starch, and is in nature
somewhat like to Wheat or Barley.



CHAP. 50. Of Barley.


Fig. 118. Common Barley
Fig. 119. Bear Barley, or Barley
Big

The Description.

Barley hath an haulm or straw which is shorter and more brittle than
that of Wheat, and hath more joints; the leaves are broader and
rougher; the ear is armed with long, rough, and prickly beards or
ails, and set about with sundry ranks, sometimes two, otherwhiles
three, four, or six at the most, according to Theophrastus; but
eight according to Tragus. The grain is included in a long chaffy
husk: the roots be slender, and grow thick together. Barley, as
Pliny writeth, is of all grain the softest, and least subject to
casualty, yielding fruit very quickly and profitably.

1. The most usual Barley is that which hath but two rows of corn in
the ear, each grain set full opposite to other, and having his long
awn at his end, is covered with a husk sticking close thereto.

2. This which commonly hath four rows of corn in the ear, and
sometimes more, as we have formerly delivered, is not so usually
sown with us; the ear is commonly shorter than the former, but the
grain very like; so that none who knows the former but may easily
know the later at the first sight.

The Place.

1. They are sown, as Columella teacheth, in loose and dry ground,
and are well known all Europe through.

2. The second is sown commonly in some parts of Yorkshire and the
Bishopric of Durham.

The Names.

1 The first is called in high Dutch, Gersten: in Low Dutch, Gerst:
in Italian, Orzo; in Spanish, Cevada: in French, Orge: in English,
Barley.

2. The second is called by Columella Galaticum; of our English
Northern people, Big, and Big Barley. Crimmon (saith Galen in his
Commentaries upon the second book of Hippocrates his Prognostics) is
the grosser part of Barley meal being grossly ground. Malt is well
known in England, insomuch that the word needeth no interpretation;
notwithstanding because these works may chance into the hands of
strangers, that never heard of such a word, or such a thing, by
reason it is not everywhere made; I thought good to lay down a word
of the making thereof. First, it is steeped in water until it swell;
then is it taken from the water, and laid (as they term it) in a
couch; that is, spread upon an even floor the thickness of some foot
and an half; and thus is it kept until it come, that is, until it
send forth two or three little strings or fangs at the end of each
corn: then it is spread usually twice a day, each day thinner than
other, for some eight or ten days' space, until it be pretty dry,
and then it is dried up with the heat of the fire, and so used. It
is called in high Dutch, Maltz: in low Dutch, Mout: in Latin of
later time, Maltum; which name is borrowed of the Germans. Aetius a
Greek Physician nameth Barley thus prepared, Bine; the which author
affirmeth, That a plaster of the meal of malt is profitably laid
upon the swellings of the dropsy. Zythum, as Diodorus Siculus
affirmeth, is not only made in Egypt, but also in Galatia. The aire
is so cold (saith he, writing of Galatia) that the country bringeth
forth neither wine nor oil, and therefore men are compelled to make
a compound drink of Barley, which they call Zythum. Dioscorides
nameth one kind of Barley drink Zythum, another, Curmi. In English
we call it Beer and Ale which is made of Barley Malt.

The Temperature.

Barley, as Galen writeth in his book of the Faculties of
Nourishments, is not of the same temperature that Wheat is; for
Wheat doth manifestly heat, but contrariwise what medicine or bread
soever is made of Barley, is found to have a certain force to cool
and dry in the first degree, according to Galen in his book of the
Faculties of Simples. It hath also a little abstersive or cleansing
quality, and doth dry somewhat more than Bean meal.

The Virtues.

A. Barley, saith Dioscorides, doth cleanse, provoke urine, breedeth
windiness and is an enemy to the stomach.

B. Barley meal boiled in an honeyed water with figs, taketh away
inflammations: with Pitch, Rosin, and Pigeons' dung, it softeneth
and ripeneth hard swellings.

C. With Melilot and Poppy seeds it taketh away the pain in the
sides; it is a remedy against windiness in the guts, being applied
with Linseed, Fenugreek, and Rue: with tar, wax, oil, and the urine
of a young boy, it doth digest, soften, and ripen hard swellings in
the throat, called the king's evil.

D. Boiled with wine, myrtles, the bark of the pomegranate, wild
pears, and the leaves of brambles, it stoppeth the lask.

E. Further, it serveth for ptisana, polenta, maza, malt, ale, and
beer. The making whereof if any be desirous to learn, let them read
Lobel's Adversaria, in the chapter of Barley. But I think our London
beer-brewers would scorn to learn to make beer of either French or
Dutch, much less of me that can say nothing therein of mine own
experience more than by the writings of others. But I may deliver
unto you a confection made thereof (as Columella did concerning
sweet wine sodden to the half) which is this; Boil strong ale till
it come to the thickness of honey, or the form of an unguent or
salve; which applied to the pains of the sinews and joints (as
having the property to abate aches and pains) may for want of better
remedies be used for old and new sores, if it be made after this
manner.

F. Take strong ale two pound, one ox gall, and boil them to one
pound with a soft fire, continually stirring it; adding thereto of
Vinegar one pound, of Olibanum one ounce, flowers of Camomile and
Melilot of each 1 oz., Rue in fine powder 1 oz., a little honey, and
a small quantity of the powder of Cumin seed; boil them all together
to the form of an unguent, and so apply it. There be sundry sorts of
confections made of Barley, as polenta, ptisana, made of water and
husked or hulled barley, and such like. Polenta is the meal made of
parched Barley; Maza is made of parched Barley tempered with water,
after Hippocrates and Xenophon: Cyrus having called his soldiers
together, exhorteth them to drink water wherein parched barley hath
been steeped, calling it by the same name, maza. Hesychius doth
interpret maza to be barley meal mixed with water and oil.

G. Barley meal boiled in water with garden Nightshade, the leaves of
garden Poppy, the powder of Fenugreek and Linseed, and a little
Hog's grease, is good against all hot and burning swellings, and
prevaileth against the dropsy, being applied upon the belly.



CHAP. 51. Of Naked Barley.

Fig. 120. Naked Barley

The Description.

Hordeum nudum is called Zeopyrum, and Tritico-speltum, because it is
like to Zea, otherwise called Spelta, and is like to that which is
called French Barley, whereof is made that noble drink for sick
folks, called Ptisana. The plant is altogether like unto Spelt,
saving that the ears are rounder, the ails or beards rougher and
longer, and the seed or grain naked without husks, like to wheat,
the which in its yellowish colour it somewhat resembles.

The Place.

It is sown in sundry places of Germany, for the same uses as Barley
is.

The Names.

It is called Hordeum Nudum, for that the corn is without husk, and
resembleth Barley. In Greek it is called Zeopuros, because it
participateth in similitude and nature with Zea, that is, Spelt, and
Puros, (that is) wheat.

The Virtues.

A. This Barley boiled in water cooleth unnatural and hot burning
choler. In vehement fevers you may add thereto the seeds of white
Poppy and Lettuce, not only to cool, but also to provoke sleep.

B. Against the shortness the breath, and pains of the breast, may be
added to all the foresaid, figs, raisins of the sun, liquorice, and
Anise seed.

C. Being boiled in the whey of milk, with the leaves of Sorrel,
Marigolds, and Scabious, it quencheth thirst, and cooleth the heat
of the inflamed liver, being drunk first in the morning, and last to
bedward.



CHAP. 52. Of Wall Barley.

Fig. 121 Wall Barley

The Description

This kind of wild Barley, called of the Latins Hordeum Spurium; is
called of Pliny, Holcus; in English, Wall Barley, Way Barley, or
after old English Writers, Way Bennet. It groweth upon mud walls and
stony places by the wayside; very well resembling self-sowed Barley,
yet the blades are rather like Grass than Barley. This groweth some
foot and better in height, with grassy leaves, the ear is very like
that of Rye, and the corn both in colour and shape absolutely
resembles it; so that it cannot be fitlier named than by calling it
wild Rye, or Rye Grass.

The Virtues.

This Bastard Wild Barley stamped and applied unto places wanting
hair, doth cause it to grow and come forth, whereupon in old time it
was called Ristida.



CHAP. 53. Of Saint Peter's Corn.


Fig. 122. St. Peter's Corn (1)
Fig. 123. Haver Grass (2)

The Description.

1. Briza is a Corn whose leaves, stalks, and ears are less than
Spelt; the ear resembles our ordinary Barley, the corn growing in
two rows, with awns at the top, and husks upon it not easily to be
gotten off. In colour it much resembles Barley; yet Tragus saith it
is of a blackish red colour.

2. This Ægilops in leaves and stalks resembles Wheat or Barley, and
it grows some two handfuls high, having a little ear or two at the
top of the stalk, wherein are enclosed two or three seeds a little
smaller than Barley, having each of them his awn at his end. These
seeds are wrapped in a crested film or skin, out of which the awns
put themselves forth.

Matthiolus saith, That he by his own trial hath found this to be
true, That as Lolium, which is our common Darnel, is certainly known
to be a seed degenerate from wheat, being found for the most part
among wheat, or where wheat hath been: so is Festuca a seed or grain
degenerating from Barley, and is found among Barley, or where Barley
hath been.

The Place.

1. Briza is sown in some parts of Germany and France; and my memory
deceives me if I have not oftentimes found many ears thereof amongst
ordinary barley, when as I lived in the further side of
Lincolnshire, and they there called it Brant Barley.

2. This Ægilops grows commonly amongsr their Barley in Italy and
other hot countries.

The Names.

1. Briza Monococcos, after Lobel, is called by Tabernamontanus, Zea
Monococcos: in English, Saint Peter's Corn, or Brant Barley.

2. Festuca of Narbonne in France is called in Latin, Ægilops
Narbonensis, in English, Haver-Grass.

The Nature.

They are of quality somewhat sharp, having faculty to digest.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of Festuca mixed with Barley meal dried, and at times
of need moistened with rose-water, applied plasterwise, healeth the
disease called Ægilops, or fistula in the corner of the eye: it
mollifieth and disperseth hard lumps, and assuageth the swellings in
the joints.



CHAP. 54. Of Oats.


Fig. 124. Common Oats
Fig. 125. Naked Oats

The Description.

1. Avena Vesca, Common Oats, is called Vesca, à Vescendo, because it
is used in many countries to make sundry sorts of bread; as in
Lancashire, where it is their chiefest bread corn for bannocks,
haver cakes, tharf-cakes, and those which are called generally oaten
cakes; and for the most part they call the grain Haver, whereof they
do likewise make drink for want of Barley.

2. Avena Nuda is like unto the common Oats; differing in that, that
these naked Oats immediately as they be threshed, without help of a
mill become oatmeal fit for our use. In consideration whereof in
Norfolk and Suffolk they are called unhulled and naked Oats. Some of
those good house-wives that delight not to have anything but from
hand to mouth, according to our English proverb, may (whiles their
pot doth seethe) go to the barn, and rub forth with their hands
sufficient for that present time, not willing to provide for
tomorrow, according as the Scripture speaketh, but let the next day
bring with it.

The Nature.

Oats are dry and somewhat cold of temperature, as Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. Common Oats put into a linen bag, with a little bay salt quilted
handsomely for the same purpose, and made hot in a frying pan, and
applied very hot, easeth the pain in the side called the stitch, or
colic in the belly.

B. If Oats be boiled in water, and the hands or feet of such as have
the serpigo or impetigo, that is, certain chaps, chinks, or rifts in
the palms of the hands or feet (a disease of great affinity with the
pox) be holden over the fume or smoke thereof in some bowl or other
vessel wherein the Oats are put, and the patient covered with
blankets to sweat, being first anointed with that ointment or
unction usually applied contra Morbum Gallicum: it doth perfectly
cure the same in six times so anointing and sweating.

C. Oatmeal is good for to make a fair and well coloured maid to look
like a cake of tallow, especially if she take next her stomach a
good draught of strong vinegar after it.

D. Oatmeal used as a cataplasm dries and moderately discusses, and
that without biting; for it hath somewhat a cool temper, with some
astriction, so that it is good against scourings.



CHAP. 55. Of Wild Oats.


Fig. 126. Wild Oats (1)
Fig. 127. Drawk, or Small Wild
Oats (2)

The Description.

1. Bromos sterilis, called likewise Avena fatua, which the Italians
do call by a very apt name Venavana, and Avena cassa, (in English,
Barren Oats, or wild Oats) hath like leaves and stalks as our Common
Oats; but the heads are rougher, sharp, many little sharp husks
making each ear.

2. There is also another kind of Bromos or wild Oats, which Dodonæus
calleth Festuca altera, not differing from the former wild Oats in
stalks and leaves, but the heads are thicker, and more compact, each
particular ear (as I may term it) consisting of two rows of seed
handsomly compact and joined together; being broader next the straw,
and narrower as it comes to an end.

The Time and Place.

The first in July and August may be found almost in every hedge, the
latter is to be found in great plenty in most Rye.

The Names.

1. This is called in Latin, Bromos sterilis by Lobel: Ægylops prima
by Matthiolus: in English, Wild-Oats, or Hedge-Oats.

2. Lobel calls this Bromos sterilis altera Dodonaeus tames it
Festuca altera; in Brabant they call it Drauich; in English, Drawk.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. It hath a drying faculty (as Dioscorides saith.) Boil it in water
together with the roots until two parts of three be consumed; then
strain it out, and add to the decoction a quantity of honey equal
thereto: so boil it until it acquire the thickness of thin honey.
This medicine is good against the ozæna and filthy ulcers of the
nose, dipping a linen cloth therein, and putting it up into the
nostrils; some add thereto Aloes finely powdered, and souse it.

B. Also boiled in wine with dried Rose leaves, it is good against a
stinking breath.



CHAP. 56. Of Bearded Wild Oats.

Fig. 128. Bearded Wild Oats

The Description.

Ægylops Bromoides Belgarum is a plant indifferently partaking of the
nature of Ægilops and Bromos. It is in show like to the naked Oats.
The seed is sharp, hairy, and somewhat long, and of a reddish
colour, enclosed in yellowish chaffy husks like as Oats, and may be
Englished, Crested or bearded Oats. I have found it often among
Barley and Rye in sundry grounds. This is likewise unprofitable and
hurtful to corn; whereof is no mention made by the ancients worthy
the noting.



CHAP. 57. Of Burnt Corn.

Fig. 129. Burnt Corn (1-3)

The Description.

1. Hordeum ustum, or Ustilago Hordei, is that burnt or blasted
Barley which is altogether unprofitable and good for nothing, an
enemy unto corn; for that instead of an ear with corn, there is
nothing else but black dust, which spoileth bread, or whatsoever is
made thereof.

2. Burnt Oats, or Ustilago Avena, or Avenacea, is likewise an
unprofitable Plant, degenerating from Oats, as the other from
Barley, Rye, and Wheat. It were in vain to make a long harvest of
such evil corn, considering it is not possessed with one good
quality. And therefore thus much shall suffice for the description.

3. Burnt Rye hath no one good property in physic, appropriate either
to man, birds, or beast, and is a hurtful malady to all corn where
it groweth, having an ear in shape like to corn, but instead of
grain it doth yield a black powder or dust, which causeth bread to
look black, and to have an evil taste: and that corn where it is, is
called smooty corn, and the thing itself Burnt Corn, or blasted
corn.



CHAP. 58. Of Darnel.


Fig. 130. Darnel (1)
Fig. 131. Red Darnel (2)

The Description.

1. Among the hurtful weeds Darnel is the first. It bringeth forth
leaves or stalks like those of wheat or barley, yet rougher, with a
long ear made up of many little ones, every particular one whereof
containeth two or three grains lesser than those of wheat, scarcely
any chaffy husk to cover them with, by reason whereof they are
easily shaken out and scattered abroad.

2. Red Darnel is likewise an unprofitable corn or grass, having
leaves like barley. The joints of the straw or stalk are sometimes
of a reddish colour, bearing at the top a small and tender ear,
flat, and much in form resembling the former.

The Place.

They grow in fields among wheat and barley, of the corrupt and bad
seed, as Galen saith, especially in a moist and dankish soil.

The Time.

They spring and flourish with the corn, and in August the seed is
ripe.

The Names.

1. Darnel is called in the Arabian Tongue, Zizania and Sceylen: In
French, Yuray: in Italian, Loglio: in low Dutch, Dolick: in English,
Darnel: of some, Iuray, and Raye: and of some of the Latins,
Triticum temulentum.

2. Red Darnel is called in Greek Phoenix, because of the crimson
colour: in Latin, Lolium Rubrum, and Lolium Murinum: of some,
Hordeum Murinum, and Triticum Murinum: in Dutch, Muyse cozen: in
English, Red Darnel, or great Darnel Grass.

The Temperature.

Darnel is hot in the third degree, and dry in the second. Red Darnel
drieth without sharpness, as Galen saith.

The Virtues

A. The seed of Darnel, pigeons' dung, oil olive, and powder of
linseed, boiled to the form of a plaster, consume wens, hard lumps,
and such like excrescenses in any part of the body.

B. The new bread wherein Darnel is, eaten hot, causeth drunkenness:
in like manner doth beer or ale wherein the seed is fallen, or put
into the Malt.

C. Darnel taken with red wine stayeth the flux of the belly, and the
overmuch flowing of women's terms.

D. Dioscorides saith, That Darnel meal doth stay and keep back
eating sores, gangrenes, and putrefied ulcers; and being boiled with
Radish roots, salt, brimstone, and vinegar, it cureth spreading
scabs, and dangerous tetters, and leprous or naughty scurf.

E. The seed of Darnel given in white or Rhenish wine, provoketh the
flowers or menses.

F. A fume made thereof with parched barley meal, myrrh, saffron, and
frankincense, made in form of a poultice, and applied upon the
belly, helps conception, and causeth easy deliverance of
childbearing.

G. Red Darnel (as Dioscorides writeth) being drunk in sour or harsh
red wine, stoppeth the lask, and the overmuch flowing of the flowers
or menses, and is a remedy for those that piss in bed.

The danger.

Darnel hurteth the eyes, and maketh them dim, if it happen in corn
either for bread or drink; which thing Ovid in his first book
Fastorum hath mentioned, in this verse:

Et careant lolii oculos vitiantibus agri.
[May the fields be free from darnel, that spoils the eyes.]

And hereupon it seemeth that the old proverb came, That such as are
dim sighted should be said, Lolio victitare.



CHAP. 59. Of Rice.

Fig. 132. Rice

The Description.

Rice is like unto Darnel in show, as Theophrastus saith: it bringeth
not forth an ear; like corn, but a certain mane or plume, as Mill,
or Millet, or rather like Panic. The leaves, as Pliny writeth, are
fat and full of substance, like to the blades of leeks, but broader:
but (if neither the soil nor climate did alter the same) the plants
of Rice that did grow in my garden had leaves soft and grassy like
barley. The flower did not show itself with me, by reason of the
injury of our unseasonable year 1596. Theophrastus concludeth, that
it hath a flower of a purple colour. But, saith my author, Rice hath
leaves like unto Dog's Grass or Barley, a small straw or stem full
of joints like corn: at the top whereof groweth a bush or tuft far
unlike to barley or Darnel, garnished with round knobs like small
gooseberries, wherein the seed or grain is contained: every such
round knob hath one small rough ail, tail, or beard like unto barley
hanging thereat. Aristobulus, as Strabo reporteth, showeth, That
Rice grows in water in Bactria, and near Babylon, and is two yards
high, and hath many ears, and bringeth forth plenty of seed. It is
reaped at the setting of the seven stars, and purged as Spelt and
Oatmeal, or hulled as French Barley.

The Place.

It groweth in the territories of the Bactrians, in Babylon, in
Susium, and in the lower part of Syria. It groweth in those days not
only in those countries before named, but also in the fortunate
Islands, and in Spain, from whence it is brought unto us, purged and
prepared as we see, after the manner of French Barley. It prospereth
best in fenny and waterish places.

It is sown in the spring in India, as Eratosthenes witnesseth, when
it is moistened with summer showers.

The Names.

The Latins keep the Greek word Oryza: in French it is called Riz: in
the German tongue, Risz, and Rys; in English, Rice.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Galen saith, That all men use to stay the belly with this grain,
being boiled after the same manner that Chondrus is. In England we
use to make with milk and Rice a certain food or pottage, which doth
both meanly bind the belly, and also nourish. Many other good kinds
of food is made with this grain, as those that are skilful in
cookery can tell.



CHAP. 60. Of Millet.

Fig. 133. Millet

The Description.

Milium riseth up with many hairy stalks knotted or jointed like
wheat. The leaves are long, and like the leaves of the Common Reed.
It bringeth forth on the top of the stalk a spoky bush or mane, like
the plume or feather of the Pole reed, hanging downwards, of colour
for the most part yellow or white; in which groweth the seed, small,
hard, and glistering, covered with a few thin husks, out of which it
easily falleth. The roots be many, and grow deep in the ground.

2. Milium nigrum is like unto the former, saving that the ear or
plume of this plant is more loose and large, and the seed somewhat
bigger, of a shining black colour.

The Place.

It loveth light and loose mould, and prospereth best in a moist and
rainy time. And after Columella, it groweth in greatest abundance in
Campania. I have of it yearly in my garden.

The Time.

It is to be sown in April and May, and not before, for it joyeth in
warm weather.

The Names.

It is named of Hippocrates, Paspale, as Hermolaus saith: In Spanish,
Mijo: in Italian, Miglio; in High-Dutch, Hirz; in French, Millet: in
Low-Dutch, Hirs; in English, Mill, or Millet.

The temper.

It is cold in the first degree, as Galen writeth, and dry in the
third, or in the later end of the second, and is of a thin
substance.

The Virtues.

A. The meal of Mill mixed with tar is laid to the bitings of
serpents, and all venomous beasts.

B. There is a drink made hereof bearing the name of Sirupus
Ambrosii, or Ambrose his syrup, which procureth sweat, and quencheth
thirst, used in the city of Milan in Tertian agues. The receipt
whereof Henricus Rantszonius in his book Of the Government of Health
setteth down in this manner: Take (saith he) of unhusked Mill a
sufficient quantity, boil it till it be broken; then take five
ounces of the hot decoction, and add thereto two ounces of the best
white wine, and so give it hot unto the patient, being well covered
with clothes, and then he will sweat throughly. This is likewise
commended by Iohannes Heurneus, in his book of Practice.

C. Millet parched, and so put hot into a linen bag, and applied,
helps the griping pains of the belly, or any other pain occasioned
by cold.



CHAP. 61. Of Turkey Corn.


Fig. 134. Corn of Asia (1)
Fig. 135 Turkey Corn (2)

Fig. 136. The form of the ears of Turkey Wheat (3)
The Kinds.

Of Turkey Corn there be divers sorts, notwithstanding of one stock
or kindred, consisting of sundry coloured grains, wherein the
difference is easy to be discerned, and for the better explanation
of the same, I have set forth to your view certain ears of different
colours, in their full and perfect ripeness, and such as they show
themselves to be when their skin or film doth open itself in the
time of gathering.


Fig. 137. Yellow and Red
Turkey Wheat (4, 5)
Fig. 138. Blue Turkey Wheat (6)

The Description.

1. Corn of Asia beareth a long great stem or stalk, covered with
great leaves like the great Cane Reed, but much broader, and of a
dark brownish colour towards the bottom: at the top of the stalks
grow idle or barren tufts like the common Reed, sometimes of one
colour, and sometimes of another. Those ears which are fruitful do
grow upon the sides of the stalks, among the leaves, which are thick
and great, so covered with skins or films, that a man cannot see
them until ripeness have discovered them. The grain is of sundry
colours, sometimes red, and sometimes white, and yellow, as myself
have seen in mine own garden, where it hath come to ripeness.

2. The stalk of Turkey Wheat is like that of the Reed, full of
spongy pith, set with many joints, five or six foot high, big
beneath, and now and then of a purple colour, and by little and
little small above: the leaves are broad, long, set with veins like
those of the Reed. The ears on the top of the stalk be a span long,
like unto the feather top of the common Reed, divided into many
plumes hanging downward, empty and barren without seed, yet blooming
as Rye doth. The flower is either white, yellow, or purple, that is
to say, even as the fruit will be. The fruit is contained in very
big ears, which grow out of the joints of the stalk, three or four
from one stalk, orderly placed one above another, covered with coats
or films like husks and leaves, as if it were a certain sheath; out
of which do stand long and slender beards, soft and tender, like
those laces that grow upon Savory, but greater and longer, every one
fastened upon his own seed. The seeds are great, of the bigness of
common peason, cornered in that part whereby they are fastened to
the ear, and in the outward part round: being of colour sometimes
white, now and then yellow, purple, or red; of taste sweet and
pleasant, very closely joined together in eight or ten orders or
ranks. This grain hath many roots, strong, and full of strings.

The Place.

These kinds of grain were first brought into Spain, and then into
other provinces of Europe: not (as some suppose) out of Asia Minor,
which is the Turk's dominions, but out of America and the islands
adjoining, as out of Florida and Virginia, or Norembega, where they
use to sow or set it, and to make bread of it, where it groweth much
higher than in other countries. It is planted in the gardens of
these Northern regions, where it cometh to ripeness when the summer
falleth out to be fair and hot, as myself have seen by proof in mine
own garden.

The Time.

It is sown in these countries in March and April, and the fruit is
ripe in September.

The Names.

Turkey wheat is called of some Frumentum Turcicum, and Milium
Indicum, as also Maizum, and Maiz, or Mays. It in all probability
was unknown to the ancient both Greek and Latin authors. In English
it is called Turkey Corn, and Turkey Wheat. The Inhabitants of
America and the Islands adjoining, as also of the East and West
Indies, do call it Mais: the Virginians, Pagatowr.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Turkey wheat doth nourish far less than either wheat, rye, barley,
or oats. The bread which is made thereof is meanly white, without
bran: it is hard and dry as biscuit is, and hath in it no clamminess
at all; for which cause it is of hard digestion, and yieldeth to the
body little or no nourishment; it slowly descendeth, and bindeth the
belly, as that doth which is made of Mill or Panic. We have as yet
no certain proof or experience concerning the virtues of this kind
of corn; although the barbarous Indians, which know no better, are
constrained to make a virtue of necessity, and think it a good food:
whereas we may easily judge, that it nourisheth but little, and is
of hard and evil digestion, a more convenient food for swine than
for men.



CHAP. 62. Of Turkey Millet.

Fig. 139. Turkey Millet
The Description.

Turkey Millet is a stranger in England. It hath many high stalks,
thick, and jointed commonly with some nine joints, beset with many
long and broad leaves like Turkey Wheat: at the top whereof groweth
a great and large tuft or ear like the great Reed. The seed is round
and sharp pointed, of the bigness of a lentil, sometimes red, and
now and then of a fuller black colour. It is fastened with a
multitude of strong slender roots like unto threads: the whole plant
hath the form of a Reed: the stalks and ears when the seed is ripe
are red.

The Place.

It joyeth in a fat and moist ground: it groweth in Italy, Spain, and
other hot regions.

The Time.

This is one of the summer grains, and is ripe in autumn.

The Names.

The Millanois and other people of Lombardy call it Melegua, and
Melega: in Latin, Melica: in Etruria, Saggina: in other places of
Italy, Sorgho: in Portugal, Milium Saburrum; in English, Turkey
Mill, or Turkey Hirse.

This seems to be the Milium which was brought into Italy out of
India, in the reign of the Emperor Nero: the which is described by
Pliny, lib. 18. cap. 7.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The seed of Turkey Mill is like unto Panic in taste and temperature.
The country people sometimes make bread hereof; but it is brittle,
and of little nourishment, and for the most part it serveth to
fatten hens and pigeons with.



CHAP. 63. Of Panic.


Fig. 140. Indian Panic (1)
Fig. 141. Blue Panic (2)

The Kinds.

There be sundry sorts of Panic, although of the ancients there have
been set down but two, that is to say, the wild or field Panic, and
the garden or manured Panic.

The descriptin.

The Panic of India groweth up like Millet, whose straw is knotty, or
full of joints; the ears be round, and hanging downward, in which is
contained a white or yellowish seed, like Canary Seed, or Alpisti.

2. Blue Panic hath a reddish stank like to Sugar Cane, as tall as a
man, thicker than a finger, full of a fungous pith; of a pale
colour: the stalks be upright and knotty; these that grow near the
root are of a purple colour: on the top of the stalk cometh forth a
spike or ear like the water Cat's Tail, but of a blue or purple
colour. The seed is like to naked Oats: The roots are very small, in
respect of the other parts of the plant.

Fig. 142. West Indian Panic (3)

3. To these may be added another West Indian Panic, sent to Clusius
from Mr. James Garet of London. The ear hereof was thick, close,
compact and made taper-fashion, smaller at the one end than at the
other; the length thereof was more than a foot & half. The shape of
the seed is much like the last described, but that many of them
together are contained in one hairy husk, which is fastened to a
very short stalke, as you may see represented apart by the side of
the figure.


Fig. 143. Common or German Panic
(4)
Fig. 144. Wild Panic (5)
	4. German Panic hath many hairy roots growing thick together
like unto wheat, as is all the rest of the plant, as well leaves or
blades, as straw or stalk. The ear groweth at the top single, not
unlike to Indian Panic, but much lesser. The grains are contained in
chaffy scales, red declining to tawny.

5. The wild Panic groweth up with long reeden stalks, full of
joints, set with long leaves like those of Sorghum, or Indian Panic:
the tuft or feather-like top is like unto the common reed, or the
ear of the grass called Ischæmon, or Manna grass. The root is small
and thready.

The Place and Time.

The kinds of Panic are sown in the spring, and are ripe in the
beginning of August. They prosper best in hot and dry regions, and
wither for the most part with much watering, as doth Mill and Turkey
wheat: they quickly come to ripeness, and may be kept good a long
time.

The Names.

Diocles the Physician nameth it Mel Frugum: the Spaniards, Panizo:
the Latins, Panicum, or Pannicula: in English, Indian Panic, or
Oatmeal.

The Temperature.

Panics nourish little, and are driers, as Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. Panic stoppeth the lask, as Millet doth, being boiled (as Pliny
reporteth) in goat's milk, and drunk twice in a day. Outwardly in
poultices or otherwise, it dries and cools.

B. Bread made of Panic nourisheth little, and is cold and dry, very
brittle, having in it neither clamminess nor fatness; and therefore
it drieth a moist belly.



CHAP. 64. Of Canary Seed, or Petty Panic.


Fig. 145. Canary Seed (1)
Fig. 146. Quaking Grass. (2)

The Description.

1. Canary Seed, or Canary Grass after some, hath many small hairy
roots, from which arise small strawy stalks jointed like corn,
whereupon do grow leaves like those of Barley, which the whole plant
doth very well resemble. The small chaffy ear groweth at the top of
the stalk, wherein is contained small seeds like those of Panic, of
a yellowish colour, and shining.

2. Shakers, or Quaking Grass groweth to the height of half a foot,
and sometimes higher, when it groweth in fertile meadows. The stalk
is very small and benty, set with many grassy leaves like the common
meadow grass, bearing at the top a bush or tuft of flat scaly
pouches, like those of Shepherds Purse, but thicker, of a brown
colour, set upon the most small and weak hairy foot-stalks that may
be found, whereupon those small pouches do hang: by means of which
small hairy strings, the knaps which are the flowers do continually
tremble and shake, in such sort that it is not possible with the
most steadfast hand to hold it from shaking.

Fig. 147. Pearl Grass (3)


3. There is also another Grassy plant which may fitly be referred to
these: the leaves and stalks resemble the last described, but the
heads are about the length and bredth of a small Hop, and handsomely
compact of light scaly films much like thereto; whence some have
termed it Gramen Lupuli glumis. The colour of this pretty head when
it cometh to ripeness is white.

The Place.

1. Canary Seed groweth naturally in Spain, and also in the Fortunate
or Canary Islands, and doth grow in England or any other of these
cold regions, if it be sown therein.

2. Quaking Phalaris groweth in fertile pastures, and in dry meadows.

3. This grows naturally in some parts of Spain; and it is sown
yearly in many of our London Gardens.

The Time.

1 & 3. These Canary Seeds are sown in May, and are ripe in August.

The Names.

1. Canary Seed, or Canary corn is called of the Grecians and the
Latins retaining the same name Phalaris: in the Islands of Canary,
Alpisti: in English, Canary Seed, and Canary grass.

2. Phalaris pratensis is called also Gramen tremulum: in Cheshire
about Nantwich, Quakers and Shakers; in some places, Cow-quakes.

3. This by some is termed Phalaris altera: Clusius calleth it Gramen
Amourettes majus: Baubine, Gramen tremulum maximum: In English they
call it Pearl-Grass, and Garden-Quakers.

The Nature and Virtues.

I find not anything set down as touching the temperature of
Phalaris, notwithstanding it is thought to be of the nature of
Millet.

A. The juice and seed, as Galen saith, are thought to be profitably
drunk against the pains of the bladder. Apothecaries for want of
Millet do use the same with good success in fomentations; for in dry
fomentations it serveth instead thereof, and is his succedaneum, or
quid pro quo. We use it in England also to feed the Canary birds.



CHAP. 65. Of Fox-Tail.

Fig. 148. Fox-tail

The Description

1. Fox-tail hath many grassy leaves or blades, rough and hairy, like
unto those of Barley, but less and shorter. The stalk is likewise
soft and hairy; whereupon doth grow a small spike or ear, soft, and
very downy, bristled with very small hairs in shape, like unto a
Fox-tail, whereof it took his name, which dieth at the approch of
winter, and recovereth itself the next year by falling of his seed.

There is one or two varieties of this plant in the largeness and
smallness of the ear.

2. Besides these forementioned strangers, there is also another
which grows naturally in many watery salt places of this kingdom, as
in Kent by Dartford, in Essex, &c. The stalks of this plant are
grassy, and some two foot high, with leaves like Wheat or Dog's
Grass. The ear is very large, being commonly four or five inches
long, downy, soft like silk, and of a brownish colour.

The Place.

1. This kind of Fox-tail Grass groweth in England, only in gardens.

The Time.

1. This springeth up in May, of the seed that was scattered the year
before, and beareth his tail with his seed in June.

2. This bears his head in July.

The Names.

1. There hath not been more said of the ancient or later writers, as
touching the name, than is set down, by which they called it in
Greek Alopecuros; that is in Latin, Cauda vulpis: in English, Fox-
tail.

2. This by Lobel is called Alopecuros altera maxima Anglica paludosa
that is, the large English Marsh Fox-tail.

The Temperature and Virtues.

I find not anything extant worthy the memory, either of his nature
or virtues.



CHAP. 66. Of Job's Tears.

Fig. 149. Job's Tears

The Description.

Job's Tears hath many knotty stalks, proceeding from a tuft of
thready roots, two foot high, set with great broad leaves like unto
those of reed, amongst which leaves come forth many small branches
like straw of corn: on the end whereof doth grow a grey shining seed
or grain hard to break, and like in shape to the seeds of Gromwell,
but greater, and of the same colour, whereof I hold it a kind: every
of which grains are bored through the midst like a bead, and out of
the hole cometh a small idle or barren chaffy ear like unto that of
Darnel.

The Place.

It is brought from Italy and the countries adjoining, into these
countries, where it doth grow very well, but seldom cometh to
ripeness; yet myself had ripe seed thereof in my garden, the summer
being very hot.

The Time.

It is sown early in the Spring, or else the winter will overtake it
before it come to ripeness.

The Names.

Divers have thought it to be Lithospermi species, or a kind of
Gromwell, which the seed doth very notably resemble, and doth not
much differ from Dioscorides his Gromwell. Some think it Pliny's
Lithospermum; and therefore it may very aptly be called in Latin,
Arundo Lithospermos, that is in English, Gromwell reed, as Gesner
saith. It is generally called Lachrima Iob, and Lachrima Iobi: of
some it is called Diospiros: in English it is called Job's Tears, or
Job's Drops, for that every grain resembleth the drop or teare that
falleth from the eye.

The Nature and Virtues.

There is no mention made of this herb for the use of physic: only in
France and those places (where it is plentifully growing) they do
make beads, bracelets, and chains thereof, as we do with pomander
and such like.



CHAP. 67. Of Buckwheat.

Fig. 150. Buckwheat.

The Description

Buckwheat may very well be placed among the kinds of grain or corn,
for that oftentimes in time of necessity bread is made thereof,
mixed among other grain. It hath round fat stalks somewhat crested,
smooth and reddish, which is divided in many arms or branches
whereupon do grow smooth and soft leaves in shape like those of Ivy
or one of the Bindweeds, not much unlike Basil, wherof
Tabernamontanus called it Ocymum Cereale. The flowers be small,
white, and clustered together in one or more tufts or umbels,
slightly dashed over here & there with a flourish of light carnation
colour. The seeds are of a dark blackish colour, triangle, or three-
square like the seed of Black Bindweed. The root is small and
thready.

The Place.

It prospereth very well in any ground, be it never so dry or barren,
where it is commonly sown to serve as it were instead of a dunging.
It quickly cometh up, and is very soon ripe: it is very common in
and about the Nantwich in Cheshire where they sow it as well for
food for their cattle, pullen, and such like, as to the use
aforesaid. It groweth likewise in Lancashire, and in four parts of
our South country, about London in Middlesex, as also in Kent and
Essex.

The Time.

This base kind of grain is sown in April and the beginning of May,
and is ripe in the beginning of August.

The Names.

Buckwheat is called of the high Almaines, Heydencorn, of the base
Almaines Buckenweidt; that is to say, Hirci triticum, or Goat's
wheat: of some, Fagi triticum, Beech Wheat: In Latin, Fago triticum,
taken from the fashion of the seed or fruit of the Beech tree. It is
called also Fegopyrum, and Tragopyron: In English, French wheat,
Bullimong, and Buckwheat: In French, Dragee aux cheveaux.

The temper.

Buckwheat nourisheth less than Wheat, Rye, Barley, or Oats, yet more
than either Mill or Panic.

The Virtues.

Bread made of the meal of Buckwheat is of easy digestion, and
speedily passeth through the belly, but yieldeth little nourishment.

CHAP. 68. Of Cow-Wheat.

Fig. 151. Cow-wheat (1-4)

The Description.

1. Melampyrum grows upright, with a straight stalk, having other
small stalks coming from the same, of a foot long. The leaves are
long and narrow, and of a dark colour. On the top of the branches
grow bushy or spiky ears full of flowers and small leaves mixed
together, and much jagged, the whole ear resembling a Fox-tail. This
ear beginneth to flower below, and so upward by little and little
unto the top: the small leaves before the opening of the flowers,
and likewise the buds of the flowers, are white of colour. Then come
up broad husks, wherein are enclosed two seeds somewhat like wheat,
but smaller and browner. The root is of a woody substance.

2, 3. These two are like the former in stalks and leaves, but
different in the colour of their flowers, the which in the one are
purple, and in the other blue. Clusius calls these, as also the
Cratæogonon treated of in the next Chapter, by the names of
Parietariæ sylvestres.

4. Of this kind there is another called Melampyrum luteum, which
groweth near unto the ground, with leaves not much unlike Hartshorn;
among which riseth up a small straw with an ear at the top like
Alopecuros, the common Fox-tail, but of a yellow colour.

The Place.

1. The flrst groweth among corn, and in pasture grounds that be
fruitful: it groweth plentifully in the pastures about London.

The rest are strangers in England.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

Melampyrum is called of some Triticum vaccinium: in English, Cow-
wheat, and Horse-flower; The fourth is called Melampyrum luteum: in
English, Yellow Cow-wheat.

The danger.

The seed of Cow-wheat raiseth up fumes, and is hot and dry of
nature, which being taken in meats and drinks in the manner of
Darnel, troubleth the brain; causing drunkenness and headache.



CHAP. 69. Of Wild Cow-wheat.

Fig. 152. Wild Cow-wheat (1)	Fig. 153. Eyebright Cow-wheat (3)

The Description.

1. The first kind of wild Cow-wheat Clusius in his Pannonic History
calls Parietaria sylvestris, or wild Pellitory: which name,
according to his own words, if it do not fitly answer the plant, he
knoweth not what to call it, for that the Latins have not given any
name thereunto: yet because some have so called it, he retaineth the
same name. Notwithstanding he referreth it unto the kinds of
Melampyrum, or Cow-wheat, or unto Cratæogonon, the wild Cow-wheat,
which it doth very well answer in divers points. It hath an hairy
four-square stalk, very tender, weak, and easy to break, nor able to
stand upright without the help of his neighbours that dwell about
him, a foot high or more; whereupon do grow long thin leaves, sharp
pointed, and oftentimes lightly snipped about the edges, of a dark
purplish colour, sometimes greenish, set by couples one opposite
against the other; among the which come forth two flowers at one
joint, long and hollow, somewhat gaping like the flowers of a Dead-
nettle, at the first of a pale yellow, and after of a bright golden
colour; which do flower by degrees, first a few, and then more, by
means whereof it is long in flowering. Which being past, there
succeed small cups or seed vessels wherein is contained brown seed
not unlike to wheat. The whole plant is hairy, not differing from
the plant Stichwort.

2. Red-leaved wild Cow-wheat is like unto the former, sauing that
the leaves be narrower, and the tuft of leaves more jagged. The
stalks and leaves are of a reddish horse-flesh colour. The flowers
in form are like the other, but in colour differing; for that the
hollow part of the flower with the heel or spur is of a purple
colour, the rest of the flower yellow. The seed and vessels are like
the precedent.

3. This kind of wild Cow-wheat Tabernamontanus hath set forth under
the title of Odontites: others have taken it to be a kind of
Euphrasia or Eyebright, because it doth in some sort resemble it,
especially in his flowers. The stalks of this plant are small,
woody, rough, and square. The leaves are indented about the edges,
sharp pointed, and in most points resembling the former Cow-wheat;
so that of necessity it must be of the same kind, and not a kind of
Eyebright, as hath been set down by some.

The Place.

These wild kinds of Cow-wheat do grow commonly in fertile pastures,
and bushy copses, or low woods, and among bushes upon barren heaths
and such like places.

The two first do grow upon Hampstead Heath near London, among the
Juniper bushes and bilberry bushes in all the parts of the said
heath, and in every part of England where I have travelled.

The Time.

They flower from the beginning of May, to the end of August.

The Names.

The first is called of Lobel, Cratæogonon: and of Tabernamontanus,
Milium Sylvaticum, or Wood Millet, and Alsine sylvatica, or Wood
Chickweed.

2. The second hath the same titles: in English, Wild Cow-wheat.

3. The last is called by Tabernamontanus, Odontites: of Dodonæus,
Euphrasia altera, and Euphrosine. Hippocrates called the wild Cow-
wheat, Polycarpum, and Polycritum.

The Nature and Virtues.

There is not much set down either of the nature or virtues of these
plants: only it is reported that the seeds do cause giddiness and
drunkenness as Darnel doth.

The seed of Cratæogonon made in fine powder, and given in broth or
otherwise, mightily provoketh venery.

Some write, that it will likewise cause women to bring forth male
children.

See the virtues attributed to Cratæogonon by Dioscorides before,
Chap. 38. B.



CHAP. 70. Of White Asphodel.
The Kinds.

Having finished the kinds of corn, it followeth to show unto you the
sundry sorts of Asphodels, whereof some have bulbous roots, other
tuberous or knobby roots, some of yellow colour, and some of mixed
colours: notwithstanding Dioscorides maketh mention but of one
Asphodel, but Pliny setteth down two; which Dionysius confirmeth,
saying, That there is the male and female Asphodel. The latter age
hath observed many more besides the bulbed one, of which. Galen
maketh mention.


Fig. 154. White Asphodel (1)
Fig. 155. Branched Asphodel. (2)

The Description.

1. The White Asphodel hath many long and narrow canes like those of
leeks, sharp pointed. The stalk is round, smooth, naked, and without
leaves, two cubits high, garnished from the middle upward with a
number of flowers star-fashion, made of five leaves apiece; the
colour white, with some dark purple streaks drawn down the back-
side. Within the flowers be certain small chives. The flowers being
past, there spring up little round heads, wherein are contained
hard, black, and 3-square seeds like those of Buckwheat or
Stavesacre. The root is compact of many knobby roots growing out of
one head, like those of the Peony, full of juice, with a small
bitterness and binding taste.

2. Branched Asphodel agreeth well with the former description,
saving that this hath many branches or arms growing out of the
stalk, whereon the flowers do grow, and the other hath not any
branch at all, wherein consisteth the difference.


Fig. 156. Red Asphodel (3)
Fig. 157. Yellow Asphodel (4)
	3. Asphodel with the reddish flower groweth up in roots,
stalk, leaf, and manner of growing like the precedent, saving that
the flowers of this be of a dark red color, & the others white,
which setteth forth the difference, if there be any such difference,
or any such plant at all: for I have conferred with many most
excellent men in the knowledge of plants, but none of them can give
me certain knowledge of any such, but tell me they have heard it
reported that such a one there is, and so have I also, but certainly
I cannot set down anything of this plant until I hear more
certainly: for as yet I give no credit to my author, which for
reverence of his person I forbear to name.

4. The Yellow Asphodel hath many roots growing out of one head, made
of sundry tough, fat, and oleous yellow sprigs, or gross strings,
from the which rise up many grassy leaves, thick and gross, tending
to squareness, among the which cometh up a strong thick stalk set
with the like leaves even to the flowers, but less: upon the which
do grow star-like yellow flowers, otherwise like the white Asphodel.

Fig. 158. Dwarf Asphodel (5)


5. Besides these there is an Asphodel which Clusius for the
smallness calls Asphodelus minimus. The roots thereof are knotty and
tuberous, resembling those of the formerly described, but less: from
these arise five or six very narrow and long leaves; in the midst of
which grows up a stalk of the height of a foot, round and without
branches, bearing at the top thereof a spoke of flowers, consisting
of six white leaves apiece, each of which hath a streak running
alongst, both on the inside and outside, like as the first
described. It flowers in the beginning of July, when as the rest are
past their flowers. It loseth the leaves in winter, and gets new
ones again in the beginning of April.

The Time and Place.

They flower in May and June, beginning below; and so flowering
upward: and they grow naturally in France, Italy, Spain, and most of
them in our London gardens.

The Names.

Asphodel is called in Latin, Asphodelus, Albucum, Albucus, and
Hastula Regia: in English, Asphodel, not Daffodil; for Daffodil is
Narcissus, another plant differing from Asphodel. Pliny writeth,
That the stalk with the flowers is called Anthericos; and the root,
that is to say, the bulbs Asphodelus.

Of this Asphodel Hesiod maketh mention in his Works, where he saith,
that fools know not how much good there is in the Mallow and in the
Asphodel, because the roots of Asphodel are good to be eaten. Yet
Galen doth not believe that he meant of this Asphodel, but of that
bulbed one, whereof we will make mention hereafter. And he himself
testifieth, that the bulbs thereof are not to be eaten without very
long seething; and therefore it is not like that Hesiod hath
commended any such; for he seemeth to understand by the Mallow and
the Asphodel, such kind of food as is easily prepared, and soon made
ready.

The Nature.

These kinds of Asphodels be hot and dry almost in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. After the opinion of Dioscorides and Aetius, the roots of
Asphodel eaten, provoke urine and the terms effectually, especially
being stamped and strained with wine, and drunk.

B. One dram thereof taken in wine in manner before rehearsed,
helpeth the pain in the sides, ruptures, convulsions, and the old
cough.

C. The roots boiled in dregs of wine cure foul eating ulcers, all
inflammations of the dugs or stones, and easeth the felon, being put
thereto as a poultice.

D. The juice of the root boiled in old sweet wine, together with a
little myrrh and saffron, maeketh an excellent collyre profitable
for the eyes.

E. Galen saith, the roots burnt to ashes, and mixed with the grease
of a duck, helpeth the alopecia, and bringeth hair again that was
fallen by that disease.

F. The weight of a dram thereof taken with wine helpeth the drawing
together of sinews, cramps, and burstings.

G. The like quantity taken in broth provoketh vomit, and helpeth
those that are bitten with any venomous beasts.

H. The juice of the root cleanseth and taketh away the white
morphew, if the face be anointed therewith: but first the place must
be chafed and well rubbed with a coarse linen cloth.



CHAP. 71. Of the King's Spear.


Fig. 159 King's Spear (1)
Fig. 160. Lancashire Asphodel
(2)

The Description.

1. The leaves of the King's Spear are long, narrow, and chamfered or
furrowed, of a bluish green colour. The stalk is round, of a cubit
high. The flowers which grow thereon from the middle to the top are
very many, in shape like to the flowers of the other; which being
past, there come in place thereof little round heads or seed-
vessels, wherein the seed is contained. The roots in like manner are
very many, long, and slender, smaller than those of the other yellow
sort. Upon the sides whereof grow forth certain strings, by which
the plant itself is easily increased and multiplied.

2. There is found in these days a certain watery or marsh Asphodel
like unto this last described, in stalk and flowers, without any
difference at all. It bringeth forth leaves of a beautiful green
somewhat chamfered, like to those of the Fleur-de-lys, or Corn-flag,
but narrower, not full a span long. The stalk is strait, a foot
high, whereupon grow the flowers, consisting of six small leaves: in
the middle whereof come forth small yellow chives or threads. The
seed is very small, contained in long sharp pointed cods. The root
is long, jointed, and creepeth as grass doth, with many small
strings.

Fig. 161. The true Lancashire Asphodel. (3)

3. Besides the last described (which our author I fear mistaking,
termed Asphodelus Lancastriæ) there is another water Asphodel, which
grows in many rotten moorish grounds in this kingdom, and in
Lancashire is used by women to die their hair of a yellowish colour,
and therefore by them it is termed Maiden-hair; if we may believe
Lobel). This plant hath leaves of some two inches and an half, or
three inches long, being somewhat broad at the bottom, and so
sharper towards their ends. The stalk seldom attains to the height
of a foot, and it is smooth without any leaves thereon; the top
thereof is adorned with pretty yellow star-like flowers, whereto
succeed longish little cods, usually three, yet sometimes four or
five-square, and in these there is contained a small red seed. The
root consists only of a few small strings.

The Place.

1. The small yellow Asphodel groweth not of itself wild in these
parts, notwithstanding we have great plenty thereof in our London
gardens.

2. The Lancashire Asphodel groweth in moist and marsh places near
unto the town of Lancaster, in the moorish grounds there, as also
near unto Maudsley and Martom, two villages not far from thence;
where it was found by a worshipful and learned Gentleman, a diligent
searcher of simples, and fervent lover of plants, Mr. Thomas Hesket,
who brought the plants thereof unto me for the increase of my
garden.

I received some plants thereof likewise from Master Thomas Edwards,
apothecary in Exeter, learned and skilful in his profession, as also
in the knowledge of plants. He found this Asphodel at the foot of a
hill in the west part of England, called Bagshot Hill, near unto a
village of the same name.

3. This Asphodel figured and described out of Dodonæus, and called
Asphodelus Lancastriæ, by our author, grows in an heath some two
miles from Bruges in Flanders, and divers other places of the Low-
countries; but whether it grow in Lancashire or no, I can say
nothing of certainty: but I am certain, that which I have described
in the third place grows in many places of the West of England; and
this year 1632, my kind friend Mr. George Bowles sent me some plants
thereof, which I keep yet growing. Lobel also affirms this to be the
Lancashire Asphodel.

The Time.

They flower in May and June: most of the leaves thereof remain green
in the winter, if it be not extreme cold.

The Names.

1. Some of the later herbarists think this yellow Asphodel to be
Iphyon of Theophrastus, and others judge it to be Erizambac of the
Arabians. In Latin it is called Asphodelus luteus: of some it is
called Hastula Regia. We have Englished it, the Spear for a King, or
small yellow Asphodel.

2. The Lancashire Asphodel is called in Latin, Asphodelus
Lancastriæ: and may likewise be called Asphodelus palustris, or
Pseudoasphodelus luteus, or the Bastard yellow Asphodel.

3. This is Asphodelus minimus lateus palustris Scoticus &
Lancastriensis, of Lobel; and the Pseudoasphodelus pumilio foliis
Iridis, of Clusius, as far as I can judge; although Bauhin
distinguisheth them.
The Temperature and Virtues.

It is not yet found out what use there is of them in nourishment or
medicines.



CHAP. 72. Of Onion Asphodel.

Fig. 162. Onion Asphodel.

The Description.

The bulbed Asphodel hath a round bulbous or Onion root, with some
fibres hanging thereat; from the which come up many grassy leaves,
very well resembling the Leek; among the which leaves there riseth
up a naked or smooth stem, garnished toward the top with many star-
like flowers, of a whitish green on the inside, and wholly green
without, consisting of six little leaves sharp pointed, with certain
chives or threads in the middle. After the flower is past there
succeedeth a small knop or head three-square, wherein lieth the
seed.

The Place.

It groweth in the gardens of herbarists in London, and not elsewhere
that I know of, for it is not very common.

The Time.

It flowereth in June and July, and somewhat after.

The Names.

The stalk and flowers being like to those of the Asphodel before
mentioned do show it to be Asphodeli species, or a kind of Asphodel;
for which cause also it seemeth to be that Asphodel of which Galen
hath made mention in his second book of the Faculties of
Nourishments, in these words; The root of Asphodel is in a manner
like to the root of Squill, or Sea Onion, as well in shape as
bitterness. Notwithstanding, saith Galen, myself have known certain
countrymen, who in time of famine could not with many boilings and
steepings make it fit to be eaten. It is called of Dodonæus,
Asphodelus fœmine, and Asphodelus Bulbosus, Hyacintho-Asphodelus,
and Asphodelus Hyacinthinus by Lobel, and that rightly; for that the
root is like the Hyacinth, and the flowers like the Asphodel: and
therefore as it doth participate of both kinds, so likewise doth the
name: in English we may call it Bulbed Asphodel. Clusius calls it
Ornithogalum majus, and that fitly.

The Nature.

The round rooted Asphodel, according to Galen, hath the same
temperature and virtue that Aron, Arisarum, and Dracontium have,
namely an abstersive and cleansing quality.

The Virtues.

A. The young sprouts or springs thereof is a singular medicine
against the yellow jaundice, for that the root is of power to make
thin and open.

B. Galen saith, that the ashes of this bulb mixed with oil or hen's
grease cureth the falling of the hair in an Alopecia or scalled
head.



CHAP. 73. Of Yellow Lilies.


Fig. 163. Yellow Lily (1)
Fig. 164. Day-Lily (2)

The Kinds.

Because we shall have occasion hereafter to speak of certain Cloved
or Bulbed Lilies, we will in this chapter entreat only of another
kind not bulbed, which likewise is of two sorts, differing
principally in their roots; for in flowers they are Lilies, but in
roots Asphodels, participating as it were of both, though nearer
approching unto Asphodels than Lilies.

The Description.

1. The yellow Lily hath very long flaggy leaves, chamfered or
channelled, hollow in the midst like a gutter, among the which
riseth up a naked or bare stalk, two cubits high, branched toward
the top, with sundry brittle arms or branches, whereon do grow many
goodly flowers like unto those of the common white Lily in shape and
proportion, of a shining yellow colour; which being past, there
succeed three-cornered husks or cods, full of black shining seeds
like those of the Peony. The root consisteth of many knobs or
tuberous clogs, proceeding from one head, like those of the white
Asphodel or Peony.

2. The Day-Lily hath stalks and leaves like the former. The flowers
be like the white Lily in shape, of an orange tawny colour: of which
flowers much might be said which I omit. But in brief, this plant
bringeth forth in the morning his bud, which at noon is full blown,
or spread abroad, and the same day in the evening it shuts itself,
and in a short time after becomes as rotten and stinking as if it
had been trodden in a dunghill a month together, in foul and rainy
weather: which is the cause that the seed seldom followeth, as in
the other of his kind, not bringing forth any at all that I could
ever observe; according to the old proverb, Soon ripe, soon rotten.
His roots are lke the former.

The Place.

These Lilies do grow in my garden, as also in the gardens of
herbarists, and lovers of fine and rare plants; but not wild in
England, as in other countries.

The Time.

These Lilies do flower somewhat before the other Lilies, and the
yellow Lily the soonest.

The Names.

Divers do call this kind of Lily, Liliasphodelus, Liliago, and also
Liliastrum, but most commonly Lilium non bulbosum: In English,
Liriconfancy, and yellow Lily. The old herbarists name it
Hemerocallis: for they have two kinds of Hemerocallis; the one a
shrub or woody plant, as witnesseth Theophrastus, in his sixth book
of the History of Plants. Pliny setteth down the same shrub among
those plants, the leaves whereof only do some for garlands.

The other Hemerocallis which they set down, is a flower which
perisheth at night, and buddeth at the sun rising, according to
Athenaeus; and so we in English may rightly term it the Day-Lily, or
Lily for a day,

The Nature.

The nature is rather referred to the Asphodels than to Lilies.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, That the root stamped with honey, and a mother
pessary made thereof with wool, and put up, bringeth forth water and
blood.

B. The leaves stamped and applied do allay hot swellings in the
dugs, after women's travail in child-bearing, and likewise taketh
away the inflammation of the eyes.

C. The roots and the leaves be laid with good success upon burnings
and scaldings.



CHAP. 74. Of Bulbed Fleur-de-lys.


Fig. 165. Broadleaved Bulbous
Fleur-de-lys (1)
Fig. 166. Onion Fleur-de-lys (2)

The Kinds.

Like as we have set down sundry sorts of Fleur-de-lys, with flaggy
leaves, and tuberous or knobby roots, varying very notably in sundry
respects, which we have distinguished in their proper chapters: it
resteth that in like manner we set forth unto your view certain
bulbous or Onion-rooted Fleur-de-lys, which in this place do offer
themselves unto our consideration; whereof there be also sundry
sorts, sorted into one chapter as followeth.

The Description.

1. The first of these, whose figure here we give you under the name
of Iris Bulbosa Latifolia, hath leaves somewhat like those of the
Day-Lily, soft, and somewhat palish green, with the undersides
somewhat whiter; amongst which there riseth up a stalk bearing at
the top thereof a flower a little in shape different from the
formerly described Fleur-de-lys. The colour thereof is blue; the
number of the leaves whereof it consists, nine: three of these are
little, and come out at the bottom of the flower as soon as it is
opened; three more are large, and being narrow at their bottom,
become broader by little and little, until they come to turn
downwards, whereas then they are shapen somewhat roundish or obtuse.
In the midst of these there runs up a yellow variegated line to the
place whereas they bend back. The three other leaves are arched like
as in other flowers of this kind, and divided at their upper end,
and contain in them three threads of a whitish blue colour.

This is called Iris Bulbosa Latifolia, by Clusius; and Hyacinthus
Poetarum Latifolius, by Lobel.

It flowers in January and February, whereas it grows naturally, as
it doth in divers places of Portugal and Spain. It is a tender
plant, and seldom thrives well in our gardens.

2. Onion Fleur-de-lys hath long narrow blades or leaves, crested,
chamfered, or streaked on the back side as it were welted; below
somewhat round, opening itself toward the top, yet remaining as it
were half round, whereby it resembleth an hollow trough or gutter.
In the bottom of the hollowness it tendeth to whiteness; and among
these teams do rise up a stalk of a cubit high; at the top whereof
groweth a fair blue flower, not differing in shape from the common
Fleur-de-lys: the which being past, there come in the place thereof
long thick cods or seed-vessels, wherein is contained yellowish seed
of the bigness of a tare or fitch. The root is round like an onion,
covered over with certain brown skins or films. Of this kind there
are some five or six varieties, caused by the various colours of the
flowers.


Fig. 167. Changeable Fleur-de-
lys (3)
Fig. 168. Many-branched
Changeable Fleur-de-lys (4)
	3. Changeable Fleur-de-lys hath leaves, stalks, and roots like
the former, but lesser. The flower hath likewise the form of the
Fleur-de-lys, that is to say, it consisteth of six greater leaves,
and three lesser; the greater leaves fold backward and hang
downward, the lesser stand upright; and in the middle of the leaves
there riseth up a yellow welt, white about the brims, and shadowed
all over with a wash of thin blue tending to a watchet colour.
Toward the stalk they are striped over with a light purple colour,
and likewise amongst the hollow places of those that stand upright
(which cannot be expressed in the figure) there is the same fair
purple colour; the smell and favour very sweet and pleasant. The
root is onion fashion, or bulbous like the other.

4. There is also another variegated Fleur-de-lys, much like this
last described, in the colour of the flower; but each plant
produceth more branches and flowers, whence it is termed Iris
Bulbosa versicolor polyclonos, Many-branched Changeable Fleur-de-
lys.

Fig. 169. Yellow bulbed Fleur-de-lys. (5)


5. Of which kind or sort there is another in my garden, which I
received from my brother James Garret apothecary, far more beautiful
than the last described; the which is dashed over, instead of the
blue or watchet colour, with a most pleasant gold yellow colour, of
smell exceeding sweet, with bulbed roots like those of the other
sort.


Fig. 170. Ash-coloured Fleur-de-
lys (6)
Fig. 171. Whitish Fleur-de-lys.
(7)


6. It is reported, that there is in the garden of the Prince Elector
the Landgrave of Hesse, one of this sort or kind, with white
flowers, the which as yet I have not seen.

Besides these sorts mentioned by our author, there are of the narrow
leaved bulbous Fleur-de-lys, some twenty four or more varieties,
which in shape of roots, leaves, and flowers differ very little, or
almost nothing at all; so that he which knows one of these may
presently know the rest. Wherefore because it is a thing no more
pertinent to a general history of plants, to insist upon these
accidental nicities, than for him that writes a history of Beasts to
describe all the colours, and their mixtures, in Horses, Dogs, and
the like; I refer such as are desirous to inform themselves of those
varieties, to such as have only and purposely treated of flowers and
their diversities, as De-Bry, Swerts, and our countryman Mr.
Parkinson, who in his Paradisus terrestris, set forth in English,
Anno 1629, hath judiciously and exactly comprehended all that hath
been delivered by others in this nature.

The Place.

The second of these bulbed Fleur-de-lys grows wild, or of itself, in
the corn fields of the West parts of England, as about Bath and
Wells, and those places adjacent; from whence they were first
brought into London, where they be naturalised, and increase in
great plenty in our London gardens.

The other sorts do grow naturally in Spain and Italy wild, from
whence we have had plants for our London gardens, whereof they do
greatly abound.

The Time.

They flower in June and July, and seldom after.

The Names.

The Bulbed Fleur-de-lys is called of Lobel, Iris Bulbosa, and also
Hyacinthus flore Iridis: of some, Hyacinthus Poetarum; and
peradventure it is the same that Apuleius mentioneth in the one and
twentieth chapter, saying, That Iris, named among the old writers
Hieris, may also be called, and not unproperly, Hierobulbus, or
Hieribulbus: as though you should say, Iris Bulbosa, or Bulbed
Ireos; unless you would have Ierabulbos, a greater or larger bulb:
for it is certain, that great and huge things were called of the
ancients, Iera, or sacra: in English, Holy.

The Nature.

The nature of these bulbed Fleur-de-lys are referred to the kinds of
Asphodels.

The Virtues.

A. Take, saith Apuleius, of the herb Hierobulbus six ounces, goat's
suet as much, oil of alcanna one pound; mix them together, being
first stamped in a stone mortar, it taketh away the pain of the
gout.

B. Moreover, if a woman do use to wash her face with the decoction
of the root, mixed with the meal of Lupines, it forthwith cleanseth
away the freckles & morphew, and such like deformities.



CHAP. 75. Of Spanish Nut.


Fig. 172. Spanish Nut (1)
Fig. 173. Small Spanish Nut (2)

The Description.

1. Spanish Nut hath small grassy leaves like those of Star of
Bethlehem, or Ornithogalum among which riseth up a small stalk of
half a foot high, garnished with the like leaves, but shorter. The
flowers grow at the top, of a sky colour, in shape resembling the
Fleur-de-lys, or common Iris; but the leaves that turn down are each
of them marked with a yellowish spot: they fade quickly, and being
past, there succeed small cods with seeds as small as those of
Turnips. The root is round, composed of two bulbs, the one lying
upon the other as those of the Corn-flag usually do and they are
covered with a skin or film in shape like a net. The bulb is sweet
in taste, and may be eaten before any other bulbed root.

2. There is set forth another of this kind, somewhat lesser, with
flowers that smell sweeter than the former.


Fig. 174. Velvet Fleur-de-lys

3. Velvet Fleur-de-lys hath many long square leaves, spongeous or
full of pith, trailing upon the ground, in shape like to the leaves
of rushes: among which riseth up a spike of a foot high, bearing at
the top a flower like the Fleur-de-lys. The lower leaves that turn
downward are of a perfect black colour, soft and smooth as is black
velvet; the blackness is welted about with greenish yellow, or as we
term it a goose-turd green; of which colour the uppermost leaves do
consist: which being past, there followeth a great knob or crested
seed vessel of the bigness of a man's thumb, wherein is contained
round white seed as big as the vetch or tare. The root consisteth of
many knobby bunches like fingers.

The Place.

These bastard kinds of Fleur-de-lys are strangers in England, except
it be among some few diligent herbarists in London, who have them in
their gardens, where they increase exceedingly; especially the last
described, which is said to grow wild about Constantinople, Morea,
and Greece: from whence it hath been transported into Italy, where
it hath been taken for Hermodactylus, and by same espressed or set
forth in writing under the title Hermodactylus; whereas in truth it
hath no semblance at all with Hermodactylus.

The Time.

The wild or bastard Fleur-de-lys do flower from May to the end of
June.

The Names.

1, 2. These bulbed bastard Fleur-de-lys, which we have Englished
Spanish Nuts, are called in Spain, Nozelhas; that is, little Nuts:
the lesser sort are Parva Nozelha, and Macuca: we take it to be that
kind of nourishing Bulb which is named of Pliny, Sisynrichium.

3. Some, as Ulysses Aldroandus, would have this to be Louchitis
Prior, of Dioscorides. Matthiolus makes it Hermodactylus verus, or
the true Hermodactyl: Dodonæus and Lobel more fitly refer it to the
Fleur-de-lys, and call it Iris tuberosa.

The Nature and Virtues.

Of these kinds of Fleur-de-lys there hath been little or nothing at
all left in writing concerning their natures or virtues; only the
Spanish nut is eaten at the tables of rich and delicious, nay vicous
persons, in salads or otherwise, to procure lust and lechery.



CHAP. 76. Of Corn-Flag.


Fig. 175. French Corn-flag, or
Sword-flag (1)
Fig. 176. Italian Corn-flag, or
Sword-flag (2)

The Description.

1. French Corn-Flag hath small stiff leaves, ribbed or chamfered
with long nerves or sinews running through the same, in shape like
those of the small Fleur-de-lys, or the blade of a sword, sharp
pointed, of an overworn green colour, among the which riseth up a
stiff brittle stalk two cubits high, whereupon do grow in comely
order many fair purple flowers, gaping like those of Snapdragon, or
not much differing from the Foxglove, called in Latin Digitalis.
After them come round knobby seed-vessels, full of chaffy seed, very
light, of a brown reddish colour. The root consisteth of two bulbs,
one set upon the other; the uppermost whereof in the beginning of
the spring is lesser, and more full of juice; the lower greater, but
more loose and lithy, which a little while after perisheth.

2. Italian Corn-Flag hath long narrow leaves with many ribs or
nerves running through the same: the stalk is stiff and brittle,
whereupon do grow flowers orderly placed upon one side of the stalk,
whereas the precedent hath his flowers placed on both the sides of
the stalk, in shape and colour like the former, as are also the
roots, but seldom seen one above another as in the former.

3. There is a third sort of Corn-Flag which agreeth with the last
described in every point, saving that the flowers of this are of a
pale colour, as it were between white, and that which we call
Maiden's Blush.

Fig. 177. Water sword-flag (4)

4. This Water Sword-Flag, described by Clusius in his Cur. Post,
hath leaves about a span long, thick and hollow, with a partition in
their middles, like as we see in the cods of Stock-Gillyflowers, and
the like: their colour is green, and taste sweet, so that they are
an acceptable food to the wild ducks ducking down to the bottom of
the water; for they sometimes lie some ells underwater:which
notwithstanding is over-topped by the stalk, which springs up from
among these leaves, and bears flowers of colour white, larger than
those of Stock- Gillyflowers, but in that hollow part that is next
the stalk they are of a bluish colour, almost in shape resembling
the flowers of the Corn-Flag, yet not absolutely like them. They
consist of five leaves, whereof the two uppermost are reflected
towards the stalk the three other being broader hang downwards.
After the flowers there follow round pointed vessels filled with red
seed. It flowers at the end of July.

It was found in some places of West-Friesland, by John Dortman a
learned apothecary of Groningen. It grows in waters which have pure
gravel at the bottom, and that bring forth no plant besides.

Clusius, and Dortman who sent it him, call it Gladiolus Lacustris,
or Stagnalis.

The Place.

These kinds of Corn-flags grow in meadows, and in arable grounds
among corn, in many places of Italy, as also in the parts of France
bordering thereunto. Neither are the fields of Austria and Moravia
without them, as Cordus writeth. We have great plenty of them in our
London gardens, especially for the garnishing and decking them up
with their seemly flowers.

The Time.
They flower from May to the end of July.

The Names.

Corn-Flag is called in Latin, Gladiolus; and of some, Ensis: of
others, Gladiolus Segetalis. Theophrastus in his discourse of
Phasganum maketh it the same with Xiphion. Valerius Cordus calleth
Corn-flag Victorialis fœmina; others, Victorialis rotunda: in the
German tongue, Seigwurtz: yet we must make a difference between
Gladiolus and Victorialis longa; for that is a kind of Garlic found
upon the highest Alpish mountains, which is likewise called of the
Germans Seigwurtz. The flowers of Corn-flag are called of the
Italians, Monacuccio: in English, Corn-flag, Corn-sedge, Sword-flag,
Corn Gladin: in French, Glais.

The Nature.

The root of Corn-Flag, as Galen saith, is of force to draw, waste,
or consume away, and dry, as also of a subtle and digesting quality.

The Virtues.

A. The root stamped with the powder of frankincense and wine, and
applied, draweth forth splinters and thorns that stick fast in the
flesh.

B. Being stamped with the meal of darnel and honeyed water, doth
waste and make subtle hard lumps, nodes, and swellings, being
emplastered.

C. Some affirm, that the upper root provoketh bodily lust, and the
lower causeth barrenness.

D. The upper root drunk in water is profitable against that kind of
bursting in children called Enterocele.

E. The root of Corn-flag stamped with hog's grease and wheaten meal,
hath been found by late practitioners in physic and surgery, to be a
certain and approved remedy against the Struma Scrophula, and such
like swellings in the throat.

F. The cods with the seed dried and beaten into powder, and drunk in
Goat's milk or Ass's milk, presently taketh away the pain of the
colic.



CHAP. 77. Of Starry Hyacinths and their Kinds.


Fig. 178. Starry Hyacinth (1)
Fig. 179. White Flowered Starry
Hyacinth (2)

There be likewise bulbous or onion rooted plants that do orderly
succeed, whereof some are to be eaten, as Onions, Garlic, Leeks, and
Chives; nothwithstanding I am first to entreat of those bulbed
roots, whose fair and beautiful flowers are received for their grace
and ornament in gardens and garlands: the first are the Hyacinths,
whereof there is found at this day divers sorts, differing very
notably in many points as be declared in their several descriptions.

Fig. 180. Starry Hyacinths (3, 4, 6)

The Description.

1. The first kind of Hyacinth hath three very fat thick brown
leaves, hollow like a little trough, very brittle, of the length of
a finger: among which shoot up fat, thick brownish stalks, soft and
very tender, and full of juice; whereupon do grow many small blue
flowers consisting of six little leaves spread abroad like a star.
The seed is contained in small round bullets, which are so ponderous
or heavy that they lie trailing upon the ground. The root is bulbous
or onion fashion, covered with brownish scales or films.

2. There is also a white flowered one of this kind.

3. There is found another of this kind which seldom or never hath
more than two leaves. The roots are bulbed like the other. The
flowers be whitish, star-fashion, tending to blueness, which I
received of Robinus of Paris.

4. This kind of Hyacinth hath many broad leaves spread upon the
ground, like unto those of Garden Lily, but shorter. The stalks do
rise out of the midst thereof bare, naked; and very smooth, an
handful high; at the top whereof do grow small blue flowers star-
fashion, very like unto the precedent. The root is thick and full of
juice, compact of many scaly cloves of a yellow colour.

There are some ten or eleven varieties of starry Hyacinths, besides
these two mentioned by our author. They differ each from other
either in the time of flowering (some of them flowering in the
spring, other some in summer) in their bigness, or the colours of
their flowers. The leaves of most of them are much like to our
ordinary Hyacinth, or Hare-bells, and lie spread upon the ground.
Their flowers in shape resemble the last described, but are usually
more in number, and somewhat larger. The colour of most of them are
blue or purple, one of them excepted, which is of an ash colour, and
is known by the name of Somers his Hyacinth. I think it not amiss to
give you their usual names, together with some of their figures; for
so you may easily impose them truly upon the things themselves
whensoever you shall see them.


Fig. 181. Somers' Starry
Hyacinth (8)
Fig. 182. Greater Starry Summer
Hyacinth (9)



Fig. 183. Lesser Starry Summer
Hyacinth (10)
Fig. 184. Hyacinth of Peru (13)

5. Hyacinthus stellaris Byzantinus nigra radice, flore cæruleo. The
blue starry Hyacinth of Constantinople, with the black root.
6. Hyacinthus stellatus Byzantinus major flore cæruleo. The greater
blue starry Hyacinth of Constantiple.
7. Hyacinthus stellatus Byzantinus alter flore boraginis. The other
blue starry Hyacinth of Constantinonople, with flowers somewhat
resembling Borage.
8. Hyacinthus stellaris æstivus, siue exoticus Someri flore cinereo.
Ash coloured starry Hyacinth, or Somers; Hyacinth.
9. Hyacinthus stellatus æstivus major. The greater starry summer
Hyacinth.
10. Hyacinthus stellatus æstivus minor. The lesser starry summer
Hyacinth.
11. Hyacinthus stellaris Poreti flore cæruleo striis purpureis.
Poret's starry Hyacinth with blue Flower, hauing purple streaks
alongst their middles.
12. Hyacinthus Hispanicus stellaris flore sature cæruleo. The
Spanish starry Hyacinth with deepe blue flower.
13. There is another starry Hyacinth more large and beautiful than
any of these before mentioned. The leaves are broad and not very
long, spread upon the ground, and in the midst of them there riseth
up a stalk which at the top beareth a great spike of fair starry
flowers, which first begin to open themselves below, and to show
themselves by little and little to the top of the stalk. The usual
sort hereof hath blue or purple flowers. There is also a sort hereof
which hath flesh-coloured flower, and another with white flowers:
This is called Hyacinthus stellatus Peruanus, The starry Hyacinth of
Peru.

Those who are studious in varieties of flower, and require larger
descriptions of these, may have recourse to the works of the learned
Carolus Clusius in Latin; or to M. Parkinson's work in English,
where they may have full satisfaction.

The Place.

The three first mentioned Plants grow in many places of Germany in
woods and mountains, as Fuchsius and Gesner do testify: In Bohemia
also upon divers banks that are full of Herbes. In England we
cherish most of these mentioned in this place, in our gardens, only
for the beauty of their flower.

The Time.

The three first begin to flower in the midst of January, and bring
forth their seed in May. The other flower in the spring.

The Names.

1. The first of these Hyacinths is called Hyacinthus stellatus,or
Stellaris Fuchsii,of the star-like flowers: Narcissus cæruleus
Bockii: of some, Flos Martius stellatus.

3. This by Lobel is thought to be Hyacinthus Bifolius, of
Theophrastus: Tragus calls it Narcissus cæruleus: and Fuchsius,
Hyacinthus cæruleus minor mas. We may call it in English, The small
two leaved starry Hyacinth.

4. The Lily Hyacinth is called Hyacinthus Germanicus Lilliflorus, or
German Hyacinth, taken from the country where it naturally groweth
wild.

The Virtues.

The faculties of the starry Hyacinths are not written of by any. But
the Lily-leaved Hyacinth, (which grows naturally in a hill in
Aquitaine called Hos, where the herdmen call it Sarahug) is said by
them to cause the heads of such cattle as feed thereon to swell
exceedingly, and then kills them: which shows it hath a malign and
poisonous quality. Clusius.



CHAP. 78. Of Autumn Hyacinths.


Fig. 185. Small Autumn Hyacinth
(1)
Fig. 186. Great Autumn Hyacinth
(2)

The Description

1. Autumn Hyacinth is the least of all the Hyacinths: it hath small
narrow grassy leaves spread abroad upon the ground; in the midst
whereof springeth up a small naked stalk an handful high, set from
the middle to the top with many small star-like blue flowers, having
certain small loose chives in the middle. The seed is black,
contained in small husks: the root is bulbous.

2 The great Winter Hyacinth is like unto the precedent, in leaves,
stalks, and flower, not differing in any one point but in greatness.

3. To these I think it not amiss to add another small Hyacinth, more
different from these last described in the time of the flowering,
than in shape. The root of it is little, small, white, longish, with
a few fibres at the bottom; the leaves are small and long like the
last described. The stalk, which is scarce an handful high, is
adorned at the top with three or four starry flowers of a bluish ash
colour, each flower consisting of six little leaves, with six chives
and their pointels, of a dark blue, and a pistil in the midst. It
flowers in April.

The Place.

1. The first or lesser grows wild in divers places of England, as
upon a bank by the Thames side between Chelsea and London.

2. The greater Autumn Hyacinth grows not wild in England, but it is
to be found in some gardens.

The Time.

They flower in the end of August, and in September, and sometimes
after.

The Names.

1. The first is called Hyacinthus Autumnalis minor, or the Lesser
Autumn Hyacinth, and Winter Hyacinth.

2. The second, Hyacinthus Autumnalis major, the Great Autumn
Hyacinth, or Winter Hyacinth.

3. This is called by Lobel, Hyacinthus parvulus stellaris vernus,
The Small Starry Spring Hyacinth.



CHAP. 79. Of the English Hyacinth, or Harebells.


Fig. 187. English Harebell (1)
Fig. 188. White English
Harebell. (2)

The Description

1. The blue Harebell or English Hyacinth is very common throughout
all England. It hath long narrow leaves leaning towards the ground,
among the which spring up naked or bare stalks laden with many
hollow blue flowers, of a strong sweet smell, somewhat stuffing the
head: after which come the cods or round knobs, containing a great
quantity of small black shining seed. The root is bulbous, full of a
slimy gluish juice, which will serve to set feathers upon arrows
instead of glue, or to paste books with: whereof is made the best
starch next unto that of Wake-robin roots.

2. The white English Hyacinth is altogether like unto the precedent,
saving that the leaves hereof are somewhat broader, the flowers more
open, and very white of colour.

3. There is found wild in many places of England, another sort,
which hath flowers of a fair carnation colour, which maketh a
difference from the other.

There are also sundry other varieties of this sort, but I think it
unnecessary to insist upon them, their difference is so litle,
consisting not in their shape, but in the colour of their flower.
The Place.

1. The blue Harebells grow wild in woods, copses, and in the borders
of fields every where through England.

2. The other two are not so common, yet do they grow in the woods by
Colchester in Essex in the fields and woods by Southfleet near unto
Gravesend in Kent,as also in a piece of ground by Canturbury called
the Clapper, in the fields by Bath, about the woods by Warrington in
Lancashire, and other places.

The Time.
They flower from the beginning of May unto the end of June.

The Names.

1. The first of our English Hyacinths is called Hyacinthus Anglicus,
for that it is thought to grow more plentifully in England than
elsewhere of Dodonæus, Hyacinthus non scriptus, or the unwritten
Hyacinth.

2. The second, Hyacinthus Belgicus candidus, or the Low-Country
Hyacinth with white Flowers.

3. This third is called Hyacinthus Anglicus, aut Belgicus Flore
incarnato, Carnation Harebells.

Of Oriental Hyacinths


Fig. 189. Blue Oriental Hyacinth
(4)
Fig. 190. Many-flowered Oriental
Hyacinth.

The Description.

4. The Oriental Hyacinth hath great leaves, thick, fat, and full of
juice, deeply hollowed in the middle like a trough: from the middle
of those leaves riseth up a stalk two hands high, bare without
leaves, very smooth, soft, and full of juice, loaden toward the top
with many fair blue flowers, hollow like a bell, greater than the
English Hyacinth, but otherwise like them. The root is great,
bulbous, or Onion fashion, covered with many scaly reddish films or
peelings, such as cover Onions.

5. The Hyacinth with many Flowers (for so doth the word Polyanthos
import) hath very many large and broad leaves, short and very thick,
fat, or full of slimy juice: from the middle whereof rise up strong
thick gross stalks, bare and naked, set from the middle to the top
with many blue or sky coloured flowers growing for the most part
upon one side of the stalk. The root is great, thick, and full of
slimy juice.

Fig. 191. Oriental hyacinths (6-9)

6. There is another like the former in each respect , saving that
the flowers are wholly white on the inside, and white also on the
outside, but three of the out-leaves are of a pale whitish yellow.
These flowers smell sweet as the former, and the heads wherein the
seeds are contained are of a lighter green colour.

7. There is come unto us from beyond the seas divers other sorts,
whose figures are not extant with us; of which there is one like
unto the sirst of these Oriental Hyacinths, saving that the flower
thereof are purple coloured whence it is termed Hyacinthus purpuro
rubeus.

8. Likewise there is another called orientalis albus, differing also
from the others in colour of the flower, for that these are very
white, and the others blue.

9. There is another called Hyacinthus Brumalis, or winter Hyacinth:
it is like the others in shape, but differeth in the time of
flowering.

Fig. 192. Oriental Hyacinth with leaves on the stalk. (10)

10. There is another Hyacinth belonging rather to this place than
any other, for that in root, leaves, flower, and seeds it resembles
the first described Oriental Hyacinth; but in one respect it differs
not only from them, but also from all other Hyacinths: which is, it
hath a leaf having sometimes one, and otherwhiles two narrow long
leaves coming forth at the bottom of the setting on of the flower.
Whereupon Clusius calls it Hyacinthus Orientalis caule folioso: That
is, the Oriental Hyacinth with leaves on the stalk.

Of Double flowered Oriental Hyacinths.


Fig. 193. Double Flowered
Oriental Hyacinth (11).
Fig. 194. Greater dusky-flowered
Spanish Hyacinth (14)
	11. Of this kindred there are two or three more varieties,
whereof I will give you the description of the most notable, and the
names of the other two; which, with that I shall deliver of this,
may settle for sufficient description. The first of these (which
Clusius calls Hyacinthus Orientalis subvirescente flore, or, the
Greenish Flowered Double Oriental Hyacinth) hath leaves, roots, and
seeds like unto the formerly described Oriental Hyacinths; but the
flower (wherein the difference consists) are at the first, before
they be open, green, and then on the outside next to the stalk of a
whitish blue; and they consist of six leaves whose tips are whitish,
yet retaining some manifest greens: then out of the midst of the
flower comes forth another flower consisting of three leaves,
whitish on their inner side, yet keeping the great veine or streak
upon the outer side, each flower having in the middle a few chives
with blackish pendants. It flowers in April.

12. This variety of the last described is called Hyacinthus
Orientalis flore cæruleo plena, The double blue Oriental. Hyacinth.

13. This, Hyacinthus Orientalis candidissimus flore pleno, The milk-
white double Oriental Hyacinth.

14. This, which Clusius calls Hyacinthus obsoletior Hispanicus, hath
leaves somewhat narrower, and more flexible than the Muscari, with a
white vein running alongst the inside of them: among these leaves
there riseth up a stalk of some foot high, bearing some fifteen or
sixteen flowers, more or less, in shape much like the ordinary
English, consisting of six leaves, three standing much out and the
other three little or nothing. These flowers are of a very dusky
colour, as it were mixed with purple, yellow, and green: they have
no smell. The seed, which is contained in triangular heads, is
smooth, black, scaly, and round. It flowers in June.


Fig. 195. Lesser Spanish
Hyacinth (15)
Fig. 196. Tuberous-rooted Indian
Hyacinth (16)
	15. The lesser Spanish Hyacinth hath leaves like the Grape-
flower, and small flowers shaped like the Oriental Hyacinth, some
are of colour blue, and other some white. The seeds are contained in
three-cornered seed-vessels. I have given the figure of the white
and blue together, with their seed-vessels.

16. This Indian Hyacinth with the tuberous root (saith Clusius) hath
many long narrow sharp pointed leaves spread upon the ground, being
somewhat like to those of Garlic, and in the midst of these rise up
many round firm stalks of some two cubits high, and oft-times
higher, sometimes exceeding the thickness of one's little finger;
which is the reason that oftentimes, unless they be borne up by
something, they lie along upon the ground. These stalks are at
certain spaces ingirt with leaves which end in sharp points. The
tops of these stalks are adorned with many white flowers, somewhat
in shape resembling those of the Oriental Hyacinth. The roots are
knotty or tuberous, with divers fibres coming out of them.

The Place.

These kinds of Hyacinths have been brought from beyond the seas,
some out of one country, and some out of others, especially from the
East countries, whereof they took their names Orientalis.

The Time.

They flower from the end of January unto the end of April.

The Nature.

The Hyacinths mentioned in this chapter do lightly cleanse and bind;
the seeds are dry in the third degree; but the roots are dry in the
first degree, and cold in the second.

The Virtues.

A. The root of Hyacinth boiled in wine and drunk, stoppeth the
belly, provoketh urine, and helpeth against the venomous bitings of
the field spider.

B. The seed is of the same virtue, and is of greater force in
stopping the lask and bloody flux. Being drunk in wine it prevaileth
against the falling sickness.

C. The roots, after the opinion of Dioscorides, being beaten and
applied with white wine, hinder or keep back the growth of hairs.

D. The seed given with Southern-wood in wine is good against the
jaundice.



CHAP. 80. Of Fair-haired Hyacinth.

Fig. 197. Fair-haired Hyacinths (1,2 3, 5)

The Description.

1. The Fair-haired Hyacinth hath long fat leaves, hollowed alongst
the inside, trough fashion, as are most of the Hyacinths, of a dark
green colour tending to redness. The stalk riseth out of the middest
of the leaves, bare and naked, soft and full of slimy juice, which
are beset round about with many small flowers of an overworn purple
colour: The top of the spike consisteth of a number of fair shining
purple flowers, in manner of a tuft or bush of hairs, whereof it
took his name Comosus, or Fair-haired. The seed is contained in
small bullets, of a shining black colour, as are most of those of
the Hyacinths. The roots are bulbous or Onion fashion, full of slimy
juice, with some hairy threads fastened unto their bottom.

2. White haired Hyacinth differeth not from the precedent in roots,
stalks, leaves, or seed.The flowers hereof are of a dark white
colour, with some blackness in the hollow part of them, which
setteth forth the difference.

3. Of this kind I received another sort from Constantinople,
resembling the first hairy Hyacinth very notably: but differeth in
that, that this is altogether greater, as well in leaves, roots, and
flower, as also is of greater beauty without all comparison.

4. There are two other more beautiful haired Hyacinths nourished in
the gardens of our prime florists. The first of these hath roots and
leaves resembling the last described: the stalk commonly riseth to
the height of a foot, nd it is divided into many branches on every
side,which are small and thready and then at the end as it were of
these thready branches there come forth many smaller threds of a
dark purple colour, and these spread and divaricate themselves
divers ways, much after the manner of the next described; yet the
threads are neither of so pleasing a colour, neither so many in
number, nor so finely curled. This is called Hyacinthus comosus
ramosus purpureus, the fair-haired branched Hyacinth.

5. This is a most beautiful and elegant plant, and in his leaves and
roots he differs little from the last described; but his stalk,
which is as high as the former, is divided into very many slender
branches, which subdivided into great plenty of curled threads
variously spread abroad, make a very pleasant show. The colour also
is a light blue, and the flowers usually grow so, that they are most
dilated at the bottom, and so straiten by little and little after
the manner of a pyramid. These flowers keep their beauty long, but
are succeeded by no seeds that yet could be observed. This by Fabius
Columna (who first made mention hereof in writing) is called
Hyacinthus Sannesius panniculosa coma: By others, Hyacinthus comosus
ramosus elegantior, The fair curled-hair Hyacinth.

These flower in May.


Fig. 198. Blue grape-flower
Fig. 199. Great Grape-flower
	6. The Small Grape flower hath many long fat and weak leaves
trailing upon the ground,hollow in the middle like a little trough,
full of slimy juice like the other Hyacinths; amongst which come
forth thick soft smooth and weak stalks, leaning this way and that
way, as not able to stand upright by reason it is surcharged with
very heavy flowers on his top, consisting of many little bottle-like
blue flowers, closely thrust or packed together like a bunch of
grapes, of a strong smell, yet not unpleasant, somewhat resembling
the savour of the Orange. The root is round and bulbous, set about
with infinite young cloves or roots, whereby it greatly increaseth.

7. The Great Grape-flower is very like unto the smaller of his kind.
The difference consisteth, in that this plant is altogether greater,
but the leaves are not so long.

Fig. 200. Sky-coloured Grape-flower (8)

8. The Sky-coloured Grape-flower hath a few leaves in respect of the
other Grape-flowers, the which are shorter, fuller of juice, stiff
and upright, whereas the others trail upon the ground. The flowers
grow at the top, thrust or packed together like a bunch of Grapes,
of a pleasant bright sky colour, every little bottle-like flower set
about the hollow entrance with small white spots not easy to be
perceived. The roots are like the former.

9. The White Grape-flower differeth not from the Sky-coloured
Hyacinth,but in colour of the flower: for this Hyacinth is of a
pleasant white colour tending to yellowness, tipped about the hollow
part with white, whiter than white itself, otherwise there is no
difference.

The Place.

These plants are kept in gardens for the beauty of their flowers,
wherewith our London gardens do abound.

The Time.

They flower from February to the end of May.

The Names.

The Grape-flower is called Hyacinthus Botryoides, and Hyacinthus
Neoticorum Dodonæi; of some, Bulbus Esculentus, Hyacinthus
sylvestris cordi, Hyacinthus exiguus Tragi. Some judge them to be
Bulbinæ, of Pliny.

The Fair-haired Hyacinth described in the first place is the
Hyacinthus of Dioscorides and the ancients.

The Nature and Virtues.

The virtues set down in the precedent Chapter properly belong to
that kind of Hyacinth which is described in the first place in this
Chapter.



CHAP. 81. Of Muscari or Musked Grape-flower.


Fig. 201. Yellow Musked Grape-
flower (1)
Fig. 202 Ash-coloured Grape-
flower (2)

Fig. 203. The stalk of Muscari with seed-vessels.

The Description.

1. Yellow Muscari hath five or six long leaves spread upon the
ground, thick, fat, and full of slimy juice, turning and winding
themselves crookedly this way & that way, hollowed alongst the
middle like a trough, as are those of Fair-haired Hyacinth, which at
the first budding or springing up are of a purplish colour: being
grown to perfection, become of a dark green colour: amongst the
which leaves rise up naked, thick, and fat stalks, infirm and weak
in respect of the thickness and greatness thereof, lying also upon
the ground as do the leaves; set from the middle to the top on every
side with many yellow flowers, every one made like a small pitcher
or little box, with a narrow mouth, exceeding sweet of smell like
the savour of musk, whereof it took the name Muscari. The seed is
enclosed in puffed or blown up cods, confusedly made without
order,of a fat and spongeous substance,wherein is contained round
black seed. The root is bulbous or onion fashion, whereunto are
annexed certain fat and thick strings like those of Dogs-grass.

2. Ash-coloured Muscari or Grape-flower, hath large and fat leaves
like the precedent, not differing in any point, saving that these
leaves at their first springing up are of a pale dusky colour like
ashes. The flowers are likewise sweet, but ofa pale bleak colour,
wherein consisteth the difference.

The Place.

These Plants came from beyond the Thracian Bosphorus, out of Asia,
and from about Constantinople, and by the means of friends have been
brought into these parts of Europe, whereof our London gardens are
possessed.

The Time.

They flower in March and April, and sometimes after.

The Names.

They are called generally Muscari: In the Turkey Tongue, Muschoromi,
Muscurimi, Tipcadi, and Dipcadi, of their pleasant sweet smell: Of
Matthiolus, Bulbus Vomitorius. These plants may be referred unto the
Hyacinths, whereof undoubtedly they be kinds.

The Nature and Virtues.

There hath not as yet any thing been touched concerning the nature
or virtues of these plants, only they are kept and maintained in
gardens for the pleasant smell of their flowers, but not for their
beauty,for that many stinking field flowers do in beauty far
surpasse them. But it should seem that Matthiolus called them
Vomitorius, in that he supposed they procure vomiting, which of
other authors hath not been remembered.



CHAP. 82. Of Woolly Bulbus.

Fig. 204. Woolly Hyacinth.

The Description.

There hath fallen out to be here inferred a bulbous plant consisting
of many bulbs, which hath passed current amongst all our late
writers. The which I am to set forth to the view of our nation, as
others have done in sundry languages to theirs, as a kind of the
Hyacinths, which in roots and leaves it doth very well resemble;
called in Latin, Laniferus, because of his abundance of wool-
resembling substance, wherewith the whole plant is in every part
full fraught, as well roots, leaves, as stalks. The leaves are
broad, thick, fat, full of juice, and of a spider-like web when they
be broken. Among these leaves riseth up a stalk two cubits high,
much like unto the stalk of Squilla or Sea-Onion; and from the
middle to the top it is beset round about with many small star-like
blue flowers without smell, very like to the flowers of Asphodel;
beginning to flower at the bottom, and so upward by degrees, whereby
it is long before it hath done flowering: which flowers the learned
Physician of Vienna, Iohannes Aicholzius, desired long to see;who
brought it first from Constantinople, and planted it in his garden,
where he nourished it some years with great curiosity: which time
being expired, thinking it to be a barren plant, he sent it to
Carolus Clusius, with whom in some few years it did bear such
flowers as before described, but never fine to this day. This
painful herbarist would gladly have seen the seed that should
succeed these flowers; but they being of a nature quickly subject to
perish, decay, and fade, began presently to pine away, leaving only
a few chaffy and idle seed-vessels without fruit. Myself hath been
possessed with this plant at the least twelve years, whereof I have
yearly great increase of new roots, but I did never see any token of
budding or flowering to this day: notwithstanding I shall be content
to suffer it in some base place or other of my garden, to stand as
the cipher 0 at the end of the figures, to attend his time and
leisure, as those men of famous memory have done. Of whose
temperature and virtues there hath not anything been said, but kept
in gardens to the end aforesaid.



CHAP. 83. Of two feigned Plants.


Fig. 205. False Bombast Hyacinth
(1)
Fig. 206. Flower of Tigris (2)

The Description

1. I have thought it convenient to conclude this history of the
Hyacinths with these two bulbous Plants, received by tradition from
others, though generally holden for feigned and adulterine. Their
pictures I could willingly have omitted in this history, if the
curious eye could elsewhere have found them drawn and described in
our English tongue: but because I find them in none, I will lay them
down here, to the end that it may serve for excuse to others who
shall come after, which list not to describe them, being as I said
condemned for feigned and adulterine, nakedly drawn only. And the
first of them is called Bulbus irophoros: by others, Bulbus
Bombicinus Commentitius. The description consisteth of these points,
viz. The flowers (saith the author) are no less strange than
wonderful. The leaves and roots are like to those of Hyacinths,
which hath caused it to occupy this place. The flowers resemble the
Daffodils or Narcissus. The whole plant consisteth of a woolly or
flocky matter: which description with the picture was sent unto
Dodonæus by Iohannes Aicholzius. It may be that Aicholzius received
instructions from the Indies, of a plant called in Greek Teizados,
which groweth in India, whereof Theophrastus and Athenæus do write
in this manner, saying, The flower is like the Narcissus, consining
of a flocky or woolly substance, which by him seemeth to be the
description of our bombast Hyacinth.

2. The second feigned picture hath been taken of the discoverer and
others of later time, to be a kind of dragons not seen of any that
have written thereof; which hath moved them to think it a feigned
picture likewise notwithstanding you shall receive the description
thereof as it hath come to my hands. The root (saith my author) is
bulbous or Onion fashion, outwardly black; from the which spring up
long leaves, sharp pointed, narrow, and of a fresh green colour: in
the midst of which leaves rise up naked or bare stalks, at the top
whereof groweth a pleasant yellow flower, stained with many small
red spots here and there confusedly cast abroad: and in the midst of
the flower thrusteth forth a long red tongue or stile, which in time
groweth to be the cod or seed-vessel, crooked or wreathed, wherein
is the seed. The virtues and temperature are not to be spoken of,
considering that we assuredly persuade ourselves that there are no
such plants, but mere fictions and devices, as we term them, to give
his friend a gudgeon.

Though these two have been thought commentitious or feigned, yet
Bauhin seemeth to vindicate the latter, and John Theodore de Bry in
his Florilegium hath set it forth. He gives two figures thereof,
this which we here give you being the one; but the other is far more
elegant, and better resembles a natural plant. The leaves (as Bauhin
saith) are like the sword-flag, the root like a leek, the flowers
(according to De Bries' figure) grow sometimes two or three of a
stalk: the flower consists of two leaves, and a long style or
pistil: each of these leaves is divided into three parts, the
uttermost being broad and large, and the innermost much narrower and
sharper: the tongue or style that comes forth of the midst of the
flower is long, and at the end divided into three crooked forked
points. All that De Bry saith thereof is this; Flos Tigridis rubet
egregie circa medium tamen pallet, albusque est & maculatus; ex
Mexico a Casparo Bauhino. That is; Flos Tigridis is wondrous red,
yet is it pale and whitish about the middle, and also spotted; it
came from about Mexico, I had it from Caspar Bauhin.



CHAP. 84. Of Daffodils.

The Kinds.

Daffodil, or Narcissus according to Dioscorides, is of two sorts:
the flowers of both are white, the one having in the middle a purple
circle or coronet; the other with a yellow cup circle or coronet.
Since whose time there hath been sundry others described, as shall
be set forth in their proper places.


Fig. 207. Purple Circled
Daffodil (1)
Fig. 208. Late many-flowered
Daffodil with the Saffron-
coloured middle.(4)

The Description.

1. The first of the Daffodils is that with the purple crown or
circle, having small narrow leaves, thick, fat, and full of slimy
juice; among the which riseth up a naked stalk, smooth and hollow,
of a foot high, bearing at the top a fair milk-white flower growing
forth of a hood or thin film, such as the flowers of onions are
wrapped in: in the midst of which flower is a round circle or small
coronet of a yellowish colour, purfled or bordered about the edge of
the said ring or circle with a pleasant purple colour; which being
past, there followeth a thick knob or button, wherein is contained
black round seed. The root is white, bulbous or Onion fashion.

2. The second kind of Daffodil agreeth with the precedent in every
respect, saving that this Daffodil flowereth in the beginning of
February, and the other not until April, and is somewhat lesser. It
is called Narcissus medio purpureus præcox; that is, Timely purple
ringed Daffodil. The next may have the addition præcocior, More
timely: and the last in place, but first in time, præcosissimus,
Most timely, or very early flowering Daffodil.

3. The third kind of Daffodil with the purple ring or circle in the
middle, hath many small narrow leaves, very flat, crookedly bending
toward the top; among which riseth up a slender bare stalk, at whose
top doth grow a fair and pleasant flower, like unto those before
described, but lesser, and flowereth sooner, wherein consisteth the
difference.

There is also another somewhat less, and flowering somewhat carlier
than the last described.

4. This in roots, leaves, and stalks differeth very little from the
last mentioned kinds; but it bears many flowers upon one stalk, the
out-leaves being like the former, white, but the cup or ring in the
middle of a saffron colour, with divers yellow threads contained
therein.

Fig. 209. Daffodils (5-8)

5. To these may be added another mentioned by Clusius, which differs
from these only in the flowers; for this hath flowers consisting of
six large leaves fairly spread abroad, within which are other six
leaves not so large as the former, and then many other little leaves
mixed with threads coming forth of the middle. Now there are purple
welts which run between the first and second rank of leaves, in the
flower, and so in the rest. This flowers in May and it is Narcissus
pleno flore quintus, of Clusius.

6. This late flowering Daffodil hath many fat thick leaves, full of
juice, among the which riseth up a naked stalk, on the top whereof
groweth a fair white flower, having in the middle a ring or yellow
circle. The seed groweth in knobby seed vessels. The root is bulbous
or Onion fashion. It flowereth later than the others before
described, that is to say, in April and May.

7. The seventh kind of Daffodil is that sort of Narcissus or
Primrose Peerless that is most common in our country gardens,
generally known every where. It hath long fat and thick leaves, full
of a slimy juice; among which riseth up a bare thick stalk, hollow
within and full of juice. The flower groweth at the top, of a
yellowish white colour, with a yellow crown or circle in the middle;
and flowereth in the month of April, and sometimes sooner. The root
is bulbous fashion.

8. The eighth Daffodil hath many broad and thick leaves, fat and
full of juice, hollow and spongeous. The stalks, flowers, and roots
are like the former,and differeth in that, that this plant bringeth
forth many flowers upon one stalk, and the other fewer, and not of
so perfect a sweet smell, but more offensive and stuffing the head.
It hath this addition, Polyanthos, that is, of many flowers, wherein
especially consisteth the difference.

Fig. 210. Daffodils (9-12)


9. The Italian Daffodil is very like the former, the which to
distinguish in words, that they may be known one from another, is
impossible. Their flowers, leaves, and roots are like, saving that
the flowers of this are sweeter and more in number.

10. The double white Daffodil of Constantinople was sent into
England unto the right honourable the Lord Treasurer, among other
bulbed flowers: whose roots when they were planted in our London
gardens, did bring forth beautiful flowers, very white and double,
with some yellowness mixed in the middle leaves, pleasant and sweet
in smell, but since that time we never could by any industry or
manuring bring them unto flowering again. So that it should appear,
when they were discharged of that birth or burthen which they had
begotten in their own country, and not finding that matter, soil, or
climate to beget more flowers, they remain ever since barren and
fruitless. Besides, we found by experience, that those plants which
in autumn did shoot forth leaves, did bring forth no flowers at all;
and the others that appeared not until the spring, did flourish and
bear their flowers. The stalks, leaves, and roots are like unto the
other kinds of Daffodils. It is called of the Turks, Giul Catamer
lale; That is, Narcissus with double flowers. Notwithstanding we
have received from beyond the seas, as well from the Low Countries,
as also from France, another sort of greater beauty, which from year
to year doth yield forth most pleasant double flowers, and great
increase of roots, very like as well in stalks as other parts of the
plant, unto the other sorts of Daffodils. It differeth only in the
flowers, which are very double and thick thrust together, as are the
flowers of our double Primrose, halting in the middle of the flower
some few chives or welts of a bright purple colour, and the other
mixed with yellow as aforesaid.

11. This also with double white flowers, which Clusius sets forth in
the sixth place, is of the same kind with the last described; but it
bears but one or two flowers upon a stalk, whereas the other hath
many.

12. This, which is Clusius his Narcissus flore plena 2, is in roots,
leaves, and stalks very like the precedent; but the flowers are
composed of six large white out-leaves; but the middle is filled
with many fair yellow little leaves much like to the double yellow
wall-flower. They smell sweet like as the last mentioned.



Fig. 211. Double Daffodil with a
divers coloured middle. (13)
Fig. 214. Milk-white Daffodil.
(14)
	13. This differs from the last mentioned only in that it is
less, and that the middle of the flower within the yellow cup is
filled with longish narrow little leaves, as it were crossing each
other. Their colour is white, but mixed with some green on the
outside, and yellow on the inside.

14. The Milk-white Daffodil differeth not from the common white
Daffodil, or Primrose peerless, in leaves, stalks, roots, or
flowers, saving that the flowers of this plant hath not any other
colour in the flower but white, whereas all the others are mixed
with one colour or other.


Fig. 213. Rush Daffodil (15)
Fig. 214. Late Flowering Rush
Daffodil.(16)
	15. The Rush Daffodil hath long, narrow, and thick leaves,
very smooth and flexible, almost round like Rushes, whereof it took
his surname Iuncifolius or Rushy. It springeth up in the beginning
of January, at which time also the flowers do shoot forth their buds
at the top of small rushy stalks, sometimes two, and often more upon
one stalk, made of six small yellow leaves. The cup or crown in the
middle is likewise yellow, in shape resembling the other Daffodils,
but smaller, and of a strong sweet smell. The root is bulbed, white
within, and covered with a black skin or film.

16. This Rush Daffodil is like unto the precedent in each respect,
saving that it is altogether lesser, and longer before it come to
flowering. There is also a white flowered one of this kind.


Fig. 215. Rose or round flowered
Iunquilia (17)
Fig. 216. White Iunquilia with
the large cup. (18)
	17. There is also another Rush Daffodil or Iunquilia, with
flowers not sharp pointed but round with a little cup in the middle:
the colour is yellow or else white. This is Lobel's Narcissus
juncifolius flore rotundæ circinitatis roseo.

18. There is also another Iunquilia whose leaves and stalks are like
those of the first described Rushy Daffodil, but the cup in the
midst of the flower is much larger. The colour of the flower is
commonly white. Clusius calls this Narcissus 1 Iuncifolius amplo
calice.



Fig. 217. White reflex
Iunquilia. (19)
Fig. 218. Lesser reflex
Iunquilia (19)
	19. There are three or four reflex Iunquilia, whose cups hang
down, and the six encompassing leaves turn up or back, whence they
take their names. The flowers of the first are yellow; those of the
second all white, the cup of the third is yellow, and the reflex
leaves white. The fourth hath a white cup, and yellow reflex leaves.
This seems to be Lobel's Narcissus montanus minimus coronatus.



Fig. 219. Double Iunquilia. (20)
Fig. 220. Persian Daffodil (21)
	20. This is like to the ordinary lesser Iunquilia, but that
the flowers are very double, consisting of many long and large
leaves mixed together; the shorter leaves are obtuse, as if they
were clipped off. They are wholly yellow.

21. The Persian Daffodil hath no stalk at all, but only a small and
tender foot stalk of an inch high, such as the Saffron flower hath:
upon which short and tender stalk doth stand a yellowish flower
consisting of six small leaves; of which the three innermost are
narrower than those on the outside. In the middle of the flower doth
grow forth a long style or pointel, set about with many small chives
or threads. The whole flower is of an unpleasant smell, much like to
Poppy. The leaves rise up a little before the flower; long, smooth,
and shining. The root is bulbed, thick, and gross, blackish on the
outside, and pale within, with some threads hanging at the lower
part.


Fig. 221. Great Winter Daffodil
(22)
Fig. 222. Timely Spring
Daffodil. (23)
	22. The autumn Daffodil bringeth forth long smooth, glittering
leaves, of a deep green colour: among which riseth up a short stalk,
bearing at the top one flower and no more, resembling the flower of
Mead Saffron or Common Saffron, consisting of six leaves of a bright
shining yellow colour; in the middle whereof stand six threads or
chives, and also a pistil or clapper yellow likewise. The root is
thick and gross like unto the precedent.

23. To this last may be adjoined another which in shape somewhat
resembles it. The leaves are smooth, green, growing straight up, and
almost a finger's breadth; among which riseth up a stalk a little
more than half a foot in height, at the top of which groweth forth a
yellow flower not much unlike that of the last described autumn
Narcissus: it consisteth of six leaves some inch and half in length,
and some half inch broad, sharp pointed, the three inner leaves
being somewhat longer than the outer. There grow forth out of the
midst of the flower three whitish chives, tipped with yellow, and a
pistil in the midst of them longer than any of them. The root
consists of many coats, with fibres coming forth of the bottom
thereof like others of this kind. It flowers in February.

Fig. 223. Small Winter Daffodil (24)

24. Small Winter Daffodil hath a bulbous root, much like unto the
root of Rush Daffodil, but lesser: from the which riseth up a naked
stalk without leaves, on the top whereof groweth a small white
flower with a yellow circle in the middle, sweet in smell, something
stuffing the head as do the other Daffodils.

The Place.

The Daffodils with purple coronets do grow wild in sundry places of
France, chiefly in Burgundy, and in Switzerland in meadows.

The Rush Daffodil groweth wild in sundry places of Spain, among
grass and other herbs. Dioscorides saith, That they be especially
found upon mountains. Theocritus affirmeth the Daffodils to grow in
meadows, in his nineteenth Idyll or twentieth, according to some
editions: where he writeth, That the fair Lady Europa entering with
her Nymphs into the meadows, did gather the sweet smelling
Daffodils; in verses which we may English thus:

But when the girls were come into
The meadows flowering all in sight,
That wench with these, this wench with those
Trim flowers, themselves did all delight:
She with the Narcissus good in scent,
And she with Hyacinths content.

But it is not greatly to our purpose particularly to seek out their
places of growing wild, seeing that we have them all and every of
them in our London gardens, in great abundance. The common white
Daffodil groweth wild in fields and sides of woods in the west parts
of England.

The Time.

They flower for the most part in the Spring, that is, from the
beginning of February unto the end of April.

The Persian and winter Daffodils do flower in September and October.

The Names.

Although their names be set forth in their several titles, which may
serve for their appellations and distinctions; notwithstanding it
shall not be impertinent to add a supply of names, as also the cause
why they are so called.

The Persian Daffodil is called in the Sclavonian or Turkish tongue,
Zaremcada Persiana, and Zaremcatta, as for the most part all other
sorts of Daffodils are. Notwithstanding the double flowered Daffodil
they name Giul catamer lale, which name they generally give unto all
double flowers.

The common white Daffodil with the yellow circle they call Serin
cade, that is to say, the king's Chalice; and Deue bohini, which is
to say, Camel's neck, or as we do say of a thing with long spindle-
shins, Long-shanks, urging it from the long neck of the flower.

The Rush Daffodil is called of some Ionquillæ, of the similitude the
leaves have with Rushes. Of Dioscorides, Bulbus Vomitorius, or
Vomiting Bulb, according to Dodonæus.

Generally all the kinds are comprehended under this name Narcissus,
called in Dutch, Narcissen: in Spanish, Iennetten: in English,
Daffodilly, Daffodowndilly, and Primrose Peerless.

Sophocles nameth them the garland of the infernal gods, because they
that are departed and dulled with death, should worthily be crowned
with a dulling flower.

Of the first and second Daffodil Ovid hath made mention in the third
book of his Metamorphosis, where he describeth the transformation of
the fair boy Narcissus into a flower of his own name; saying,
Nusquam corpus erat, croceum pro corpore florem
Inveniunt, folis medium cingentibus albis.
But as for body none remain'd; instead whereof they found
A yellow flower, with milk white leaves ingirting of it round.

Pliny and Plutarch affirm, as partly hath been touched before, that
their narcotic quality was the very cause of the name Narcissus,
that is, a quality causing sleepiness; which in Greek is narkesis,
or of the fish Torpedo, called in Greek, narke which benumbs the
hands of them that touch him, as being hurtful to the sinews; and
bringeth dullness to the head, which properly belongeth to the
Narcissus, whose smell causeth drowsiness.

The Nature.

The roots of Narcissus are hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. Galen saith, That the roots of Narcissus have such wonderful
qualities in drying, that they confound and glue together very great
wounds, yea and such gashes or cuts as happen about the veins,
sinews, and tendons. They have also a certain cleansing and
attracting faculty.

B. The roots of Narcissus stamped with honey, and applied plaster-
wise, helpeth them that are burned with fire, and joineth together
sinews that are cut in sunder.

C. Being used in manner aforesaid, it helpeth the great wrenches of
the ankles, the aches and pains of the joints.

D. The same applied with honey and nettle seed helpeth sun burning
and the morphew.

E. The same stamped with barrow's grease and leaven of rye bread,
hasteneth to maturation hard impostumes which are not easily brought
to ripeness.

F. Being stamped with the meal of Darnel and honey, it draweth forth
thorns and stubs out of any part of the body.

G. The root, by the experiment of Apulieus, stamped and strained,
and given in drink, helpeth the cough and colic, and those that be
entred into a phthisic.

H. The roots whether they be eaten or drunken, do move vomit; and
being mingled with vinegar and nettle seed, taketh away lentils and
spots in the face.



CHAP. 85. Of the Bastard Dafodill.

Fig. 224. Yellow or Bastard Daffodils. (1-4)

The Description.

1. The double yellow Daffodil hath small smooth narrow leaves, of a
dark green colour; among which riseth up a naked hollow stalk of two
hands high, bearing at the top a fair and beautiful yellow flower,
of a pleasant sweet smell: it sheddeth his flower but there
followeth no seed at all, as it happeneth in many other double
flowers. The root is small, bulbous, or onion fashion, like unto the
other Daffodils, but much smaller.

2. The common yellow Daffodil or Daffadowndilly is so well known to
all that it needeth no description.

3. We have in our London gardens another sort of this common kind,
which naturally groweth in Spain, very like unto our best known
Daffodil in shape and proportion, but altogether fairer, greater,
and lasteth longer before the flower doth fall or fade.

4. This hath leaves and roots like the last described, but somewhat
less; the flower also is in shape not unlike that of the precedent,
but less, growing upon a weak slender green stalk, of some fingers'
length: the seed is contained in three-cornered, yet almost round
heads. The root is small, bulbous, and black on the outside.

Fig. 225. White Bastard Daffodil (5)

5. This hath a longish bulbous root, somewhat black on the outside,
from which rise up leaves not so long nor broad as those of the last
described: in the midst of these leaves springs up a stalk, slender,
and some half foot in height; at the top of which, forth of a
whitish film, breaks forth a flower like in shape to the common
Daffodil, but less and wholly white, with the brim of the cup welted
about. It flowers April, and ripens the seeds in June.

The Place.

The double yellow Daffodil I remitted from Robinus of Paris, which
he procured by means of friends from Orleans and other parts of
France.

The yellow English Daffodil groweth almost everywhere through
England. The yellow Spanish Daffodil doth likewise deck up our
London gardens, where they increase infinitely.

The Time.

The double Daffodil sendeth forth his leaves in the beginning of
February, and his flowers in April.

The Names.

The first is called Pseudonarcissus multiplex, and Narcissus luteus
Polyanthos: in English, the double yellow Daffodil, or Narcissus.

The common sort are called in Dutch, Geel Sporken Blumen: in
English, yellow Daffodill, Daffodily, and Daffodowndilly.

The Temperature.

The temperature is referred unto the kinds of Narcissus.

The Virtues.

Touching the virtues hereof, it is found out by experiment of some
of the later Physicians, that the decoction of the roots of this
yellow Daffodil do purge by siege tough and phlegmatic humors, and
also waterish, and is good for them that are full of raw humors,
especially if there be added thereto a little anise seed and ginger,
which will correct the churlish hardness of the working.

The distilled water of Daffodils doth cure the Palsy, if the patient
be bathed and rubbed with the said liquor by the fire. It hath been
proved by an especial and trusty friend of mine, a man learned, and
a diligent searcher of nature, Mr. Nicholas Belson, sometimes of
King's College in Cambridge.




CHAP. 86. Of divers other Daffodils or Narcissuss.

There are besides the forementioned sorts of Daffodils, sundry
others, some of which may be referred to them; other some not. I do
not intend an exact enumeration of them, it being a thing not so
fitting for a history of plants, as for a Florilegie, or book of
flowers. Now those that require all their figures, and more exact
descriptions, may find satisfaction in the late work of my kind
friend Mr. John Parkinson, which is intitled Paradisus terrestris:
for in other Florilegies, as in that of De Bry, Swertz, &c. you have
barely the names and figures, but in this are both figures, and an
exact history or declaration of them. Therefore I in this place will
but only briefly describe and name some of the rarest that are
preserved in our choice gardens, and a few others whereof yet they
are not possesssed.


Fig. 226. Nonpareil Daffodil (1)
Fig. 227. Double Yellow Daffodil
(3)

The Descriptions.

1. The first of these, which for the largeness is called Nonpareil,
hath long broad leaves and roots like the other Daffodils. The
flower consists of six very large leaves of a pale yellow colour,
with a very large cup, but not very long: this cup is yellower than
the encompassing leaves, narrower also at the bottom than at the
top, and unevenly cut about the edges. This is called Narcissus
omnium maxima, or Nonpareil; the figure well expresseth the flower,
but that it is somewhat too little. There is a variety of this with
the open leaves & cup both yellow, which makes the difference. There
is also another Nonpareil, whose flowers are all white, and the six
leaves that stand spread abroad are usually a little folded, or
turned in at their ends.

2. Besides these former there are four or five double yellow
Daffodils, which I cannot passe over in silence; the first is that,
which is vulgarly amongst Florists known by the name of Robine's
Narcissus; and it may be was the same our author in the precedent
chapter mentions he received from Robine; but he giving the figure
of another and a description not well fitting this, I can affirm
nothing of certainty. This double Narcissus of Robine grows with a
stalk some foot in height, and the flower is very double, of a pale
yellow colour, and it seems commonly to divide itself into some six
partitions, the leaves of the flower lying one upon another even to
the middle of theflower. This may be called Narcissus pallidus
multiplex Robini, Robine's double pale Narcissus.

3. The next to this is that which from our author, the first
observer thereof, is vulgarly called Gerard's Narcissus: the leaves
and root do not much differ from the ordinary Daffodil; the stalk is
scarce a foot high, bearing at the top thereof a flower very double;
the six outmost leaves are of the same yellow colour as the ordinary
one is; those that are next are commonly as deep as the tube or
trunk of the single one, and amongst them are mixed also other paler
coloured leaves, with some green stripes here & there among those
leaves: these flowers are sometimes all contained in a trunk like
that of the single one, the six out-leaves excepted: other whiles
this inclosure is is broke, and then the flower stands fair open
like as that of the last described. Lobel in the second part of his
Adversaria tells, That our author Master Gerard found this in
Wiltshire, growing in the garden of a poor old woman; in which place
formerly a cunning man (as they vulgarly term him) had dwelt.

This may be called in Latin, according to the English, Narcissus
multiplex Gerardi, Gerard's double Narcissus.

The figure we here give you is expressed some what too tall, and the
flower is not altogether so double as it ought to be.

4. There are also two or three double yellow Daffodils yet 
remaining. The first of there is called Wilmot's Narcissus, (from
Master Wilmot, late of Bow) and this hath a very fair double & large
yellow flower composed of deeper and paler yellow leaves orderly
mixed.

The second (which is called Tradescant's Narcissus, from Master John
Tradescant of South Lambeth) is the largest and stateliest of all
the rest; in the largeness of the flowers it exceeds Wilmot's, which
otherwise it much resembles; some of the leaves whereof the flower
consists are sharp pointed, and these are of a paler colour; other
some are much more obtuse, and these are of a deeper and fairer
yellow.

This may be called Narcissus Roseus Tradescanti, Tradescant's Rose
Daffodil.

The third Mr. Parkinson challengeth to himself; which is a flower to
be respected, not so much for the beauty, as for the various
composure thereof, for same of the leaves are long and sharp
pointed, others obtuse and curled, a third sort long and narrow, and
usually some few hollow, and in shape resembling a horn; the utmost
leaves are commonly streaked, and of a yellowish green; the next to
them fold themselves up round, and are usually yellow, yet sometimes
they are edged with green. There is a deep yellow pistil divided
into three parts, usually in the midst of this flower. It flowers in
the end of March. I usually (before Mr. Parkinson set forth his
Florilegy, or Garden of Flowers) called this flower Narcissus
Polymorphos, by reason of its various shape and colour: but since I
think it fitter to give it to the author, and term it Narcissus
multiplex varius Parkinsoni, Parkinson's various double Narcissus.


Fig. 228. Indian or Jacobean
Narcissus (5)
Fig. 229. Least Rush-leaved
Mountain Narcissus.(6)


5. Now come I to treat of some more rarely to be found in our
gardens, if at all. That which takes the first place is by Clusius
called Narcissus Iacobæus Indicus, the Indian or Jacobean Narcissus.
The root hereof is much like to an ordinary onion, the leaves are
broad like the other Narcisses, the stalk is smooth, round, hollow,
and without knots, at the top whereof, out of a certain skinny husk
comes forth a fair red flower like that of the flowering Indian
reed, but that the leaves of this are somewhat larger, and it hath
six chives or threads in the middle thereof of the same colour as
the flower, and they are adorned with brownish pendants; in the
cilia of these there stands a little farther out than the rest, a
three forked style, under which succeeds a triangular head, after
the falling of the flower.

This gives his flower in June or July.

6. This Lobel calls Narcissus montanus juncifolius minimus, The
Least Rush-leaved mountain Narcissus. The leaves of this are like
the Iunquilia; the stalk is short, the flower yellow with the six
winged leaves small and paler coloured, the cup open and large to
the bigness of the flower.


Fig. 230. Mountain Narcissus
with a curled cup (7)
Fig. 231. Least mountain white
Narcissus (8)


7. This also is much like the former; but the six encompassing
leaves are of a greenish faint yellow colour; the cup is indented,
or unequally curled about the edges, but yellow like the precedent.
Lobel calls this Narcissus montanus juncifolius flore fimbriato, The
mountain Rush-leaved Narcissus with an indented or curled cup.

8. The leaves of this are as small as the autumn Hyacinth, the stalk
some handful high, and the flower like the last described, but it is
of a whitish colour. Lobel calls this last described, Narcissus
omnium minimus montanus albus, The least mountain white Narcissus.
These three last usually flower in February.



CHAP. 87. Of Tulip, or the Dalmatian Cap.


Fig. 232. Tulips (1-4)

The Kinds

Tulip, or the Dalmatian Cap is a strange and foreign flower, one of
the number of the bulbed flowers, whereof there be sundry sorts,
some greater, some lesser with which all studious and painful
herbarists desire to be better acquainted, because of that excellent
diversity of most brave flowers which it beareth. Of this there be
two chief and general kinds, viz. Præcox and Serotina; the one doth
bear his flowers timely, the other later. To these two we will add
another sort called Media, flowering between both the others. And
from these three sorts, as from their heads, all other kinds do
proceed, which are almost infinite in number. Notwithstanding, my
loving friend Mr. James Garret, a curious searcher of simples, and
learned apothecary of London, hath undertaken to find out, if it
were possible, the infinite sorts, by diligent sowing of their
seeds, and by planting those of his own propagation, and by others
received from his friends beyond the seas for the space of twenty
years, not being yet able to attain to the end of his travail, for
that each new year bringeth forth new plants of sundry colours, not
before seen: all which to describe particularly were to roll
Sisyphus' stone, or number the sands. So that it shall suffice to
speak of and describe a few, referring the rest to some that mean to
write of Tulips a particular volume.

The Description.

1. The Tulip of Bologna hath fat, thick, and gross leaves, hollow,
furrowed or chanelled, bending a little backward, and as it were
folded together: which at their first coming up seem to be of a
reddish colour, and being throughly grown turn into a whitish green.
In the midst of those leaves riseth up a naked fat stalk a foot
high, or something more, on the top whereof standeth one or two
yellow flowers, sometimes three or more, consisting of six small
leaves, after a sort like to a deep wide open cup, narrow above, and
wide in the bottom. After it hath been some few days flowered, the
points and brims of the flower turn backward, like a Dalmatian or
Turkish cap, called Tulipan, Tolepan, Turban, and Turfan, whereof it
took his name. The chives or threads in the middle of the flowers be
sometimes yellow, otherwhiles blackish or purplish, but commonly of
one overworn colour or other, Nature seeming to play more with this
flower than with any other that I do know. This flower is of a
reasonable pleasant smell, and the other of his kind have little or
no smell at all. The seed is flat, smooth, shining, and of a gristly
substance. The root is bulbous, and very like to a common onion of
Saint Omers.

2. The French Tulip agreeth with the former, except in the black
bottom which this hath in the middle of the flower, and is not so
sweet of smell, which setteth forth the difference.

3. The yellow Tulip that flowereth timely hath thick and gross
leaves full of juice, long, hollow, or gutter fashion, set about a
tender stalk, at the top whereof doth grow a fair and pleasant
shining yellow flower, consisting of six small leaves without smell.
The root is bulbous or like an onion.

4. The fourth kind of Tulip, that flowereth later, hath leaves,
stalks and roots like unto the precedent. The flowers hereof be of a
scarlet colour, welted or bordered about the edges with red. The
middle part is like unto a heart tending to whiteness, spotted in
the same whiteness with red speckles or spots. The seed is contained
in square cods, flat, tough, and sinewy.

Fig. 233. Tulips (5-8)


5. The fifth sort of Tulip, which is neither of the timely ones, nor
of the later flowering sort, but one that buddeth forth his most
beautiful flowers between both. It agreeth with the last described
Tulip, in leaves, stalks, roots, and seed, but differeth in flowers.
The flower consisteth of six small leaves joined together at the
bottom: the middle of which leaves are of a pleasant bloody colour,
the edges be bordered with white, and the bottom next unto the stalk
is likewise white; the whole flower resembling in colour the
blossoms of an Apple tree.

6. The sixth hath leaves, roots, stalks, and seed like unto the
former, but much greater in every point. The flowers hereof are
white, dashed about the brims or edges with a red or blush colour.
The middle part is striped confusedly with the same mixture, wherein
is the difference.

7. Carolus Clusius setteth forth in his Pannonic History a kind of
Tulip that beareth fair red flowers, black in the bottom, with a
pistil in the middle of an overworn greenish colour; of which sort
there happeneth some to have yellow flowers, agreeing with the
others before touched: but this bringeth forth increase of root in
the bosom of his lowest leaf next to the stalk, contrary to all the
other kinds of Tulip.

8. Lobel in his learned Observations hath set forth many other
sorts; one he calleth Tulipa Chalcedonica, or the Turkey Tulip,
saying it is the least of the small kinds or Dwarf Tulips, whose
flower is of a sanguine red colour, upon a yellow ground, agreeing
with the others in root, leaf, and stalk.


Fig. 234. Purple Tulip (9)
Fig. 235. Bright Red Tulip (10)


9. He hath likewise set forth another; his flower is like the Lily
in proportion, but in colour of a fine purple.

10. We may also behold another sort altogether greater than any of
the rest, whose flower in colour like the stone called Amethyst, not
unlike to the flowers of Peony.

Fig. 236. Tulips (11-16)

11. We have likewise another of greater beauty, and very much
desired of all, with white flowers dashed on the backside, with a
light wash of watchet colour.

12. There is another also in our London gardens, of a snow white
colour; the edges slightly washed over with a little of that we call
blush colour.

13. We have another like the former, saving that his flower is of a
straw colour.

14. There is another to be seen with a flower mixed with streaks of
red and yellow, resembling a flame of fire, whereupon we have called
it Flambant.

There be likewise so many more differing so notably in colour of
their flowers, although in leaves, stalk, and roots for the most
part one like another, that (as I said before) to speak of them
severally would require a peculiar volume.

Therefore not to trouble you any further, I have given you only the
figures and names of the notablest differences which are in shape;
as, the dwarf Tulips, and the branched ones, together with the
colour of their flowers, contained in their titles, that you need
not far to seek it.

There be a sort greater than the rest, which in form are like; the
leaves whereof are thick, long, broad, now and then somewhat folded
in the edges; in the midst whereof doth rise up a stalk a foot high,
or something higher, upon which standeth only one flower bolt
upright, consisting of six leaves, after a sort like to a deep wide
cup of this form, viz. the bottom turned upwards, with threads or
chives in the middle, of the colour of Saffron. The colour of the
flower is sometimes yellow, sometimes white, now and then as it were
of a light purple, and many times red; and in this there is no small
varieties of colours, for the edges of the leaves, and oftentimes
the nails or lower part of the leaves are now & then otherwise
coloured than the leaves themselves, and many times there doth run
all along these streaks some other colours. They have no smell at
all that can be perceived. The roots of these are likewise bulbed,
or Onion fashion; every of the which to set forth severally would
trouble the writer, and weary the reader; so that, what hath been
said shall suffice touching the description of Tulips. True it is
that our author here affirms, the varieties of these flowers are so
infinite, that it would both tire the writer and reader to recount
them. Yet for that some are more in love with flowers than with
plants in general, I have thought good to direct them where rhey may
find somewhat more at large of this plant: Let such therefore as
desire further satisfaction herein have recourse to the Florilegies
of De Bry, Swerts, Robin, or to Mr. Parkinson, who hath not only
largely treated of the flowers in particular, but also of the
ordering of them.

Fig. 237. Tulips (17-21)


Fig. 238. Vermilion Tulip (22)
Fig. 239. White and red striped
Tulip (23)



Fig. 240. Red and Yellow Fool's
Coat. (24)
Fig. 241. Sulphur-coloured Tulip
(25)


Fig. 242. Red Tulip with Pale
Edges (26)
Fig. 243. Late-flowering Yellow
Tulip (27)



Fig. 244. Late flowering Yellow
Tulip with sanguine spots and a
black bottom.(28)
Fig. 245. White Holias with
sanguine spots and streaks (29)

Fig. 246. A middle Tulip of a deep purple colour with a bluish
bottom.

The Place.

Tulip groweth wild in Thracia, Cappadocia, and Italy; in Byzantia
about Constantinople, at Tripoli and Aleppo in Syria. They are now
common in all the gardens of such as affect flowers, all over
England.

The Time.

They flower from the end of February unto the beginning of May, and
somewhat after; although Augerius Busbequius in his journey to
Constantinople, saw between Hadrianople and Constananople, great
abundance of them in flower everywhere, even in the midst of winter,
in the month of January, which that warm and temperate climate may
seem to perform.

The Names.

The later herbarists by a Turkish and srange name call it Tulipa, of
the Dalmatian Cap called Tulipa, the form whereof, the flower when
it is open seemeth to represent.

It is called in English after the Turkish name Tulip, or it may be
called Dalmatian Cap, or the Turk's Cap. What name the ancient
writers gave it is not certainly known. Conradus Gesnerus and divers
others have taken Tulip to be that Satyrium which is surnamed
Erythronium, because one kind hath a red four; or altogether a
certain kind of Satyrium: with which it doth agree reasonable well.
In the Turkey Tongue it is called Café lalé, Cauálé lalé, and
likewise Turban and Turfan, of the Turks Cap so called, as
beforesaid of Lobel.

I do verily think that these are the the Lilies of the field
mentioned by our Saviour, Mat. 6. 28, 29; for he saith, That Solomon
in all his royalty was not arrayed like one of these. The reasons
that induce me to think thus are these: First, their shape; for
their flowers resemble Lilies, and in these places whereas our
Saviour was conversant they grow wild in the fields. Secondly, the
infinite variety of colour, which is to be found more in this than
any other sort of flower: and thirdly, the wondrous beauty and
mixtures of these flowers. This is my opinion, and these my reasons,
which any may either approve of or gainsay as he shall think good.

The Temperature and Virtues.

There hath not been anything set down of the ancient or later
writers as touching the nature or virtues of the Tulips, but they
are esteemed especially for the beauty of their flowers.

A. The roots preserved with sugar, or otherwise dressed, may be
eaten, and are no unpleasant nor any way offensive meat, but rather
good and nourishing.



CHAP. 88. Of Bulbous Violets.


Fig. 247. Early bulbous Violet
(1)
Fig. 248. Byzantine Early
Bulbous Violet (2)

The Kinds.

Theophrastus hath mentioned one kind of bulbous Leucoion, which Gaza
translates Viola alba, or the white Violet. Of this Viola
Theophrasti, or Theophrastus his Violet, we have observed three
sorts, whereof some bring forth many flowers and leaves, others
fewer; some flower very early, and others later, as shall be
declared.

The Description.

1. The first of these bulbous Violets riseth out of the ground, with
two small leaves flat and crested, of an overworn green colour,
between the which riseth up a small and slender stalk of two hands
high; at the top whereof cometh forth of a skinny hood a small white
flower of the bigness of a Violet, compact of six leaves, three
bigger, and three lesser, tipped at the points with a light green:
the smaller are fashioned into the vulgar form of a heart, and
prettily edged about with green; the other three leaves are longer,
and sharp pointed. The whole flower hangeth down his head, by reason
of the weak foot stalk whereon it groweth. The root is small, white,
and bulbous.

2. There are two varieties of this kind which differ little in
shape, but the first hath a flower as big again as the ordinary one,
and Clusius calls it Leucomium bulbosum præcox Byzantinum, The
greater early Constantinopolitan bulbous Violet. The other is
mentioned by Lobel, and differs only in colour of flowers; wherefore
he calls it Leucomium triphyllum flore cæruleo, The blue flowered
bulbous Violet.



Fig. 249. Late Bulbous Violet
(3)
Fig. 250. Many-flowered Great
Bulbous Violet (4)
	3. The third sort of bulbed Violets hath narrow leaves like
those of the leek, but lesser and smoother, not unlike to the leaves
of the bastard Daffodil. The stalks be slender and naked, two hands
high, whereupon do grow fair white flowers, tipped with a yellowish
green colour, with many small chives or threads in the midst of the
flower. The seed is contained in small round buttons. The root is
white and bulbous

4. The great bulbed Violet is like unto the third in stalk and
leaves, yet greater and higher. It bringeth forth on every stalk not
one flower only, but five or six, blowing or flowering one after
another, altogether like the other flowers in form and bigness.

Fig. 251. Least Autumn Bulbous Violet (5)


5. This small bulbous plant may be annexed to the former, the root
is small, compact of many coats: the leaves are also small, and the
stalk an handful high, at the top whereof there hang down one or two
small white flowers consisting of six leaves apiece, much resembling
the last described, but far less. It flowers in autumn.

6. Besides these, Clusius makes mention of a small one much like
this, and it flowers in the Spring, and the flowers are somewhat
reddish nigh the stalk, and smell sweet. Clusius calls this,
Leucoium bulbosum vernum minimum, The smallest spring bulbous
Violet.

The Place.

These plants do grow wild in Italy and the places adjacent.
Notwithstanding our London gardens have taken possession of most of
them many years past.

The Time.

The first flowereth in the beginning of January; the second in
September; and the third in May; the rest at their seasons mentioned
in their descriptions.

The Names

 The first is called of Theophrastus, Leukion; which Gaza renders
Viola alba, and Viola bulbosa, or Bulbed Violet. Lobel hath from the
colour and shape called it Leuconarcissolirion, and that very
properly, considering how it doth as it were participate of two
sundry plants, that is to say, the root of the Narcissus, the leaves
of the small Lily, and the white colour; taking the first part
Leuco, of his whiteness; Narcisso, of the likeness the roots have
unto Narcissus; and Lirium, of the leaves of Lilies, as aforesaid.
In English we may call it the bulbous Violet; or after the Dutch
name, Somer sottekens that is, summer fools, and Druyfkens. Some
call them also Snowdrops. This name Leucoium, without his epithet
Bulbosum, is taken for the Wallflower, and Stock-Gillyflower, by all
modern writers.

The Nature and Virtues.

Touching the faculties of these bulbous Violets we have nothing to
say, seeing that nothing is set down hereof by the ancient writers,
nor anything observed by the modern, only they are maintained and
cherished in gardens for the beauty and rareness of the flowers, and
sweetness of their smell.



CHAP. 89. Of Turkey or Guinea-hen flower.


Fig. 252. Chequered Daffodil (1)
Fig. 253. Changeable Chequered
Daffodil (2)

The Description.

1. The Chequered Daffodil, or Guinea-hen Flower, hath small narrow
grassy leaves; among which there riseth up a stalk three hands high,
having at the top one or two flowers, and sometimes three, which
consisteth of six small leaves chequered most strangely: wherein
Nature, or rather the Creator of all things, hath kept a very
wonderful order, surpassing (as in all other things) the curiousest
painting that art can set down. One square is of a greenish yellow
colour, the other purple, keeping the same order as well on the
backside of the flower, as on the inside, although they are blackish
in one square, and of a violet colour in an other; insomuch that
every leaf seemeth to be the feather of a Guinea-hen, whereof it
took his name. The root is small, white, and of the bigness of half
a garden bean.

2. The second kind of Chequered Daffodil is like unto the former in
each respect, saving that this hath his flower dashed over with a
light purple, and is somewhat greater than the other, wherein
consisteth the difference.

There are sundry differences and varieties of this flower, taken
from the colour, largeness, doubleness, earliness and latenes of
flowering, as also from the many or few branches bearing flowers. We
will only specify their varieties by their names, seeing their form
differs little from those you have here described.



Fig. 254. Lesser dark yellow
Fritillary (3)
Fig. 255. Early White Fritillary
(9)
	4. Fritillaria maxima ramosa purpurea. The greatest branched
purple chequered Daffodil.

5. Fritillaria flore purpureo pleno. The double purple flowered
chequered Daffodil.

6. Fritillaria polyanthos flavoviridis. The yellowish green many
flowered chequered Daffodil.

7. Fritillaria lutea Someri. Somers his yellow Chequered Daffodil.

8. Fritillaria alba purpureo tessulata. The white Fritillary
chequered with purple.

9. Fritillaria albapræcox. The early white Fritillary or Chequered
Daffodil.

10. Fritillaria minor flore luteo absoleto. The lesser dark yellow
Fritillary.

11. Fritillaria angustifolia lutea variegata parvo flore, & altera
flore majore. Narrow leaved yellow variegated Fritillary with small
flowers; and another with a larger flower.

12. Fritillaria minima pluribus floribus. The least Fritillary with
many flowers.

13. Fritillaria Hispanica umbellifera. The Spanish Fritillary with
the flowers standing as it were in an umbel.

The Names.

The Guinea hen flower is called of Dodonæus, Flos Meleagris: of
Lobel, Lilio-narcissus variegata, for that it hath the flower of a
Lily, and the root of Narcissus: it hath been called Fritillaria, of
the table or bord upon which men play at Chess, which square
checkers the flower doth very much resemble; some thinking that it
was named Fritillus: whereof there is no certainty; for Martial
seemeth to call Fritillus, Abacus, or the tables whereat men play at
dice, in the fifth Book of his Epigrams, writing to Galla.

Iam tristis, nucibus per relictis,
Clamoso revocatur a magistro
Et blando male proditus Fritillo
Arcana modo raptus e popina
Aedilem rogat udus aleator. &c.

The sad boy now his nuts cast by,
Called unto school by master's cry
And the drunk dicer now betray'd
By flattering tables as he play'd,
Is from his secret tipling house drawn out,
Although the officer he much besought. &c.

In English we may call it Turkey-hen or Guinea-hen Flower, and also
Chequered Daffodil, and Fritillary, according to the Latin.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Of the faculty of these pleasant flowers there is nothing set down
in the ancient or later writers, but are greatly esteemed for the
beautifying of our gardens, and the bosoms of the beautiful.

CHAP. 90. Of True Saffron, and the wild or Spring Saffrons.

Fig. 256. Saffron with and without flower.

The Description.

Although I have expressed two pictures of Saffron, as you see, yet
are you to understand that these two do but set forth one kind of
plant, which could not so easily be perceived by one picture as by
two, because his flower doth first rise out of the ground nakedly in
September, and his long small grassy leaves shortly after the
flower, never bearing flower and leaf at once. The which to express,
I thought it convenient to set down two pictures before you, with
this description, viz. The root is small, round, and bulbous. The
flower consisteth of six small blue leaves tending to purple, having
in the middle many small yellow strings or threads; among which are
two, three, or more thick fat chives of a fiery colour somewhat
reddish, of a strong smell when they be dried, which doth stuff and
trouble the head. The first picture setteth forth the plant when it
beareth flowers, and the other expresseth nothing but leaves.

The Place.

Common, or the best known Saffron groweth plentifully in
Cambridgeshire, Saffron-Walden, and other places thereabout, as corn
in the fields.

The Time.

Saffron beginneth to flower in September, and presently after spring
up the leaves, and remain green all the winter long.

The Names.

Saffron is called in Latin; Crocus: in Mauritania, Saffaran: in
Spanish, Açafron; in English, Saffron: in the Arabic tongue,
Zahafaran.

The Temperature.

Saffron is a little astringent or binding, but his hot quality doth
so over-rule in it, that in the whole essence it is in the number of
those herbs which are hot in the second degree, and dry in the
first: therefore it also hath a certain force to concoct, which is
furthered by the small astriction that is in it, as Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. Avicenna affirmeth that it causeth head-ache, and is hurtful to
the brain, which it cannot do by taking it now and then, but by too
much using of it: for too much using of it cutteth off sleep,
through want whereof the head and senses are out of frame. But the
moderate use of it is good for the head, and maketh the senses more
quick and lively, shaketh off heavy and drowsy sleep, and maketh a
man merry.

B. Also Saffron strengtheneth the heart, concocteth crude and raw
humors of the chest, openeth the lungs, and removeth obstructions.

C. It is also such a special remedy for those that have consumption
of the lungs, and are, as we term it, at death's door, and almost
past breathing, that it bringeth breath again, and prolongeth life
for certain days, if ten, or twenty grains at the most be given with
new or sweet wine. For we have found by often experience, that being
taken in that sort, it presently and in a moment removeth away
difficulty of breathing, which most dangerously and suddenly
happeneth.

D. Dioscorides teacheth, That being given in the same sort it is
also good against a surfeit.

E. It is commended against the stoppings of the liver and gall, and
against the yellow jaundice: And hereupon Dioscorides writeth, That
it maketh a man well coloured. It is put into all drinks that are
made to help the diseases of the entrails, as the same author
affirmeth, and into those especially which bring down the flowers,
the birth, and the after-burden. It provoketh urine, stirreth
fleshly lust, and is used in cataplasms and poultices for the matrix
and fundament, and also in plasters and cerecloths which serve for
old swellings and aches, and likewise for hot swellings that have
also in them, S. Anthony's fire.

F. It is with good success put into compositions for infirmities of
the ears.

G. The eyes being anointed with the same dissolved in milk, or
fennel or rose water, are preserved from being hurt by the smallpox
and measles, and are defended thereby from humours that would fall
into them.

H. The chives steeped in water, serve to illumine or (as we say)
limn pictures and imagery, as also to colour sundry meats and
confections. It is with good success given to procure bodily lust.
The confectlons called Crocomagna, Oxycroceum, and Diacurcama, with
divers other emplasters and electuaries cannot be made without this
Saffron.

I. The weight of ten grains of Saffron, the kernels of Walnuts two
ounces, Figs two ounces, Mithridate one dram, and a few sage leaves,
stamped together with a sufficient quantity of Pimpernel water, and
made into a mass or lump, and kept in a glass for your use, and
thereof twelve grains given in the morning fasting, preserveth from
the pestilence, and expelleth it from those that are infected.

Wild or Spring Saffron


Fig. 257. Early wild Saffron (1)
Fig. 258. Small wild Saffron (2)

The Kinds of Spring Saffron

Of wild Saffrons there be sundry sorts, differing as well in the
colour of the flowers, as also in the time of their flowering. Of
which, most of the figures shall be set forth unto you.

The Description of Wild Saffron.

1. The first kind of wild Saffron hath small short grassy leaves,
furrowed or chanelled down the midst with a white line or streak:
among the leaves rise up small flowers in shape like unto the common
Saffron, but differing in colour; for this hath flowers of mixed
colours; that is to say, the ground of the flower is white, striped
upon the back with purple, and dashed over on the inside with a
bright shining murrey colour; the other not. In the middle of the
flowers come forth many yellowish chives, without any smell of
saffron at all. The root is small, round, and covered with a brown
skin or film like unto the roots of common Saffron.

2. The second wild Saffron in leaves, roots, and flowers is like
unto the precedent, but altogether lesser and the flowers of this
are of a purple violet colour.

Fig. 259. Wild Saffron (3-6)

3. We have likewise in our London gardens another sort, like unto
the other wild Saffrons in every point, saving that this hath
flowers of a most perfect shining yellow colour, seeming afar off to
be a hot glowing coal of fire, which maketh the difference.

4. There is found among herbarists another sort, not differing from
the others, saving that this hath white flowers, contrary to all the
rest.

5. Lovers of plants have gotten into their gardens one sort hereof
with purple or Violet coloured flowers, in other respects like unto
the other.

6. Of these we have another that flowereth in the fall of the leaf,
with flowers like to the common Saffron, but destitute of those
chives which yield the colour, smell, or taste that the right
manured Saffron hath.


Fig. 260. Whitish-blue Autumn
Mountain Saffron (7)
Fig. 261. White Autumn Saffron
(8)
	7. And of this last kind there is another with broader leaves,
and the flower also is larger, with the leaves thereof not so sharp
pointed, but more round; the colour being at the first whitish, but
afterwards intermixt with some blueness.

8. There is also another of autumn wild Saffrons with white flowers,
which sets forth the distinction.

Many sorts there are in our gardens besides those before specified,
which I thought needless to entreat of, because their use is not
great.

Therefore I will only give the figures and names of some of the
chief of them, and refer such as delight to see or please themselves
with the varieties for they are no specific differences) of these
plants, to the gardens and the books of florists, who are only the
preservers and admirers of these varieties, not sought after for any
use but delight.


Fig. 262. Narrow Leaved Spring
Saffron with a violet flower (9)
Fig. 263. Broad Leaved Spring
Saffron with a yellow flower and
purple streaks (10)


Fig. 264. Double flowered
streaked Spring Saffron (11)
Fig. 265. Broad-leaved purple-
flowered Saffron (12)



Fig. 266. Spring Saffron with an
ash-coloured streaked flower
(13)
Fig. 267. Broad-leaved Spring
Saffron with a double yellow
streaked flower (14)

The Place.

All these wild Saffrons we have growing in our London gardens. Those
which do flower in autumn do grow upon certain craggy rocks in
Portugal, not far from the seaside. The other have been sent over
unto us, some out of Italy, and some out of Spain, by the labour and
diiligence of that notable learned herbarist Carolus; out of whose
observations, and partly by seeing them in our own gardens, we have
set down their descriptions.

That pleasant plant that bringeth forth yellow flowers was sent unto
me from Robinus of Paris, that painful and most curious searcher of
simples.

The Time.

They flower for the most part in January and February; that of the
mountain excepted, which flowereth in September.

The Names.

All these Saffrons are unprofitable, and therefore they be truly
said to be Crocus sylvestres, or wild Saffrons: in English, spring
Saffrons, and vernal Saffrons.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Of the faculties of these we have nothing to set down, for that as
there is no known use of them in Physic.



CHAP. 91. Of Meadow Saffron.

The Kinds.

There be sundry sorts of Meadow Saffrons differing very notably as
well in the colour of their flowers, as also in stature and country,
from whence they had their being, as shall be declared.



Fig. 268. Purple English Meadow
Saffron (1)
Fig. 269. White English meadow
saffron (2).

The Descripion.

1. Meadow Saffron hath three or four leaves rising immediately forth
of the ground, long, broad, smooth, fat, much like to the leaves of
the white Lily in form and smoothness: in the middle whereof spring
up three or four thick cods of the bigness of a small walnut,
standing upon short tender foot-stalks three-square, and opening
themselves when they be ripe, full of seed something round, and of a
blackish red colour: and when this seed is ripe, the leaves together
with the stalks do fade and fall away. In September the flowers bud
forth, before any leaves appear, standing upon short tender and
whitish stems, like in form and colour to the flowers of Saffron,
having in the middle small chives or threads of a pale yellow
colour, altogether unfit for meat or medicine. The root is round or
bulbous, sharper at the one end than at the other, flat on the one
side, having a deep cleft or furrow in the same flat side when it
flowereth, and not at any time else: it is covered with blackish
coats or films; it sendeth down unto the lowest part certain strings
or threads. The root itself is full of a white substance, yielding a
juice like milk, whilst it is green and newly digged out of the
earth. It is in taste sweet, with a little bitterness following,
which draweth water out of the mouth.

2. The second kind of Meadow Saffron is like the precedent,
differing only in the colour of the flowers, for that this plant
doth bring forth white leaves, which of some hath been taken for the
true Hermodactylus; but in so doing they have committed the greater
error.

Fig. 270. Hungary Meadow Saffron (3)

3. These two figures express both but one and the self same plant,
which is distinguished because it never beareth flowers and leaves
both at one time. So that the first figure sets it forth when it is
in leaves and seed, and the other when it flowereth; and therefore
one description shall suffice for them both. In the spring of the
year it bringeth forth his leaves, thick, fat, shining, and smooth,
not unlike the leaves of Lilies, which do continue green unto the
end of June; at which time the leaves do wither away, but in the
beginning of September there shooteth forth of the ground naked
milk-white flowers without any green leaf at all: but so soon as the
plant hath done bearing of flowers, the root remains in the ground,
not sending forth anything until February in the year following.

It bears plentiful store of reddish seed in loose triangular heads.
The root hereof is bigger than that of the last described.

Fig. 271. Small Spanish Meadow Saffron (4)

4. The small meadow Saffron hath three or four thick fat leaves
narrower than any of the rest. The flower appeareth in the fall of
the leaf, in shape, colour, and manner of growing like the common
Meadow Saffron, but of a more reddish purple colour, and altogether
lesser. The leaves in this, contrary to the nature of these plants,
presently follow after the flower; and so continue all the winter
and spring, even until May or June. The root is bulbous, and not
great; it is covered with many blackish red coats, and is white
within.



Fig. 272. Varicoloured Lesser
Mountain Saffron (5)
Fig. 273. Greek or Illyrian
Meadow Saffron (6)
	5. This meadow Saffron hath roots and leaves like to those of
the last described, but the leaves of the flower are longer and
narrower, and the colour of them is white on the inside, green on
the middle of the back part, and the rest thereof of a certain flesh
colour.

6. The meadow Saffron of Illyria hath a great thick and bulbous
root, full of substance: from which riseth up a fat, thick, and
gross stalk, set about from the lower part to the top by equal
distances, with long, thick, and gross leaves, sharp pointed, not
unlike to the leaves of leeks; among which leaves do grow yellowish
flowers like unto the English meadow Saffron, but smaller.

Fig. 274. Assyrian Meadow Saffron (7)

7. The Assyrian Meadow Saffron hath a bulbous root, made as it were
of two pieces; from the middle cleft whereof riseth up a soft and
tender stalk set with fair broad leaves from the middle to the top:
among which cometh forth one single flower like unto the common
meadow Saffron, or the white Anemone of Matthiolus' description.


Fig. 275. Mountain Wild Saffron (8)

8. The Mountain Wild Saffron is a base and low plant, but in shape
altogether like the common meadow Saffron, but much lesser. The
flowers are smaller, and of a yellow colour, which setteth forth the
difference. The leaves and roots (as Clusius affirms) are more like
to the Narcissus; and therefore he calls this Narcissus Autumnalis
minor, The lesser autumn Narcissus.

Fig. 275. Broad-leaved Meadow Saffron (9) & Parti-coloured Meadow
Saffron (10)

9. This, whose figure we here give you, is by Clusius called
Colchicum Byzantium latifolium, The broad leaved Colchicum of
Constantinople. The leaves of this are not in form and magnitude
much unlike to those of the white Hellebore, neither less nervous,
yet more green. It bears many flowers in autumn, so that there come
sometimes twenty from one root. Their form and colour are much like
the ordinary sort, but that these are larger, and have thicker
stalks. They are of a lighter purple without, and of a deeper on the
inside, and they are marked with certain veins running alongst these
leaves. The roots and seeds of this plant are thrice as large as
those of the common kind.

10. This hath roots and leaves like to the first described, but the
flower is shorter, and grows upon a shorter stalk; so that it rises
but little above the earth: the three inner leaves are of a reddish
purple; the three outer leaves are either wholly white, or purplish
on the middle in the inside, or streaked with fair purple veins, or
spotted with such coloured spots: all the leaves of the flower are
blunter and rounder than in the common kind.

Fig. 277. Meadow Saffrons (11-14)

11. This in leaves, roots, manner and time of growing, as also in
the colour of the flowers, differs not from the first described, but
the flowers, as you may perceive by the figure here expressed, are
very double, and consist of many leaves.

12. This Colchicum differs little from the first ordinary one, but
that the flowers are somewhat less, and the three out-leaves are
somewhat bigger than the three inner leaves; the colour is a little
deeper also than that of the common one; but that wherein the
principal difference consists, is, That this flowers twice in a
year; to wit, in the spring and autumn; and hence Clusius hath
called it Colchicum biflorum, Twice-flowering Meadow Saffron.

13. This also in the shape of the root and leaves is not much
different from the ordinary, but the leaves of the flower are longer
and narrower, the colour also when they begin to open and show
themselves, is white, but shortly after they are changed into a
light purple: each leaf of the flower hath a white thread tipped
with yellow growing out of it, and in the middle stands a white
three forked one longer than the rest. The flower grows up between
three or four leaves narrower than those of the ordinary one, and
broader than those of the small Spanish kind. Clusius, to whom we
are beholden for this, as also for most of the rest, calls it
Colchicum vernum, or spring Meadow Saffron, because it then flowers
together with the spring Saffrons and Dog's Tooth.

14. There are other Meadow-Saffrons besides these I have mentioned,
but because they may be referred easily to same of these, for that
their difference chiefly consists either in the doubleness or colour
of the flowers, whereof some are striped, some fraided, others
variegated, I will not insist upon them, but refer such as desire
their further acquaintance to look into the gardens of our florists,
as Mr. Parkinson's, Mr. Tuggies, &c. or else into the book of
flowers set forth not long since by Mr. Parkinson, where they shall
find them largely treated of. Yet I cannot pass over in silence that
curious Colchicum which is called by some, Colchicum variegatum
Chiense. The flower thereof is very beautiful, consisting of six
pretty broad and sharp pointed leaves, all curiously checkered over
with deep blue or purple, the rest of the flower being of a light
whitish colour: the leaves, that rise up in the Spring, are not very
long, but somewhat broad und sharp pointed; the root is like others
of this kind. I have given you an exact and large figure of this, as
I took it from the growing flower some three years agone, it being
at that time amongst her Majesty's flowers kept at Edgcombe in
Surry, in the garden of my much honoured friend Sir John Tunstall,
Gentleman usher unto her Majesty.

Fig. 278. True Hermodactyl (15)

15. I give you here in this place the true Hermodactyl of the shops,
which probably by all is adjudged to this tribe, though none can
certainly say what flowers or leaves it bears: the roots are only
brought to us, and from what place I cannot tell; yet I conjecture
from some part of Syria or the adjacent countries. Now how hard it
is to judge of plants by one part or particle, I shall show you more
at large when I come to treat of Pistolochia, wherefore I will say
nothing thereof in this place. These roots, which wanting the malign
quality of colchicum, either of their own nature, or by dryness, are
commonly about the bigness of a chestnut, smooth, flattish, and
sharp at the one end, but somewhat full at the other, and on the one
side there is a little channel or hollowness, as is in the roots of
Meadow-Saffron where the stalk of the flower comes up. Their colour
is either white, brown, or blackish on the outside, and very white
within, but those are the best that are white both without and
within, and may easily be made into a fine white meal or powder.

The Place.

Meadow Saffron, or Colchicum, groweth in Messenia, and in the Isle
of Colchis, whereof it took his name. The titles of the rest do set
forth their native countries notwithstanding our London gardens are
possessed with the most part of them.

The two first do grow in England in great abundance, in fat and
fertile meadows, as about Vilford [sic: does he mean Alford?] and
Bath, as also in the meadows near to a small village in the West
part of England, called Shepton Mallet, in the meadows about
Bristol, in Kingsthorpe meadow near unto a water-mill as you go from
Northampton to Holdenby House, upon the right hand of the way, and
likewise in great plenty in Nobottle wood two miles from the said
town of Northampton, and many other places. The rest for the most
part may be found in the gardens of the florists among us.

The Time.

The leaves of all the kinds of Meadow-Saffron do begin to show
themselves in February; the seed is ripe in June. The leaves,
stalks, and seed do perish in July, and their pleasant flowers do
come forth of the ground in September.

The Names.

Divers name it in Latin Bulbus agrestis, or wild Bulb: in high Dutch
it is called Zeitloosen: in low Dutch, Tilteloosen; in French, Mort
au Chien. Some have taken it to be the true Hermodactyl, yet
falsely. Other some call it Filius ante Patrem, although there is a
kind of Lysimachia or Loosestrife so called, because it first
bringeth forth his long cods with seed, and then the flower after,
or at the same time at the end of the said cod. But in this Meadow
Saffron it is far otherwise, because it bringeth forth leaves in
February, seed in May, and flowers in September, which is a thing
clean contrary to all other plants whatsoever, for that they do
first flower, and after seed; but this Saffron seedeth first, and
four months after brings forth flowers and therefore some have
thought this a fit name for it, Filius ante Patrem; and we
accordingly may call it, The Son before the Father.

Our author in this chapter was of many minds; for first, in the
description of Colchicum Anglicum, being the second, he reproves
such as make that white flowered Colchicum the true Hermodactyl.
Then in the description of the eighth he hath these words, which
being omitted in that place I here set down. Of all these kinds
(saith he) of Meadow Saffrons it hath not been certainly known which
hath been the true Hermodactyl; notwithstanding we have certain
knowledge that the Illyrian Colchicum is the physical Hermodactyl.
Yet when he comes to speak of the names, after that out of Dodonæus
he had set down the truth in these words; But notwithstanding that
Hermodactyl which we do use in compound medicines, differeth from
this (to wit, Colchicum) in many notable points, for that the true
Hermodactyl hath a bulb or round root, which being dried continueth
very white within, and without not wrinkled at all, but full and
smooth, of a mean hardness; and that he had out of the same author
alleged the words Valerius Cordes and Avicenna, (which are here
omitted) he concludes contrary to the truth, his first admonition,
and second assertion, That the white Meadow Saffron which we bave in
the West part of England, growing especially about Shepton Mallet,
is the Hermodactyl used in shops.

Those we have in shops seem to be the Hermodactyls of Paulus
Ægineta; yet not those of Nicholaus and Actuarius, which were
cordial, and increasers of sperm; the which the authors of the
Adversaria, pag. 55. think to be the Behen album & rubrum of the
Arabians. And to these unknown ones are the virtues set down by our
author in the third place under C, to be referred.

The Temperature.

Meadow Saffron is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues of Hermodactyls.

A. The roots of Hermodactyls are of force to purge, and are properly
given (saith Paulus) to those that have the Gout, even then when the
humors are in flowing. And they are also hurtful to the stomach.

B. The same stamped, and mixed with the whites of eggs, barley meal,
and crumbs of bread, and applied plasterwise, ease the pain of the
Gout, swellings and aches about the joints.

C. The same strengtheneth, nourisheth, and maketh good juice,
increaseth sperm or natural seed, and is also good to cleanse ulcers
or rotten sores.

The correction.

The powder of Ginger, long Pepper, Aniseed or Cumin seed, and a
little mastic, correcteth the churlish working of that Hermodactyl
which is used in shops. But those which have eaten of the common
meadow Saffron must drink the milk of a cow, or else death presently
ensueth.

The Danger.

The roots of all the sorts of Meadow Saffrons are very hurtful to
the stomach, and being eaten they kill by choking, as Mushrooms do,
according unto Dioscorides; whereupon some have called it Colchicum
strangulatorium.



CHAP. 92. Of Star of Bethlehem.

The Kinds.

There be sundry sorts of wild field Onions called Stars of
Bethlehem, differing in stature, taste, and smell, as shall be
declared.



Fig. 279. Star of Bethlehem (1)
Fig. 280. Yellow Star of
Bethlehem (2)

The Description.

1. Our common Star of Bethlehem hath many narrow leaves, thick, fat,
full of juice, and of a very green colour, with a white streak down
the middle of each leaf: among the which rise up small naked stalks,
at the top whereof grow flowers compact of six little leaves,
striped on the backside with lines of green, the inside being milk-
white. These flowers open themselves at the rising of the sun, and
shut again at the sun setting; whereupon this plant hath been called
by some, Bulbus Solsequius. The flowers being past, the seed doth
follow enclosed in three-cornered husks. The root is bulbous, white
both within and without.

2. The second sort hath two or three grassy leaves proceeding from a
cloven bulbous root. The stalke riseth up in the midst naked, but
toward the top there do thrust forth more leaves like unto the
other, but smaller and shorter; among which leaves do step forth
very small, weak, and tender foot-stalks. The flowers of this are on
the backside of a pale yellow striped with green, on the inside of a
bright shining yellow colour, with saffron coloured threads in their
middles. The seed is contained in triangular vessels.



Fig. 281. Star of Hungary (3)
Fig. 282. Lesser Spanish Star-
flower (4)
	3. This Star of Hungary, contrary to the custom of other
plants of this kind, sendeth forth before winter five or six leaves
spread upon the ground, narrow, and of some fingers length, somewhat
whitish green, and much resembling the leaves of Gillyflowers, but
somewhat roughish. In April the leaves beginning to decay, amongst
them rises up a stalk bearing at the top a spoke of flowers, which
consisting of six leaves apiece show themselves open in May; they in
colour are like the first described, as also in the green streak on
the lower side of each leaf. The seed is black, round, and contained
in triangular heads. The root is bulbous, long, and white.

4. This fourth, which is the Ornithogalum Hispanicum minus of
Clusius, hath a little white root which sends forth leaves like the
common one, but narrower, and destitute of the white line wherewith
the other are marked. The stalk is some two handfuls high, bearing
at the top thereof some seven or eight flowers growing each above
other, yet so, as that they seem to make an umbel each of these
flowers hath six leaves of a whitish blue colour, with so many white
chives or threads, and a little bluish umbone in the midst. This
flowers in April.


Fig. 283. Dwarf Yellow Star of
Bethlehem (5)
Fig. 284. One-leaved Bulb (6)
	5. This fifth first sends up one only leaf two or three inches
long, narrow, and of a whitish colour, and of an acid taste: nigh
whereto riseth up a small stalk some inch or two high, having one or
two leaves thereon, between which come forth small star-flowers,
yellow within, and of a greenish purple without. The seed, which is
reddish and small, is contained in triangular heads. The root is
white, round, and covered with an ash-coloured film.

6. I think it not amiss, hereto to add another small bulbous plant,
which Clusius calls Bulubu monophyllos, the one leaved Bulb. This
from a small root sends forth one rush-leaf of some foot in length,
which about two inches above the earth being somewhat broader than
in the other places, and guttered, sends forth a little stalk some
three inches long, whose top is set with three little flowers, each
standing above other, about the bigness here presented unto your
view in the figure: each of those consisteth of six very white
leaves, and are not much unlike the flowers of the grass of
Parnassus, but yet without leaves to sustain the flower, as it hath:
six white threads tipped with yellow, and a three-square head with a
white pointel possess the midst of the flower; the smell thereof is
somewhat like that of the flowers of the Hawthorn. It flowers in the
midst of June.


Fig. 285. Great Arabic Star-
flower (7)
Fig. 286. Spike-fashioned Star
Flower (8)
	7. Having done with these two small plants, I must acquaint
you with three or four larger, belonging also to this Classis. The
first of these is that which Dodonæus calls Ornithogalum major, and
Clusius, Ornithogalum Arabicum: This by Lobel and some others is
called Lilium Alexandrinum, or the Lily of Alexandria, as our author
calls it in the chapter of Cotton-Grass. This fair, but tender
plant, hath broad green leaves coming from a large white flat
bottomed root, amongst which rises up a stalk some cubit high, whose
top is garnished with sundry pretty large flowers made of six very
white leaves, with a shining blackish head, engirt with six white
threads tipped with yellow. This flowers in May.

8. This, which is commonly called Ornithogalum spicatum, hath large
leaves and roots, and the stalk grows some cubit or more high,
whereon grow many star-flowers in shape and colour like those of the
ordinary, but larger, and they begin to flower below, and flower
upwards to the top. There is a larger sort of this spicatum, whose
flowers are not streaked with green on their backs. There is also a
lesser, differing from the first of these only in bigness.

Fig. 287. Neapolitan Star-flower. (9)

9. This Neapolitan hath three or four long leaves not much unlike
those of the Hyacinths, but narrower, the stalk is pretty thick,
some foot high, and hath usually growing thereon some five or six
flowers hanging one way, though their stalks grow alternately out of
each side of the main stem. These flowers are composed of six
leaves, being about an inch long, and some quarter of an inch broad,
white within, and of an ash-coloured green without, with white
edges, the middle of the flower is possessed by another little
flower, considing also of six little leaves, having in them six
threads headed with yellow, and a white pointel. A black wrinkled
seed is contained in three-cornered heads, which by reason of their
bigness weigh down the stalk. This flowers in April.

The Place.

Stars of Bethlehem, or Star-flowers, especially the first and
second, grow in sundry places that lie open to the air, not only in
Germany and the Low-countries, but also in England, and in our
gardens very common. The yellow kind Lobel found in Somersetshire in
the corn fields. The rest are strangers in England; yet we have most
of them, as the third, fourth, eighth, and ninth, in some of our
choice gardens.

The Time.

These kinds of bulbed plants do flower from April to the end of May.

The Names.

Touching the names; Clusius calls it Ornithogalos: Pliny calls it
Ornithogale: in high Dutch it is called Feldz Wibel, Ackers Wibel:
as you should say, Cepa agraria: in English, Stars of Bethlehem.

The rest are named in their titles and history; but Clusius
questions whether the Bulbus unifolius be not Bulbine of
Theophrastus, 7. Hist. 13. Bauhin seems to affirm the Spicatum to be
Moly of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, and Epimedium of Pliny.

The Nature.

These are temperate in heat and dryness.

The Virtues.

A. The virtues of most of them are unknown; yet Hieronymus Tragus
writeth, That the root of the Star of Bethlehem roasted in hot
embers, and applied with honey in manner of a cataplasm or poultice,
healeth old eating ulcers, and softens and discusses hard tumors.

The roots, saith Dioscorides, are eaten both raw and boiled.



CHAP. 93. Of Onions.

The Kinds.

There be, saith Theophrastus, divers sorts of Onions, which have
their surnames of the places where they grow: some also lesser,
others greater; some be round, and divers others long; but none
wild, as Pliny writeth.



Fig. 288. White Onion (1)
Fig. 289. Longish Spanish Onion
(3)

The Description.

1. The Onion hath narrow leaves, and hollow within; the stalk is
single, round, biggest in the middle, on the top whereof groweth a
round head covered with a thin skin or film, which being broken,
there appear little white flowers made up in form of a ball, and
afterward black seed three-cornered, wrapped in thin white skins.
Instead of the root there is a bulb or round head compact of many
coats, which oftentimes becometh great in manner of a Turnip, many
times long like an egg. To be brief, it is covered with very fine
skins for the most part of a whitish colour.

2. The red Onion differeth not from the former but in sharpness and
redness of the roots, in other respects there is no difference at
all.

3. There is also a Spanish kind, whose root is longer than the
other, but in other respects very little different.

Fig. 290. Scallions (4)

4. There is also another small kind of Onion, called by Lobel,
Ascalonitis Antiquorum, or Scallions; this hath but small roots,
growing many together: the leaves are like to Onions, but less. It
seldom bears either stalk, flower, or seed. It is used to be eaten
in salads.

The Place

The Onion requireth a fat ground well digged and dunged, as
Palladius saith. It is cherished everywhere in kitchen gardens: it
is now and then in beds sown alone, and many times mixed with other
herbs, as with Lettuce, Parsnips, and Carrots. Palladius liketh well
that it should be sown with Savory, because, saith Pliny, it
prospereth the better, and is more wholesome.

The Time.

It is sown in March or April, and sometimes in September.

The Names.

The Onion is ealled in Latin, Cepa, and many times Cepe in the
neuter gender: the shops keep that name. The old writers have given
unto this many surnames of the places where they grow, for some are
named Cipriæ, Sardiæ, Samothraciæ, Ascaloniæ, of a town in Judea,
otherwise called Pompeiana: in English, Onions. Moreover, there is
one named Marisca, which the country-men call Unio saith Columella;
and thereupon it cometh that the Frenchmen call it Oignon, as
Ruellius thinkth: and peradventure the Low-Dutch men name it Aueuim,
of the French word corrupted: they are called Setaniæ which are very
little and sweet; and these are thought to be those which Palladius
nameth Cepullæ, as though he called them parvæ Cepæ, or little
Onions.

There is an Onion which is without an head or bulb, and hath as it
were a long neck, and spends itself wholly in the leaves, and it is
often cropped or cut for the pot like the Leeks. Of this Pliny
writeth, in his nineteenth book, and sixth chapter. There is with us
two principal sorts of Onions, the one serving for a sauce, or to
season meat with, which some call Gethyon, and others Pallacana; and
the other is the headed or common Onion, which the Germans call
Onionzboibel: the Italians, cipolla: the Spaniards, Cebolla, Ceba,
and Cebola.

The Temperature.

All Onions are sharp, and move tears by the smell. They be hot and
dry, as Galen saith, in the fourth degree, but not so extreme hot as
Garlic. The juice is of a thin watery and airy substance: the rest
is of thick parts.

The Virtues.

A. The Onions do bite, attenuate, or make thin, and cause dryness:
being boiled they do lose their sharpeness, especially if the water
be twice or thrice changed, and yet for all that they do not lose
their attenuating quality.

B. They also break wind, provoke urine, and be more soluble boiled
than raw; and raw they nourish not at all, and but a little though
they be boiled.

C. They be naught for those that are choleric, but good for such as
are replete with raw and phlegmatic humours; and for women that have
their terms stayed upon a cold cause, by reason they open the
passages that are stopped.

D. Galen writeth, That they provoke the haemorrhoids to bleed if
they be laid unto them, either by themselves, or stamped with
vinegar.

E. The juice of Onions sniffed up into the nose, purgeth the head,
and draweth forth raw phlegmatic humors.

F. Stamped with salt, rue, and honey, and so applied, they are good
against the biting of a mad dog.

G. Roasted in the embers, and applied, they ripen and break cold
apostumes, boils, and such like.

H. The juice of Onions mixed with the decoction of Pennyroyal, and
anointed upon the gouty member with a feather, or a cloth wet
therein, and applied, easeth the same very much.

I. The juice anointed upon a pilled or bald head in the sun,
bringing again the hair very speedily.

K. The juice taketh away the heat of scalding with water or oil, as
also burning with fire and gun-powder, as is set forth by a very
skilful Chirurgeon named Master William Clowes, one of the Queen's
Chirurgeons; and before him by Ambrose Parey, in his Treatise of
Wounds made by Gunshot.

L. Onions diced, and dipped in the juice of Sorrel, and given unto
the sick of a tertian ague, to eat, take away the fit in once or
twice so taking them.

The Hurts.

The Onion being eaten, yea though it be boiled, causeth head-ache,
hurteth the eyes, and maketh a man dim lighted, dulleth the senses,
engendereth windiness, and provoketh overmuch sleep, especially
being eaten raw.



CHAP. 94. Of Squills, or Sea-Onions.

Fig. 291. Common Spanish Squill (1)

The Description.

1. The ordinary Squill or Sea Onion hath a pretty large root,
composed of sundry white coats filled with a certain viscous
humidity, and at the bottom thereof grow forth sundry white and
thick fibres. The leaves are like those of Lilies, broad, thick, and
very green, lying spread upon the ground, and turned up on the
sides. The stalk groweth some cubit or more high, straight, naked
without leaves, beautified at the top with many star-fashioned
flowers, very like those of the bigger Ornitholagum. The seed is
contained in chaffy three-cornered seed-vessels, being itself also
black, smooth, and chaffy. It flowers in August and September, and
the seed is ripe in October. The leaves spring up in November and
December, after that the seed is ripe, and stalk decayed.


Fig. 292. Great Squill, or Sea
Onion (2)
Fig. 293. Sea Onion of Valencia
(3)
	2. The great Sea Onion, which Clusius hath set forth in his
Spanish History, hath very great and broad leaves, as Dioscorides
saith, longer than those of the Lily, but narrower. The bulb or
headed root is very great, consisting of many coats or scaly films
of a reddish colour. The flower is sometimes yellow, sometimes
purple, and sometimes of a light blue. Clusius saith it is like that
of the former, I think he means both in shape and colour.

3. The Sea Onion of Valencia, or rather the Sea Daffodil, hath many
long and fat leaves, and narrow like those of Narcissus, but
smoother and weaker, lying upon the ground; among which riseth up a
stalk a foot high, bare and naked, bearing at the top a tuft of
white flowers, in shape like unto our common yellow Daffodil. The
seed is enclosed in thick knobby husks, black, flat, and thick, very
soft, in shape like unto the seeds of Aristolochia longa, or long
Birth-wort. The root is great, white, long, and bulbous.
 	
Fig. 294. Red Flowered Sea Daffodil (4)	Fig. 295. White Sea
Daffodil (6)

4. Red flowered Sea Daffodil, or Sea Onion, hath a great bulb or
root like to the precedent; the leaves long, fat, and sharp pointed,
the stalk bare and naked, bearing at the top sundry fair red flowers
in shape like to the last described.

5. The yellow flowered sea Daffodil, or Sea Onion, hath many thick
fat leaves like unto the common Squill or Sea Onion, among which
riseth up a tender straight stalk full of juice, bearing at the top
many flowers like the common yellow Daffodil. The seed and root is
like the precedent.

6. To these may fitly be added that elegant plant which is known by
the name of Narcissus tertius of Matthiolus, and may be called White
Sea Daffodil. This plant hath large roots, as big sometimes as the
ordinary Squill; the leaves are like those of other Daffodils, but
broader, rounder pointed, and not very long. The stalk is pretty
thick, being sometimes round, otherwhiles cornered, at the top
whereof grow many large white flowers: each flower is thus composed:
it hath six long white leaves, in the midst grows forth a white
pointel which is encompassed by a welt or cap divided into six
parts, which six are again by threes divided into eighteen jags or
divisions, a white thread tipped with green of an inch long, coming
forth of the middle of each division. This flowereth in the end of
May. It is said to grow naturally about the sea coast of Illyria.

The Place.

1. The first is found in Spain and Italy, not far from the seaside.

2. The second also near unto the sea, in Italy, Spain, and Valencia.
I have had plants of them brought me from sundry parts of the
Mediterranean seaside, as also from Constantinople, where it is
numbered among the kinds of Narcissus.

3. The third groweth in the sands of the sea, in most places of the
coast of Narbonne, and about Montpellier.

4. The fourth groweth plentifully about the coasts of Tripoli and
Aleppo, near to the sea, and also in the salt marshes that are sandy
and lie open to the air.

The Time.

They flower from May to the end of July, and their seed is ripe in
the end of August.

The Names.

1. The first is called of the Latins Scilla: the apothecaries name
it Squilla: Divers, Cepa muris: the Germans, Meerzwibel: the
Spaniards, Cebolla albarrana: the Frenchmen, Oignon de mer: in
English, Squill, and Sea Onion.

2. The second is called Scilla rubra major.

3, 4, 5. These are all figures of the same plant, but the least
(which is the worst) is the figure of the Adversaria, where it is
called Pancratium marinum: Dodonæus calls it Narcissus marinus: and
Clusius, Hemerocallis Valentina; and it is judged to be the
Emerochalis of Theophrastus, Lib. 6. Hist. Cap. 1. The Spaniards
call this Amores mios: the Turks, Con zambach: the Italians, Giglio
marino. These three (as I said) differ no otherwise than in the
colour of their flowers.

6. The sixth is Narcissus tertius, or Constantinopolitanus, of
Matthiolus: Clusius calls it Lilionarcissus Hemerocallidis facie.

The Temperature.

The Sea Onion is hot in the second degree, and cutteth very much, as
Galen saith. It is best when it is taken baked or roasted, for so
the vehemency of it is taken away.

The Virtues of Squills.

A. The root is to be covered with paste or clay, (as Dioscorides
teacheth) and then put into an oven to be baked, or else buried in
hot embers till such time as it be thoroughly roasted: for not being
so baked or rosted it is very hurtful to the inner parts.

B. It is likewise baked in an earthen pot close covered and set in
an oven. That is to be taken especially which is in the midst, which
being cut in pieces must be boiled, but the water is still to be
changed, till such time as it is neither bitter nor sharp: then must
the pieces be hanged on a thread, and dried in the shadow, so that
no one piece touch another. Thus used it loseth most of the
strength; therefore it is better to use it lightly dried, without
any other preparation.

C. These slices of the Squill are used to make oil, wine, or vinegar
of Squill. Of this vinegar of Squills is made an Oxymel. The use
whereof is to cut thick, tough, and clammy humors, as also to be
used in vomits.

D. This Onion roasted or baked is mixed with potions and other
medicines which provoke urine, and open the stoppings of the liver
and spleen, and is also put into treacles. It is given to those that
have the dropsy, the yellow jaundice, and to such as are tormented
with the gripings of the belly, and is used in a licking medicine
against an old rotten cough, and for shortness of breath.

E. One part of this Onion being mixed with eight parts of salt, and
taken in the morning fasting to the quantity of a spoonful or two,
looseth the belly.

F. The inner part of Squills boiled with oil and turpentine, is with
great profit applied to the chaps or chilblains of the feet or
heels.

G. It driveth forth long and round worms if it be given with honey
and oil.

The Pancratium marinum, or Hemerocallis Valentina (saith Clusius)
when as I lived with Rondeletius, at Montpellier, was called Scilla;
and the apothecaries thereof made the trochisks for the composition
of treacle: afterwards it began to be called Pancratium flora Lilii.
Rondeletius also was wont to tell this following story concerning
the poisonous and malign quality thereof. There were two Fishermen,
whereof the one lent unto the other (whom he hated) his knife,
poisoned with the juice of this Hemerocallis, for to cut his meat
withal; he suspecting no treachery cut his victuals therewith, and
so eat them, the other abstaining therefrom, and saying that he had
no stomach. Some few days after, he that did eat the victuals died;
which showed the strong and deadly quality of this plant: which
therefore (as Clusius saith) cannot be the Scilla Epimenidia of
Pliny, which was eatable, and without malignity.



CHAP. 95. Of Leeks.


Fig. 296. Headed or set Leek (1)
Fig. 297. Cut or unset Leek (2)
The Description.

1. The leaves or the blades of the Leek be long, somewhat broad, and
very many, having a keel or crest in the backside, in smell and
taste like to the Onion. The stalks, if the blades be not often cut,
do in the second or third year grow up round, bringing forth on the
top flowers made up in a round head or ball as doth the Onion. The
seeds are like. The bulb or root is long and slender, especially of
the unset Leek. That of the other Leek is thicker and greater.

2. Most Writers distinguish the common Leek into Porrum capitatum &
sectivum; and Lobel gives these two figures wherewith we here
present you. Now both these grow of the same seed, and they differ
only in culture; for that which is often cut for the use of the
kitchen is called sectivum: the other, which is headed, is not cut,
but spared, and removed in Autumn.

The Place.

It requireth a mean earth, fat, well dunged and digged. It is very
common everywhere in other countries, as well as in England.

The Time.

It may be sown in March or April, and it to be removed in September
or October.

The Names.

The Latins call it Porrum. The Emperor Nero had great pleasure in
this root, and therefore he was called in scorn, Porrophagus [Leek-
eater]. But Palladius in the masculine gender called it Porrus: the
Germans, Lauch: the Brabanters, Pozreue: the Spaniards, Puerro: the
French, Porreau: the Englishmen, Leek, or Leeks.

The Temperature.

The Leek is hot and dry, and doth attenuate or make thin as doth the
Onion.

The Virtues.

Being boiled it is less hurtful, by reason that it loseth a great 
part of his sharpness: and yet being so used it yieldeth no good
juice. But being taken with cold herbs his too hot quality is
tempered.

A. Being boiled and eaten with ptisan or barley cream; it concocteth
and bringeth up raw humours that lie in the chest. Some affirm it to
be good in a lohoch or licking medicine, to cleanse the pipes of the
lungs.

B. The juice drunk with honey is profitable against the bitings of
venomous beasts, and likewise the leaves, stamped and laid
thereupon.

C. The same juice, with vinegar, frankincense, and milk, or oil of
roses, dropped into the ears, mitigateth their pain, and is good for
the noise in them.

D. Two drams of the seed, with the like weight of myrtle berries
drunk, stop the spitting of blood which hath continued a long time.
The same ingredients put into wine keep it from souring, and being
already sour, amend the same, as divers write. It cutteth and
attenuateth gross and tough humours.

E. Lobel commends the following Loch as very effectual against
phlegmatic quinsies, and other cold catarrhs which are like to cause
suffocation. This is the description thereof; Take blanched almonds
three ounces, four figs, soft Bdellium half an ounce, juice of
Liquorice, two ounces, of sugar candy dissolved in a sufficient
quantity of juice of Leeks, and boiled in Balneo to the height of a
syrup, as much as shall be requisite to make the rest into the form
of an eclegma.

The Hurts.

It heateth the body, engendereth naughty blood, causeth troublesome
and terrible dreams, offendeth the eyes, dulleth the sight, hurteth
those that are by nature hot and choleric, and is noisome to the
stomach, and breedeth windiness.



CHAP. 96. Of Chives and Wild Leeks.


Fig. 298. Chives
Fig. 299. French or Vine Leeks

The Kinds.

There be divers kinds of Leeks, some wild, and some of the garden,
as shall be declared. Those called Chives have been taken of some
for a kind of wild Onion: but all the authors that I have been
acquainted with, do accord that there is not any wild Onion.

The Description.

1. Chives bring forth many leaves about a hand-full high, long,
slender, round, like to little rushes; amongst which grow up small
and tender stalks, sending forth certain knops with flowers like
those of the Onion, but much smaller. They have many little bulbs or
headed roots fastened together: out of which grow down into the
earth a great number of little strings, and it hath both the smell
and taste of the Onion and Leek, as it were participating of both.

2. The Vine Leek or French Leek groweth up with blades like those of
Leeks: the stalk is a cubit high, on the top whereof standeth a
round head or button, covered at the first with a thin skin, which
being broken, the flowers and seeds come forth like those of the
Onion. The bulb or headed root is round, hard, and sound, which is
quickly multiplied by sending forth many bulbs.

Fig. 300. Wild Leek

3. The wild Leek hath leaves much like unto those of Crow-garlic,
but larger, and more acrid. The flowers and seeds also resemble
those of the Crow-garlic, the seeds being about the bigness of corns
of wheat, with small strings coming forth at their ends.
The Time and Place.

1. Chives are set in gardens, they flourish long, and continue many
years, they suffer the cold of winter. They are cut and polled
often, as is the unset Leek.

2. The Vine Leek groweth of itself in vineyards, and near unto vines
in hot regions, wherof it both took the name Vine Leek, and French
Leek. It beareth his green leaves in winter, and withereth away in
the summer. It groweth in most gardens of England.

3. Thus far our author describes and intimates to you a garden Leek,
much like the ordinary in all respects, but somewhat larger. But the
following names belong to the wild Leek which here we give you in
the third place.

The Names.

Chives are called in Greek, Shænoprasum: in Dutch, Biefloack, as
though you should say, Juncum Porrum, or Rush Leek: in English,
Cives, Chives, Civet and Sweth: in French, Brelles.

2. The Vine leek, or rather wild Leek, is called in Greek
Ampeloprason, of teh place where it naturally groweth: it may be
called in Latin, Porrum Vitium, or Vitigineum Porrum: in English,
after the Greek and Latin, Vine Leek, or French Leek.

The Temperature.

Chives are like in faculty unto the Leek, hot and dry. The Vine Leek
heateth more than doth the other Leek.

The Virtues.

A. Chives attenuate or make thin, open, provoke urine, engender hot
and gross vapours, and are hurtful to the eyes and brain. They cause
troublesome dreams, and work all the effects that the Leek doth.

B. The Vine-leek, or Ampeloprason, provoketh urine mightily, and
bringeth down the flowers. It cureth the bitings of venomous beasts,
as Dioscorides writeth.



CHAP. 97. Of Garlic.


Fig. 301. Garlic. (1)
Fig. 302. Wild Garlic with Red
Cloves. (2)

The Description.

1. The bulb or head of Garlic is covered with most thin skins or
films of a very light white purple colour, consisting of many cloves
severed one from another, under which in the ground below groweth a
tassel of thready fibres: it hath long green leaves like those of
the Leek, among which riseth up a stalk at the end of the second or
third year, whereupon doth grow a tuft of flowers covered with a
white skin, in which, being broken when it is ripe, appeareth round
black seeds.

2. There is also another Garlic which grows wild in some places of
Germany and France, which in shape much resembles the ordinary, but
the cloves of the roots are smaller and redder. The flower is also
of a more dusky and dark colour than the ordinary.

The Place and Times.

Garlic is seldom sown of seed, but planted in gardens of the small
cloves in November and December, and sometimes in February and
March.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Allium: The apothecaries keep the Latin name:
the Germans call it Knoblauch; the Low Dutch, Look: the Spaniards,
Aios, Alho: the Italians, Aglio: the French, Ail or Aux: the
Bohemians, Czesnek: the English, Garlic, and Poor Man's Treacle.

The Temperature.

Garlic is very sharp, hot, and dry, as Galen saith, in the fourth
degree, and exulcerateth the skin by raising blisters.

The Virtues.

A. Being eaten, it heateth the body extremely, attenuateth and
maketh thin thick and gross humors; cutteth such as are tough and
clammy, digesteth and consumeth them; also openeth obstructions, is
an enemy to all cold poisons, and to the bitings of venomous beasts:
and therefore Galen nameth it Theriaca Rusticorum, or the
husbandman's Treacle.

B. It yieldeth to the body no nourishment at all, it engendereth
naughty and sharp blood. Therefore such as are of a hot complexion
must especially abstain from it. But if it be boiled in water until
such time as it hath lost his sharpeness, it is the less forcible,
and retaineth no longer his evil juice, as Galen saith.

C. It taketh away the roughness of the throat, it helpeth an old
cough, it provoketh urine, it breaketh and consumeth wind, and is
also a remedy for the dropsy which proceedeth of a cold cause.

D. It killeth worms in the belly, and driveth them forth. The milk
also wherein it hath been sodden is given to young children with
good success against the worms.

E. It helpeth a very cold stomach, and is a preservative against the
contagious and pestilent air.

F. The decoction of Garlic used for a bath to sit over, bringeth
down the flowers and secondines or after-burden, as Dioscorides
saith.

G. It taketh away the morphew, tetters, or ringworms, scabbed heads
in children, dandruff and scurf, tempered with honey, and the parts
anointed therewith.

H. With Fig leaves and Cumin it is laid on against the bitings of
the mouse called in English, a shrew.




CHAP. 98. Of Crow-Garlic and Ramsons.


Fig. 303. Crow-Garlic (1)
Fig. 304. Ramsons (2)

The Description.

1. The wild Garlic or Crow-garlic hath small tough leaves like unto
rushes, smooth and hollow within; among which groweth up a naked
stalk, round, slippery, hard and sound: on the top whereof, after
the flowers be gone, grow little seeds made up in a round cluster
like small kernels, having the smell and taste of Garlic. Instead of
a root there is a bulb or round head without any cloves at all.

2. Ramsons do send forth two or three broad longish leaves sharp
pointed, smooth, and of a light green colour. The stalk is a span 
high, smooth and slender, bearing at the top a cluster of white
star-fashioned flowers. Instead of a root it hath a long slender
bulb, which sendeth down a multitude of strings, and is covered with
skins or thick coats.

The Time.

They spring up in April and May. Their seed is ripe in August.

The Place

The Crow Garlic groweth in fertile pastures in all parts of England.
I found it in great plenty in the fields called the Mantels, on the
back side of Islington by London.

Ramsons grow in the woods and borders of fields under hedges, among
the bushes. I found it in the next field unto Boobies Barn, under
that hedge that bordereth upon the lane; and also upon the left
hand, under an hedge adjoining to a lane that leadeth to Hampstead,
both places near London.

The Names.

Both of them be wild Garlic, and may be called in Latin, Alliua
sylvestria: The first, by Dodonæus and Lobel is called Allium
sylvestretenuifolium.

Ramsons are named of the later practioners, Allium ursinum, or
Bear's Garlic: Allium latifolium, and Moly Hippocraticum: in
English, Ramsons, Ramsies, and Buckrams.

The Nature.


The temperatures of these wild Garlics are referred unto those of
the gardens.

The Virtues.

A. Wild Garlic, or Crow-Garlic, as Galen saith, is stronger and of
more force than the garden Garlic.

B. The leaves of Ramsons be stamped and eaten ofdivers in the Low-
countries, with fish for a sauce, even as we do eat green-sauce made
with sorrel.

C. The same leaves may very well be eaten in April and May with
butter, of such as are of a strong constitution, and labouring men.

D. The distilled water drunk breaketh the stone, and driveth it
forth, and provoketh urine.



CHAP. 99. Of Mountain Garlic.


Fig. 305. Great Mountain Garlic
(1)
Fig. 306. Clusius' Mountain
Garlic (2)

The Description.

1,2. The great Mountain Garlic hath long and broad leaves like those
of Leeks, but much greater and longer, embracing or clasping about a
great thick stalk, soft and full of juice, bigger than a man's
finger, and bare toward the top; upon which is set a great head
bigger than a tennis ball, covered with a skin after the manner of
an Onion. The skin when it cometh to perfection breaketh, and
discovereth a great multitude of whitish flowers; which being past,
black seeds follow, enclosed in a three-cornered husk. The root is
bulbous, of the bigness of a great Onion. The whole plant smelleth
very strong like unto Garlic, and is in show a Leek, whereupon it
was called scorodoprasum, as if we should say, Garlic Leek;
participating of the Leek and Garlic, or rather a degenerate Garlic
grown monstrous.

I cannot certainly determine what difference there may be between
the plants expressed by the first figure, which is our author's, and
the second figure which is taken out of Clusius. Now the history
which Clusius gives us to the second, the same is (out of him) given
by our author to the first so that by this reason they are of one
and the same plant. To the which opinion I rather incline, than
affirm the contrary with Bauhin, who distinguishing them, puts the
first amongst the Leeks, under the name of Porrum folio latissimo:
following Tabernamontanus, who first gave this figure, under the
name of Porrum Syriacum.


Fig. 307. Lesser Leek-leaved
Garlic (3)
Fig. 308. Viper's Garlic (4)


3. This plant is lesser in all the parts than the former; the root
is set about with longer and slenderer bulbs wrapped in brownish
skins; the flowers and leaves are like, yet smaller than Garlic.

4. The third, which Clusius makes his second Scorodoprasum, hath
stalks some two cubits high, having many leaves like those of Leeks
from the bottom of the stalk to the middle thereof; their smell is
between that of Leeks and Garlic; the rest of the stalk is naked,
green, smooth, sustaining at the top a head composed of many bulbs,
covered with a whitish skin ending a long green point;which skin by
the growth of the bulbs being broken, they show themselves, being
first of a purplish, and afterwards of a whitish colour, amongst
which are some flowers. The top of the stalk at first twines itself,
so that it in some sort represents a serpent; then by little it
untwines again, and bears the head straight up. The root consists of
many cloves much like that of Garlic.

Fig. 309. Broad-leaved Mountain Garlic or Victorialis (5)

5. The Broad-leaved Mountain Garlic, or rather the Mountain Ramsons,
riseth up with a stalk a cubit high, a finger thick, yet very weak,
full of a spongeous substance, near to the bottom of a purplish
colour, and green above, bearing at the top a multitude of small
whitish flowers, somewhat gaping, star-fashion. The leaves are three
or four, broad ribbed like the leaves of great Gentian, resembling
those of Ramsons, but greater. The root is great and long, covered
with many scaly coats and hairy strings.

The Place.

The great mountain Garlic grows about Constantinople, as saith
Clusius. I received a plant of it from Mr. Thomas Edwards apothecary
of Exeter, who found it growing in the West parts of England.

Victorialis groweth in the mountains of Germany, as saith Carolus
Clusius, and is yet a stranger in England for anything that I do
know.

TheTime.

Most of these plants flower in the months of June and July.

The Names.

Of the first and second I have spoken already. The third is
Scorodoprasum minus of Lobel. The fourth is Allium sativum secundum
of Dodonæus, and Scorodoprasum secundum of Clusius. The fifth is
Allium anguinum of Matthiolus; Ophioscoridon of Lobel, and
Victorialis of Clusius and others, as also Allium Alpinum. The
Germans call it Seigwurtz.

The Temper.

They are of a middle temper between Leeks and Garlic.

The Virtues.

Scorodoprasum, as it partakes of the temper, so also of the virtues
of Leeks and Garlic; that is, it attenuates gross and tough matter,
helps expectoration, &c.

Victorialis is like Garlic in the operation thereof. Some (as
Camerarita writeth) hang the root thereofabout the necks of their
cattle being fallen blind, by what occasion soever it happen, and
persuade themselves that by this means they will recover their
sight. Those that work in the mines in Germany affirm, That they
find this root very powerful in defending them from the assaults of
impure spirits or devils, which often in such places are troublesome
unto them. Clusius.



CHAP. 100. Of Moly, or the Sorcerer's garlic.


Fig. 310. Dioscorides' Moly (1)
Fig. 311. Serpent's Moly (2)

The Description.

1. The first kind of Moly hath for his root a little whitish bulb
somewhat long, not unlike to the root of the unset Leek, which
sendeth forth leaves like the blades of corn or grass: among which
doth rise up a slender weak stalk, fat and full of juice, at the top
whereof cometh forth of a skinny film a bundle of milk-white
flowers, not unlike to those of Ramsons. The whole plant hath the
smell and taste of Garlic, whereof no doubt it is a kind.

2. Serpent's Moly hath likewise a small bulbous root with some
fibres fastened to the bottom, from which rise up weak grassy leaves
of a shining green colour, crookedly winding and turning themselves
toward the point like the tail of a serpent, where of it took his
name: the stalk is tough, thick, and full of juice at the top
whereof standeth a cluster of small red bulbs, like unto the
smallest clove of Garlic, before they be pilled from their skin. And
among those bulbs there do thrust forth small and weak foot-stalks,
every one bearing at the end one small white flower tending to a
purple colour: which being past, the bulbs do fall down upon the
ground, where they without help do take hold and root, and thereby
greatly increase, as also by the infinite bulbs that the root doth
cast off: all the whole plant doth smell andtaste of Garlic, whereof
it is also a kind.


Fig. 312. Homer's Moly (3)
Fig. 313. Indian Moly (4)
	3. Homer's Moly hath very thick leaves, broad toward the
bottom, sharp at the point, and hollowed like a trough or gutter, in
the bottom of which leaves near unto the bottom cometh forth a
certain round bulb or ball of a goose-turd green colour which being
ripe and set in the ground groweth and becometh a fair plant such as
is the mother. Among those leaves riseth up a naked smooth thick
stalk, of two cubits high, as strong as a small walking staff: at
the top of the stalk standeth a bundle of fair whitish flowers,
dashed over with a wash of purple colour, smelling like the flowers
of Onion. When they be ripe there appeareth a black seed wrapped in
a white skin or husk. The root is great and bulbous, covered with a
blackish skin on the outside, and white within, and of the bigness
of a great Onion.

4. Indian Moly hath very thick fat short leaves, and sharp pointed;
in the bosom whereof cometh forth a thick knobby bulb like that of
Homer's Moly. The stalk is also like the precedent, bearing at the
top a cluster of scaly bulbs included in a large thin skin or film.
The root is great, bulbous fashion, and full of juice.


Fig. 314. Caucafon, or Yellow
Moly (5)
Fig. 315. Yellow-flowered broad-
leaved Moly (6)
	5. Caucafon, or withering Moly, hath a very great bulbous
root, greater than that of Homer's Moly, and fuller of a slimy
juice; from which do arise three or four great thick and broad
leaves withered always at the point; wherein consist all the
difference between these leaves and those of Homer's Moly, which are
not so. In the middle of the leaves riseth up a bunch of smooth
greenish bulbs set upon a tender footstalk, in shape and bigness
like to a great garden worm, which being ripe and planted in the
earth, do also grow unto a fair plant like unto their mother.

These two last mentioned (according to Bauhin, and I think the
truth) are but figures of one and the same plant; the later whereof
is the better, and more agreeing to the growing of the plant.

6. To these may be fitly added two other Molies: the first of these,
which is the yellow Moly, hath roots whitish and round, commonly two
of them growing together; the leaves which it sends forth are long
and broad, and somewhat resemble those of the Tulip, and usually are
but two in number, between which rises up a stalk some foot high,
bearing at the top an umbel of fair yellow star-like flowers tipped
on their lower sides with a little green. The whole plant smelleth
of Garlic.

Fig. 216 Dwarf White-flowered Moly (7)

7. This little Moly hath a root about the bigness of an hazelnut,
white, with some fibres hanging thereat; the stalk is of an handful
or little more in height, the top thereof is adorned with an umbel
of ten or twelve white flowers, each of which consists of six
leaves, not sharp pointed, but turned round, and pretty large,
considering the bigness of the plant. This plant hath also usually
but two leaves, and those like those of Leeks, but far less.

The Place.

These plants grow in the garden of Mr. John Parkinson apothecary,
and with Mr. John Tradescant and some others, studious in the
knowledge of plants.

The Time.

They spring forth of the ground in February, and bring forth their
flowers, fruit, and seed in the end of August.

The Names.

Some have derived the name Moly from the Greek words meaning to
drive away diseases. It may probably be argued to belong to a
certain bulbous plant, and that a kind of Garlic. by the words
Moliza and Molix. The former, Galen in his Lexicon of some of the
difficulter words used by Hippocrates, expounds that Moliza is a
Garlic having a simple or single head, and not to be parted or
distinguished into cloves: some term it Moly. Erotianus in his
Lexicon expounds the latter thus: Molix (saith he) is a head of
Garlic, round, and not to be parted into cloves.

The Names in particular.

1. This is called Moly by Matthiolus; Moly Angustifolium by
Dodonæus; Moly Dioscorideum by Lobel and Clusius.

2. This, Moly Serpentinum vocatum, by Lobel and the author of the
Hist. Lugd.

3. This same is thought to be the Moly of Theophrastus and Pliny, by
Dodonæus, Clusius, &c. and some also would have it to be that of
Homer, mentioned in his twentieth Odyss. Lobel calleth it Moly
Liliflorum.

4. 5. The fourth and fifth being one, are called Caucafon, and Moly
Indicum by Lobel, Clusius, and others.

6. This is Moly Montanum latifolium flavo flore of Clusius, and Moly
luteum of Lobel, Adversar. par. 2.

7. This same is Moly minus of Clusius.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These Molies are very hot, approaching to the nature of Garlic, and
I doubt not but in time some excellent man or other will find out as
many good virtues of them, as their stately and comely proportion
thould seem to be possessed with. But for my part, I have neither
proved, nor heard of others, nor found in the writings of the
ancients, anything touching their faculties. Only Dioscorides
reporteth, That they are of marvellous efficacy to bring down the
terms, if one of them be stamped with oil of Fleur-de-lys according
to art, and used in manner of a pessary or mother suppository.



CHAP. 101. Of divers other Molies.

Besides the Garlics and Molies formerly mentioned by our author, and
those I have in this edition added, there are divers others, which,
mentioned by Clusius, and belonging unto this tribe, I have thought
good in this place to set forth. Now for that they are more than
conveniently could be added to the former chapters, (which are
sufficiently large) I thought it not amiss to allot them a place by
themselves.


Fig. 317. The first Narcissus-
leaved Moly (1)
Fig. 318. The second Narcissus-
leaved Moly (2)

The Description

1. This, which in face nighest represents the Molies described in
the last Chapter, hath a root made of many scales, like as an Onion
in the upper part, but the lower part is knotty, and runs in the
ground like as Solomon's Seal; the Onion-like part hath many fibres
hanging thereat; the leaves are like those of the white Narcissus,
very green and shining, amongst which riseth up a stalk of a cubit
high, naked, firm, green, and crested; at the top come forth many
flowers consisting of six purplish leaves, with as many chives on
their insides: after which follow three-square heads, opening when
they are ripe, and containing a round black seed.

2. This other being of the same kind, and but a variety of the
former, hath softer and more ash-coloured leaves, with the flowers
of a lighter colour. Both these flower at the end of June, or in
July.


Fig. 319. The third Narcissus-
leaved Moly (3)
Fig. 320. The first Broad-leaved
Mountain Moly (4)
	3. This hath five or six leaves equally as broad as those of
the last described, but not so long, being somewhat twined, green,
and shining. The stalk is some foot in length, smaller than that of
the former, but not less stiff, crested, and bearing in a round head
many flowers, in manner of growing and shape like those of the
former, but of a more elegant purple colour. In seed and root it
resembles the precedent. There is also a variety of this kind, with
leaves longer and narrower, neither so much twined, the stalks
weaker, and flowers much lighter coloured.

This flowers later than the former, to wit, in July and August.

All these plants grow naturally in Leitenberg and other hills near
to Vienna in Austria, where they were first found and observed by
Carolus Clusius.

4. This hath a stalk some two cubits high, which even to the middle
is encompassed with leaves much longer and broader than those of
Garlic, and very like those of the Leek: on the top of the smooth
and rush-like stalk groweth a tuft consisting of many dark purple
coloured bulbs growing close together, from amongst which come forth
pretty long stalks bearing light purple star-fashioned flowers,
which are succeeded by three-cornered seed-vessels. The root is
bulbous, large, consisting of many cloves, and having many white
fibres growing forth thereof. Moreover, there grow out certain round
bulbs about the root, almost like those which grow in the head, and
being planted apart, they produce plants of the same kind. This is
Allium, sive Moly montanum latifolium 1, Clusius.


Fig. 321. The second Mountain
Moly (5)
Fig. 322. The third Mountain
Moly (6)
	5. This hath a smooth round green stalk four cubits high,
whereon do grow most commonly three leaves narrower than those of
the former, and as it were grassy. The top of the stalk sustains a
head wrapped in two lax films, each of them running out with a sharp
point like two horns, which opening themselves, there appear many
small bulbs heaped together, amongst which are flowers composed of
six purplish little leaves, and fastened to long stalks. The root is
round and white, with many long white fibres hanging thereat.
Clusius calls this, Allium, sive Moly montanum secundum. And this is
Lobel's Ampeloprason proliferum.

6. Like to the last described is this in height and shape of the
stalk and leaves, as also in the forked or horned skin involving the
head, which consisteth of many small bulbs of a reddish green
colour, and ending in a long green point; amongst which, upon long
and slender stalks hang down flowers like in form and magnitude to
the former, but of a whitish colour, with a dark purple streak
alongst the middle, and upon the edges of each leaf. The root is
round and white, like that of the last described. This Clusius gives
under the title of Allium sive Moly montanum tertium.


Fig. 323. The fourth Mountain
Moly, the first kind (7)
Fig. 324. The fourth Mountain
Moly, the second kind (8)
	7. This also hath three rushy leaves, with a round stalk of
some cubit high, whose top is likewise adorned with a forked
membrane, containing many pale coloured flowers hanging upon long
stalks, each flower consisting of six little leaves, with the like
number of chives, and a pistil in the midst. This tuft of flowers
cut off with the top of the stalk, and carried into a chamber, will
yield a pleasant smell (like that which is found in the flowers in
the earlier Cyclamen) but it will quickly decay. After these flowers
are past succeed three-cornered heads containing a black small seed,
not much unlike Gillyflower seed. The root is round like the former,
sometimes yielding off-sets. This is Alii montani 4. species 1. of
Clusius.

8. There is another kind of this last described, which grows to
almost the same height, and hath like leaves, and the head ingirt
with the like skinny long pointed husks; but the flowers of this are
of a very dark colour. The roots are like the former, with off-sets
by their side. This is Clusius his Moly montani quarti species
secunda. The roots of the three last described smell of garlic, but
the leaves have rather an herby or grass-like smell.

The fifth and sixth of these grow naturally in the Styrian and
Austrian Alps. The seventh grows about Pressburg in Hungary
[Bratislava in Slovakia], about Niclasburg in Moravia [Mikulov in
the Czech Republic], but most abundantly about the Baths in Baden.

Fig. 325. The fifth Mountain Moly (9)

9. This grows to the like height as the former, with a green stalk,
having few leaves thereupon, and naked at the top, where it carrieth
a round head consisting of many star-like small flowers, of a fair
purple colour, fastened to short stalks, each flower being composed
of six little leaves, withal many chives, and a pistil in the
middle. The root is bulbous and white, having sometimes his off-sets
by his sides. The smell of it is like Garlic. This groweth also
about Pressburg in Hungary, and was there observed by Clusius to
bear his flower in May and June. He calleth this Allium, seu Moly
montanum quintum.



CHAP. 102. Of White Lilies.


Fig. 326 White Lily (1)
Fig. 327. Constantinople White
Lily (2)

The Kinds.

There be sundry sorts of Lilies, whereof some be wild, or of the
field; others tame, or of the garden; some white, others red; some
of our own country's growing, others from beyond the seas; and
because of the variable sorts we will divide them into chapters,
beginning with the two white Lilies, which differ little but in the
native place of growing.

The Description

1. The white Lily hath long, smooth, and full bodied leaves, of a
grassy or light green colour. The stalks be two cubits high, and
sometimes more, set or garnished with the like leaves, but growing
smaller and smaller toward the top; and upon them do grow fair white
flowers strong of smell, narrow toward the foot of the stalk whereon
they do grow, wide or open in the mouth like a bell. In the middle
part of them do grow small tender pointels tipped with a dusty
yellow colour, ribbed or chamfered on the back side, consisting of
six small leaves thick and fat. The root is a bulb made of scaly
cloves, full of tough and clammy juice, wherewith the whole plant
doth greatly abound.

2. The white Lily of Constantinople hath very large and fat leaves
like the former, but narrower and lesser. The stalk riseth up to the
height of three cubits, set and garnished with leaves also like the
precedent, but much less. Which stalk oftentimes doth alter and
degenerate from his natural roundness to a flat form, as it were a
lath of wood furrowed or chanelled alongst the same, as it were ribs
or welts. The flowers grow at the top like the former, saving that
the leaves do turn themselves more backward like the Turk's Cap, and
beareth many more flowers than our English white Lily doth.

The Place.

Our English white Lily groweth in most gardens of England. The other
groweth naturally in Constantinople and the parts adjacent, from
whence we had plants for our English gardens, where they flourish as
in their own country.

The Time.

The Lilies flower from May to the end of June.

The Names.

The Lily is called in Latin, Lilium, and also Rosa Iunonis, or
Juno's Rose, because as it is reported it came up of her milk that
fell upon the ground. For the poets feign, That Hercules, who
Jupiter had by Alcumena, was put to Juno's breath whilest she was
asleep; and after the sucking there fell away abundance of milk; and
that one part was spilt in the heavens, and the other on the earth;
and that of this sprang the Lily and of the other the circle in the
heavens called Lacteus Circulus, or the Milky Way, or otherwise in
English Watling Street. Saint Basil in the explication of the 44th
Psalm saith, That no flower so lively sets forth the frailty of
man's life as the Lily. It is called in high Dutch, Weiz Gilgen: in
low Dutch, Witte Lilien: in Italian, Giglio: in Spanish, Lirio
blanco: in French, Lys blanc: in English, the white Lily.

The other is called Lilium album Byzantinum, and also Martagon album
Byzantinium: in English, the white Lily of Constantinople: of the
Turks themselves, Sultan Zambach, with this addition, (that they
might be the better known which kind of Lily they meant when they
sent roots of them into these countries) Fa fioragrandi Bianchi; so
that Sultan Zambach fa fioragrandi Bianchi, is as much to say as,
Sultan's great Lily with white flowers.

The Nature.

The white Lily is hot, and partly of a subtle substance. But if you
regard the root, it is dry in the first degree, and hot in the
second.

The Virtues.

A. The root of the garden Lily stamped with honey glueth together
sinews that be cut in sunder. It consumeth or scoureth away the
ulcers of the head called Achores, and likewise all scurviness of
the beard and face.

B. The Root stamped with Vinegar, the leaves of Henbane, or the meal
of Barley, cureth the tumours and apostumes of the privy members. It
bringeth the hair again upon places which have been burned or
scalded, if it be mingled with oil or grease, and the place anointed
therewith.

C. The same root roasted in the embers, and stamped with some leaven
of rye bread and hog's grease, breaketh pestilential botches. It
ripeneth apostumes in the flanks, coming of venery and such like.

D. The flowers steeped in Oil of Olive, and shifted two or three
times during summer, and set in the sun in a strong glass, is good
to soften the hardness of sinews, and the hardness of the matrix.

E. Florentinus a writer of husbandry saith, That if the root be
curiously opened, and therein be put some red, blue, or yellow
colour that hath no caustic or burning quality, it will cause the
flower to be of the same colour.

F. Julius Alexandrinus the Emperor's physician saith, That the water
thereof distilled and drunk causeth easy and speedy deliverance, and
expelleth the secondine or after-burthen in most speedy manner.

G. He also saith, the leaves boiled in red wine, and applied to old
wounds or ulcers, do much good, and forward the cure, according to
the doctrine of Galen in his seventh book de simpl. Med. facultat.

H. The root of a white Lily stamped and strained with wine, and
given to drink for two or three days together, expelleth the poison
of the pestilence, and causeth it to break forth in blisters in the
outward part of the skin, according to the experience of a learned
gentleman Mr. William Godorus, Sergeant Surgeon to the Queen's
Majesty: who also hath cured many of the dropsy with the juice
thereof, tempered with barley meal, and baked in cakes, and so eaten
ordinarily for some month or six weeks together with meat, but no
other bread during that time.



CHAP. 103. Of Red Lilies.


Fig. 328. Gold-red Lily (1)
Fig. 329. Red Lily (2)

The Kinds.

Here be likewise sundry sorts of Lilies, which we do comprehend
under one general name in English, Red Lilies, whereof some are of
our own country's growing, and others of beyond the seas, the which
shall be distinguished severally in this chapter that followeth.

The Description.

1. The gold-red Lily groweth to the height of two, and sometimes
three cubits, and often higher than those of the common white Lily.
The leaves be blacker and narrower, set very thick about the stalk.
The flowers in the top be many, from ten to thirty flowers,
according to the age of the plant, and fertility of the soil, like
in form and greatness to those of the white Lily, but of a red
colour tending to a saffron, sprinkled or powdered with many little
black specks; like to rude unperfect drafts of certain letters. The
roots be great bulbs, consisting of many cloves, as those of the
white Lily.

2. The many-flowered red Lily hath a root like that of the last
described, as also leaves and stalks; the flower also in shape is
like that of the former, but of a more light red colour, and in
number of flowers it exceedeth the precedent, for sometimes it bears
sixty flowers upon one stalk.



Fig. 330. Fiery Red Lily (3)
Fig. 331. Red Bulb-bearing Lily
(4)
	3. This red Lily is like unto the former, but not so tall; the
leaves be fewer in number, broader, and downy towards the top of the
stalk, where it bears some bulbs. The flowers in shape be like the
former, saving that the colour hereof is more red, and thick dashed
with black specks. The root is scaly like the former.

4. There is another red Lily which hath many leaves somewhat ribbed,
broader than the last mentioned, but shorter, and not so many in
number. The stalk groweth to the height of two cubits, and sometimes
higher, whereupon do grow flowers like the former: among the foot-
stalks of which flowers come forth certain bulbs or cloved roots,
brown of colour, tending unto redness; which do fall in the end of
August upon the ground, taking root and growing in the same place,
whereby it greatly increaseth, for seldom or never it bringeth forth
seed for his propagation.


Fig. 332. Red Lily with bulbs
growing along the stalk (5)
Fig. 333. Small Red Lily (6)
	5. There is another sort of red Lily having a fair scaly or
cloved root, yellow above, and brown toward the bottom; from which
riseth up a fair stiff stalk crested or furrowed, of an overworn
brown colour, set from the lower part to the branches, whereon the
flowers do grow with many leaves, confusedly placed without order.
Among the branches close by the stem grow forth certain cloves or
roots of a reddish colour, like unto the cloves of Garlic before
they are peeled which being fallen upon the ground at their time of
ripeness, do shoot forth certain tender strings or roots that do
take hold of the ground, whereby it greatly increaseth. The flowers
are in shape like the other red Lilies, but of a dark orange colour,
resembling a flame of fire spotted with black spots.

6. This hath a much shorter stalk, being but a cubit or less in
height, with leaves blackish, and narrower than those aforegoing.
The flowers, as in the rest, grow out of the top of the stalk, and
are of a purplish saffron colour, with some blackish spots. The root
in shape is like the precedent.

The Place.

These Lilies do grow wild in the ploughed fields of Italy and
Languedoc, in the mountains and valleys of Etruria and those places
adjacent. They are common in our English gardens, as also in
Germany.

The Time.

These red Lilies do flower commonly a little before the white
Lilies, and sometimes together with them.

The Names.

1. The first of these is thought by some to be the Bulbus cruentus
of Hippocrates; as also the Lilium purpureum of Dioscorides: Yet
Matthiolus and some others would have it his Hemerocallis. Dodonæus
and Bapt. Porta think it the Hyacinthus and Cosmosandalos of the
poets, of which you shall find more hereafter. It is the Martagon
Chymistarum of Lobel, and the Lilium aureum maius of
Tabernamontanus.

2. This is Martagon Chymistarum alterum of Lobel.

3. This is Clusius his Martagon bulbiferum secundum.

4. Martagon bulbiferum primum of Clusius.

5. This Dodonæus calls Lilium purpureum tertium, and it is Martagon
bulbiferum tertium of Clusius.

6. This last Lobel and Dodonæus call Lilium purpureum minus.

I have thought good here also to give you that discourse touching
the poets' Hyacinth, which being translated out of Dodonæus, was
formerly unfitly put into the chapter of Hyacinths which therefore I
there omitted, and have here restored to his due place, as you may
see by Dodonæus, Pempt. 2. lib. 2. Cap. 2.

There is a Lily which Ovid, Metamorph. lib 10. calls Hyacinthus, of
the boy Hyacinthus, of whose blood he feigneth that this flower
sprang, when he perished as he was playing with Apollo, for whose
sake, he saith, that Apollo did print certain letters and notes of
his mourning. These are his words:

Ecce cruor, qui fusus humo signaverat herbas,
Definit esse cruor, Tyrioque nitentior ostro
Flos oritur, formamque capit, quam Lilia, si non
Purpureus color his argenteus esset in illis.
Non satis hoc Phœbo est, (is enim fuit auctor honoris)
Ispe suos gemitus foliis inscribit, & ai ai,
Flos habet inscriptum, funestaque litera ducta est.

Which lately were elegantly thus rendered in English by Mr. Sands:

Behold! the blood which late the grass had dyed
Was now no blood: from thence a flower full blown,
Far brighter than the Tyrian scarlet shone:
Which seem'd the same, or did resemble right
A Lily, changing but the red to white.
Nor so contented, (for the youth received
That grace from Phoebus) in the leaves he weaved
The sad impression of his sighs, Ai, Ai,
They now in funeral characters display, &c.

Theocritus also hath made mention of this Hyacinth, in Bion's
Epitaph; in the 19th Idyll which IDyll by some is attributed to
Moschus, and made his third. The words are in English thus:

Now Hyacinth speak thy letters, and once more
Imprint thy leaves with Ai, Ai, as before.

Likewise Virgil hath written hereof in the third Eclogue of his
Bucolics.

Et me Phoebus amat, Phoebo sua semper apud me
Munera sunt, lauri & suave rubens Hyacinthus.

Phoebus loves me, his gifts I always have,
The e'er green Laurel, and the Hyacinth brave.

In like manner also Nemesianus in his second Eclogue of his
Bucolics:

Te sine me, misero mihi Lilia nigra videntur,
Pallentesque Rosæ, nec dulce rubens Hyacinthus:
At si tu venias, & candida Lilia fient
Purpureæque Rosæ, & dulce rubens Hyacinthus.

Without thee, Love, the Lilies black do seem;
The Roses pale, and Hyacinths I deem
Not lovely red. But if thou com'st to me,
Lilies are White, red Rose and Hyacinths be.

The Hyacinths are said to be red which Ovid calleth purple; for the
red colour is sometimes termed purple. Now it is thought this
Hyacinthus is called Ferrugineus, for that it is red of a rusty iron
colour: for as the putrefaction of brass is named Ærugo; so the
corruption of iron is called Ferrugo, which from the reddish colour
is stled also Rubigo. And certainly they are not a few that would
have Color ferrugineus to be so called from the rust which they
think Ferrugo. Yet this opinion is not allowed of by all men; for
some judge, that Color ferrugineus is inclining to a blue, for that
when the best iron is heated and wrought, when as it is cold again
it is of a colour near unto blue, which from Ferrum (or iron) is
called ferrugineus. These latter ground themselves upon Virgil's
authority, who in the sixth of his Æneidos describeth Charon's
ferrugineous barge or boat, and presently calleth the same blue. His
words are these:

Ipse ratem conto subigit velisque minstrat,
Et ferruginea subuectat corpora Cymba.

He thrusting with a pole, and setting sails at large,
Bodies transports in ferrugineous barge.

And then a little after he adds:
Cœruleam advertit puppim, ripæque propinquat,

He then turns in his blue barge, and the shore
Approches nigh to.

And Claudius also, in his second book of the carrying away of
Proserpina, doth not a little confirm their opinions; who writeth,
That the Violets are painted, ferrugine dulci, with a sweet iron
colour.

Sanguineo splendore rosas, vaccinea nigro
Induit, & aulci violas ferrugine pingit.

He trims the Rose with bloody bright,
And prime-tree berries black he makes,
And decks the Violet with a sweet
Dark iron colour which it takes.

But let us return to the proper names from which we have digressed.
Most of the later herbarists do call this plant Hyacinthus Poeticus,
or the Poets' Hyacinth: Pausanias in his second book of his
Corinthiacs hath made mention of Hyacinthus called of the
Hermonians, Comosandalos, setting down the ceremonies done by them
on their festival days, in honour of the goddess Chthonia. The
priests (saith he) and the magistrates for that year being, do lead
the troupe of the pomp; the women and men follow after; the boys
solemnly lead forth the goddess with a stately show: they go in
white vestures, with garlands on their heads made of a flower which
the inhabitants call Comosandalos, which is the blue or sky-coloured
Hyacinth, having the marks and letters of mourning as aforesaid.

The Nature

The flower of the red Lily (as Galen saith) is of a mixed
temperature, partly of thin, and partly of an earthly essence. The
root and leaves do dry and cleanse, and moderately digest, or waste
and consume away.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of the herb applied are good against the stinging of
serpents.

B. The same boiled and tempered with vinegar are good against
burnings, and heal green wounds and ulcers.

C. The root roasted in the embers, and pounded with oil of roses
cureth burnings, and softeneth hardness of the matrix.

D. The same stamped with honey cureth the wounded sinews and members
out of joint. It takes away the morphew, wrinkles, and deformity of
the face.

E. Stamped with vinegar, the leaves of Henbane, and wheat meal, it
removeth hot swellings of the stones, the yard, and matrix.

F. The roots boiled in wine (saith Pliny) causeth the corns of the
feet to fall away within few days, with removing the medicine until
it have wrought his effect.

G. Being drunk in honeyed water, they drive out by siege
unprofitable blood.



CHAP. 104. Of Mountain Lilies.


Fig. 334. Great Mountain Lily
(1)
Fig. 335. Small Mountain Lily
(2)

The Description.

1. The great mountain Lily hath a cloved bulb or scaly root like to
those of the Red Lily, yellow of colour, very small in respect of
the greatness of the plant: From the which riseth up a stalk,
sometimes two or three, according to the age of the plant; whereof
the middle stalk commonly turneth from his roundness into a flat
form, as those of the white Lily of Constantinople. Upon these
stalks do grow fair leaves of a blackish green colour, in roundels
and spaces as the leaves of Woodruff, not unlike to the leaves of
white Lily, but smaller at the top of the stalks. The flowers be in
number infinite, or at the least hard to be counted, very thick set
or thrust together, of an overworn purple, spotted on the inside
with many small specks of the colour of rusty iron. The whole flower
doth turn itself backward at such time as the sun hath cast his
beams upon it, like unto the Tulip or Turk's Cap, as the Lily or
Martagon of Constantinople doth; from the middle whereof do come
forth tender pointels with small dangling pendants hanging thereat,
of the colour the flower is spotted with.

2. The small mountain Lily is very like unto the former in root,
leaf, stalk, and flowers; differing in these points: The whole plant
is lesser, the stalk never leaveth his round form, and beareth fewer
flowers.

There are two or three more varieties of these plants mentioned by
Clusius; the one of this lesser kind, with flowers on the outside of
a flesh colour, and on the inside white, with blackish spots as also
another wholly white without spots. The third variety is like the
first, but differs in that the flowers blow later, and smell sweet.

The Place

These plants grow in the woody mountains of Styria and Hungary, and
also in such like places on the North of Frankfurt, upon the Main.

The small sort I have had many years growing in my garden but the
greater I have not had till of late, given me by my loving friend
Mr. James Garret apothecary of London.

The Time.

These Lilies of the mountain flower at such time as the common white
Lily doth, and sometimes sooner.

The Names.

The great mountain Lily is called of Tabernamontanus, Lilium
Saracenicum, received by Master Garret aforesaid from Lille in
Flanders, by the name of Martagon Imperiale: of some, Lilium
Saracenicum mas: It is Hemerocallis flore rubella, of Lobel.

The small mountain Lily is called in Latin, Lilium montanum, and
Lilium sylvestre: of Dodonæus, Hemerocallis: of others, Martagon:
but neither truly; for that there is of either, other plants
properly called by the same names. In high Dutch it is called
Goldwurtz, from the yellowness of the roots: in low Dutch, Lilikens
van Gualarien; in Spanish, Lirio Amarillo: in French, Lys Sauvage:
in English, Mountain Lily.

The Nature and Virtues.

There hath not been anything left in writing either of the nature or
virtues of these plants: notwithstanding we may deem, that God which
gave them such seemly and beautiful shape, hath not left them
without their peculiar virtues; the finding out whereof we leave to
the learned and industrious searcher of nature.



CHAP. 105. Of the Red Lily of Constantinople.


Fig. 336. Red Constantinople
Lily (1)
Fig. 337. Purplish-Red
Constantinople Lily (2)

The Description.

1. The red Lily of Constantinople hath a yellow scaly or cloved root
like unto the Mountain Lily, but greater: from the which ariseth up
a fair fat stalk a finger thick, of a dark purplish colour toward
the top, which sometimes doth turn from his natural roundness into a
flat form, like as doth the great mountain Lily: upon which stalk
grow sundry fair and most beautiful flowers, in shape like those of
the mountain Lily, but of greater beauty, seeming as it were framed
of red wax, tending to a red lead colour. From the middle of the
flower cometh forth a tender pointel or pistil, and likewise many
small chives tipped with loose pendants. The flower is of a
reasonable pleasant savour. The leaves are confusedly set about the
stalk like those of the white Lily, but broader and shorter.

2. This hath a large Lily-like root, from which ariseth a stalk some
cubit or more in height, set confusedly with leaves like the
precedent. The flowers also resemble those of the last described, 
but usually are more in number, and they are of a purplish sanguine
colour.


Fig. 338. Light Red
Constantinople Lily (3)
Fig. 339. Many-flowered
Vermilion Constantinople Lily
(4)


3. This differs little from the last, but in the colour of the
flowers, which are of a lighter red colour than those of the first
described. The leaves and stalks also, as Clusius observeth are of a
lighter green.

4. This may also more fitly be termed a variety from the former,
than otherwise: for according to Clusius, the difference is only in
this, that the flowers grow equally from the top of the stalk, and
the middle flower rises higher than any of the rest, and sometimes
consists of twelve leaves as it were a twin, as you may perceive by
the figure.

The Time

They flower and flourish with the other Lilies.

The Names.

The Lily of Constantinople is called likewise in England, Martagon
of Constantinople: of Lobel, Hemerocallis Chalcedonica, and likewise
Lilium Byzantinum: of the Turks it is called Zufiniare: of the
Venetians, Marocali.

The Nature and Virtues.

Of the nature or virtues there is not anything as yet set down, but
it is esteemed especially for the beauty and rareness of the flower;
referring what may be gathered hereof to a further consideration.



CHAP. 106. Of the narrow-leaved reflex Lilies.


Fig. 340. Red Narrow-leaved Lily
(1)
Fig. 341. Spotted Yellow
Mountain Lily (3)

The Description.

1. The root of this is not much unlike that of other Lilies; the
stalk is some cubit high, or better; the leaves are many and narrow,
and of a darker green than those of the ordinary Lily the flowers
are reflex, like those treated of in the last chapter, of a red or
vermilion colour. This flowers in the end of May: wherefore Clusius
calls it Lilium rubrum præcox, The early red Lily.

2. This plant is much more beautiful than the last described; the
roots are like those of Lilies, the stalk some cubit and an half in
height, being thick set with small grassy leaves. The flowers grow
out one above another, in shape and colour like those of the last
described, but oft-times are more in number, so that some one stalk
hath borne some 48 flowers. The root is much like the former.

3. This in roots is like those afore described, the stalk is some 2
cubits high, set confusedly with long narrow leaves, with three
conspicuous nerves running alongst them. The flowers are ar first
pale coloured, afterwards yellow, consisting of six leaves bended
back to their stalks, & marked with blackish purple spots.

Fig. 342. Unspotted Yellow Mountain Lily (4)

4. There is also another differing from the last described only in
that the flower is not spotted, as that of the former.

The Place.

These Lilies are thought natives of the Pyrenean mountains, and of
late years are become denizens in some of our English gardens.

The Time.

The first (as I have said) flowers in the end of May: the rest in
June.

The Names.

1. This is called by Clusius Lilium rubrum præcox.

2. Clusius names this, Lilium rubrum præcox. 3. angustifolium. Lobel
styles it, Hemerocallis Macedonica, and Martigon Pomponeum.

3. This is Lilium flavo flore maculis distinctum of Clusius, and
Lilium montanum flavo flo. of Lodel.

4. This being a variety of the last, is called by Clusius, Lilium
flavo flore maculis non distinctum.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These in all likelihood cannot much differ from the temper and
virtues of other Lilies, which in all their parts they so much
resemble.



CHAP. 107. Of the Persian Lily.

Fig. 343. The Persian Lily

The Description.

The Persian Lily hath for his root a great white bulb, difering in
shape from the other Lilies, having one great bulb firm or solid,
full of juice, which commonly each year setteth off or increaseth
one other bulb, and sometimes more, which the next year after is
taken from the mother root, and so bringeth forth such flowers as
the old plant did. From this root riseth up a fat thick and straight
stem of two cubits high, whereupon is placed long narrow leaves of a
green colour, declining to blueness as doth those of the Woad. The
flowers grow alongst the naked part of the stalk like little bells,
of an overworn purple colour, hanging down their heads, every one
having his own foot-stalk of two inches long, as also his pistil or
clapper from the middle part of the flower; which being past and
withered, there is not found any seed at all, as in other plants,
but is increased only in his root.

The Place.

This Persian Lily groweth naturally in Persia and those places
adjacent, whereof it took his name, and is now (by the industry of
travellers into those countries, lovers of plants) made a denizen in
some few of our London gardens.

The Time.

This plant flowereth from the beginning of May, to the end of June.

The Names.

This Persian Lily is called in Latin, Lilium Persicum, Lilium
Susianum, Pennacio Persiano, and Pannaco Persiano, either by the
Turks themselves, or by such as out of those parts brought them into
England but which of both is uncertain. Alphonsus Pancius, Physician
to the Duke of Ferrara, when as he sent the figure of this plant
unto Carolus Clusius, added this title, Pennacio Persiano e pianta
bellisima & e specie di Giglio o Martagon, diverso della corona
Imperiale: That is in English, This most elegant plant Pennacio of
Persia is a kind of Lily or Martagon, differing from the flower
called the Crown Imperial.

The Nature and Virtues.

There is not anything known of the nature or virtues of this Persian
Lily, esteemed as yet for his rareness and comely proportion;
although (if I might be so bold with a stranger that hath vouchsafed
to travel so many hundreds of miles for our acquaintance) we have in
our English fields many scores of flowers in beauty far excelling
it.



CHAP. 108. Of the Crown Imperial.


Fig. 344. Crown Imperial
Fig. 345. Double Crown Imperial

Fig. 346. Crown Imperial with Seed

The Description.

The Crown Imperial hath for his root a thick firm and solid bulb,
covered with a yellowish film or skin, from the which riseth up a
great thick fat stalk two cubits high, in the bare and naked part of
a dark overworn dusky purple colour. The leaves grow confusedly
about the stalk like those of the white Lily, but narrower: the
flowers grow at the top of the stalk, encompassing it round in form
of an Imperial crown, (whereof it took his name) hanging their heads
downward as it were bells: in colour it is yellowish or to give you
the true colour, which bywords otherwise cannot be expressed, if you
lay sap berries in steep in fair water for the space of two hours,
and mix a little saffron with that infusion, and lay it upon paper,
it showeth the perfect colour to limn or illumine the flower withal.
The backside of the said flower is streaked with purplish lines,
which doth greatly set forth the beauty thereof. In the bottom of
each of these bells there is placed six drops of most clear shining
sweet water, in taste like sugar, resembling in show fair Orient
pearls, the which drops if you take away, there do immediately
appear the like: notwithstanding if they may be suffered to stand
still in the flower according to his own nature, they will never
fall away, no not if you strike the plant until it be broken.
Amongst these drops there standeth out a certain pistil, as also
sundry small chives tipped with small pendants like those of the
Lily: above the whole flowers there grows a tuft of green leaves
like those upon the stalk, but smaller. After the flowers be faded,
there follow cods or seed-vessels six-square, wherein is contained
flat seeds, tough and limber, of the colour of Mace. The whole
plant, as well roots as flowers, do savour or smell very like a fox.
As the plant groweth old, so doth it wax rich, bringing forth a
crown of flowers amongst the uppermost green leaves, which some make
a second kind, although in truth they are but one and the self same,
which in time is thought to grow to a triple crown, which happeneth
by the age of the root, and fertility of the soil; whose figure or
type I have thought good to adjoin with that picture also which in
the time of his infancy it had.

The Place.

This plant likewise hath been brought from Constantinople amongst
other bulbous roots, and made denizens in our London gardens,
whereof I have great plenty.

The Time.

It flowereth in April, and sometimes in March, when as the weather
is warm and pleasant. The seed is ripe in June.

The Names.

This rare & strange Plant is called in Latin, Corona Imperialis, and
Lilium Byzantinum: the Turks do call it Cauale lale, and Tusai. And
as divers have sent into these parts of these roots at sundry times,
so have they likewise sent them by sundry names; some by the name
Tusai; others, Tousai, and Tuyschiachi, and likewise Turfani and
Turfanda. Clusius, and that not without good reason, judgeth this to
be the Hemerocallis of Dioscorides, mentioned lib. 3. cap. 120.

The Nature and Virtues.

The virtue of this admirable plant is not yet known, neither his
faculties or temperature in working.

If this be the Hemerocallis of Dioscorides, you may find the virtues
thereof specified Chapter 73 of this work; where in my judgement
they are not so fitly placed as they might have been here: yet we at
this day have no knowledge of the physical operation of either of
those plants mentioned in that place, or of this treated of in this
chapter.



CHAP. 109. Of Dog's Tooth.


Fig. 347. Dog's Tooth (1)
Fig. 348. White Dog's Tooth (2)

The Description.

1. There hath not long since been found out a goodly bulbous rooted
plant, and termed Satyrion, which was supposed to be the true
Satyrion of Dioscorides, after that it was cherished, and the
virtues thereof found out by the studious searchers of nature.
Little difference hath been found betwixt that plant of Dioscorides
and this Dens caninus, except in the colour, which (as you know)
doth commonly vary according to the diversity of places where they
grow, as it falleth out in Squills, Onions, and the other kinds of
bulbous plants. It hath most commonly two leaves, very seldom three;
which leaf in shape is very like to Allium ursinum, or Ramsons,
though far less. The leaves turn down to the groundward; the stalk
is tender and flexible like to Cyclamen, or Sow-bread, about an
handful high, bare and without leaves to the root. The proportion of
the flower is like that of Saffron or the Lily flower, full of
streams of a purplish white colour. The root is big, and like unto a
date, with some fibres growing from it: unto the said root is a
small flat half round bulb adjoining, like unto Gladiolus, or Corn-
flag.

2. The second kind is far greater and larger than the first, in
bulb, stalk, leaves, flower, and cod. It yieldeth two leaves for the
most part, which do close one within another, and at the first they
do hide the flower (for so long as it brings not out his flower) it
seems to have but one leaf like the Tulip's, and like the Lily's,
though shorter, and for the most part broader; wherefore I have
placed it and his kinds next unto the Lilies before the kinds of
Orchis or Stones. The leaves which it beareth are spotted with many
great spots of a dark purple colour, and narrow below, but by little
and little toward the top wax broad, and after that grow to be sharp
pointed, in form somewhat near Ramsons, but thicker and more oleous.
When the leaves be wide opened the flower showeth itself upon his
long weak naked stalk, bowing toward the earth-ward, which flower
consisteth of six very long leaves of a fine delayed purple colour,
which with the heat of the sun openeth itself, and bendeth his
leaves back again after the manner of the Cyclamen flower, within
which there are six purple chives, and a white three forked style or
pistil. This flower is of no pleasant smell, but commendable for the
beauty: when the flower is faded, there succeedeth a three-square
husk or bead, wherein are the seeds, which are very like them of
Leucoium bulbosum præcox; but longer, slenderer, and of a yellow
colour. The root is long, thicker below than above, set with many
white fibres, waxing very tender in the upper part, having one or
more off-sets, or young shoots, from which the stalk ariseth out of
the ground (as hath been said) bringing forth two leaves, and not
three, or only one, save when it will not flower.

3. The third kind is in all things like the former, save in the
leaves, which are narrower, and in the colour of the flower, which
is altogether white, or consisting of a colour mixed of purple and
white. Wherefore sith there is no other difference, it shall suffice
to have said thus much for the description.

The Place.

These three plants grow plentifully at the foot of certain hills in
the green and moist grounds of Germany and Italy, in Styria not far
from Graz, as also in Modena and Bologna in Italy, and likewise in
some of the choice gardens of this country.

The Time.

They flower in April, and sometimes sooner, as in the middle of
March.

The Names.

This plant is called in Latin, Dens Caninus; and some have judged it
Satyrium Erythronium. Matthiolus calls it Pseudohermodactylus. The
men of the country where it groweth call it Shoftwurtz: and the
Physicians about Styria call it Dentali. The second may for
distinctions sake be termed Dens caninus flore albo, angustioribus
foliis; that is, Dog's tooth with the white flower and narrow
leaves.

The Nature.

These are of a very hot temperament, windy, and of an
excrementitious nature, as may appear by the virtues.

The Virtues.

A. The women that dwell about the place where these grew, and do
grow, have with great profit put the dried meal or powder of it in
their childrens pottage, against the worms of the belly.

B. Being drunk with Wine it hath been proved marvellously to assuage
the colic passion.

C. It strengtheneth and nourisheth the body in great measure, and
being drunk with water it cureth children of the falling sickness.



CHAP. 110. Of Dog's Stones.
The Kinds

Stones or Testicles, as Dioscorides saith, are of two sorts, one
named Cynosorchis, or Dog's Stones, the other Orchis Serapias, or
Serapias his Stones. But because there be many and sundry other
sorts differing one from another, I see not how they may be
contained under these two kinds only: therefore I have thought good
to divide them as followeth. The first kind we have named
Cynosorchis, or Dog's Stones: the second, Testiculus Morionis, or
Fool's Stones: the third, Tragorchis, ot Goat's Stones: the fourth,
Orchis Serapias, or Serapis' Stones: the Fifth, Testiculus odoratus,
or sweet smelling Stones, or after Cordus, Testiculus Pamilio, or
Dwarf Stones.



Fig. 349. Great Dog's Stones (1)
Fig. 350. White Dog's Stones (2)

The Description.

1. Great Dog's Stones hath four, and sometimes five, great broad
thick leaves, somewhat like those of the garden Lily, but smaller.
The stalk riseth up a foot or more in height; at the top whereof
doth grow a thick tuft of carnation or horse-flesh coloured flowers,
thick and close thrust together, made of many small flowers spotted
with purple spots, in shape like to an open hood or helmet. And from
the hollow place there hangeth forth a certain chive or tassel, in
shape like to the skin of a dog, or same such other four footed
beast. The roots be round like unto the stones of a dog, or two
olivss, one hanging somewhat shorter than the other, whereof the
highest or uppermost is the smaller, but fuller and harder. The
lowermost is the greatest, lightest, and most wrinkled or shriveled,
not good for anything.

2. Whitish Dog's Stones hath likewise smooth, long broad Ieaves, but
lesser and narrower than those of the first kind. The stalk is a
span long, set with five or six leaves clasping or embracing the
same round about. His spiky flame is short, thick, bushy, composed
of many small whitish purple coloured flowers, spotted on the inside
with many small purple spots and little lines or streaks. The small
flowers are like an open hood or helmet, having hanging out of every
one as it were the body of a little man without a head, with arms
stretched out, and thighs straddling abroad, after the same manner
almost that the little boys are wont to be pictured hanging out of
Saturn's mouth. The roots be like the former.


Fig. 351. Spotted Dog's Stones
(3)
Fig. 352. Marsh Dog's Stones (4)
	3. Spotted Dog's Stones bring forth narrow leaves, ribbed in
some sort like unto the leaves of narrow Plaintain or Ribwort,
dashed with many black streaks and spots. The stalk is a cubit and
more high: at the top whereof doth grow a tuft or ear of violet-
coloured flowers, mixed with a dark purple, but in the hollowness
thereof whitish, not of the same form or shape that the others are
of, but lesser, and as it were resembling somewhat the flowers of
Larkspur. The roots be like the former.

4. Marsh Dog's Stones have many thick blunt leaves next the root,
thick streaked with lines or nerves like those of Plantain. The
flower is of a whitish red or carnation: the stalk and roots be like
the former.

Fig. 353. Lesser Austrian Dog's Stones (5)

5. This hath five or six little leaves; the stalk is some handful or
better in height, set about with somewhat less leaves: the tuft of
flowers at the top of the stalk are of a purple colour, small, with
a white lip divided into four partitions hanging down, which also is
lightly spotted with purple; it hath a little spur hanging down on
the hinder part of each flower. The seed is small, and contained in
such twined heads as in other plants of this kind. The roots are
like the former, but much less.

The Place.

These kinds of Dog's Stones do grow in moist and fertile meadows.
The Marsh Dog's Stones grow for the most part in moist and waterish
woods, and also in marsh grounds. The 5 grows in many hilly places
ofAustria and Germany.

The Time.

They flower from the beginning of May to the midst of August.

The Names.

The first and second are of that kind which Dioscorides calleth
Cynosorchos; that is in English, Dog's Stones, after the common or
vulgar speech; the one the greater, the other the lesser.

1. This is Cynosorchis prior of Dodonæus, Cynosorchis nostra major
of Lobel.

2. Dodonæus names this Cynosorchis altera. Lobel, Cynosorchis
majoris secunda species.

3. This Lobel calls Cynosorchis Delphinia, &c.: Tabern., Cynosorchis
maculata.

4. Dodonæus calls this, Cynosorchis tertia: Lobel, Cynosorchis major
altera nostras: Tabernamontanus, Cynosorchis major quarta.

5. This is Clusius his Orchis Pannonica quarta.

The Temperature.

These kinds of Dog's Stones be of temperature hot and moist; but the
greater or fuller stone seemeth to have much superfluous windiness, 
and therefore being drunk it stirreth up fleshly lust.

The second, which is lesser, is quite contrary in nature, tending to
a hot and dry temperature; therefore his root is so far from moving
venery, that contrariwise it stayeth and keepeth it back; as Galen
teacheth.

He also affirmeth, that Serapis' Stones are of a more dry faculty,
and do not so much prevail to stir up the lust of the flesh.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth that it is reported, That if men do eat of
the great full or fat roots of these kinds of Dog's Stones, they
cause them to beget male children; and if women eat of the lesser
dry or barren root which is withered or shrivelled, they shall bring
forth females. These are some doctors' opinions only.

B. It is further reported, That in Thessalia the women give the
tender full root to be drunk in goat's milk, to move bodily lust,
and the dry to restrain the same.

The Choice.

Our age useth all the kinds of Stones to stir up venery, and the
apothecaries mix any of them indifferently with compositions serving
for that purpose. But the best and most effectual are the Dog's
Stones, as most have deemed: yet both the bulbs or stones are not to
be taken indifferently, but the harder and fuller, and that which
contains most quantity of juice, for that whieh is wrinkled is less
profitable, or not fit at all to be used in medicine. And the fuller
root is not always the greater, but often the lesser, especially if
the roots be gathered before the plant hath shed his flower or when
the stalk first cometh up; for that which is fuller of juice is not
the greatest before the seed be perfectly ripe. For seeing that
every other year by course one stone or bulb waxeth full, the other
empty and perisheth, it cannot be that the harder and fuller of
juice should be always the greater; for at such time as the leaves
come forth, the fuller then begins to increase, and whilst the same
by little & little increaseth, the other doth decrease and wither
till the seed be ripe: then the whole plant, together with the
leaves and stalks doth forthwith fall away and perish, and that
which in the mean time increased, remaineth fresh and full unto the
next year.



CHAP. 111. Of Fool's Stones.


Fig. 354. Male Fool's Stones (1)
Fig. 355. Female Fool's Stones
(2)

The Description.

1. The male Fool's Stones hath five, sometimes six long broad and
smooth leaves, not unlike to those of the Lily, saving that they are
dashed and spotted in sundry places with black spots and streaks.
The flowers grow at the top, tuft or spike fashion, somewhat like
the former, but thrust more thick together, in shape like to a
fool's hood, or cock's comb, wide open, or gaping before, and as it
were crested above, with certain ears standing up by every side, and
a small tail or spur hanging down, the backside declining to a
violet colour, of a pleasant savour or smell.

2. The female Fool's Stones have also smooth narrow leaves ribbed
with nerves like those of Plantain. The flowers be likewise gaping,
and like the former, as it were open hoods, with a little horn or
heel hanging behind every one of them, and small green leaves sorted
or mixed among them, resembling cock's combs, with little ears, not
standing straight up, but lying flat upon the hooded flower, in such
sort, that they cannot at the sudden view be perceived. The roots
are a pair of small stones like the former. The flowers of this sort
do vary infinitely in colour, according to the soil or country where
they do grow: some bring forth their flowers of a deep violet
colour, some as white as snow; some of a flesh colour, and some
garnished with spots of divers colours, which are not possible to be
distinguished.

Fig. 356. Lesser Spotted Fool's Stones (3)

3. This hath narrow spotted leaves, with a stalk some foot or more
high, at the top wherof groweth a tuft of purple flowers in shape
much like those of the last described, each flower consisting of a
little hood, two small wings or side leaves, and a broad lip or leaf
hanging down.

The Place.

These kinds of Fool's Stones do grow naturally to their best liking
in pastures and fields that seldom or never are dunged or manured.

The Time.

They flower in May and June. Their stones are to be gathered for
medicine in September, as are those of the Dog's Stones.

The Names.

1. The first is called Cynosorchis Morio: of Fuchsius, Orchis mas
angustifolia: of Apuleius, Satyrion: and also it is the Orchis
Delphinia of Cornelius Gemma.

2. The second is Cynosorchis morio fœmina of Lobel: Orchis
angustifolia foemin. of Fuchsius: Testiculus Morionis foemina of
Dodonæus.

3. This is Cynosorchis minimis & secundum caulem, &c. maculosis
foliis, of Lobel.

The Temperature.

Fool's Stones both male and female are hot and moist of nature.

The Virtues.

These Fool's Stones are thought to have the virtues of Dog's stones,
whereunto they are referred.



CHAP. 112. Of Goat's Stones.

Fig. 355. Goat's Stones (1-4)

The Description.

1. The greatest of the Goat's Stones bringeth forth broad leaves,
ribbed in some sort like unto the broad leaved Plantain, but larger:
the stalk groweth to the height of a cubit, set with such great
leaves even to the top of the stalk by equal distances. The tuft or
bush of flowers is small and flat open, with many tender strings or
laces coming from the middle part of those small flowers, crookedly
tangling one with another, like to the small tendrils of the Vine,
or rather the laces or strings that grow upon the herb Savory. The
whole flower consisteth of a purple colour. The roots are like the
rest of the Orchides, but greater,

2. The male Goat's Stones have leaves like to those of the garden
Lily, with a stalk a foot long, wrapped about even to the tuft of
the flower with those his leaves: the flowers which grow in this
bush or tuft be very small, in form like unto a lizard, because of
the twisted or writhing tails, and spotted heads. Every of these
small flowers is at the first like a round close husk, of the
bigness of a pea, which when it openeth there cometh out of it a
little long and tender spur or tail, white toward the setting of it
to the flower; the rest spotted with red dashes, having upon each
side a small thing adjoining unto it, like to a little leg or foot;
the rest of the said tail is twisted crookedly about, and hangeth
downward. The whole plant hath a rank or stinking smell or savour
like the smell of a goat, whereof it took his name.

3. The female Goat's Stones have leaves like the male kind, saving
that they be much smaller, having many flowers on the tuft
resembling the flies that seed upon flesh, or rather ticks. The
stones or roots, as also the smell are like the former.

4. This also because of the unpleasant smell may fitly be referred
to this classis. The roots hereof are small, and from them arise a
stalk some half a foot high, beset with three or four narrow leaves:
the tuft of flowers which groweth on the top of this stalk is small,
and the colour of them is red without, but somewhat paler within;
each flower hanging down a lippe parted in three.

The Place.

1, 2, 3. These kinds of Goat's Stones delight to grow in fat clay
grounds, and seldom in any other soil to be found.

4. This grows upon the sea banks in Holland, and also in some places
near unto the Hague.

The Time.

They flower in May and June with the other kinds of Orchis.

The Names.

1. Some have named this kind of Goat's Stones in Latin, Testiculus
Hircinus, and also Orchis Saurodes, or Scincophora, by reason that
the flowers resemble Lizards.

2. The second may be called Tragorchis mas, male Goat's Stones and
Orchis Saurodes, or Scincophora, as well as the former.

3. The third, Tragorchis fœmina, as also Coriosmites, and
Coriophora, for that the flowers in shape and their ungrateful smell
resemble ticks.

The Nature and Virtues.

The temperature and virtues of these are referred to the Fool's
Stones, notwithstanding they are seldom or never used in physic, in
regard of the stinking and loathsome smell and savor they are
possessed with.



CHAP. 113. Of Fox Stones.


Fig. 358. Butterfly Satyrion (1)
Fig. 359. Gnat Satyrion (2)

The Kinds.

There be divers kinds of Fox-Stones, differing very much in shape of
their leaves, as also in flowers: some have flowers wherein is to be
seen the shape of sundry sorts of living creatures; some the shape
and proportion of flies, in other gnats, some humble bees, others
like unto honey bees; some like butterflies, and others like wasps
that be dead; some yellow of colour, others white; some purple mixed
with red, others of a brown overworn colour: the which severally to
distinguish, as well those here set down, as also those that offer
themselves daily to our view and consideration, would require a
particular volume; for there is not any plant which doth offer such
variety unto us as these kinds of Stones, except the Tulips, which
go beyond all account: for that the most singular simplest that ever
was in these later ages, Carolus Clusius (who for his singular
industry and knowledge herein is worthy triple honour) hath spent at
the least five and thirty years, sowing the seeds of Tulips from
year to year, and to this day he could never attain to the end or
certainty of their several kinds of colours. The greatest reason
whereof that I can yield is this; that if you take the seeds of a
Tulip that bear white flowers, and sow them in some pan or tub with
earth, you shall receive from that seed plants of infinite colours:
contrariwise, if you sow the seeds of a plant that beareth flowers
of variable colours, the most of those plants will be nothing like
the plant from whence the seed was taken. It shall be sufficient
therefore to set down most of the varieties, and comprehend them in
this chapter.

The Description.

1. Butterfly Orchis, or Satyrion, beareth next the root two very
broad leaves like those of the Lily, seldom three: the flowers be
white of colour, resembling the shape of a butterfly: the stalk is a
foot high; the root is two stones like the other kinds of Stones or
Cullions, but somewhat sharper pointed.

2. Gnat Satyrion cometh forth of the ground, bearing two, sometimes
three leaves like the former, but much smaller. The stalk groweth to
the height of an hand, whereon are placed very orderly small flowers
like in shape to Gnats, and of the same colour. The root is like the
former.


Fig. 360. Humble Bee Orchis (3)
Fig. 361. Wasp Orchis (4)
	3. The Humble Bee Orchis hath a few small weak and short
leaves, which grow scatteringly about the stalk: the flowers grow at
the top among the small leaves. resembling in shape the humble bee.
The root consisteth of two stones or bulbs, with some few threads
annexed thereunto.

4. The Wasp Satyrion groweth out of the ground, having stalks small
and tender. The leaves are like the former, but somewhat greater,
declining to a brown or dark coloue. The flowers be small, of the
colour of a dry oaken leaf, in shape resembling the great bee,
called in English an hornet or drone bee. The root is like the
other.


Fig. 362. Bee Orchis (5)
Fig. 363. Fly Satyrion (6)


5. The leaves of Bee Satyrion are longer than the last before
mentioned, narrower, turning themselves against the sun as it were
round. The stalk is round, tender, and very fragile. Atop grow the
flowers, resembling the shape of the dead carcass of a Bee. The
stones or bulbs of the roots be smaller and rounder than the last
described.

6. The Fly Satyrion is in his leaves like the other, saving that
they be not of so dark a colour: the flowers be smaller and more
plentifully growing about the stalk, in shape like unto flies, of a
greenish colour.


Fig. 364. Yellow Satyrion (7)
Fig. 365. Small Yellow Satyrion
(8)
	7. Yellow Orchis riseth out of the ground with brown leaves,
smaller than the last before mentioned: the stalk is tender and
crooked. The flowers grow at the top yellow of colour, in shape
resembling the yellow flies bred in the dung of kine after rain.

8. The Small Yellow Satyrion hath leaves spread upon the ground, at
the first coming the slender stalk riseth up in the midst, of half a
hand high. The flowers grow scatteringly toward the top, resembling
the flies last before mentioned, dark or rusty of colour. The stones
or bulbs are very round.

Fig. 366. Orchids or Satyrions (9-12)

9. Bird's Orchis hath many large ribbed leaves, spread upon the
ground like unto those of Plaintain; among the which rise up tender
stalks covered even to the tuft of the flowers with the like leaves,
but lesser, in such sort that the stalks cannot be seen for the
leaves. The flowers grow at the top, not so thick set or thrust
together as the others, purple of colour, like in shape unto little
birds, with their wings spread abroad ready to fly. The roots be
like the former.

10. Spotted Bird's Satyrion hath leaves like unto the former, saving
that they be dashed or spotted here and there with dark spots or
streaks, having a stalk covered with the like leaves, so that the
plants differ not in any point, except the black spots which this
kind is dashed with.

11. White Bird's Satyrion hath leaves rising immediately forth of
the ground like unto the blades or leaves of Leeks, but shorter;
among the which riseth up a slender naked stalk two handfuls high;
on the top whereof be white flowers resembling the shape or form of
a small bird ready to fly, or a white butterfly with her wings
spread abroad. The roots are round, and smaller than any of the
former.

12. Soldier's Satyrion bringeth forth many broad large and ribbed
leaves, spread upon the ground like unto those of the great
plantain: among the which riseth up a fat stalk full of sap or
juice, clothed or wrapped in the like leaves even to the tuft of
flowers, whereupon do grow little flowers resembling a little man
having a helmet upon his head, his hands and legs cut off, white
upon the inside, spotted with many purple spots, and the back part
of the flower of a deeper colour tending to redness. The roots be
greater than any of the other kinds of Satyrions.


Fig. 367. Soldier's Cullions
(13)
Fig. 368. Spider Satyrion (14)
	13. Soldier's Cullions hath many leaves spread upon the
ground, but lesser than the Soldier's Satyrion, as is the whole
plant. The backside of the flowers are somewhat mixed with
whiteness, and sometimes are ash coloured: the inside of the flower
is spotted with white likewise.

14. Spider Satyrion hath many thin leaves like unto those of the
Lily, scatteringly set upon a weak and feeble stalk, whereupon doth
grow small flowers, resembling as well in shape as colour the body
of a dead humble bee, or rather of a spider; and therefore I think
Lobel, who was the author of this name, would have said Arachnitis,
a Spider.


Fig. 369. Small gnat Satyrion
(15)
Fig. 370. Narrow Leaved Satyrion
(16)
	15. This by right should have been put next the Gnat Satyrion,
described in the second place. It hath short, yet pretty broad
leaves, and those commonly three in number, besides those small ones
set upon the stem. The flowers are small, and much like those of the
second formerly described.

16. Our author gave you this figure in the fourteenth place, under
the title of Orchis Andrachnitis; but it is of the Orchis 16. minor
of Tabernam. or Orchis Angustifolia of Bauhin. This Orchis is of the
kind of the Myodes, or Fly Satyrions, but his leaves are far longer
and narrower than any of the rest of that kind, and therein consists
the only and chiefest difference.

The Place.

These kinds of Orchis grow for the most part in moist meadows and
fertile pastures, as also in moist woods.

The Bee, the Fly, and the Butterfly Satyrions do grow upon barren
chalky hills and heathy grounds, upon the hills adjoining to a
village in Kent named Greenhithe, upon long field downs by
Southfleet, two miles from the same place, and in many other places
of Kent: likewise in a field adjoining to a small grove of trees,
half a mile from Saint Alban's, at the South end thereof. They grow
likewise at Hatfield near S. Alban's, by the relation of a learned
preacher there dwelling, Mr. Robert Abbot, an excellent and diligent
herbarist.

That kind which resembleth the white butterfly groweth upon the
declining of the hill at the north end of Hampstead Heath, near unto
a small cottage there in the wayside, as ye go from London to Hendon
a village thereby. It groweth in the fields adjoining to the pound
or pinfold without the gate, at the village called Highgate, near
London: and likewise in the wood belonging to a worshipful gentleman
of Kent named Master Sidley, of Southfleet; where do grow likewise
many other rare and dainty simples, that are not to be found
elsewhere in a great circuit.

The Time.

They flower for the most part from May to the end of August, and
some of them sooner.

The Names.

These kinds of Orchis have not been much written of by the ancients,
neither by the late writers to any purposs, so that it may content
you for this time to receive the names set down in their several
titles, reserving what else might be said as touching the Greek,
French, or Dutch names or any general definition until a further
consideration.

The Nature and Virtues.

The nature and virtues of these kinds of Orchis are referred unto
the others, namely to those of the Fox Stones; notwithstanding there
is no great use of these in physic, but they are chiefly regarded
for the pleasant and beautiful flowers, wherewith Nature hath seemed
to play and disport herself.



CHAP. 114. Of Sweet Cullions.


Fig. 371. Lady Traces (1)
Fig. 372. Triple Lady Traces (2)

The Kinds.

There be sundry sorts of sweet smelling Testicles or Stones, whereof
the first is most sweet and pleasant in smell, the others of less
smell or savour, differing in flower and roots. Some have white
flowers, others yellow; some flesh coloured; some dashed upon white
with a little reddish wash; some have two stones, others three, and
some four, wherein their difference consisteth.

The Description.

1. The first kind of Sweet Stones is a small base and low plant in
respect of all the rest: The leaves be small, narrow, and short,
growing flat upon the ground; amongst the which riseth up a small
weak and tender stalk of a finger long, whereupon do grow small
white flowers spike fashion, of a pleasant sweet smell. The roots
are two small stones in shape like the other.

2. Triple Orchis hath commonly three, yet sometimes four bulbs or
tuberous roots, somewhat long, set with many small fibres or short
threads; from the which roots rise immediately many flat and plain
leaves, ribbed with nerves alongst them like those of Plantain:
among the which come forth naked stalks, small and tender, whereupon
are placed certain small white flowers, trace fashion, not so sweet
as the former in smell and savour. The top of the stalk whereon the
flowers do grow, is commonly as if it were twisted or writhed about.


Fig. 373. Friesland Lady
Traces(3)
Fig. 374. Li?ge Lady Traces (4)
	3. Friesland Lady Traces hath two small round stones or bulbs,
of the bigness of the peas that we call rouncifalls; from the which
rise up a few hairy leaves, lesser than those of the Triple Stones,
ribbed as the small-leaved Plantain: among the which cometh forth a
small naked stalk, set round about with little yellow flowers, not
trace fashion as the former.

4. Li?ge Lady Traces hath for his roots two greater stones, and two
smaller; from the which come up two and sometimes more leaves,
furrowed or made hollow in the midst like to a trough, from the
which riseth up a slender naked stalk, set with such flowers as the
last described saming thar they be of an overworn yellow colour.

The Place

These kinds of Stones or Cullions do grow in dry pastures and
heaths, and likewise upon chalky hills, the which I have found
growing plentifully in sundry places, as in the field by Islington,
near London, where there is a bowling place under a few old shrubby
Oaks. They grow likewise upon the heath at Barn Elms, near unto the
head of a conduit that sendeth water to the house belonging to the
late Sir Francis Walsingham. They grow in the field next unto a
village called Thistleworth, as you go from Branford to her
Majesty's house at Richmond; also upon a common heath by a village
near London called Stepney, by the relation of a learned merchant of
London, named Mr. James Cole, exceedingly well experienced in the
knowledge of simples.

The yellow kinds grow in barren pastures and borders of fields about
Ovenden and Clare in Essex. Likewise near unto Much Dunmow in Essex,
where they were showed me by a learned gentleman Master James
Twaights, excellently well seen in the knowledge of plants.

I received some roots of the second from my kind friend Mr. Thomas
Wallis of Westminster, the which he gathered at Dartford in Kent,
upon a piece of ground commonly called the Brimth: but I could not
long get them to grow in a garden, neither do any of the other
Satyrions love to be pent up in such strait bounds.

The Time.

These kinds of Stones do flower from August to the end of September.

The Names.

1. The first is called in Latin Testiculus Odoratus: in English,
Sweet selling Testicles or Stones, not of the sweeetness of the
roots, but of the flowers. It is called also Orchis spiralis, or
Autumnalis, for that this (as also that which is set forth in the
next place) hath the top of the stalk as it were twisted or twined
spire fashion, and for that it cometh to flowering in autumn: of our
English women they be called Lady-traces; but every country hath a
several name; for same cals them Sweet Ballocks, Sweet Cods, Sweet
Cullions, and Stander-Grass. In Dutch, Knabenkraut, and
Stondelcraut; in French, Satyrion.

2. The second sort is called Triorchis, and also Tetrorchis: in
English, Triple Lady-traces, or white Orchis.

3. The third is called Orchis Frisia: in English Friesland Orchis.

4. The last of these kinds of Testicles or Stones is called of some
in Latin, Orchis Leodiensis, and Orchis Lutea, as also Basilica
minor Serapias, and Triorchis Æginetæ: In English, Yellow Lady-
traces.

The Temperature.

These kinds of Sweet Cullions are of nature and temperature like the
Dog's Stones, although not used in physic in times past;
notwithstanding later writers have attributed some virtues unto them
as followeth.

The Virtues.

A. The full and sappy roots of Lady-traces eaten or boiled in milk,
and drunk, provoke venery, nourish and strengthen the body, and be
good for such as be fallen into a consumption or hectic fever.



CHAP. 115. Of Satyrion Royal.


Fig. 375. Male Satyrion Royal
(1)
Fig. 376. Female Satyrion Royal
(2)

The Description.

1. The male Satyrion Royal hath large roots, knobbed, not bulbed as
the others, but branched or cut into sundry sections like an hand,
from the which come up thick and fat stalks set with large leaves
like those of Lilies, but less; at the top whereof groweth a tuft of
flowers, spotted with a deep purple colour.

2. The Female Satyrion hath cloven or forked roots, with some fibres
joined thereto. The leaves be like the former, but smaller and
narrower, and confusedly dashed or spotted with black spots: from
the which springeth up a tender stalk, at the top whereof doth grow
a tuft of purple flowers, in fashion like unto a Friar's hood,
changing or varying according to the soil and climate, sometimes
red, sometimes white, and sometimes light carnation or flesh colour.

Fig. 377. Austrian Handed Satyrion (3)


3. This in roots and leaves is like the former, but that the leaves
want the black spots, the stalk is but low, and the top thereof hath
flowers of a whitish colour, not spotted: they on the foreside
resemble gaping hoods, with ears on each side, and a broad lip
hanging down; the back part ends in a broad obtuse spur. These
flowers smell like Elder blossoms.

The Place.

The Royal Satyrions grow for the most part in moist and fenny
grounds, meadows, and woods that are very moist and shadowy. I have
found them in many places, especially in the midst of a wood in Kent
called Swanscombe Wood near to Gravesend, by the village Swanscombe,
and likewise in Hampstead wood four miles from London.

The Time.

They flower in May and June, but seldom later.

The Names

Royal Satyrion, or finger Orchis is called in Latin, Palma Christi;
notwithstanding there is another herb or plant called by the same
name, which otherwise is called Ricinus. This plant is called
likewise of some, Satyrium Basilicum, or Satyrium regium. Some would
have it to be Buzeiden, or Buzidan Arabum, but Avicenna saith
Buzeiden is a woody Indian medicine: and Serapio saith, Buzeiden be
hard white roots like those of Behen album, and that it is an Indian
drug: but contrariwise the roots of Palma Christi are nothing less
than woody, so that it cannot be the same. Matthiolus would have
Satyrion Royal to be the Digita Citrini of Avicenna; finding fault
with the monks which set forth commentaries upon Mesue's
Compositions, for doubting and leaving it to the judgement of the
discreet reader. Yet do we better allow of the monks doubt, than of
Matthiolus his assertion. For Avicenna's words be these; What is
Asabasafra, or Digiti Citrini? and answering the doubt himself, he
saith, It is in figure or shape like the palm of a man's hand, of a
mixed colour between yellow and white, and it is hard, in which
there is a little sweetness, and there is a citrine sort dusty and
without sweetness. Rhasis also in the last book of his Continent
calls these, Digiti Crocei, or Saffron Fingers; and he saith it is a
gum or vein for dyers. Now these roots are nothing less than of a
saffron colour, and wholly unfit for dyeing. Wherefore without doubt
these words of Avicenna and Rhasis, in the ears of men of judgment
do confirme, That Satyrion Royal, or Palma Christi, are not those
Digiti Citrini. The Germans call it Creutsblum; the low Dutch,
Handekens cruyt; the French, Satyrion royal.

The Temperature and Virtues

The roots of Satyrion Royal are like to Cynosorchis or Dog's Stones,
both in savour and taste, and therefore are thought by some to be of
like faculties. Yet Nicolaus Nicolus, in the chapter of the cure of
a quartan ague, saith, That the roots of Palma Christi are of force
to purge upward and downward; and that a piece of the root as long
as one's thumb stamped and given with wine before the fit cometh, is
a good remedy against old quartans after purgation: and reporteth,
That one Baliolus, after he had endured 44 fits, was cured
therewith.

This faculty of purging and vomiting, which our author out of
Dodonæus, and he out of Nicolus, give to the root of Palma Christi,
I doubt it mistaken and put to the wrong place; for I judge it to
belong to the Ricinus, which also is called Palma Christi; for that
Nicolus saith, a piece of root must be taken as long as one's thumb;
now the whole root of this plant is not so long. And besides,
Ricinus is known to have a vomitory or purging faculty.



CHAP. 116. Of Serapis' Stones.

Fig. 378. Orchids and Satyrions (1-4)

The Kinds

There be sundry sorts of Serapis' Stones, whereof some be male
others female; some great, and some of a smaller kind; varying
likewise in colour of the flowers, whereof some be white, others
purple; altering according to the soil or climate, as the greatst
part of bulbous roots do. Moreover, some grow in marshy and fenny
grounds, and some in fertile pastures, lying open to the sun,
varying likewise in the shape of their flowers; retaining the form
of flies, butterflies, and gnats, like those of the Fox stones.

The Description.

1. The white handed Orchis or Satyrion hath long and large leaves,
spotted and dashed with black spots, from the which doth rise up a
small fragile or brittle stalk of two hands high, having at the top
a bush or spoky tuft of white flowers, like in shape to those of
Palma Christi, whereof this is a kind. The root is thick, fat, and
full of juice, fashioned like the hand and fingers of a man, with
some tough and fat strings fastened to the upper part thereof.

2. Red Handed Satyrion is a small low and base herb, having a small
tender stalk set with two or three small leaves, like unto those of
the Leek, but shorter. The flower groweth at the top tuft fashion,
of a glistering red colour, with a root fashioned like an hand, but 
lesser than the former.

3. Serapis' Stones, or Marsh Satyrion hath a thick knobby root,
divided into fingers like those of Palma Christi, whereof it is a
kind: from which rise thick fat and spongeous stalks, let with broad
leaves like those of Plantain, but much longer, even to the top of
the tuft of flowers; but the higher they rise toward the top the
smaller they are. The flower consisteth of many small hooded flowers
somewhat whitish, spotted within with deep purple spots; the
backside of these little flowers are Violet mixed with purple.

4. Fenny Satyrion (or Serapis' Stones) differeth little from the
former, saving that the leaves are smaller, and somewhat spotted,
and the tuft of flowers hath not so many green leaves, nor so long,
mixed with the flowers, neither are they altogether of so dark or
purplish a colour as the former. The roots are like those of the
last described.

Fig. 379. Satyrions (5-7)

5. Mountain Orchis or Satyrion hath thick fat and knobby roots, the
one of them for the most part being handed, and the other long. It
grows like the former in stalks, leaves, and flowers, but is
somewhat bigger, with the leaves smoother, and more shining.

6. Clove Satyrion, or sweet smelling Orchis, hath flat and thick
roots divided into fingers like those of Palma Christi, saving that
the fingers are longer, smaller, and more in number; from the which
rise up long and narrow leaves like those of Narcissus or Daffodil:
among which cometh forth a small tender stalk, at the top whereof
groweth a purple tuft compact of many small flowers resembling
flies, but in savour and smell like the Clove, or Clove Gillyflower;
but far sweeter and pleasanter, as myself with many others can
witness now living, that have both seen and smelt them in my garden.
After the flower is past, come many seed vessels filled with a small
seed, and growing after the manner as you see them here at large
expressed in a figure, together with the root also set forth at
full.

7. Gelded Satyrion hath leaves with nerves and sinews like to those
of Daffodil, set upon a weak and tender stalk, with flowers at the
top white of colour; spotted within the flower, and in shape they
are like gnats and little flies. The stalk is gelded as it were, or
the stones and hands cut off, leaving for the root two long legs or
fingers, with many strings fastened unto the top.


Fig. 380. Frog Satyrion (8)
Fig. 381. The other Frog
Satyrion (9)
	8. Frog Satyrion hath small flat leaves set upon a slender
weak stem; at the top whereof, grows a tuft of flowers compact of
sundry small flowers, which in shape do resemble little frogs,
whereof it took his name. The root is likewise gelded, only reserved
two small mis-shapen lumps with certain fibres annexed thereto.

9. This also may fitly be added to the last described, the root
showing it to be of a kind between the Serapis' and Orchis. It
groweth to the height of the former, with short leaves engirting the
stalk at their setting on. The flowers on the top resemble a Frog,
with their long leaves: and if you look upon them in another
posture, they will somewhat resemble little Flies; wherefore Lobel
calls it as well Myoides, as Batrachites.

The Time.

These plants flourish in the month of May and June, but seldom
after, except some degenerate kind, or that it hath had same
impediment in the time when it should have flowered, as often
happeneth.

The Names.

We have called these kinds, Serapis' Stones, or Serapiades,
especially for that sundry of them do bring forth flowers resembling
flies and such like fruitful and lascivious insects, as taking their
name from Serapis the god of the citizens of Alexandria in Egypt,
who had a most famous temple at Canopus, where he was worshipped
with all kind of lascivious wantonness, songs, and dances, as we may
read in Strabo, in his seventeenth Book. Apuleius confounds the
Orchides and Serapiades, under the name of both the Satyrions: and
withal saith it is called Entaticos, Panion, and of the Latins,
Testiculæ Leporinus. In English we may call them Satyrions, and
finger Orchis, and Hare's Stones.

The Nature and Virtues.

Serapis' Stones are thought to be in nature, temperature, and
virtues, like unto the Satyrion Royal; and although not so much used
in physic, yet doubtless they work the effect of the other Stones.



CHAP. 117. Of Fenny Stones.


Fig. 382. Marsh Dragon Satyrion
(1)
Fig. 383. The other Marsh Dragon
Satyrion (2)

The Description.

1. This hath cleft or divided roots like fingers, much like unto the
roots of other Palma Christi; whereof this is a kind: from the which
riseth up a stalk of a foot high, set here and there with very fair
lily-like leaves, of colour red, the which do clip or embrace the
stalks almost round about, like the leaves of Thoroughwax. At the
top of the stalk groweth a fair bush of very red flowers, among the
which flowers do grow many small sharp pointed leaves. The seed I
could never observe, being a thing like dust that flieth in the
wind.

2. The other Marsh handed Satyrion differeth little from the
precedent, but in the leaves and flowers, for that the leaves are
smaller and narrower, and the flowers are fair white, gaping wide
open;. in the hollowness whereof appear certain things obscurely
hidden, resembling little helmets, which setteth forth the
difference.


Fig. 384. The third Handed Marsh
Satyrion (3)
Fig. 385. Creeping Satyrion (4)
	3. This third Handed Satyrion hath roots fashioned like an
hand, with some strings fastened to the upper part of them; from
which riseth up a fair stiff stalk armed with large leaves, very
notably dashed with blackish spots, clipping or embracing the stalk
round about; at the top of the stalk standeth a fair tuft of purple
flowers, with many green leaves mingled amongst the same, which
maketh the bush or tuft much greater. The seed is nothing else but
as it were dust like the other of his kind; and it is contained in
such twined vessels as you see espressed apart by the side of the
figure; which vessels are not peculiar to this, but common to most
part of the other Satyrions.

4. The creeping rooted Orchis or Satyrion without testicles, hath
many long roots dispersing themselves, or creeping far abroad in the
ground, contrary to all the rest of the Orchids: which roots are of
the bigness of straws, in substance like those of Soapwort; from the
which immediately doth rise four or five broad smooth leaves like
unto the small Plantain, from the which shooteth up a small and
tender stalk, at the top whereof groweth a pleasant spiky ear of a
whitish colour, spotted on the inside with little specks of a bloody
colour. The seed also is very small.

Fig. 386. The greatest Handed Satyrion (5)

5. This from handed roots like others of this kind sends up a large
stalk, sometimes attaining to the height of two cubits; the leaves
are much like to those of the Marsh Satyrions; the flowers are of an
elegant purple, with little hoods like the top of an helmet (whence
Gemma termed the plant, Cynososorchis conopsæa; and from the height
he called it Macrocaulos.)These flowers smell sweet, and are
succeeded by seeds like those of the rest of this kindred.

It delights to grow in grounds of an indifferent temper, not too
moist nor too dry. It flowers from mid-May to mid-June.

The Place.

They grow in rich and fenny grounds, and in shadowy woods that are
very moist.

The fourth was found by a learned preacher called Master Robert
Abbot, of Bishop's Hatfield, in a boggy grove where a conduit head
doth stand, that sendeth water to the Queen's house in the same
town.

It grows also plentifully in Hampshire within a mile of a market
town called Petersfield, in a moist meadow named Woodmead, near the
path leading from Petersfield, towards Buriton.

The Time.

They flower and flourish about May and June.

The Names.

1. This is Cynosorchis Dracuntias of Lobel and Gemma.

2. This is Cynosorchis palustris altera Leptaphylla, of Lobel;
Testiculus Galericulatus, of Tabernamontanus.

3. Lobel and Gemma term this, Cynosorchis palustris altera Lophodes,
vel nephelodes.

4. This is Orchis minor radice repente, of Camerarius.

5. This by Lobel and Gemma is called Cynosorchis macrocaulos, sive
conopsæa.

The Temperature and Virtues.

There is little use of these in physic; only they are referred unto
the handed Satyrions, whereof they are kinds: notwithstanding
Dalechampius hath written in his great volume, that the Marsh Orchis
is of greater force than any of the Dog's Stones in procuring of
lust.

Camerarius of Nuremberg, who was the first that described this kind
of creeping Orchis, hath set it forth with a bare description only
and I am likewise constrained to do the like, because as yet I have
had no trial thereof.



CHAP. 118. Of Bird's Nest.

Fig. 387. Bird's Nest.

The Description.

Bird's Nest hath many tangling roots plaited or crossed one over
another very intricately, which resembleth a crow's nest made of
sticks; from which riseth up a thick soft gross stalk of a brown
colour, set with small short leaves of the colour of a dry oaken
leaf that hath lain under the tree all the winter long. On the top
of the stalk groweth a spiky ear or tuft of flowers, in shape like
unto Maimed Satyrion, whereof doubtless it is a kind. The whole
plant, as well sticks, leaves, and flowers, are of a parched brown
colour.

I received out of Hampshire from my often remembered friend Master
Goodyer this following description of a Nidus avis found by him the
twenty-ninth of June, 1622.

Nidus avis flore & caule violaceo purpureo colore; an
Pseudoleimodoron Clus. Hist. Rar. plant. pag. 270.

This riseth up with a stalk about nine inches high, with a few
small narrow sharp pointed short skinny leaves, set without
order, very little or nothing at all wrapping or inclosing the
stalk; having a spike of flowers like those of Orobanche,
without tails or leaves growing amongst them: which fallen,
there succeed small seed-vessels. The lower part of the stalk
within the ground is not round like Orobanche, but slender or
long, and of a yellowish white colour, with many small brittle
roots growing underneath confusedly, wrapped or folded
together like those of the common Nidus avis. The whole plant
as it appeareth above ground, both stalks, leaves, and
flowers, is of a violet or deep purple colour. This I found
wild in the border of a field called Marborne, near Habridge
in Holybourne, a mile from a town called Alton in Hampshire,
being the land of William Baden. In this place also groweth
wild the thistle called Corona fratrum. Joh. Goodyer.

The Place.

This bastard or unkindly Satyrion is very seldom seen in these
Southerly parts of England. It is reported, that it groweth in the
North parts of England, near unto a village called Knaresborough. I
found it growing in the middle of a wood in Kent two miles from
Gravesend, near unto a worshipful gentleman's house called Master
William Swan, of Houk Green. The wood belongeth to one Master John
Sidley: which plant I did never see elsewhere; and because it is
very rare, I am the more willing to give you all the marks in the
wood for the better finding it, because it doth grow but in one
piece of the wood: that is to say, the ground is covered all over in
the same place near about it with the herb Sanicle, and also with
the kind of Orchis called Hermaphroditica, or Butterfly Satyrion.

The Time

It flowereth and flourisheth in June andAugust. The dusty or mealy
seed (if it may be called seed) falleth in the end of August but in
my judgement it is an unprofitable or barren dust, and not any seed
at all.

The Names.

It is called Satyrium abortirum: of some, Nidus avis: in French Nid
d'oiseau: in English, Bird's-nest, or Goose-nest: in Low Dutch,
Vogels nest: in High-Dutch, Margen dzehen.

The Temperature and Virtues.

It is not used in physic that I can find in any authority either of
the ancient or later writers, but is esteemed as a degenerate kind
of Orchis, and therefore not used.


END OF BOOK I
-190-
