The Herbal
Or
General History of Plants

By

John Gerard
and
Thomas Johnson


Volume 3
(Book 2 Part 2)



Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2019
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain



CHAP. 174. Of Garden Thyme.
Fig. 856. Common or Hard Thyme (1) Fig. 857. Broad-Leaved Thyme (2)
The Description

1. The first kind of Thyme is so well known that it needeth no
description; because there is not any which are ignorant what Thymum
durius is, I mean our common garden Thyme.

2. The second kind of Thyme with broad leaves hath many woody branches
rising from a thready root, beset with leaves like Myrtus. The flowers
are set in roundels about the stalk like Horehound. The whole plant is
like the common Thyme in taste and smell.



Fig. 858. Candy Thyme (3)
Fig. 859. Laced or Dodder Thyme (4)

3. Thyme of Candy is in all respects like unto common Thyme, but
differeth in that, that this kind hath certain knoppy tufts not much
unlike the spikes or knots of Staaecados, but much lesser, beset with
slender flowers of a purple colour. The whole plant is of a more gracious
smell than any of the other Thymes, and of another kind of taste, as it
were savouring like spice. The root is brittle, and of a woody substance.

4. Doubtless that kind of Thyme whereon Epithymum doth grow, and is
called for that cause Epithymum, and used in shops, is nothing other than
Dodder that grows upon Thyme; and is all one with ours, though Matthiolus
makes a controversy and difference thereof: for Pena travelling over the
hills in Narbonne near the sea, hath seen not only the garden Thyme, but
the wild Thyme also loden and garnished with this Epithymum. So that by
his sight and mine own knowledge I am assured, that it is not another
kind of Thyme that beareth Epithymum, but is common Thyme: for I have
often found the same in England, not only upon our Thyme, but upon Savory
and other herbs also: notwithstanding thus much I may conjecture, that
the climate of those countries doth yield the same forth in greater
abundance than ours, by reason of the intemperance of cold, whereunto our
country is subect.

The Place

These kinds of Thyme grow plentifully in England in most gardens
everywhere, except that with broad leaves, and Thyme of Candy, which I
have in my garden.

The Time.

They flourish from May unto September.

The Names

The first may be called Hard Thyme, or common garden Thyme: the second,
Broad-Leaved Thyme: the third, Thyme of Candy; our English women call it
Musk Thyme: the last may be called Dodder Thyme.

The Temperature.

These kinds of Thyme are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Thyme boiled in water and honey drunken, is good against the cough and
shortness of the breath; it provoketh urine, expelleth the secondine or
after-birth, and the dead child, and dissolves clotted or congealed blood
in the body.

B. The same drunk with vinegar and salt purgeth phlegm: and boiled in
mead or metheglin, it cleanseth the breast, lungs, reins, and matrix, and
killeth worms.

C. Made into powder, and taken in the weight of three drams with mead or
honeyed vinegar, called oxymel, and a little sait, purgeth by stool tough
and clammy phlegm, sharp and choleric humours, and all corruption of
blood.

D. The same taken in like sort, is good against the sciatica, the pain in
the side and breast, against the wind in the side and belly, and is
profitable also for such as are fearful, melancholic, and troubled in
mind.

E. It is good to be given unto those that have the falling sickness to
smell unto.

F. Epithymum, after Galen, is of more effectual operation in physic than
Thyme, being hot and dry in the third degree, more mightily cleansing,
heating, drying, and opening than Cuscuta, having right good effect to
eradicate melancholy, or any other humour in the spleen, or other
disease, sprung by occasion of the spleen.

G. It helpeth the long continued pains of the head, and besides his
singular effects about splenetical matters, it helpeth the lepry, or any
disease of melancholy; all quartan agues, and such like griefs proceeding
from the spleen.

H. Dioscorides saith, Epithymum drunk with honeyed water, expelleth by
siege, phlegm, and melancholy.

I. Of his native property it relieveth them which be melancholic, swollen
in the face and other parts, if you pound Epithymum, and take the fine
powder thereof in the quantity of four scruples in the liquour which the
apothecaries call passum["raisin wine"], or with oxymel and salt, which
taketh away all flatuous humours and ventosities.



CHAP. 175. Of Savory.
Fig. 860. Winter Savory (1) Fig. 861. Summer Savory (2)
The Kinds.

There be two kinds of Savory, the one that endureth winter, and is of
long continuance, the other an annual or yearly plant, that perisheth at
the time when it hath perfected his seed, and must be sown again the next
year; which we call Summer Savory, or Savory of a year. There is likewise
another, which is a stranger in England, called of Lobel Thymbra S.
Iuliani, denying it to be the right Sataureia, or Savory: whether that of
Lobel, or that we have in our English gardens be the true Winter Savory,
is yet disputable, for we think that of St. Julian's rock to be rather a
wild kind than otherwise. Pena and Lobel do not deny, but affirm it in
these words, Nullus non fatetur Satureiam veram; that is, which none can
deny to be the true Satureia or Savory. Vid. ["see"] Adversariara pag.
182.

The Description.

1. Winter Savory is a plant resembling Hyssop, but lower, more tender and
brittle: it bringeth forth very many branches compassed on every side
with narrow and sharp pointed leaves, longer than those of Thyme; among 
which grow the flowers from the bottom to the top, out of small husks,
ofcolour white, tending to a light purple. The root is hard and woody, as
is the rest of the plant.

2. Summer Savory groweth up with a slender brittle stalk of a foot high,
divided into little branches: the leaves are narrow, lesser than those of
Hyssop, like the leaves of Winter Savory, but thinner set upon the
branches. The flowers stand hard to the branches, of a light purple
tending to whiteness. The root is small, full of strings, and perisheth
when it hath perfected his seed.
Fig. 862. Rock Savory (3) Fig. 863. Candy Savory (4)

3. This small kind of Savory, which Lobel hath set forth under the title
of Thymbra S. Iuliani, because it groweth plentifully upon the rough
cliffs of the Tyrrhenian Sea in Italy, called Saint Julian's Rock, hath
tender twiggy branches an handful high, of a woody substance, set full of
leaves from the bottom to the top, very thick thrust together like unto
those of Thyme, saving that they be smaller & narrower, bringing forth at
the top of the sprigs a round spiky tuft of small purplish flowers. The
whole plant is whitish, tending to a bleak colour, and of a very hot and
sharp taste, and also well smelling.

4. This in the opinion of Honorius Bellus, Clusius, and Pena, is thought,
and not without good reason, to be the true Thymbra, or Satureia of
Dioscorides and the ancients, for (besides that it agrees with their
description, it is to this day called in Candia Thymbri). Clusius
describes it thus: It sends forth many branches immediately from the root
like as Thyme, and those quadrangular, rough, and of a purplish colour:
upon these grow alternately little roughish leaves much like those of the
true Thyme; and out of their bosoms come little branches set with the
like, but lesser leaves. The tops of the branches are compassed with a
roundel made of many little leaves, whereout come flowers of a fine
purple colour, and like the flowers of Thyme, being divided into four
parts, whereof the lower is the broader, and hangs down: The upper is
also broad but shorter, and the other two less. Out of the middle of the
flower come five whitish threads, pointed with brown, and a forked style.
The seed is small and black like that of Thyme. The root hard and woody.
It flowered with Clusius (who received the seeds out of Candy from
Honorius Bellus) in October and November.

The Place.

They are sown in gardens, and bring forth their flowers the first year of
their sowing.

The Time.

They flower in July and August.

The Names.

Savory is called in Greek Thymbra, neither hath it any other true name in
Latin. The interpreters would have it called Satureia, wherein they are
repugnant to Columella a Latin writer, who doth show a manifest
difference between Thymbra and Satureia, in his tenth book; where he
writeth, Et Satureia Thymi referens Thymbra aeq. saporem that is, that
Savory hath the taste of Thyme, and of Thymbra or the Winter Savory.

Notwithstanding this assertion of Columella, Pliny lib. 19, chap 8, makes
Satureia, or Savory, to be that Thymbra which is called also Cunila.
Savory in High Dutch is called Kunel Saturey, and Sadaney: in Low Dutch,
Ceulen: which name, as it seemeth, is drawn out of Cunila: in Italian,
Savoreggia: in Spanish, Axedrea, and Sagorida: in French, Sarriette: in
English, Savory, Winter Savory, and Summer Savory.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Winter Savory is of temperature hot and dry in the third degree, it
maketh thin, cutteth, it cleanseth the passages: to be brief, it is
altogether of like virtue with Thyme.

B. Summer Savory is not full so hot as Winter Savory, and therefore saith
Dioscorides, more fit to be used in medicine: it maketh thin, and doth
marvellously prevail against wind: therefore it is with good success
boiled and eaten with beans, peason, and other windy pulses, yea if it be
applied to the belly in a fomentation, it forthwith helpeth the affects
of the mother proceeding from wind.



CHAP. 176. Of Dodder.

Fig. 864. Dodder.

The Description.

Cuscuta, or Dodder, is a strange herb, altogether without leaves or root,
like unto threads very much snarled or wrapped together, confusedly
winding itself about bushes and hedges, and sundry kinds of herbs. The
threads are somewhat red: upon which grow here & there little round heads
or knops, bringing forth at the first slender white flowers, afterward a
small seed.
The Place.

This herb groweth upon sundry kinds of herbs, as upon Thyme, Winter
Savory, Germander, and such like, taking his name from the herb whereupon
it doth grow, as that upon Thyme is called Epithymum, upon Line or Flax
Epilinum: and so of others, as Dodonaeus setteth forth at large: yet hath
he forgotten one among the rest, which groweth very plentifully in
Somersetshire upon Nettles: neither is it the least among many, either in
beauty or operation, but comparable to the best Epithymum. Following
therefore the example of Dioscorides, 1 have thought good to call it
Epiurtica, and so of the rest according to the herbs whereon they do
grow.

The Names.

The greatest is called in shops everywhere Cuscuta: and of divers because
it groweth upon Flax or Line, Podagra Lini; the better learned do name it
Cassutha, or Cassytha: the Arabians, Kessuth and Chasuth: in Dutch,
Schorte, and Wranghe: in High Dutch, Filkraut: in French, Goute d'Lin,
and Tigne de Lin: in English, Dodder.

The lesser and slenderer which wrappeth itself upon Thyme and Savory, is
called of Dioscorides Epithymon: the apothecaries keep the name
Epithymum. Others, among whom is Actuarius, name that Epithymum which
groweth upon Thyme only, and that which groweth on Savory Epithymbrum,
and that also which hangeth upon Stoebe, they term Epistoebe, giving a
peculiar name to every kind.

The Nature.

The nature of this herb changeth and altereth, according to the nature
and quality of the herbs whereupon it groweth: so that by searching of
the nature of the plant you may easily find out the temperament of the
laces growing upon the same. But more particularly: it is of temperature
somewhat more dry than hot, and that in the second degree: it also
cleanseth with a certain astrictive or binding quality, and especially
that which is found growing upon the Bramble: for it also receiveth a
certain nature from his parents on which it groweth; for when it groweth
upon the hotter herbs, as Thyme and Savory, it becometh hotter and drier
and of thinner parts: that which cometh of Broom provoketh urine more
forcibly, and maketh the belly more soluble: and that is moister which
groweth upon Flax: that which is found upon the Bramble hath joined with
it as we have said a binding quality, which by reason of this faculty
joined with it is good to cure the infirmities of the liver and milt; for
seeing that it hath both a purging and binding faculty united to it, it
is most singular good for the entrails: for Galen in his thirteenth Book
Of the Method of Curing, doth at large declare that such medicines are
fittest of all for the liver and milt.

The Virtues.

A. Dodder removeth the stoppings of the liver and of the milt or spleen,
it disburdeneth the veins of phlegmatic, choleric, corrupt and
superfluous humours: provoketh urine gently, and in a mean openeth the
kidneys, cureth the yellow jaundice which are joined with the stopping of
the liver and gall: it is a remedy against lingering agues, bastard and
long tertians, quartans also, and properly agues in infants and young
children, as Mesue saith in Serapio, who also teacheth, that the nature
of Dodder is to purge choler by the stool, and that more effectually is
it have Wormwood joined with it; but too much using of it is hurtful to
the stomach: yet Avicenna writeth that it doth not hurt it, but
strengtheneth a weak or feeble stomach; which opinion also we do better
allow of.

B. Epithymum, or the Dodder which groweth upon Thyme, is hotter and drier
than the Dodder that groweth upon Flax, that is to say even in the third
degree, as Galen saith. It helpeth all the infirmities of the milt: it is
a remedy against obstructions and hard swellings. It taketh away old
headaches, the falling sickness, madness that cometh of melancholy, and
especially that which proceedeth from the spleen and parts thereabout: it
is good for those that have the French disease, and such as be troubled
with contagious ulcers, the leprosy, and the scabby evil.

C. It purgeth downwards black and melancholic humours, as Actius,
Actuarius, and Mesue write, and also phlegm, as Disocorides noteth: that
likewise purgeth by stool which groweth upon Savory and Scabious, but
more weakly, as Actuarius saith.

D. Cuscuta, or Dodder that groweth upon Flax, boiled in water or wine and
drunk, openeth the stoppings of the liver, the bladder, the gall, the
milt, the kidneys and veins, and purgeth both by siege and urine choleric
humours.

E. It is good against the ague which hath continued a long time, and
against the jaundice, I mean that Dodder especially that groweth upon
Brambles.

F. Epiurtica or Dodder growing upon Nettles, is a most singular and
effectual medicine to provoke urine, and to loose the obstructions of the
body, and is proved oftentimes in the West parts with good success
against many maladies.



CHAP. 177. Of Hyssop.

Fig. 865. Kinds of Hyssop (1-4)

The Description.

1. Dioscorides that gave so many rules for the knowledge of simples, hath
left Hyssop altogether without description, as being a plant so well
known that it needed none: whose example I follow not only in this plant,
but in many others which be common, to avoid tediousness to the reader.

2. The second kind of Hyssop is like the former, which is our common
Hyssop, and differeth in that, that this Hyssop hath his small and
slender branches decked with fair red flowers.

3. The third kind of Hyssop hath leaves, stalks, branches, seed, and
root, like the common Hyssop, and differeth in the flowers only, which
are as white as snow.

4. This kind of Hyssop of all the rest is of the greatest beauty; it hath
a woody root, tough, and full of strings; from which rise up small,
tough, and slender flexible stalks whereupon do grow infinite numbers of
small Fennel-like leaves, much resembling those of the smallest grass, of
a pleasant sweet smell, & aromatic taste, like unto the rest of the
Hyssops but much sweeter; at the top of the stalks do grow amongst the
leaves small hollow flowers, of a bluish colour tending to purple. The
seeds as yet I could never observe.

Fig. 866. Dwarf Narrow-leaved Hyssop

5. This differs from the first described, in that the stalks are weaker
and shorter, the leaves also narrower, and of a darker colour; the
flowers grow after the same manner, & are of the same colour as those of
the common kind.

We have in England in our gardens another kind, whose picture it shall be
needless to express, considering that in few words it may be delivered.
It is like unto the former, but the leaves are some of them white, some
green, as the other; and some green and white mixed and spotted, very
goodly to behold.

Of which kind we have in our gardens moreover another sort, whose leaves
are wonderfully curled, rough, and hairy, growing thick thrust together,
making as it were a tuft of leaves; in taste and smell, and in all other
things like unto the common Hyssop.

I have likewise in my garden another sort of Hyssop, growing to the form
of a small woody shrub, having very fair broad leaves like unto those of
Nummularia, or Moneywort, but thicker, fuller of juice, and of a darker
green colour; in taste and smell like the common Hyssop.

The Place.

All these kinds of Hyssop do grow in my garden, and in some others also.

The Time.

They flower from June to the end of August.

The Names.

Hyssop is called in Latin Hyssopus: the which name is likewise retained
among the Germans, Brabanters, Frenchmen, Italians, and Spaniards.
Therefore that shall suffice which hath been set down in their several
titles.

This is by most writers judged to be Hyssop used by the Arabian
physicians, but not that of the Greeks, which is nearer to Origanum and
Marjoram, as this is to Satureia or Savory.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. A decoction of Hyssop made with figs, and gargled in the mouth and
throat, ripeneth & breaketh the tumors and impostumes of the mouth and
throat, and easeth the difficulty of swallowing, coming by cold rheums.

B. The same made with figs, water, honey, and rue, and drunken, helpeth
the inflammation of the lungs, the old cough, and shortness of breath,
and the obstructions or stoppings of the breast.

C. The syrup or juice of Hyssop taken with the syrup of vinegar, purgeth
by stool tough and clammy phlegm, and driveth forth worms if it be eaten
with figs.

D. The distilled water drunk, is good for those diseases before named,
but not with that speed and force.



CHAP. 178. Of Hedge Hyssop.
Fig. 867. Hedge Hyssop (1) Fig. 868. Grass Poley (2) & Broad-Leaved Hedge
Hyssop (3)
The Description.

1. Hedge Hyssop is a low plant or herb about a span long, very like unto
the common Hyssop, with many square stalks or slender branches, beset
with leaves somewhat larger than Hyssop, but very like. The flowers grow
betwixt the leaves upon short stems, of a white colour declining to
blueness. All the herb is of a most bitter taste, like the small
Centaury. The root is little and thready, dilating itself far abroad; by
which means it multiplieth greatly, and occupieth much ground where it
groweth.

2. Narrow leaved Hedge Hyssop from a small fibrous white root sends up a
reddish round crested stalk divided into sundry branches, which are set
with leaves like those of Knot-Grass, of a pale green colour, and without
any stalks: out of the bosom of these come flowers set in long cups
composed of four leaves of a pleasing blue colour, which are succeeded by
longish seed-vessels containing a small dusky seed. The whole plant is
without smell, neither hath it any bitterness or other manifest taste. It
varies in leaves, sometimes broader, and otherwhiles narrower, the plant
growing sometimes but an handful, and otherwhiles a foot high. Gesner
called this Gratiola minor: and Camerarius, Hyssopoides: and Bauhin only
hath figured it, and that by the name of Hyssopifolia sive Gratiola
minor. Cordus first mentioned it, and that by the Dutch name of Grass
Poley, which name we may also very fitly retain in English.

3. Broad-Leaved Hedge Hyssop hath many small and tender branches, four-
square, and somewhat hollow or furrowed, beset with leaves by couples one
opposite against another, like unto the former, but somewhat shorter, and
much broader: among which grow the flowers of a purple colour, spotted on
the inside with white, and of a brighter purple than the rest of the
flower, fashioned like the smallest Antirrhinum or least Snapdragon;
which being past there succeed little seed vessels, fashioned like the
nut of a crossbow, which contain small yellowish seed, extreme bitter of
taste. The whole plant is likewise bitter, as the common or well known
Gratiola. The root is compact of a great number of whitish strings,
entangled one within another, which mightily increaseth and spreadeth
abroad.

This plant is only a lesser kind of the Lysimachia galericulata of Lobel,
which some have called Gratiola latifolia.

The Place.

1. The first groweth in low and moist places naturally, which I have
planted in my garden.

2. The second was found growing by my oft mentioned friend Mr. Bowles at
Dorchester in Oxfordshire, at the back side of the enclosed grounds on
the left hand of the town, if you would ride from thence to Oxford in the
grassy places of the champion corn fields.

3. The third groweth likewise in moist places. I found it growing upon
the bog or marsh ground at the further end of Hampstead Heath, and upon
the same heath towards London, near unto the head of the springs that
were digged for water to be conveyed to London, 1590, attempted by that
careful citizen John Hart, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of London: at
which time myself was in His Lordship's company, and viewing for my
pleasure the same goodly springs, I found the said plant, not heretofore
remembered.

The Time.

The first flowereth in May: the second in June and July: the third in
August.

The Names in general.

Hedge Hyssop is called in Latin Gratiola, and Gratia Dei or the Grace of
God; notwithstanding there is a kind of Geranium, or Stork's Bill, called
by the latter name. Of Cordus, Limnesium, and Centauroides: of
Anguillaria it is thought to be Dioscorides his Papaver spumeum, or
Spatling Poppy: but some think Papaver spumeum to be that which we call
Behen album: in Dutch it is called Godts Gratie: in Italian, Stanca
cavallo, because that horses when they have eaten thereof do wax lean,
and languish thereupon: and in English, Gratia Dei, and Hedge Hyssop. The
seed hereof is called Gelbenech, which name the Arabians retain unto this
day.

The Names in particutar.

1. Matthiolus, Dodonaeus and others have called this Gratiola;
Anguillara, Gratia Dei; Cordus, Limnesium, Centaureides; he also thought
it, but unfitly, to be the Eupatoreum of Mesue: Gesner thinks it may be
Polemonium palustre amarum of Hippocrates, that write of the diseases of
cattle.

2. Cordus called this Grass Poley; Gesner, Gratiola minor; Camerarius,
Hyssopoides: and Bauhin, Hyssopifolia.

3. This is not set forth by any but our author, and it may fitly be named
Lysimachia galericulata minor, as I have formerly noted.

The Temperature.

Hedge Hyssop is hot and dry of temperature. And the first only is used in
medicine.

The Virtues.

A. Who so taketh but one scruple of Gratiola bruised, shall perceive
evidently his effectual operation and virtue, in purging mightily, and
that in great abundance, waterish, gross, and slimy humours. Conradus
Gesnerus experimented this, and found it to be true, and so have I
myself, and many others.

B. Gratiola boiled, and the decoction drunk or eaten with any kind of
meat, in manner of a salad, openeth the belly, and causeth notable
looseness, and to scour freely, and by that means purgeth gross phlegm
and choleric humours.

C. Gratiola or Hedge Hyssop boiled in wine and given to drink, helpeth
fevers of what sort soever, and is most excellent in dropsies, and such
like diseases proceeding of cold and watery causes.

D. The extraction given with the powder of cinnamon and a little of the
juice of Calamint, prevaileth against tertian and quotidian fevers, set
down for most certain by the learned Joachimus Camerarius.



CHAP. 179. Of Lavender Spike.
Fig. 869. Common Lavender (1) Fig. 870. White-Flowered Lavender (2)
The Description.

1. Lavender Spike hath many stiff branches of a woody substance, growing
up in the manner of a shrub, set with many long hoary leaves, by couples
for the most part; of a strong smell, and yet pleasant enough to such as
do love strong savours. The flowers grow at the top of the branches spike
fashion, of a blue colour. The root is hard and woody.

2. The second differeth not from the precedent, but in the colour of the
flowers: for this plant bringeth milk white flowers; and the other blue,
wherein especially consisteth the difference.

Fig. 871. Lavender Spike

3. We have in our English gardens a small kind of Lavender, which is
altogether lesser than the other, and the flowers are of a more purple
colour and grow in much less and shorter heads, yet have they a far more
grateful smell: the leaves are also less and whiter than those of the
ordinary sort. This did, and I think yet doth grow in great plenty, in
his Majesy's private garden at Whitehall. And this is called Spike,
without addition, and sometimes Lavender Spike: and of this by
distillation is made that vulgarly known and used oil which is termed
Oleum spicae, or oil of Spike.

The Place.

In Spain and Languedoc in France, most of the mountains and desert
fields, are as it were covered over with Lavender. In these cold
countries they are planted in gardens.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in June and July.

The Names.

Lavender Spike is called in Latin Lavendula, and Spica: in Spanish,
Spigo, and Languda. The first is the male, and the second the female. It
is thought of some to be that sweet herb Casia whereof Virgil maketh
mention in the second Eclogue of his Bucolics:
Tum Casia atque aliis intexus suavibus herbis,
Mollia luteola pingit vacinia Caltha.
And then shell Spike and such sweet herbs infold
And paint the Jacinth with the Marigold.

And likewise in the fourth of his Georgics where he entreateth of
choosing of seats and places for bees, and for the ordering thereof, he
saith thus:
Haec circum Casiae virides & olentia late
Serpilla, & graviter spirantis copia Thymbrae
Floreat; &c. --
About them set fresh Lavender and store
Of wild Thyme with strong Savory to flower.

Yet there is another Casia called in shops Casia Lignea, as also Casia
nigra, which is named Casia fistula; and another a small shrubby plant
extant among the shrubs or hedge bushes, which some think to be the Casia
Poetica, mentioned in the precedent verses.

The Temperature.

Lavender is hot and dry, and that in the third degree, and is of a thin
subsance, consisting of many airy and spiritual parts. Therefore it is
good to be given any way against the cold diseases of the head, and
especially those which have their original or beginning not of abundance
of humours, but chiefly of a cold quality only.

The Virtues.

A. The distilled water of Lavender smelt unto, or the temples and
forehead bathed therewith, is a refreshing to them that have the
catalepsy, a light migraine, & to them that have the falling sicknesss,
and that use to swoon much. But when there is abundance of humours,
especially mixed with blood, it is not then to be used safely, neither is
the composition to be taken which is made of distilled wine: in which
such kind of herbs, flowers, or seeds, and certain spices are infused or
steeped, though most men do rashly and at aduenture give them without
making any difference at all. For by using such hot things that fill and
stuff the head, both the disease is made greater, and the sick man also
brought into danger, especially when letting of blood, or purging have
not gone before. Thus much by way of admonition, because that everywhere
some unlearned physicians and divers rash and overbold apothecaries, and
other foolish women, do by and by give such compotations, and others of
the like kind, not only to those that have the apoplexy; but also to
those that are taken, or have the catuche or catalepsis with a fever; to
whom they can give nothing worse, seeing those things do very much hurt,
and oftentimes bring death itself.

B. The flowers of Lavender picked from the knops, I mean the blue part
and not the husk, mixed with cinnamon, nutmegs, and cloves, made into
powder, and given to drink in the distilled water thereof, doth help the
panting and passion of the heart, prevaileth against giddiness, turning,
or swimming of the brain, and members subject to the palsy.

C. Conserve made of the flowers with sugar, profiteth much against the
diseases aforesaid, if the quantity of a bean be taken thereof in the
morning fasting.

D. It profiteth these much that have the palsy, if they be washed with
the distilled water of the flowers, or anointed with the oil made of the
flowers, and oil olive, in such manner as oil of roses is, which shall be
expressed in the treatise of Roses.



CHAP. 180. Of French Lavender, or Stickadove.
Fig. 872. Stickadove or French Lavender (1) Fig. 873. Jagged Stickadove
(2)
The Description.

1. French Lavender hath a body like Lavender, short, and of a woody
substance, but slenderer, beset with long narrow leaves, of a whitish
colour, lesser than those of Lavender: it hath in the top bushy or spiky
heads, well compact or thrust together; out of the which grow forth small
purple flowers, of a pleasant smell. The seed is small and blackish: the
root is hard and woody.

2. This Jagged Stickadove hath many small stiff stalks of a woody
substance; whereupon do grow jagged leaves in shape like unto the leaves
of Dill, but of an hoary colour: on the top of the stalks do grow spike
flowers of a bluish colour;. and like unto the common Lavender Spike; the
root is likewise woody. This by Clusius who, first described it, as also
by Lobel, is called Lavendula multifido folio, or Lavender with the
divided leaf; the plant more resembling Lavender than Stickadove.
Fig. 874. Toothed Stickadove (3) Fig. 875. Naked Stickadove (4)

3. There is also a certain kind hereof, differing in smallness of the
leaves only, which are round about the edges nicked or toothed like a
saw, resembling those of Lavender cotton. The root is likewise woody.

4. There is also another kind of Stoechas which differs from the first or
ordinary kind, in that the tops of the stalks are not set with leaves
almost close to the head as in the common kind, but are naked and wholly
without leaves: also at the tops of the spike or flowers (as it were to
recompense their defect below) there grow larger and fairer leaves than
in the other sorts. The other parts of the plant differ not from the
common Stoechas.

The Place.

These herbs do grow wild in Spain, in Languedoc in France, and the
islands called Stoechades over against Massilita: we have them in our
gardens, and keep them with great diligence from the injury of our cold
climate.

The Time.

They are sown of seed in the end of April, and covered in the winter from
the cold, or else set in pots or tubs with earth, and carried into
houses.

The Names.

The apothecaries call the flower Stoecados: Dioscorides, Stichas: Galen, 
Stoichas, by the dipthong oi in the first syllable: in Latin, Stoechas:
in High Dutch, Stichaskraut: in Spanish, Thomani, and Cantuesso: in
English, French Lavender, Steckado, Stickadove, Cassidony, and some
simple people imitating the same name do call it Cast-me-down.

The Temperature.

French Lavender saith Galen is of temperature compounded of a little cold
earthy substance, by reason whereof it bindeth: it is of force to take
away obstructions, to extenuate or make thin, to scour and cleanse, and
to strengthen not only all the entrails, but the whole body also.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides teacheth that the decoction hereof doth help the diseases
of the chest, and is with good success mixed with counterpoisons.

B. The later physicians affirm, that Stoechas, and especially the flowers
of it, are most effectual against pains of the head, and all diseases
thereof proceeding of cold causes, and therefore they be mixed in all
compositions almost which are made against headache of long continuance,
the apoplexy, the falling sickness, and such like diseases.

C. The decoction of the husks and flowers drunk, openeth the stoppings of
the liver, the lungs, the milt, the mother, the bladder, and in one word
all other inward parts, cleansing and driving forth all evil and corrupt
humours, and procuring urine.



CHAP. 181. Of Flea-Wort.
Fig. 876. Flea-Wort (1) Fig. 877. Never-Dying Flea-Wort (2)
The Description.

1. Psyllium, or the common Flea-wort hath many round and tender branches,
set full of long and narrow leaves somewhat hairy. The top of the stalks
are garnished with sundry round chaffy knops, beset with small yellow
flowers: which being ripe contain many little shining seeds, in
proportion, colour, and bigness like unto fleas.

2. The second kind of Psyillium or Flea-wort hath long and tough
branches, of a woody substance like the precedent, but longer and harder,
with leaves resembling the former, but much longer and narrower. The
chaffy tuft which containeth the seed is like the other, but more like
the ear of Phalaris, which is the ear of Alpisti, the Canary seed which
is meat for birds that come from the Islands of Canary. The root hereof
lasteth all the winter, and likewise keepeth his green leaves, whereof it
took this addition of Sempervirens.

The Place.

These plants are not growing in our fields of England, as they do in
France and Spain, yet I have them growing in my garden.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

Flea-wort is called in Latin, Pulicaria, and Herba pulicaris: in shops,
Psillium: in English, Flea-wort; not because it killeth fleas, but
because the seeds are like fleas: of some, Flea-bane, but unproperly: in
Spanish, Zargatona: in French, L'herbe aus pulces; in Dutch, Duyls Bloye-
cruyt.

The Temperature.

Galen and Serapio record, that the seed of Psyillium (which is chiefly
used in medicine) is cold in the second degree, and temperate in moisture
and dryness.

The Virtues.

A . The seed of Flea-wort boiled in water or infused, and the decoction
or infusion drunk, purgeth downwards adust and choleric humours, cooleth
the heat of the inward parts, hot fevers, burning agues, and such like
diseases proceeding of heat, and quencheth drought and thirst.

B. The seed stamped, and boiled in water to the form of a plaster, and
applied, taketh away all swellings of the joints, especially if you boil
the same with vinegar and oil of Roses, and apply it as aforesaid.

C. The same applied in manner aforesaid unto any burning heat, called St.
Anthony's fire, or any hot and violent impostume assuageth the same, and
bringeth it to ripeness.

D. Some hold that the herb strewed in the chamber where many fleas be,
will drive them away; for which cause it took the name Flea-wort: but I
think it is rather because the seed doth resemble a flea so much, that it
is hard to discern the one from the other.

The Danger.

Too much Flea-wort seed taken inwardly is very hurtful to man's nature:
so that I wish you not to follow the mind of Galen and Dioscorides in
this point, being a medicine rather bringing a malady, than taking away
the grief: remembering the old proverb, A man may buy gold too dear; and
The honey is too dear that is licked from thorns.

Dioscorides nor Galen mention no use of this inwardly; but on the
contrary, Dioscorides in his sixth book, which treats wholly of the
curing and preventing of poisons, mentions this in the tenth chapter for
a poison, and there sets down the symptoms which it causes, and refers
you to the foregoing chapter for the remedies.



CHAP. 185. Of Clove-Gillyflowers.
Fig. 878. Great Double Carnation (1) Fig. 879. Double Clove-Gillyflower
(2)
The Kinds.

There are at this day under the name of Caryophyllus comprehended divers
and sundry sorts or plants, of such various colours, and also several
shapes, that a great and large volume would not suffice to write of every
one at large in particular considering how infinite they are; and how
every year every climate and country bringeth forth new sorts, such as
have not heretofore been written of; some whereof are called Carnations,
others Clove-Gillyflowers, some Sops-in-wine, some Pagiants, or Pagion
colour, horse-flesh, blunket, purple, white, double and single
Gillyflowers, as also a Gillyflower with yellow flowers: the which a
worshipful Merchant of London Mr. Nicolas Lete procured from Poland, and
gave me thereof for my garden, which before that time was never seen nor
heard of in these countries. Likewise there be sundry sorts of Pinks
comprehended under the same title, which shall be described in a several
chapter. There be under the name of Gillyflowers also those flowers which
we call Sweet-Johns and Sweet-Williams. And first of the great Carnation
and Clove-Gillyflower.

The Description.

1. The great Carnation Gillyflower hath a thick round woody root, from
which riseth up many strong jointed stalks set with long green leaves by
couples: on the top of the stalks do grow very fair flowers of an
excellent sweet smell, and pleasant carnation colour, whereof it took his
name.

2. The Clove-Gillyflower differeth not from the Carnation but in
greatness as well of the flowers as leaves. The flower is exceeding well
known, as also the Pinks and other Gillyflowers wherefore I will not
stand long upon the description.
Fig. 880. White Carnation and Pageant (3,4) Fig. 881. Deep Purple
Gillyflower (5)
Fig. 882. Single Gillyflower, or Pink (6)


3-6. The very many kinds both of Gillyflowers, Pinks, and the like,
differ very little in their roots, leaves, seeds, or manner of growing,
though much in the colour, shape, and magnitude of their flowers, whereof
some are of one colour, other some of more; and of them some are striped,
others spotted, &c. Now I (holding it a thing not so fit for me to insist
upon these accidental differences of plants, having specific differences
enough to treat of) refer such as are addicted to these commendable and
harmless delights to survey the late and oft mentioned work of my friend
Mr. John Parkinson, who hath accurately and plentifully treated of these
varieties; and if they require further satisfaction, let them at the time
of the year repair to the garden of Mistress Tuggy (the wife of my late
deceased friend Mr. Ralph Tuggy) in Westminster, which in the excellency
and variety of these delights exceedeth all that I have seen: as also he
himself whilst he lived exceeded most, if not all of his time, in his
care, industry, and skill in raising, increasing, and preserving of these
plants and some others; whose loss therefore is the more to be lamented
by all those that are lovers of plants. I will only give you the figures
of some three or four more, whereof one is of the single one, which
therefore some term a Pink, though in mine opinion unfitly, for that it
is produced by the seed of most of the double ones, and is of different
colour and shape as they are, varying from them only in the singleness of
the flowers.

The Place.

These Gillyflowers, especially the Carnations, are kept in pots from the
extremity of our cold winters. The Clove-Gillyflower endureth better the
cold, and therefore is planted in gardens.

The Time.

They flourish and flower most part of the summer.

The Names.

The Clove-Gillyflower is called of the later herbarists Caryophyllus
flos, of the smell of cloves wherewith it is possessed: in Italian,
Garofoli: in Spanish, Clavel: in French, Oeilletz: in Low Dutch,
Ginoffelbloemen: in Latin of most, Ocellus damascenus, Ocellus
barbaricus, and barbarica: in English, Carnations, and Clove-
Gillyflowers. Of some it is called Vetonica, and Herba Tunica. The which
Bernardus Gordonius hath set down for Dioscorides his Polemonium.

That worthy herbarist and learned physician of late memory Mr. Doctor
Turner maketh Caryophyllis to be Cantabrica; which Pliny, lib. 23, cap.
8, writeth to have been found out in Spain about Augustus' time, and that
by those of Biscay.

Johannes Ruellius saith, That the Gillyflower was unknown to the old
writers: whose judgment is very good, especially because this herb is not
like to that of Vetonica or Cantabrica. It is a marvel, saith he, that
such a famous flower, so pleasant and sweet, should lie hid, and not be
made known by the old writers: which may be thought not inferior to the
rose in beauty, smell, and variety.

The Temperature.

The Gillyflower with the leaves and roots for the most part are temperate
in heat and dryness.

The Virtues.

A. The conserve made of the flowers of the Clove-Gillyflower and sugar,
is exceeding cordial, and wonderfully above measure doth comfort the
heart, being eaten now and then.

B. It prevaileth against hot pestilential fevers, expelleth the poison
and fury of the disease, and greatly comforteth the sick, as hath of late
been found out by a learned gentleman of Lee in Essex, called Mr. Rich.



CHAP. 183. Of Pinks, or Wild Gillyflowers.

Fig. 883. Kinds of Pink (1-3)
The Description.

1. The double purple Pink hath many grassy leaves set upon small jointed
stalks by couples, one opposite against another, whereupon do grow
pleasant double purple flowers of a most fragrant smell, not inferior to
the Clove-Gillyflower. The root is small and woody. There is also a
single one of this kind, whose figure I here give you.

2. The single red Pink hath likewise many small grassy leaves lesser than
the former. The flowers grow at the top of the small stalks single, and
of a sweet bright red colour.

3. The white jagged Pink hath a tough woody root: from which rise
immediately many grassy leaves, set upon a small stalk full of joints or
knees, at every joint two, one against another even to the top; whereupon
do grow fair double purple flowers of a sweet and spicy smell, consisting
of five leaves, sometimes more, cut or deeply jagged on the edges,
resembling a feather: whereupon I gave it the name Plumarius, or
feathered Pink. The seed is soft, blackish, and like unto Onion seed.
There is another variety of this, with the leaves somewhat larger and
greener than the last mentioned: the flowers also are somewhat bigger,
more cut in or divided, and of a much sweeter smell.



Fig. 884. Purple Jagged Pink (4)
Fig. 885. Wild White Jagged Pink (5)

4. This purple coloured Pink is very like the precedent in stalks, roots,
and leaves. The flowers grow at the top of the branches lesser than the
last described, and not so deeply jagged, of a purple colour tending to
blueness, wherein consisteth the difference.

There be divers sorts of Pinks more, whereof to write particularly were
to small purpose, considering they are all well known to the most, if not
to all. Therefore these few shall serve at this time for those that we do
keep in our gardens: notwithstanding I think it convenient to place these
wilder sorts in this same chapter, considering their nature and virtues
do agree, and few or none of them be used in physic, besides their
nearness in kindred and neighbourhood.

5. This wild jagged Pink hath leaves, stalks, and flowers like unto the
white jagged Pink of the garden, but altogether lesser, wherein they
especially differ.

Fig. 886. Kinds of Pink (6-9)

6. The purple mountain or wild Pink hath many small grassy leaves: among
which rise up slender stalks set with the like leaves, but lesser; on the
top whereof do grow small purple flowers, spotted finely with white or
else yellowish spots, and much lesser than any of the others before
described.

7. The mountain Pink of Clusius his description hath many leaves growing
into a tuft like unto those of Thrift, and of a bitter taste: amongst
which rise up small slender footstalks, rather than stalks or stems
themselves of the height of two inches; whereupon do grow such leaves as
those that were next the ground; but lesser, set by couples one opposite
to another: at the top of each small footstalk doth stand one red flower
without smell, consisting of five little leaves set in a rough hairy husk
or hose five-cornered, of a greenish colour tending to purple. The root
is tough and thick, casting abroad many shoots, whereby it greatly
increaseth.

8. This for his stature may justly take the next place; for the stalk is
some inch high, set with little sharp pointed green grassy leaves: the
flowers which grow upon these stalks are composed of five little flesh-
coloured leaves a little divided in their upper parts: the seed is
contained in black shining heads, and it is small and reddish, and shaped
somewhat like the fashion of a kidney, whereby it comes nearer to the
Lychnides, than to the Caryophylli or Pinks. The root is long, black, and
much spreading, whereby this little plant covers the ground a good space
together like as a moss, and makes a curious show when the flowers are
blown. It grows naturally on divers places of the Alps. Gesner called it
Muscus floridus: Pona, Ocimoides Muscosus: and Clusius, Caryophyllus
pumilo alpinus 9.

9. This leafless Pink (as the Greek word doth seem to import) hath many
small rushy or benty leaves rising immediately from a tough rushy root:
among which rise up stalks like unto rushes, of a span high, without any
joint at all, but smooth and plain; on the top whereof groweth a small
flower of a bluish or sky colour, consisting of four little leaves
somewhat jagged in the edges, not unlike those of wild flax. The whole
plant is very bitter, and of a hot taste.

Fig. 887. Kinds of Pink (10-13)

10. The White Mountain Pink hath a great thick and woody root; from the
which immediately rise up very many small and narrow leaves, finer and
lesser than grass, not unlike to the smallest rush: among which rise up
little tender stalks, jointed or kneed by certain distances, set with the
like leaves even to the top by couples, one opposite against another: at
the top whereof grow pretty sweet smelling flowers composed of five
little white leaves. The seed is small and blackish.

11. There is a wild creeping Pink which groweth in our pastures near
about London, and in other places, but especially in the great field next
to Deptford, by the path side as you go from Redriffe to Greenwich; which
hath many small tender leaves shorter than any of the other wild Pinks,
set upon little tender stalks which lie flat upon the ground, taking hold
of the same in sundry places, whereby it greatly increaseth; whereupon
grow little reddish flowers. The root is small, tough, and long lasting.

12. This hath tender stalks some span high, set with two long narrow hard
sharp pointed leaves at each joint. The flowers (which grow commonly but
one on a stalk) consist of five little snipped leaves of a light purple
colour, rough, and deeper coloured about their middles, with two little
crooked threads or horns: the seed is chaffy and black: the root long,
and creeping: it flowers in April and May, and is the Flos caryophylleus
sylvestris 1 of Clusius.

13. Clusius mentions also another whose stalks are come three inches
high: the leaves broader, softer, and greener than than the former: the
flowers also that grow upon the top of the stalks are larger than the
former, and also consist of fine leaves of a deeper purple than the
former, with longer hairs finely intermixed with purple and white.

Fig. 888. Kinds of Pink (14-17)

14. This from a hard woody root, sends up such stalks as the former;
which are set at the joints with short narrower and dark green leaves:
the flowers are white, sweet-smelling, consisting of five much divided
leaves, having two threads or horns in their middle. It flowers in May,
and it is the Caryophyllus sylvestris quintus of Clusius.

15. This wild sea Pink hath divers small tender weak branches trailing
upon the ground, whereupon are set leaves like those of our smallest
garden Pink, but of an old hoary colour tending to whiteness, as are most
of the sea plants. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks in shape
like those of Stitchwort, and of a whitish colour. Neither the seeds nor
seed-vessels have I as yet observed: the root is tough and single.

16. There is another of these wild Pinks which is found growing in
ploughed fields, yet in such as are near unto the sea: it hath very many
leaves spread upon the ground of fresh green colour; amongst which rise
up tender stalks of the height of a foot, set with the like leaves by
couples at certain distances. The flowers grow at the top many together,
in manner of the Sweet-William, of a white, or sometimes a light red
colour. The root is small, tough, and long lasting.  This is a kind of
Gramen leucanthemum, or Holasteum ruellii, described in the 38th chapter
of the first book.

17. Chlsius makes this a Lychnis: and Lobel (whom I here follow) a Pink,
calling it Caryophyllus minimus humilis alter exoticus flore candido
amoeno. This from creeping roots sendeth up every year many branches some
handful and better high, set with two long narrow green leaves at each
joint: the flowers which grow on the tops of the branches are of a
pleasing white colour, composed of five jagged leaves without smell.
After the flowers are gone there succeed round blunt pointed vessels,
containing a small blackish flat seed like to that of the other Pinks.
This hath a viscous or clammy juice like as that of the Muscipulas or
Catch-flies. Clusius makes this his Lychnis sylvestris decima.

The Place.

These kinds of Pinks do grow for the most part in gardens, and likewise
many other sorts, the which were over long to write of particularly.
Those that be wild do grow upon mountains, stony rocks, and desert
places. The rest are specified in their descriptions.

The Time.

They flower with the Clove-Gillyflower, and often after.

The Names.

The Pink is called of Pliny and Turner, Cantabrica and Stactice: of
Fuchsius and Dodonaeus, Vetonica altera, and Vetonica altilis: of
Lobelius and Fuchsius, Superba: in French, Gyrofflees, Oeilletz, and
Violettes herbes: in Italian, Garofoli, and Garoni: in Spanish, Clavis:
in English, Pinks, and Small Honesties.

The Temperature.

The temperature of the Pinks is referred unto the Clove-Gillyflowers.

The Virtues.

A. These are not used in physic, but esteemed for their use in garlands
and nosegays. They are good to be put into vinegar, to give it a pleasant
taste and gallant colour, as Ruellius writeth. Fuchsius saith, that the
roots are commended against the infection of the plague and that the
juice thereof is profitable to waste away the stone, and to drive it
forth: and likewise to cure them that have the falling sickness.



CHAP. 184. Of Sweet Saint Johns and Sweet-Williams.
Fig. 889. White Saint Johns (1) Fig. 890. Double White and Red Saint Johns
(2)
The Description.

1. Sweet Johns have round stalks as have the Gillyflowers, (whereof they
are a kind) a cubit high, whereupon do grow long leaves broader than
those of the Gillyflower, of a green grassy colour: the flowers grow at
the top of the stalks, very like unto Pinks, of a perfect white colour.

2. The second differeth not from the other but in that, that this plant
hath red flowers, and the other white.

We have in our London gardens a kind hereof bearing most fine and
pleasant white flowers, spotted very confusedly with reddish spots, wnich
setteth forth the beauty thereof; and hath been taken of some (but not
rightly) to be the plant called of the later writers Superba austriaca,
or the Pride of Austria. It is now commonly in most places called London-
Pride.

We have likewise of the same kind bringing forth most double flowers, and
these either very white, or else of a deep purple colour.


Fig. 891. Broad-Leaved Sweet-William (3)
Fig. 892. Narrow-Leaved Sweet-William (4)

3. The great Sweet-William hath round jointed stalks thick and fat,
somewhat reddish about the lower joints, a cubit high, with long broad
and ribbed leaves like as those of the Plantain, of a green grassy
colour. The flowers at the top of the stalks are very like to the small
Pinks, many joined together in one tuft or spoky umbel, of a deep red
colour: the root is thick and woody.

4. The Narrow-Leaved Sweet-William groweth up to the height of two
cubits, very well resembling the former, but lesser, and the leaves
narrower: the flowers are of a bright red colour, with many small sharp
pointed grassy leaves standing up amongst them, wherein especially
consisteth the difference.

Fig. 893. Childing Sweet-William (5)

5. This little fruitful Pink hath a small whitish woody root, which sends
forth little stalks some handful and better high; and these at each joint
are set with two thin narrow little leaves: at the top of each of these
stalks grows a single skinny smooth shining husk, out of which (as in
other Pinks) grows not one only flower, but many, one still coming out as
another withers; so that oft times out of one head come seven, eight, or
nine flowers one after another, which as they fade leave behind them a
little pod containing small black flattish seed. The flower is of a light
red, and very small, standing with the head somewhat far out of the hose
or husk.

The Place.

These plants are kept and maintained in gardens more for to please the
eye, than either the nose or belly.
The Time.

They flourish and bring forth their flowers in April and May, somewhat
before the Gillyflowers, and after bear their flowers the whole summer.

The Names.

The Sweet John, and also the Sweet-William are both comprehended under
one title, that is to say, Armeria: of some, superba, and Caryophyllus
sylvestris: of some herbarists, Veronica agrestis, or sylvestris: of
some, Herba tunica: but it doth no more agree herewith than the Clove-
Gillyflower doth with Veronica altera, or Polemonium. In Frehch,
Armoires: hereupon Ruellius nameth them Armerii Flores: in Dutch,
Keykens: as though you should say, a bundle or cluster, for in their
vulgar tongue bundles of flowers or nosegays they call keykens: doubtless
they are wild kinds of Gillyflowers: In English the first two are called
Sweet Johns; and the two next, Sweet-Williams, Tolmeiners, and London
Tufts.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These plants are not used either in meat or medicine, but esteemed for
their beauty to deck up gardens, the bosoms of the beautiful, garlands
and crowns for pleasure.



CHAP. 185. Of Crow-Flowers, or Wild Williams.
Fig. 894. Male Crow-Flower (1) Fig. 895. Double Crow-Flower (3)
The Description.

1. Besides these kinds of Pinks before described, there is a certain
other kind, either of the Gillyflowers or else of the Sweet-Williams,
altogether and everywhere wild, which of some hath been inserted amongst
the wild Campions; of others taken to be the true Flos cuculi.
NotwithstandingI am not of any of their minds, but do hold it for
neither: but rather a degenerate kind of wild Gillyflower. The Cuckoo
flower I have comprehended under the title of Sisimbrium: Englished,
Ladies' Smocks; which plant hath been generally taken for Flos cuculi. It
hath stalks of a span or a foot high, whereupon the leaves do stand by
couples out of every joint; they are small and bluntly pointed, very
rough and hairy. The flowers are placed on the tops of the stalks, many
in one tuft, finely and curiously snipped in the edges, lesser than those
of Gillyflowers, very well resembling the Sweet-William (whereof no doubt
it is a kind) of a light red or scarlet colour.

2. This female Crow-Flower differeth not from the male, saving that this
plant is lesser, and the flowers more finely jagged like the feathered
Pink, whereof it is a kind.

3. Of these Crow-Flowers we have in our gardens one that doth not differ
from the former of the field, saving that the plant of the garden hath
many fair red double flowers, and those of the field single.

The Place.

These grow all about in meadows and pastures, and dankish places.
The Time.

They begin to flower in May, and end in June.

The Names.

The Crow-Flower is called in Latin Armoraria sylvestris, and Armoracia:
of some, Flos cuculi, but not properly; is also called Tunix: of some,
Armeria, Armerius flos primus of Dodonaeus, and likewise Caryophillus
minor sylvestris foliis latioribus: in Dutch, Craeynbloemkens: that is to
say, Cornicis flores: in French, Cuydrelles: ln English, Crow-flowers,
Wild Williams, Marsh Gillyflowers, and Cuckoo Gillyflowers,

The Temperatures and Virtues.

These are not used either in medicine or in nourishment: but they serve
for garlands & crowns, and to deck up gardens.



CHAP. 186. Of Catch-Fly, or Limewort.
Fig. 896. Limewort (1) Fig. 897. Catchfly (2)
The Description.

1. This plant, called Viscaria, or Limewort, is likewise of the stock and
kindred of the wild Gillyflowers: notwithstanding Clusius hath joined it
with the wild Campions, making it a kind thereof, but not properly. Lobel
among the Sweet-Williams, whereof doubtless it is a kind. It hath many
leaves rising immediately from the root like those of the Crow-Flower, or
wild Sweet-William: among which rise up many reddish stalks jointed or
kneed at certain spaces, set with leaves by couples one against another:
at the top whereof come forth pretty red flowers; which being past there
cometh in place small blackish seed. The root is large with many fibres.
The whole plant, as well leaves and stalks, as also the flowers, are here
and there covered over with a most thick and clammy matter like unto
bird-lime, which if you take in your hands, the sliminess is such, that
your fingers will stick and cleave together, as if your hand touched
bird-lime: and furthermore, if flies do light upon the same, they will be
so intangled with the liminess, that they cannot fly away; insomuch that
in some hot day or other you shall see many flies caught by that means.
Whereupon I have called it Catchfly, or Limewort. This is Lychnis
sylvestris 3 of Clusius; Viscago of Camerarius; and Muscipula sive
Viscaria of Lobel.

2. This plant hath many broad leaves like the great Sweet-William but
shorter (whereof it is likewise a kind) set upon a stiff and brittle
stalk, from the bosom of which leaves spring forth smaller branches,
clothed with the like leaves, but much lesser. The flowers grow at the
top of the stalks many together tuft fashion, of a bright red colour. The
whole plant is also possessed with the like liminess as the other is, but
less in quantity. This is Lychnis sylvestris 1 of Clusius; and Muscipula
sive Armoraria altera of Lobel: Dodonaeus calls it Armerius flos 3 in his
first edition: but makes it his fourth in the last edition in folio.

Fig. 898. Narrow-Leaved Catchfly (3)

3. There is also belonging unto this kindred another plant which Clusius
makes his Lychnis sylvatica 4. It comes up commonly with one stalk a foot
or more high, of a green purplish colour, with two long sharp pointed
thick green leaves, set at each joint: from the middle to the top of the
stalk grow little branches, which upon pretty long stalks carry flowers
consisting of five little round leaves, yet divided at the tops, they are
of a fair incarnate colour, with a deep purple ring in their middles,
without smell: after the flowers are past succeed skinny and hard heads,
smaller towards the stalks, and thicker above, and in these are contained
very small dark red seeds. The root is thick and black, with many fibres,
putting up new shoots and stalks after the first year, and not dying
every year like as the two last described.

The Place.

These plants do grow wild in the fields in the west parts of England,
among the corn; we have them in our London gardens rather for toys of
pleasure, than any virtues they are possessed with, that hath as yet been
known.

The Time.

They flower and flourish most part of the summer.

The Names.

Catchflies hath been taken for Behen, commonly so called, for the
likeness that it hath with Behen rubente flore: or with Behen that hath
the red flower, called of some Valeriana rubra, or red Valerian; for it
is something like unto it in jointed stalks and leaves, but more like in
colour: of Lobel, Muscipula and Viscaria: of Dodonaeus, Armerius flos
tertius: of Clusius, Lychnis sylvestris, Silene Theophrasti, and Behen
rubrum salamanticum: in English, Catchfly, and Limewort.

The Nature and Virtues.

The nature and virtues of these wild Williams are referred to the Wild
Pinks and Gillyflowers.



CHAP. 187. Of Thrift, or Our Lady's Cushion.


Fig. 899. Thrift (1)
Fig. 900. Levant Thrsft (2)

The Description.

1. Thrift is also a kind of Gillyflower, by Dodonaeus reckoned among
grasses, which brings forth leaves in great tufts, thick thrust together,
smaller, slenderer, & shorter than grass: among which rise up small
tender stalks of a span high, naked and without leaves; on the tops
whereupon stand little flowers in a spoky tuft, of a white colour tending
to purple. The root is long and thready.

2. The other kind of Thrift, found upon the mountains near unto the
Levant or Mediterranean Sea, differeth not from the precedent in leaves,
stalks, or flowers, but yet is altogether greater, and the leaves are
broader.

The Place

The first is found in the most salt marshes in England, as also in
gardens, for the bordering up of beds and banks, for the which it serveth
very fitly. The other is a stranger in these northern regions.
The Time.

They flower from May, till summer be far spent.
The Names

Thrift is called in Latin Gramen polyanthemum, of the multitude of the
flowers: of four, Gramen marinum: of Lobel, Caryophyllus marinus: In
English, Thrift, Sea-grass, and our Lady's Cushion.

The Temperature and Virtues

Their use in physic as yet is not known, neither doth any seek into the
nature thereof, but esteem them only for their beauty and pleasure.



CHAP. 188. Of the Saxifrage of the Ancients, and of that great one of
Matthiolus, with that of Pena and Lobel.

This name Saxifraga or Saxifrage, hath of late been imposed upon sundry
plants far different in their shapes, places of growing, & temperature,
but all agreeing in this one faculty of expelling or driving the stone
out of the kidneys, though not all by one mean or manner of operation.
But because almost all of them are described in their fit places by our
author, I will not insist upon them: yet I think it not amiss a little to
enquire, whether any Saxifraga were known to the ancients; and if known,
to what kind it may probably be referred. Of the ancients, Dioscorides,
Paulus AEgineta, and Apuleius, seem to mention one Saxifraga, but Pliny
lib. 12. cap. 21, by the way, shows that some called Adianthum by the
name of Saxifragum: but this is nothing to the former; wherefore I will
not insist upon it, but return to examine that the other three have
written thereof. Dioscorides lib. 4. between the chapters of Tribulus and
Limonium, to wit, in the seventeenth place hath delivered the history of
this plant, both in the Greek edition of Aldus Manutius, as also in that
of Marcellus Virgilius, yet the whole chapter in the Paris edition, 1549,
is rejected and put amongst the Notha. The beginning thereof sagainst
which they chiefly except) is thus: Sarxiphagon, alii vera Saxifrangon,
alii vero Empetron, Romani, Saxifranga ["Sarxiphagon (flesh-eater), by
others the true Saxifrangon (stone-breaker) by others the true Empetron
(growing on rocks) by the Romans, Saxifranga"] The first exception of
Marcellus Virgilius against this Chapter is Peregrina Graecis & aliena
vox Saxifraga est, ["This is the Saxifrage of Greeks and other tongues"]
&c. The second is Quod multo feliciores in componendis ad certiorem rei
alicuius significationem vocibus Graeci, quam Latini, &c. ["The name of
this herb corresponds very happily with its nature in Greek and in
Latin"] The third is, Solem in toto hoc opere primam, & a principio
propositam audiri Romanam vocem, tamque inopes in appellanda hae herba
fuisse Graecos, ut nisi Romana voce eam indicassent, nulla sibi futura
esset. These are the arguments which he uses against this chapter; yet
rejects it not, but by this means hath occasioned others without showing
any reason, to do it: Now I will set down what my opinion is concerning
this matter and so leave it to the judgement of the learned. I grant
Marcellus, that Saxifraga is a strange and no Greek word; but the name in
the title, and first in the chapter, both in his own edition and all the
Greek editions that I have yet seen is Sarxiphagon, which none, no not he
himself can deny to have a Greek original, of eating the flesh: yet
because there is no such faculty as this denomination imports attributed
thereto by the author, therefore he will not allow it to be so. But you
must note that many names are imposed by the vulgar, and the reason of
the name not always explained by those that have written of them, as in
this same author may be seen in the Chapters of Catanance, Cynosbatos,
Hemerocallis, Crataeogonon, and divers others, which are or seem to be
significant, and to import something by their name, yet he saith nothing
thereof. It may be that which they would express by the name, was, that
the herb had so piercing a faculty that it would eat into the very flesh.
The second and third argument both are answered, if this first word be
Greek, as I have already showed it to be, and there are not many words in
Greek that more frequently enter into such composition than phago, as
Pamphagos, Polyphagos, Opsiphagos, and many other may show. Moreover, it
hath been absurd for Dioscorides, or any else how simple soever they
were, if they had known the first word to have been Latin and Saxifraga,
to say again presently after that the Romans called it Saxifranga, or
Saxifraga, for so it should be, and not Sarxifranga: but I fear that the
affinity of sounds more than of signification hath caused this confusion,
especially in the middle times between us and Dioscorides, when learning
was at a very low ebb. The chief reasons that induce me to think this
chapter worthy to keep his former place in Dioscorides, are these: First,
the general content of all both Greek and Latin copies (as Marcellus
saith) how ancient soever they be. Secondly, the mention of this herb for
the same effect in some Greek authors of a reasonable good antiquity.
Then Trallianus amongst other things in a conditum nephriticum ["A
compund medicine for the kidneys"] mentions Sarxiphagon: but Nonus a
later Greek calls it Saxiphragos: so that it is evident they knew and
used some simple medicine that had both the names of Sarxiphagon and
Saxiphragos, which is the Latin Saxifraga. Now seeng they had, and knew
such a simple medicine, it remains we enquire after the shape and figure
thereof. Dioscorides describes it to be a shrubby plant, growing upon
rocks and craggy places, like unto Epithymum: boiled in wine and drunk,
it hath the faculty to help the strangury and hicket; it also breaks the
stone in the bladder and provokes urine. This word Epithymum is not found
in most copies, but a space left for some word or words that were
wanting: But Marcellus saith, he found it expressed in a book which was
omnnium vetutissimus et probatissimus ["The oldest and most trustworthy
of all"]: and Hermolaus Barbarus saith, Veterem in Dioscorides picturam
huius herbae vidi, non plus foliis quam circus minutis per ramos ex
intervallo conditis, nec freqentibus, in cacumine surculorum flocci seu
arentes potius quam flosculi, subrubice radice non sine fibris. ["I have
seen an old picture in Dioscorides, with no more leaves than a little
circle at rare intervals around the stem, at the top of the stems little
dry flakes for flowers; a reddish root not without fibres"]

A figure reasonable well agreeing with this description of Hermolaus, I
lately received from my friend Mr. Goodyer, who writ to me that he had
sought to know what Saxifraga (to wit, of the ancients) should be; and
finding no ancient author that had described it to any purpose, he sought
Apuleius; which word Apuleius (saith he) is the printed title: my
manuscript acknowledgeth no author but Apoliensis Plato; there is no
description neither, but the manuscript hath a figure which I have drawn
and sent you, and all that verbatim that be hath written of it, I should
be glad to have this figure cut and added to your work, together with his
words, because there hath been so little written thereof by the ancients.
This his request I thought fit to perform, and have (for the better
satisfaction of the reader) as you see made a further enquiry thereof:
wherefore I will only add this, that the plants here described, and the
Alsine saxifraga of Columna, together with the two Chickweed Saxifrages
formerly described, Chap. 171, come nearest of any that I know to the
figure and deliniation of this of the ancients.

Fig. 901. Saxifrage, from an old manuscript.
[The name of this herb, Saxifrage]

Icon & Descriptio ex Manuscripto vetutissimo.

Quidam dicunt eam Scolopendriam, alii Scoliomos, alii Vitis canum, quidam
vero Brucos. Itali Saxifragam. Egyptii Peperem, alii Lamprocam eam
nominant. Nascitur enim in montibus & locis saxosis.
Una cura ipsius ad calculos expellendos.

Herbam istam Saxifragam contusam calculoso potum dabis in vino. Ipse vero
si febricitaverit cum aqua calida, tam presens effectum ab expertis
traditum, ut eodem die perfectis eiectisque calculis ad sanitatem usque
producit.

["Picture and description from a very old manuscript.

Some call this Scolopendria, others Scoliomus, others Vitis canum, others
the true Brucus. The Italians, Saxifraga. The Egyptians, Peperis, others
name it Lamproca. It grows on mountains and rocky places.
A prescription for expelling the stone.

You will give this herb Saxifrage, bruised in wine, and drunk. If the
patient has a fever, the same medicine mixed with hot water, will on the
same day perfectly expel the stone and restore him to health, as has been
proved by experience. "]

Fig. 902. Matthiolus' Great Saxifrage (1) Fig. 903. Saxifrage of the
ancients, according to Lobel. (2)
The Description.

1. This first little herb, saith Camerarius, hath been called Saxifraga
magna, not from the greatness of his growth, but of his faculties: The
stalk is woody, writhing, and below sometimes as thick as one's little
finger, from which grow many small & hard branches, and those slender
ones; the leaves are little, long and sharp pointed: the flowers are
white and small, and grow in cups, which are finely snipped at the top in
manner of a coronet, wherein is contained a small red seed: the roots
grow so fast impact in the rocks, that it cannot by any means be got out.
It grows upon divers rocks in Italy and Germany; and it is the Saxifraga
magna of Matthiolus, and the Italians.

2. Pena and Lobel say, this grows in great plenty in Italy, in Dauphin
in France, and England, having many small slender branches a foot high,
intricately wrapped within one another, where they are set with many
grassy joints: the root is small and white with some few fibres: the
leaves stand by couples at the joints, being long and narrow; of the
bigness and similitude of those of the wild Pinks, or Rock Savory: upon
each woody, small, capillary, straight, and creeping little branch, grows
one little flower somewhat like a Pink, being finely snipped about the
edges: and in the head is contained a round small reddish seed. The
foresaid authors call this Saxifragra, sive Saxifraga antiquorum.

The Virtues.

A. Matthiolus saith, that Calceolarius of Verona mightily commended this
plant to him, for the singular quality it had to expel or drive forth the
stone of the kidneys, and that I might in very deed believe it, he sent
me abundance of stones, whereof divers exceeded the bigness of a bean,
which were voided by drinking of this plant by one only Citizen of
Verona, called Hieronymo de Tortis; but this made me most to wonder, for
that there were some stones amongst them, that seemed rather to come out
of the bladder, than forth of the kidneys.

B. This (say the authors of the Adversaria) as it is the latest received
in use and name for Saxifrage, so is it the better & truer, especially so
thought by the Italians, both for the highly commended faculty, as also
for the near affinity which it seems to have with Epithymum, &c.



CHAP. 189. Of Sneezewort.
Fig. 904. Sneezewort (1) Fig. 905. Double Flowered Sneezewort (2)
The Description.

1. The small Sneezewort hath many round and brittle branches, beset with
long and narrow leaves, hacked about the edges like a saw; at the tops of
the stalks do grow small single flowers like the wild field Daisy. The
root is tender and full of strings, creeping far abroad in the earth, and
in short time occupieth very much ground: the whole plant is sharp,
biting the tongue and mouth like Pellitory of Spain, for which cause some
have called it wild Pellitory. The smell of this plant procureth
sneezing, whereof it took the name Sternutamentoria, that is the herb
which doth procure sneezing, or Neezewort.

2. Double flowered Sneezewort, or Ptarmica, is like unto the former in
leaves, stalks, and roots, so that unless you behold the flower, you
cannot discern the one from the other, and it is exceeding white, and
double like unto double Feverfew. This plant is of great beauty, and if
it be cut down in the time of his flowering, there will come within a
month after a supply or crop of flowers fairer than the rest.

Fig. 906. Austrian Sneezewort (3)

3. There is also another kind hereof, of exceeding great beauty, having
long leaves somewhat narrow like those of the Olive tree: the stalks are
of a cubit high, on the top whereof do grow very beautiful flowers of the
bigness of a small single Marigold, consisting of fifteen or sixteen
large leaves, of a bright shining red colour tending to purple; set about
a ball of thrummy substance, such as is in the middle of the Daisy, in
manner of a pale; which flowers stand in scaly knops like those of
Knapweed, or Matfellon. The root is straight, and thrusteth deep into the
ground.

4. Ptarmica imperati 3, an Ptarmica Austriacae species Clusius Cur. Post
p. 32. This riseth up with a small hard tough cornered whitish stalk,
divided into many branches, and those again divided into other branches
like those of Cyanus about two foot high, wherein grow long narrow
whitish cottony leaves out of order, of a bitter taste, whiter below than
above, of the colour of the leaves of Wormwood, having but one rib or
sinew & that in the middle of the leaf, and commonly turn downwards: on
the top of each slender branch groweth one small scaly head or knop, like
that of Cyanus, which bringeth forth a pale purple flower without smell,
containing six, seven, eight, or more, small hard dry sharp pointed
leaves: in the middle whereof groweth many stiff chives, their tops being
of the colour of the flowers: these flowers fall not away till the whole
herb perisheth, but change into a rusty colour: amongst those chives grow
long flat blackish seed, with a little beard at the top. The root is
small, whitish, hard and thready, and perisheth when the seed is ripe,
and soon springeth up by the fall of the seed, and remaineth green all
the winter, and at the spring sendeth forth a stalk as aforesaid. The
herb touched or rubbed sendeth forth a pleasant aromatical smell. July
26th 1620. John Goodyer.

The Place.

The first kind of Sneezewort grows wild in dry and barren pastures in
many places, and in the three great fields next adjoining to a village 
near London called Kentish Town, and in sundry fields in Kent about
Southfleet.

The rest grow only in gardens.

The Time.

They flower from May to the end of September.

The Names.

Sneesewort is called of some Ptarmica, and Pyrethrum sylvestre, and also
Draco sylvestris, or Tarcon sylvestris: of most, Sternutamentoria, taken
from his effect, because it procureth sneezing: of Tragus &
Tabernamontanus Tanacetum acutum album: in English, wild Pellitory,
taking that name from his sharp and biting taste; but it is altogether
unlike in proportion to the true Pellitory of Spain.

The Nature.

They are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The juice mixed with vinegar and holden in the mouth easeth much the
pain of the toothache.

B. The herb chewed and holden in the mouth, bringeth mightily from the
brain slimy phlegm, like Pellitory of Spain, and therefore from time to
time it hath been taken for a wild kind thereof.



CHAP. 190. Of Hare's Ear.
Fig. 907. Narrow-Leaved Hare's Ear (1) Fig. 907. Broad-Leaved Hare's Ear
(2)
The Description.

1. Narrow-Leaved Hare's Ear is reputed of the late writers to be
Bupleurum plinii, from which the name or figure disagreeth not: it hath
the long narrow and grassy leaves of Lachryma Iobis, or Gladiolus,
streaked or balked as it were with sundry stiff streaks or ribs running
along every leaf, as Pliny speaketh of in his Heptapleurum. The stalks
are a cubit and a half long, full of knots or knees, very rough or stiff,
spreading themselves into many branches: at the tops whereof grow yellow
flowers in round tufts or heads like Dill. The root is as big as a
finger, and black like Peucedanum, whereunto it is like in taste, smell,
and resemblance of seed, which doth the more persuade me that it is the
true Bupleurum, whereof I now speak, and by the authority of Nicander and
Pliny confirmed.

2. The second kind called broad-leaved Hare's Ear, in figure, tufts, and
flowers, is the very same with the former kind, save that the leaves are
broader and stiffer, and more hollow in the midst: which hath caused me
to call it Hare's Ear, having in the middle of the leaf some hollowness
resembling the same. The root is greater and of a woody substance.

The Place.

They grow among oaken woods in stony and hard grounds in Narbonne. I have
found them growing naturally among the bushes upon Beeston castle in
Cheshire.

The Time.

They flower and bring forth their seed in July and August.

The Names.

Hare's Ear is called in Latin Bupleurum:: the apothecaries of Montpellier
in France do call it Auricula leporis and therefore I term it in English
Hare's Ear: Valerius Cordus nameth it Isophyllon, but whence he had that
name, it is not known.

The Temperature.

They are temperate in heat and dryness.

The Virtues.

A. Hippocrates hath commended it in meats, for salads and pot-herbs: but
by the authority of Glaucon and Nicander, it is effectual in medicine,
having the taste and savour of Hypericon, serving in the place thereof
for wounds, and is taken by Tragus for Panax chironium, who doth reckon
it inter herbas vulnerarias. ["amongst the wound-herbs"]

B. The leaves stamped with salt and wine, and applied, do consume and
drive away the swelling of the neck, called the King's evil, and are used
against the stone and gravel.



CHAP. 191. Of Gromwell.
Fig. 909. Great Gromwell (1) Fig. 910. Small Gromwell (2)
The Description.

1. The Great Gromwell hath long, slender and hairy stalks, beset with
long, brown & hoary leaves; among which grow certain bearded husks,
bearing at the first small blue flowers; which being past, there
succeedeth a grey stony seed somewhat shining. The root is hard, and of a
woody substance.

2. The second kind of Gromwell hath straight, round, woody stalks full of
branches: The leaves long, small, and sharp, of a dark green colour;
smaller than the leaves of great Gromwell; among which come forth little
white flowers; which being past, there doth follow such seed as the
former hath, but smaller.


Fig. 911. Purple-Flowered Gromwell (3)
Fig. 912. Bastard Gromwell (4)

3. There is another kind of Gromwell, which hath leaves and stalks like
the small kind: the seed is not so white, neither so smooth and plain,
but somewhat shrivelled or wrinkled. The leaves are somewhat rough like
unto the common Gromwell, but the flowers are of a purple colour, and in
shape like those of that wild kind of Bugloss, called Anchusa, for which
cause it carrieth that additament anchusa facie.

4. There is also a degenerate kind hereof called Anchusa degener, being
either a kind of wild Bugloss or a kind of wild Gromwell, or else a kind
of neither of both, but a plant participating of both kinds: it hath the
seeds and stalks of Milium folis, or Gromwell: the leaves and flowers of
Anchusa, which is Alkanet, and is altogether of a red colour like the
same.
The Place.

The two first kinds do grow in untoiled places, as by the highways sides,
and barren places, in the street at Southfleet in Kent, as you go from
the church unto an house belonging to a gentleman of worship, called Mr.
William Swan, and in sundry other places.

The two last kinds grow upon the sands and beach of the sea, in the isle
of Thanet near Reculver, among the kinds of wild Bugloss there growing.

The Time.

They flower from the summer solstice, or from the twelfth day of June
even unto autumn, and in the mean season the seed is ripe.
The Names.

Gromwell is called in Greek Lithospermon, of the hardness of the seed: of
divers, Gorgonium: of others, Aegonychon, Leontion, or Diosporon, or
Diospyron, as Pliny readeth it, and also Heracleos: of the Arabians,
Milium soler: in shops, and among the Italians, Milium folis: in Spanish,
Mijo del sol: in French, Gremill, and Herbe aux perles: in English,
Gromwell: of some, Pearl plant; and of others, Lichwale.

The Temperature.

The seed of Gromwell is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Gromwell pound, and drunk in White wine, breaketh,
dissolveth, and driveth forth the stone, and provoketh urine, and
especially breaketh the stone in the bladder.



CHAP. 192. Of Chickweed.
Fig. 913. Great Chickweed (1) Fig. 914. Small Chickweed (2)
The Description.

1. The great Chickweed riseth up with stalks a cubit high, and sometime
higher, a great many from one root, long and round, slender, full of
joints, with a couple of leaves growing out of every knot or joint above
an inch broad, and longer than the leaves of Pellitory Of The Wall,
whereunto they are very like in shape, but smooth without hairs or down,
and of a light green colour: the stalks are something clear, and as it
were transparent or through-shining, and about the joints they be
oftentimes of a very light red colour, as be those of Pellitory Of The
Wall: the flowers be whitish on the top of the branches, like the flowers
of Stitchwort, but yet lesser: in whose places succeed long knops, but
not great, wherein the seed is contained. The root consisteth of fine
little strings like hairs.

2. The second Chickweed for the most part lieth upon the ground: the
stalks are small, slender, long, and round, and also jointed: from which
slender branches do spring leaves resembling the precedent, but much
lesser, as is likewise the whole herb, which in no respect attaineth to
the greatness of the same: the flowers are in like sort little and white:
the knops or seed-heads are like the former: the root is also full of
little strings.

Fig. 915. Kinds of Chickweed (3-6)

3. The third is like the second, but far lesser: the stalks be most
tender and fine: the leaves are very small, the flowers very little, the
root marvellous slender.

4. Also there is a fourth kind which groweth by the sea: this is like to
the second, but the stems are thicker, shorter, and fuller of joints: the
leaves in like sort be thicker: the knops or seed-heads be not long and
round, but somewhat broad, in which are three or four seeds contained.

5. The upright Chickweed hath a very small single thready root, from
which riseth up a slender stem, dividing itself into divers branches even
from the bottom to the top; whereon do grow small leaves, thick and fat
in respect of the others, in shape like those of Rue or Herb-Grace. The
flowers grow at the top of the branches, consisting of four small leaves
of a blue colour.

6. The Stone Chickweed is one of the common Chickweeds, having very
thready branches covering the ground far abroad where it groweth: the
leaves be set together by couples: the flowers be small and very white:
the root is tough and very slender.

Fig. 916. Kinds of Chickweed (7-10)

7. Speedwell Chickweed hath a little tender stalk, from which come divers
small arms or branches as it were wings, set together by couples; whereon
do grow leaves set likewise by couples, like those of Veronica, or Herb
Fluellen, whereof it took his name. The flowers grow along the branches
of a blue colour; after which come little pouches wherein is the seed:
the root is small, and likewise thready. This in the Historia Lugdunensis
is called Elatine polyschides: and Fabius Columna judgeth it to be the
Alysson of Dioscorides.

8. There is a kind of Chickweed growing in the brinks and borders of
wells, fountains, & shallow springs, having many thready roots from which
rise up divers tender stalks, whereupon do grow long narrow leaves; from
the bosoms of which come forth divers smaller leaves of a bright green
colour. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, small, and white of
colour.

9. There is likewise another water Chickweed smaller than the last
described, having for his root a thick hassock or tuft of thready
strings: from which rise up very many tender stems, stretching or
trailing along the stream; whereon do grow long leaves set upon a middle
rib, like those of Lentils or wild Vetch: the flowers and seeds are like
the precedent, but much smaller.

10. There grows in the marsh or waterish grounds another sort of
Chickweed, not much unlike the rest of the stock or kindred of
Chickweeds. It hath a long root of the bigness of a wheat straw, with
divers strings hanging thereat, very like the root of Couch-grass: from
the which riseth up divers upright slender stalks, set with pretty large
sharp pointed leaves standing by couples at certain distances: on the top
of the stalks grow small white flowers like those of Stitchwort, but
lesser, and of a white colour.


Fig. 917. Water Purslane (11) & Creeping Water Chickweed (12)
Fig. 918. Berry-bearing Chickweed (13)

11. To these water Chickweeds may fitly be added those two which I
mentioned and figured in my last journal: the former of which, that I
have there called Alsine aquatica foliis rotundioribus, sive Portulaca
aquatica, (that is) Round-Leaved Chickweed, or Water Purslane, hath a
small stringy root which sends forth divers creeping square branches,
which here and there at the joints put out small fibres, and take root
again: the leaves grow at the joints by couples, somewhat longish, and
round at the points, resembling those of Purslane, but much smaller, and
of a yellowish green colour: at the bosoms of the leaves come forth
little flowers, which are succeeded by little round seed-vessels
containing a small round seed. Bauhin hath set this forth by the name of
Alsine palustris minor foliis oblongis.

12. The other water Chickweed, which John Bauhin hath mentioned by the
name of Serpillifolia; and Casper Bauhin by the title of Alsinus
palustris minor serpillifolia, hath also weak and tender creeping
branches lying spread upon the ground; set with two narrow sharp pointed
leaves at each joint, green above, and of a whitish colour below: at the
setting on of these leaves grow small vessels parted as it were into two,
with a little crest on each side, and in these is contained a very small
seed. Both these may be found in watery places in July and August, as
between Clapham Heath and Tooting, and between Kentish town and
Hampstead.

13. This plant that Clusius and others have called Alsine repens major,
and some have thought the Ciclaminus altera of Dioscorides; and Cucubalus
of Pliny, may fitly be put in this rank; for it sendeth up many long weak
branches like the great Chickweed, set with two leaves at a joint, bigger
than those of the greatest Chickweed, yet like them in shape and colour:
at the tops of the branches, out of pretty large cups come whitish green
flowers, which are succeeded by berries as big as those of Juniper, at
first green, but afterwards black: the seed is small and smooth: the root
white, very fibrous, long and woody, and it endures for many years. It
flowers most part of summer, and grows wild in sundry places of Spain and
Germany, as also in Flanders and England, according to Pena and Lobel:
yet I have not seen it growing but in the garden of my friend Mr. Pemble
at Marylebone. The authors last mentioned affirm the berries hereof to
have a poisonous faculty like as those of Dwale or Deadly Nightshade.

The Place.

Chickweeds, some grow among bushes and briars, old walls, gutters of
houses, and shadowy places. The places where the rest grow are set forth
in their several descriptions.

The Time.

The Chickweeds are green in winter, they flower and seed in the spring.

The Names.

Chickweed or Chickenweed is called in Greek and Latin Alsine: of some of
the ancients it is called Hippia. The rest of the plants are
distinguished in their several titles, with proper names which likewise
setteth forth the place of their growings.

The Temperature.

Chickweed is cold and moist, and of a waterish substance and therefore it
cooleth without astriction or binding, as Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Chickweed boiled in water very soft, adding thereto some
hog's grease, the powder of Fenugreek and Linseed, and a few roots of
Marsh Mallows, and stamped to the form of cataplasm or poultice, taketh
away the swellings of the legs or any other part; bringeth to suppuration
or matter hot apostumes; dissolveth swellings that will not willingly
yield to suppuration; easeth members that are shrunk up; comforteth
wounds in sinewy parts; defendeth foul, malign and virulent ulcers from
inflammation during the cure: in a word, it comforteth, digesteth,
defendeth, and suppurateth very notably.

B. The leaves boiled in vinegar and salt are good against manginess of
the hands and legs, if they be bathed therewith.

C. Little birds in cages (especially linnets) are refreshed with the
lesser Chickweed when they loathe their meat; whereupon it was called of
some Passerina.



CHAP. 193. Of the Bastard Chickweeds.

Fig. 919. Kinds of Bastard Chickweed (1-4)

The Description.

1. Germander Chickweed hath small tender branches trailing upon the
ground, beset with leaves like unto those of Scordium, or Water
Germander. Among which come forth little blue flowers: which being faded,
there appear small flat husks or pouches, wherein lieth the seed. The
root is small and thready; which being once gotten into a garden ground
is hard to be destroyed, but naturally cometh up from year to year as a
noisome weed.

2. Clusius, a man singular in the knowledge of plants, hath set down this
herb for one of the Chickweeds, which doth very well resemble the Stork's
Bill, and might have been there inserted. But the matter being of small
moment I let it pass; for doubtless it participateth of both, that is,
the head or beak of Stork's Bill, and the leaves of Chickweed, which are
long and hairy, like those of Scorpion Mouse-ear. The flowers are small,
and of an herby colour; after which come long horned cods or seed-
vessels, like unto those of the Stork's Bill. The root is small and
single, with strings fastened thereto.

3. Ivy Chickweed or Small Henbit, hath thin hairy leaves somewhat broad,
with two cuts or gashes in the sides, after the maner of those of ground
ivy, whereof it took his name, resembling the back of a bee when she
flieth. The stalks are small, tender, hairy, and lying flat upon the
ground. The flowers are slender and of a blue colour. The root is little 
and thready.

4. The Great Henbit hath feeble stalks leaning toward the ground,
whereupon do grow at certain distances leaves like those of the Dead-
Nettle; from the bosom whereof come forth slender blue flowers tending to
purple; in shape like those of the small Dead-Nettle. The root is tough,
single, and a few strings hanging thereat.

The Place.

These Chickweeds are sown in gardens among potherbs, in dark shadowy
places, and in the fields after the corn is reaped.

The Time.

They flourish and are green when the other Chickweeds are.

The Names.

The first and third is called Morsus Gallinae, Hen's Bit, Alsine hederula
and hederacea: Lobel also calls the fourth Morsus gallinae folio hederula
alter: in High Dutch Hunerbisz: in French, Morsgelin, and Morgeline: in
low Ditch, Hoenderebeet: in English, Henbit the Greater and the Lesser.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These are thought also to be cold and moist, and like to the other
Chickweeds in virtue and operation.



CHAP. 194. Of Pimpernel
Fig. 920. Male Pimpernel (1) Fig. 921. Female Pimpernel (2)
The Description.

1. Pimpernel is like unto Chickweed; the stalks are four-square, trailing
here and there upon the ground, whereupon do grow broad leaves, and sharp
pointed, set together by couples: from the bosom whereof come forth
slender tendrils, whereupon do grow small purple flowers tending to
redness: which being past there succeed fine round bullets, like unto the
seed of Coriander, wherein is contained small dusty seed. The root
consisteth of slender strings.

2. The female Pimpernel differeth not from the male in any one point, but
in the colour of the flowers; for like as the former hath reddish
flowers, this plant bringeth forth flowers of a most perfect blue colour,
wherein is the difference.


Fig. 922. Narrow-Leaved Pimpernel (3)
Fig. 923. Yellow Pimpernel (4)

3. Of this there is another variety set forth by Clusius by the name of
Anagallis tenuifolia monelli, because he received the figure and history
thereof from John Monell of Tournai in France; it differs thus from the
last mentioned, the leaves are longer and narrower, somewhat like those
of Gratiola, and they now and then grow three at a joint, and out of the 
bosoms of the leaves come commonly as many little footstalks as there are
leaves, which carry flowers of a blue colour with the middle purplish,
and these are somewhat larger than them of the former, otherwise like.

4. The yellow Pimpernel hath many weak and feeble branches trailing upon
the ground, beset with leaves one against another like the great
Chickweed, not unlike to Nummularia, or Moneywort; between which and the
stalks, come forth two single and small tender footstalks, each bearing
at their top one yellow flower and no more. The root is small and
thready.

The Place.

They grow in ploughed fields near pathways, in gardens and vineyards,
almost everywhere. I found the female with blue flowers in a chalky corn
field in the way from Mr. William Swaine's house of Southfleet to
Longfield Downs, but never any where else, saith our author. I also being
in Essex in the company of my kind friend Mr. Nathaniel Wright found this
among the corn at Wrightsbridge, being the seat of Mr. John Wright his
brother. The yellow Pimpernel grows in the woods between Highgate and
Hampstead, and in many other woods.

The Time.

They flower in summer, and especially in the month of August, at what
time the husbandmen having occasion to go unto their harvest work, will
first behold the flowers of Pimpernel, whereby they know the weather that
shall follow the next day after: as for example, if the flowers be shut
close up, it betokeneth rain and foul weather; contrariwise, if they be
spread abroad, fair weather.

The Names.

It is called in Greek and Latin Anagallis: of divers, (as Pliny
reporteth) Corchorus, but untruly: of Marcellus an old writer, Macia; the
word is extant in Dioscorides among the bastard names. That with the
crimson flower, being the male, is named Phoenicion, and Corallion; of
this is made the composition or receipt called Diacorallion, that is used
against the gout; which composition Paula AEgineta setteth down in his
seventh book. Among the bastard names it hath been called Aetitis,
AEgitis, and Sauritis: in English, Red Pimpernel, and blue Pimpernel.

The Temperature.

Both the sorts of Pimpernel are of a drying faculty without biting, and
somewhat hot, with a certain drawing quality, insomuch that it doth draw
forth splinters and things fixed in the flesh, as Galen writeth.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writes, That they are of power to mitigate pain, to cure
inflammations or hot swellings, to draw out of the body and flesh thorns,
splinters, or shivers of wood, and to help the King's evil.

B. The juice purgeth the head by gargarising or washing the throat
therewith; it cures the toothache being sniffed up into the nostrils,
especially into the contrary nostril.

C. It helpeth those that be dim sighted: the juice mixed with honey
cleanses the ulcers of the eye called in Latin Argema.

D. Moreover he affirmeth, That it is good against the stinging of Vipers,
and other venomous beasts.

E. It prevaileth against the infirmities of the liver and kidneys, if the
juice be drunk with wine. He addeth further, how it is reported, That
Pimpernel with the blue flower helpeth up the fundament that is fallen
down; and that red Pimpernel applied, contrariwise bringeth it down.



CHAP. 195. Of Brooklime, or Water Pimpernel.
Fig. 924. Brooklime (1) Fig. 925. Great Long-Leaved Brooklime (2)
The Description.

1. Brooklime or Brooklem hath fat thick stalks, round, and parted into
divers branches: the leaves be thick, smooth, broad, and of a deep green
colour. The flowers grow upon small tender footstalks, which thrust forth
of the bosom of the leaves, of a perfect blue colour, not unlike to the
flowers of land Pimpernel: the root is white, low creeping, with fine
strings fastened thereto: out of the root spring many other stalks,
whereby it greatly increaseth.

2. The Great Water Pimpernel is like unto the precedent, saving that this
plant hath sharper pointed or larger leaves, and the flowers are of a
more whitish or a paler blue colour, wherein consisteth the difference.


Fig. 926. Round-Leaved Water Pimpernel (3)
Fig. 927. Lobel's Fourth Water Pimpernel (4)

3. Now I will acquaint you with two or three more plants which may fitly
be here inserted: The first of these Lobel calls, Anagallis aquatica
tertia; and therefore I have thought fit to give you it in the same place
here. It hath a white and fibrous root; from which ariseth a round smooth
stalk a foot and more high, (yet I have sometimes found it not above
three or four inches high) upon the stalks grow leaves round, green, and
shining, standing not by couples, but one above another on all sides of
the stalks. The leaves that lie on the ground are longer than the rest,
and are in shape somewhat like those of the common Daisy, but that they
are not snipped about the edges: the flowers are white, consisting of one
leaf divided into five parts; and they grow at the first as it were in an
umbel, but afterwards more spike-fashioned: It flowers in June and July,
and groweth in many watery places, as in the marshes of Dartford in Kent,
also between Sandwich and Sandown Castle, and in the ditches on this side
Sandwich. Bauhin saith, That Guillandinos called it sometimes Alsina, and
otherwhiles Cochlearia: and others would have it to be Samolum of Pliny,
lib. 25. cap. 11. Bauhin himself fitly calls it Anagallis aquatica folio
rotundo non crenato.

4. I conjecture this figure which we here give you with the author's
title to be only the lesser variety of that which our author describes in
the second place; but because I have no certainty hereof (for that Lobel
hath given us no description thereof in any of his Latin Works, and also
Bauhin hath distinguished them) I am forced to give you only the figure
thereof; not intending to deceive my reader by giving descriptions from
my fancy and the figure, as our author sometimes made bold to do.

Fig. 928. Garden Brooklime (5)

5. This which is set forth by most writers for Cepaea, which some may
object to be more fit to be put next the Purslanes, I will here give you,
having forgot to do it there; and I think this place not unfit, because
our author in the names in this chapter takes occasion in Dodonaeus his
words to make mention thereof. It hath a small unprofitable root, sending
up a stalk some foot high, divided into many weak branches, which are
here and there set with thick leaves like those of Purslane, but much
less, and narrower, and sharper pointed: the flowers which grow in good
plenty upon the tops of the branches are composed of five small white
leaves; whereto succeeds small heads, wherein is contained a seed like
that of Orpine. This by Matthiolus and others is called Cepaea: but
Clusius doubts that it is not the true Cepaea of the ancients.

The Place.

They grow by rivers' sides, small running brooks and watery ditches. The
yellow Pimpernel I found growing in Hampstead Wood near London, and in
many other woods and copses.
The Time.

They bring forth their flowers and seed in June, July, and August.
The Names.

Water Pimpernel is called Anagallis aquatica: of most, Becabunga, which
is borrowed of the German word Bachpunghen: in Low Dutch, Beeckpunghen:
in French, Berle: whereupon some do call it Berula: notwithstanding
Marcellus reporteth, That Berula is that which the Grecians call Cresses:
it is thought to be Cepaea; that is to say, of the garden; which
Dioscorides writeth to be like unto Purslane, whereunto this Brooklime
doth very well agree. But if it be therefore said to be because it
groweth either only or for the most part in gardens, this Pimpernel or
Brooklime shall not be like unto it, which groweth nowhere less than in
gardens, being altogether of his own nature wild, desiring to grow in
watery places, and such as be continually overflown: in English the first
is called Brooklime, and the rest by no particular names; but we may call
them water Pimpernels, or Brooklimes.

The Temperature.

Brooklime is of temperature hot and dry like Watercresses, yet not so
much.

The Virtues.

A. Brooklime is eaten in salads as Watercresses are and is good against
that illness of such as dwell near the German Seas, which they call
Scuerbuyke or as we term it, the Scurvy, or Skirby, being used after the
same manner that Watercresses and Scurvy Grass is used, yet is it not of
so great operation and virtue.

B. The herb boiled maketh a good fomentation for swollen legs and the
dropsy.

C. The leaves boiled, strained, and stamped in a stone mortar with the
powder of Fenugreek, Linseeds, the roots of Marsh Mallows, and some hog's
grease, unto the form of a cataplastm or poultice, taketh away any
swelling in leg or arm; wounds also that are ready to fall into
apostumation it mightily defendeth, that no humour or accident shall
happen thereunto.

D. The leaves of Brooklime stamped, strained, and given to drink in wine,
helpeth the strangury, and griefs of the bladder.

E. The leaves of Brooklime, and the tendrils of Asparagus, eaten with
oil, vinegar, and pepper, helpeth the strangury and stone.



CHAP. 196. Of Stinking Ground-Pine.

Fig. 929. Sea Pimpernel (1) Fig. 930. Many-Flowered Ground-Pine (2)
The Kinds.

Dioscorides hath anciently mentioned two sorts of Anthyllis: one with
leaves like to the Lentil, & the other like to Chamaepitys. To the first,
some late writers have referred divers plants, as the two first described
in this Chapter; The Anthyllis leguminosa belgarum hereafter to be
described; the Anthyllis valentina clusii formerly set forth Chap. 171.
To the second are referred the Iva moschata monspeliaca, described in the
fourth place of the 150th Chap. of this book; the Linaria adulterina
described formerly chap. 165 in the 14th place, and that which is here
described in the third place of this chapter, by the name of Anthyllis
altera italorum.

The Description.

1. There hath been much ado among writers about the certain knowledge of
the true Anthyllis of Dioscorides: I will therefore set down that plant
which of all others is found most agreeable thereunto. It hath many small
branches full of joints, not above an handful high, creeping sundry ways,
beset with small thick leaves of a pale colour, resembling Lenticula, or
rather Alsine minor, the lesser Chickweed. The flowers grow at the top of
the stalk, star-fashion, of an herby colour like Box, or Sedum minus: it
fostereth his small seeds in a three-cornered husk. The root is somewhat
long, slender, jointed, and deeply thrust into the ground like
Soldanella: all the whole plant is saltish, bitter in taste, and somewhat
heating.

This description was taken out of the Adversaria, pag. 165, where it is
called Anthyllis prior lentifolia peplios effigia maritima: also Clusius
hath described it by the name of Alsines genus pelagicum: I have called
it in my last journal by the name of Alsine cruciata marina, because the
leaves which grow thick together by couples cross each other, as it
happens in most plants which have square stalks with two leaves at each
joint. I have Englished it Sea Pimpernel, because the leaves in shape are
as like those of Pimpernel as of any other plant; and also for that our
author hath called another plant by the name of Sea Chickweed. The figure
of the Adversaria was not good, and Clusius hath none; which hath caused
some to reckon this Anthyllis of Lobel, and Alsine of Clusius for two
several plants, which indeed are not so. I have given you a figure hereof
which I took from the growing plant, and which well expresseth the
growing thereof.

2. There is likewise another sort of Anthyllis or Sea Ground-Pine, but in
truth nothing else than a kind of Sea Chickweed, having small branches
trailing upon the ground of two hands high, whereupon do grow little
leaves like those of Chickweed, not unlike those of Lenticula marina, or
Sea Lentils: on the top of the stalks stand many small mossy flowers of a 
white colour. The whole plant is of a bitter and saltish taste. This is
the Marina incana anthyllis alsine folia narbonensium of Lobel: it is the
Paronychia altera of Matthiolus.

Fig. 931. Stinking Ground Pine (3)

3. To this figure I will now give you a brief description. This in the
branches, leaves, and whole face thereof is very like the French Herb-
Ivy, or Ground-Pine, but that it is much less in all the parts thereof,
but chiefly in the leaves which also are not snipped like those of the
French Ground-Pine, but sharp pointed: the tops of the branches are downy
or woolly, and set with little pale yellow flowers.

The Place.

These do grow in the South Isles belonging to England, especially in
Portland in the gravelly and sandy fords, which lie low and against the
sea; and likewise in the Isle of Sheppey near the water side. So saith
our author, but I have only found the first described, and that both in
Sheppey, as also in Westgate Bay by Margate in the Isle of Thanet.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in June and July.

The Names.

Their titles and descriptions sufficiently set forth their several names.

The Temperature.

These sea herbs are of a temperate faculty between hot and cold.

The Virtues.

A. Half an ounce of the dried leaves drunk, prevaileth greatly against
the hot piss, the strangury, or difficulty of making water, and purgeth
the reins.

B. The same taken with oxymel or honeyed water is good for the falling
sickness, given first at morning, and last at night.



CHAP. 197. Of Whiteblow, or Whitlow Grass.
Fig. 932. Common Whitlow Grass (1) Fig. 933. Rue-Leaved Whitlow Grass (2)
The Kinds

1. The first is a very slender plant having a few small leaves like the
least Chickweed, growing in little tufts, from the midst whereof riseth
up a small stalk, three or four inches long; on whose top do grow very
little white flowers; which being past, there come in place small flat
pouches composed of three films; which being ripe, the two outsides fall
away, leaving the middle part standing long time after which is like
white satin, as is that of Bolbonac, which our women call White Satin,
but much smaller: the taste is somewhat sharp.

2. This kind of Paronychia, hath small thick and fat leaves, cut into
three or more divisions, much resembling the leaves of Rue, but a great
deal smaller. The stalks are like the former, & the leaves also; but the
cases wherein the seed is contained, are like unto the seed vessels of 
Myosotis scorpioides or Mouse-Ear Scorpion Grass. The flowers are small
and white.

There is another sort of Whitlow Grass or Nailwort, that is likewise a
low or base herb, having a small tough root, with some thready strings
annexed thereto: from which rise up divers slender tough stalks, set with
little narrow leaves confusedly like those of the smallest Chickweed
whereof doubtless these be kinds. Alongst the stalks do grow very little
white flowers, after which come the seeds in small buttons, of the
bigness of a pin's head. Our author seems here to describe the Paronychia
2 of Tabernamontanus.

The Place.

These small, base and low herbs grow upon brick and stone wals, upon old
tiled houses which are grown to have much moss upon them and upon some
shadowy, and dry muddy walls. It groweth plentifully upon the brick wall
in Chancery Lane, belonging to the Earl of Southampton, in the suburbs of
London, and sundry other places.

The Time.

These flower many times in January and February, and when hot weather
approcheth, they are no more to be seen all the year after.

The Names.

The Graecians have called these plants Paronychia: which Cicero calleth
Reduvia: There be many kinds of  plants, called by the said name of
Paronychia, which hath caused many writers to doubt of the true kind: but
you may very boldly take these plants for the same, until time hath
revealed or raised up some new plant, approching nearer unto the truth:
which I think will never be, so that we may call them in English, Nail-
Wort, and Whitlow Grass.

The Temperatures and Virtues.

A. As touching the quality hereof, we have nothing to set down: only it
hath been taken to heal the disease of the nails called a whitlow,
whereof it took his name.



CHAP. 198. Of the Female Fluellen, or Speedwell.
Fig. 934. Female Fluellen (1) Fig. 935. Sharp Pointed Fluellen ((2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Elatine, being of Fuchsius and Matthiolus called
Veronica foemina, the Female Fluellen, shooteth from a small and fibrous
root many flexible and tender branches, dispersed flat upon the ground,
ramping & creeping with leaves like Nummularia, but that the leaves of
Elatine are of an hoary, hairy, and overworn green colour; among which
come forth many small flowers, of a yellow colour mixed with a little
purple, like unto the small Snapdragon, having a certain tail or spur
fastened unto every such flower, like the herb called Larkspur. The lower
jaw or chap of the flower is of a purple colour, and the upper jaw of a
fair yellow; which being past, there succeeds a small black seed
contained in round husks.

2. The second kind of Elatine hath stalks, branches, flowers, and roots,
like the first; but the leaves are fashioned like the former, but that
they have two little ears at the lower end, somewhat resembling an
arrowhead, broad at the setting on: but the spur or tail of the flower is
longer, and more purple mixed with the yellow in the flower.

The Place.

Both these plants I have found in sundry places where corn hath grown,
espeeially barley, as in the fields about Southfleet in Kent, where
within six miles compass there is not a field wherein it doth not grow.

Also it groweth in a field next unto the house sometime belonging to that
honourable gentleman Sir Francis Walsingham, at Barn Elms and in sundry
places of Essex; and in the next field unto the churchyard at Chiswick
near London, towards the midst of the field.

The Time.

They flower in August and September.

The Names.

Their several titles set forth their names as well in Latin as English.

The Nature and Virtues

A. These plants are not only of a singular astringent faculty, and
thereby help them that be grieved with the dysentery and hot swelling;
but of such singular efficacy to heal spreading and eating cankers, and
corrosive ulcers, that their virtue in a manner passeth all credit in
these fretting sores, upon sure proof done unto sundry persons, and
especially upon a man whom Pena reporteth to have his nose eaten most
grievously with a canker or eating sore, who sent for the physicians &
chirurgeons that were famously known to be the best, and they with one
content concluded to cut the said nose off, to preserve the rest of his
face: among these surgeons and physicians came a poor sorry barber, who
had no more skill than he had learned by tradition, and yet undertook to
cure the patient. This foresaid barber standing in the company and
hearing their determination, desired that he might make trial of an herb
which he had seen his master use for the same purpose, which herb
Elatine, though he were ignorant of the name whereby it was called, yet
he knew where to fetch it. To be short, this herb he stamped, and gave
the juice of it unto the patient to drink, and outwardly applied the same
plasterwise, and in very short space perfctly cured the man, and saved
the rest of his body from further corruption, which was ready to fall
into a leprosy. Adversaria pag. 197.

B. Elatine helpeth the inflammation of the eyes, and defendeth humours
flowing unto them, being boiled, and as a poultice applied thereto.

C. The leaves sodden in the broth of a hen, or veal, stayeth the
dysentery.

D. The new writers affirm, that the Female Fluellen openeth the
obstructions or stoppings of the liver and spleen, provoketh urine,
driveth forth stones, and cleanseth the kidneys and bladder, according to
Paulus.

E. The weight of a dram or of a French crown, of the powder of the herb,
with the like weight of treacle, is commended against pestilent fevers.



CHAP. 199. Of Fluellen the male, or Paul's Betony.
Fig. 936. Fluellen or Speedwell (1) Fig. 937. Male Speedwell (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Veronica is a small herb, and creepeth by the
ground, with little reddish and hairy branches. The leaf is something
round and hairy, indented or snipped round about the edges. The flowers
are of a light blue colour, declining to purple: the seed is contained in
little flat pouches: the root is fibrous and hairy.

2. The second doth also creep upon the ground, having long slender stems,
some foot high, and somewhat large leaves a little hairy and pleasantly
soft. The flowers be blue like as those of the former, but somewhat
bigger, and of a brighter colour and they are also succeeded by round
seed vessels.


Fig. 938. Little Fluellen (3)
Fig. 939. Smallest Fluellen (4)

3. The third kind of Veronica creepeth with branches and leaves like unto
Serpillum, for which cause it hath been called Veronica serpillifolia.
The flowers grow along the small and tender branches, of a whitish colour
declining to blueness. The root is small and thready, taking hold upon
the upper face of the earth, where it spreadeth. The seed is contained in
small pouches like the former.

4. The fourth hath a root somewhat woody, from the which rise up leaves
like unto the former. The small upright stalk is beset with the like
leaves, but lesser, at the top whereof cometh forth a slender spike
closely thrust together, and full of bluish flowers, which are succeeded
by many horned seed vessels.

Fig. 940. Kinds of Fluellen (5-8)

5. This hath many woody round smooth branches, some handful and half high
or better: the leaves are like those of wild Thyme, but longer, and of a
blacker colour, sometimes lightly snipped: at the tops of the branches
grow flowers of a whitish blue colour, consisting of four, five, or else
six little leaves apiece; which falling, there follow round seed vessels,
containing a round small and black seed. It flowers in August, and grows
upon cold and high mountains, as the Alps. Pena calls this Veronica
alpina minima serpillifolia: and Clusius hath it by the name of Veronica
3 fruticans.

6. The sixth kind of Veronica hath many upright branches a foot high and
sometimes more, dividing themselves into sundry other small twigs; at the
top whereof do grow fair spiky tufts, bearing bright and shining blue
flowers. The leaves are somewhat long, indented about the edges like a
saw: the root is compact of many threads, or strings.

7. This hath stalks some cubit high and sometimes more, and these not
very full of branches, yet having divers joints, at each whereof do grow
forth two leaves, two or three inches long, and one broad, and these
leaves are also thick, smooth, and shining, lightly snipped or cut about
the edges, and of a very astringent and drying taste, and at last
somewhat biting. At the top of the stalks grow spoky tufts of blue
flowers like those of the last mentioned, but of somewhat a lighter
colour, and they begin first to flower or show themselves below, and so
go upwards; the seed, which is small and black, is contained in flat seed
vessels: the root is thick with many fibres, every year thrusting up new
shoots. There is a variety of this with the leaves not so black and
shining, but having more branches; and another which hath a longer spike
or tuft of flowers. Clusius calls this Veronica erectior latifolia.

8. The eighth having his stalks leaning upon the ground looketh with his
face upright, having sundry flexible branches, set with leaves like unto
wild Germander by couples, one right against another, deeply jagged about
the edges, in respect of the other before mentioned. The flowers are of a
blue colour: the root is long, with some threads appendant thereto.

The Place.

Veronica groweth upon banks, borders of fields, and grassy mole-hills, in
sandy grounds, and in woods, almost everywhere.

The fourth kind, my good friend Mr. Stephen Bredwell, practioner in
physic found and showed it me in the close next adjoining to the house of
Mr. Bele, chief of the clerks of her Majesty's Council, dwelling at
Barnes near London. The sixth is a stranger in England, but I have it
growing in my garden.

The Time.

These flower from May to September.

The Names.

These plants are comprehended under this general name Veronica; and
Dodonaeus would have the first of them to be the Betonica of Paulus
AEgineta, and Turner and Gesner the third: we do call them in English,
Paul's Betony, or Speedwell: in Welsh it is called Fluellen, and the
Welsh people do attribute great virtues to the same: in High Dutch,
Growndheill; in Low Dutch, Creu priis, that is to say, Honor and Praise.

The Nature.

These are of a mean temperature, between heat and dryness.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of Veronica drunk, soldereth and healeth all fresh and
old wounds, cleanseth the blood from all corruption, and is good to be
drunk for the kidneys, and against scurviness and foul spreading tetters,
and consuming and fretting sores, the smallpox and measles.

B. The water of Veronica distilled with wine, and re-distilled so often
until the liquor wax of a reddish colour, prevaileth against the old
cough, the dryness of the lungs, and all ulcers and inflammation of the
same.



CHAP. 200. Of Herb Twopence.
Fig. 941. Herb Twopence (1) Fig. 942 Purple Moneywort (3)
The Description.

1. Herb Twopence hath a small and tender root, spreading and dispersing
itself far within the ground; from which rise up many little, tender,
flexible stalks trailing upon the ground, set by couples at certain
spaces, with smooth green leaves somewhat round, whereof it took his
name: from the bosom of which leaves shoot forth small tender footstalks,
whereon do grow little yellow flowers, like those of Cinquefoil or
Tormentil.

2. There is a kind of Moneywort or Herb Twopence, like the other of his
kind in each respect, saving it is altogether lesser, wherein they
differ.

3. There is another kind of Moneywort which hath many very slender
creeping branches which here and there put forth fibres, and take root
again: the leaves are small and round, standing by couples one against
another; and out of the bosoms come slender footstalks bearing pretty
little whitish purple flowers consisting of five little leaves standing
together in manner of a little bell-flower, and seldom otherwise: the
seed is small, and contained in round heads. This grows in many wet
rotten grounds and upon bogs: I first found it Anno 1626, in the
Bishopric of Durham, and in two or three places of Yorkshire, and not
thinking any had taken notice thereof, I drew a figure of it & called it
Nummularia pusilla flore ex albo purpurascente; but since I have found
that Bauhin had formerly set it forth in his Prodromus by the name of
Nummularia flore purpurascente. It grows also on the bogs upon the heath,
near Brentwood in Essex: it flowers in July and August.
The Place.

It groweth near unto ditches and streams, and other watery places, and is
sometimes found in moist woods: I found it upon the bank of the river of
Thames, right against the Queen's palace of Whitehall; and almost in
every country where I have travelled.
The Time.

It flowereth from May till summer be well spent.

The Names.

Herb Twopence is called in Latin Nummularia, and Centummorbia: and of
divers Serpentaria. It is reported that if serpents be hurt or wounded,
they do heal themselves with this herb, whereupon came the name
Serpentaria: it is thought to be called Centummorbia, of the wonderful
effect which it hath in curing diseases; and it is called Nummularia of
the form of money, whereunto the leaves are like: in Dutch,
Penninckecruyt: in English, Moneywort, Herb Twopence, and Twopenny grass.

The Temperature.

That this herb is dry, the binding taste thereof doth show: it is also
moderate cold.

The Virtues.

A. The flowers and leaves stamped and laid upon wounds and ulcers doth
cure them: but it worketh most effectually being stamped and boiled in
oil olive, with some rosin, wax, and turpentine added thereto.

B. The juice drunk in wine, is good for the bloody flux, and all other
issues in blood of man or woman; the weakeness and looseness of the belly
and lask; it helpeth those that vomit blood, and the whites in such as
have them.

C. Boiled with wine and honey it cureth the wounds of the inward parts,
and ulcers of the lungs, & in a word, there is no better wound herb, no
not Tobacco itself, nor any other whatsoever.

D. The herb boiled in wine with a little honey, or mead, prevaileth much
against the cough in children, called the chin cough.



CHAP. 201. Of Bugle or Middle Comfrey.
Fig. 943. Bugle (1) Fig. 944. White or Carnation-Flowered Bugle (2)
The Description.

1. Bugula spreadeth and creepeth alongst the ground like Moneywort; the
leaves be long, fat, & oleous, and of a brown colour for the most part.
The flowers grow about the stalks in roundels, compassing the stalk,
leaving between every roundel bare or naked spaces; and are of a fair
blue colour, and often white. I found many plants of it in a moist ground
upon Blackheath near London, fast by a village called Charlton, but the
leaves were green, and not brown at all like the other.

2. Bugle with the white flower differeth not from the precedent, in
roots, leaves, and stalks; the only difference is, that this plant
bringeth forth fair milk white flowers, and the other those that are
blue. It is also found with a flesh coloured flower, and the leaves are
less snipped than those of the former. Bauhin makes mention of one much
less than those, with round snipped leaves and a yellow flower, which he
saith he had out of England, but I have not as yet seen it, nor found any
other mention thereof.

The Place.

Bugula groweth aImost in every wood and copse, and such like shadowy and
moist places, and is much planted in gardens: the other varieties are
seldom to be met withal.

The Time.

Bugula flowereth in April and May.

The Names.

Bugle is reckoned among the confounds or wound herbs and it is called of
some Consolida media, Bugula, and Bugulum: in High Dutch, Guntzel; in Low
Dutch Sengroen: of Matthiolus, Herba Laurentina: in English, Brown Bugle:
of some, Sicklewort, and Herb Carpenter, but not truly.

The Nature.

Bugle is of a mean temperature, between heat and dryness.

The Virtues.

A. It is commended against inward burstings, and members torn, rent, and
bruised: and therefore it is put into potions that serve for nodes, in
which it is of such virtue, that it can dissolve & wash away congealed
and clotted blood. Ruellius writeth that they commonly say in France, how
he needeth neither physician nor surgeon that hath Bugle and Sanicle, for
it doth not only cure rotten wounds being inwardly taken, but also
applied to them outwardly; it is good for the infirmities of the liver;
it taketh away the obstructions, and strengtheneth it.

B. The decoction of Bugle drunken, dissolveth clotted or congealed blood
within the body, healeth and maketh sound all wounds of the body, both
inward and outward.

C. The same openeth the stoppings of the liver and gall, and is good
against the jaundice and fevers of long continuance.

D. The same decoction cureth the rotten ulcers and sores of the mouth and
gums.

E. Bugula is excellent in curing wounds and scratches, and the juice
cureth the wounds, ulcers and sores of the secret parts, or the herb
bruised and laid thereon.



CHAP. 202. Of Self-Heal.
Fig. 945. Self-Heal (1) Fig. 946. The Second Self-Heal (2)
The Description.

1. Prunel or Brunel hath square hairy talks of a foot high, beset with
long hairy and sharp pointed leaves, & at the top of the stalks grow
flowers thick set together, like an ear or spiky knop, of a brown colour
mixed with blue flowers; and sometimes white, of which kind I found some
plants in Essex near Hedingham castle. The root is small and very
thready.

2. Prunella altera, or after Lobel and Pena, Symphytum petreum, hath
leaves like the last described, but somewhat narrower, and the leaves
that grow commonly towards the tops of the stalks, are deeply divided or
cut in, after the manner of the leaves of the Small Valerian, and
sometimes the lower leaves are also divided, but that is more seldom; the
heads and flowers are like those of the former, and the colour of the
flowers is commonly purple yet sometimes it is found with flesh coloured,
and otherwhiles with white or ash coloured flowers.

Fig. 947. White-Flowered Self-Heal (3)

3. The third sort of Self-Heal is like unto the last described in root,
stalk, & leaves, & in every other point saving that the flowers hereof
are of a perfect white colour, and the others not so, which maketh the
difference.

The Place.

1. The first kind of Prunel or Brunel groweth very commonly in all our
fields throughout England.

2. The second Brunel or Symphytum petraeum groweth naturally upon rocks,
stony mountains, and gravelly grounds.

3. The third for any thing that I know is a stranger with us: but the
first common kind I have found with white flowers.

The Time.

These plants flower for the most part all summer long.

The Names.

Brunel is called in English Prunel, Carpenter's Herb, Self-heal, and
Hook-Heal, and Sicklewort. It is called of the later herbarists Brunella:
and Prunella: of Matthiolus, Consolida minor, and Solidago minor: but
saith Ruellius, the Daisy is the right Consolida minor, and also the
Solidago minor.

The Nature.

These herbs are of the temperature of Bugula, that is to say, moderately
hot and dry, and something binding.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of Prunel made with wine or water, doth join together
and make whole and sound all wounds, both inward and outward, even as
Bugle doth.

B. Prunel bruised with oil of Roses and vinegar, and laid to the forepart
of the head, assuageth and helpeth the pain and aching thereof.

C. To be short, it serveth for the same that Bugle doth, and in the world
there are not two better wound herbs, as hath been often proved.

D. It is commended against the infirmities of the mouth, and especially
the ruggedness, blackness, and dryness of the tongue, with a kind of
swelling in the same. It is an infirmity amongst soldiers that lie in
camp. The Germans call it De Braun, which happeneth not without a
continual ague and frenzy. The remedy hereof is the decoction of Self-
Heal, with common water after blood letting out of the veins of the
tongue: and the mouth and tongue must be often washed with the same
decoction, and sometimes a little vinegar mixed therewith. This disease
is thought to be unknown to the old writers: but notwithstanding if it be
conferred with that which Paulus AEegineta calleth Erysipelas cerebri, an
inflammation of the brain, then will it not be thought to be much
differing, if it be not the very same.



CHAP. 203. Of the great Daisy, or Maudlin-Wort.

Fig. 948. Great Daisy

The Description.

The Great Daisy hath very many broad leaves spread upon the ground,
somewhat indented about the edges, of the breadth of a finger, not unlike
those of groundsel: among which rise up stalks of the height of a cubit,
set with the like leaves, but lesser, in the top whereof do grow large
white flowers with yellow thrums in the middle like those of the single
field Daisy or Mayweed, without any smell at all. The root is full of
strings.

The Place.

It groweth in meadows and in the borders of fields almost everywhere.

The Time.

It flowereth and flourisheth in May and June.

The Names.

It is called (as we have said) Bellis maior, and also Consolida media
vulnerariorum, to make a difference between it and Bugula, which is the
true Confolida media: notwithstanding this is holden of all to be
Consolida media generis, or a kind of Middle Confound: in High Dutch, as
Fuchsius reporteth, Genszblume: in English, the Great Daisy and Maudlin-
Wort.

The Temperature.

This great Daisy is moist in the end of the second degree, and cold in
the beginning of the same.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of the great Maudlin-Wort are good against all burning
ulcers and apostumes, against the inflammation and running of the eyes,
being applied thereto.

B. The same made up in an unguent or salve with wax, oil, and turpentine,
is most excellent for wounds, especially those wherein is any
inflammation, and will not come to digestion or maturation, as are those
weeping wounds made in the knees, elbows, and other joints.

C. The juice, decoction, or distilled water, is drunk to very good
purpose against the rupture or any inward burstings.

D. The herb is good to be put into vulnerary drinks or potions, as one
simple belonging thereto most necessary, to the which effect, the best
practised do use it as a simple in such cases of great effect.

E. It likewise assuageth the cruel torments of the gout, used with a few
Mallows and butter boiled and made to the form of a poultice.

F. The same receipt aforesaid used in clysters, profiteth much against
the vehement heat in agues and ceaseth the torments or wringing of the
guts or bowels.



CHAP. 204. Of little Daisies.
Fig. 949. Lesser Double Red or White Daisy (1) Fig. 950. Larger Double Red
or White Daisy
The Description

1. The Daisy bringeth forth many leaves from a thready root, smooth, fat,
long, and somewhat round withal, very slightly indented about the edges,
for the most part lying upon the ground: among which rise up the flowers,
every one with his own slender stem, almost like those of Camomile, but
lesser, of a perfect white colour, and very double.

2. The double Red Daisy is like unto the precedent in every respect,
saving in the colour of the flowers: for this plant bringeth forth
flowers of a red colour, and the other white as aforesaid.

These double Daisies are of two sorts, that is either smaller or larger,
and these again either white or red, or of both mixed together: wherefore
I have given you in the first place the figure of the small, and in the
second that of the larger.

Fig. 951. Childing Daisy (3)

3. Furthermore, there is another pretty double daisy which differs from
the first described only in the flower, which at the sides thereof puts
forth many footstalks carrying also little double flowers, being commonly
of a red colour; so that each stalk carries as it were an old one and the
brood thereof: whence they have fitly termed it the childing Daisy.


Fig. 952. Small Wild Daisy (4)
Fig. 953. Middle Wild Daisy (5)

4. The wild field Daisy hath many leaves spread upon the ground like
those of the garden Daisy: among which rise up slender stems; on the top
whereof do grow small single flowers like those of Camomile, set about a
bunch of yellow thrums, with a pale of white leaves, sometimes white, now
and then red, and often of both mixed together. The root is thready.

5. There doth likewise grow in the fields another sort of wild Daisy,
agreeing with the former in each respect, saving that it is somewhat
greater than the other, and the leaves are somewhat more cut in the
edges, and larger.


Fig. 954. Blue Italian Daisy (6)
Fig. 955. Blue French Daisy (7)

6. The Blue Italian Daisy hath many small thready roots, from the which
rise up leaves like those of the common Daisy, of a dark green colour:
among which cometh up a fat stem set round about with the like leaves,
but lesser. The flowers grow at the top globe-fashion, that is, round
like a ball, of a perfect blue colour, very like unto the flowers of
Mountain Scabious.

7. The French Blue Daisy is like unto the other blue Daisies in each
respect saving it is altogether lesser, wherein consisteth the
difference.

The Place.

The double Daisies are planted in gardens: the others grow wild
everywhere.

The blue Daisies are strangers in England; their natural place of abode
is set forth in their several titles.

The Time.

The Daisies do flower most part of the summer.

The Names.

The Daisy is called in High Dutch Maszlieben: in Low Dutch, Margarieten:
in Latin, Bellis minor, and Consolida minor, or the Middle Confound: of
Tragus, Primula veris; but that name is more proper unto Primrose: of
some, Herba Margarita, or Margaret's herb: in French, Marguerites, and
Cassaudes: in Italian, Fiori di prima veri gentili. In English, Daisies,
and Bruisewort.

The blue Daisy is called Bellis caerulea: of some, Globularia, of the
round form of the flower it is also called Aphyllanthes, and Frondiflora:
in Italian, Botanaria: in English, Blue Daisies, and Globe Daisy.

The Temperature.

The Lesser Daisies are cold and moist, being moist in the end of the
second degree, and cold in the beginning of the same.

The Virtues.

A. The Daisies do mitigate all kind of pains, but especially of the
joints, and gout proceeding from an hot and dry humour, if they be
stamped with new butter unsalted, and applied upon the pained place; but
they work more effectually if Mallows be added thereto.

B. The leaves of Daisies used amongst other pot-herbs do make the belly
soluble; and they are also put into clysters with good success, in hot
burning fevers, and against inflammations of the intestines.

C. The juice of the leaves and roots sniffed up into the nostrils,
purgeth the head mightily of foul and filthy slimy humours, and helpeth
the megrim.

D. The same given to little dogs with milk keepeth them from growing
great.

E. The leaves stamped taketh away bruises and swellings proceeding of
some stroke, if they be stamped and laid thereon; whereupon it was called
in old time Bruisewort.

F. The juice put into the eyes cleareth them, and taketh away the
watering.

G. The decoction of the field Daisy (which is the best for physic use)
made in water and drunk, is good against agues, inflammation of the
liver, and all other the inward parts.



CHAP. 205. Of Mouse-Ear.
Fig. 956. Great Mouse-Ear (1) Fig. 957. Creeping Mouse-Ear (2)
The Description.

1. The Great Mouse-ear hath great and large leaves greater than our
common Pylosella, or Mouse-ear, thick, and full of substance: the stalks
and leaves be hoary and white, with a silken mossiness in handling like
silk, pleasant and fair in view: it beareth three or four quadrangled
stalks, somewhat knotty, a foot long: the roots are hard, woody, and full
of strings: the flowers come forth at the top of the stalk, like unto the
small Piss-a-bed, or Dandelion, of a bright yellow colour.

2. The second kind of Pylosella is that which we call Auricula muris, or
Mouse-Ear, being a very common herb, but few more worthy of consideration
because of his good effect, and yet clean unremembered of the old
writers. It is called Pylosella of the rough hairy and whitish substance
growing on the leaves, which are somewhat long like the little Daisy, but
that they have a small hollowness in them resembling the ear of a mouse:
upon the which consideration some have called it Myosotis; wherein they
were greatly deceived, for it is nothing like unto the Myosotis of
Dioscorides: his small stalks are likewise hairy, slender, and creeping
upon the ground; his flowers are double, and of a pale yellow colour,
much like unto Sonchus, or Hieracium, or Hawkweed.

3. The small Mouse-Ear with broad leaves hath a small tough root, from
which rise up many hairy and hoary broad leaves spread upon the ground,
among which grows up a slender stem, at the top whereof stand two or
three small yellow flowers, which being ripe turn unto down that is
carried away with the wind.

The Place.

These plants do grow upon sandy banks and untoiled places that lie open
to the air.

The Time.

They flower in May and June.

The Names.

Great Mouse-Ear is called of the later herbarists Pylosella: the smaller
likewise Pylosella, and Auricula muris: in Dutch, Nagelcruijt, and
Muysoor: Lacuna thinks it Holostium: in French Oreille de rat, ou souris:
in Italian, Pelosella: in English, Mouse-Ear.

The Temperature.

They are hot and dry of temperature, of an excellent astringent faculty,
with a certain hot tenuity admixed.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of Pylosella drunk doth cure and heat all wounds, both
inward and outward: it cureth hernias, ruptures, or burstings.

B. The leaves dried and made into powder, do profit much in healing of
wounds, being strewed thereupon.

C. The decoction of the juice is of such excellency, that if steel-edged
tools red hot be drenched and cooled therein oftentimes, it maketh them
so hard, that they will cut stone or iron, be they never so hard, without
turning the edge or waxing dull.

D. This herb being used in gargarisms cureth the looseness of the uvula.

E. Being taken in drink it healeth the fluxes of the womb, as also the
diseases called dysentery and enterocoele: it glueth and confoundeth
wounds, stayeth the swelling of the spleen, and the bloody excrements
procured thereby.

F. The apothecaries of the Low Countries make a syrup of the juice of
this herb, which they use for the cough, consumption, and pthisis.



CHAP. 206. Of Cottonweed or Cudweed.
Fig. 958. English Cudweed (1) Fig. 959. Common Cudweed (2)
The Description.

1. English Cudweed hath sundry slender and upright stalks divided into
many branches, and groweth as high as common Wormwood, whose colour and
shape it doth much resemble. The leaves shoot from the bottom of the turf
full of hairs, in shape somewhat like a Willow leaf below, but above they
be narrower, and like the leaves of Psyllium or Fleawort: among which do
grow small pale coloured flowers like those of the small Coniza or Flea-
bane. The whole plant is of a bitter taste.

2. The second being our common Gnaphalium or Cudweed is a base or low
herb, nine or ten inches long, having many small stalks or tender
branches, and little leaves, covered all over with a certain white cotton
or fine wool, and very thick: the flowers be yellow, and grow like
buttons at the top of the stalks.


Fig. 960. Sea Cudweed (3) 
Fig. 961. White and Purple Mountain Cudweed (4, 5)

3. The third kind of Cudweed or Cottonweed, being of the sea, is like
unto the other Cudweed last described, but is altogether smaller and
lower, seldom growing much above a handful high: the leaves grow thick
upon the stalks, and are short, flat, and very white, soft and woolly.
The flowers grow at the top of the stalks in small round buttons, of
colour and fashion like the other Cudweed.

4. The fourth being the Cottonweed of the hills and stony mountains, is
so exceeding white and hoary, that one would think it to be a plant made
of wool, which may very easily be known by his picture, without other
description.

5. The fifth kind of Cottonweed hath leaves and stalks like the other of
his kind, and differeth in that, that this plant beareth a bush or tuft
of purple flowers, otherwise it is very like.

Fig. 962. Kinds of Cottonweed or Cudweed (6-9)

6. The sixth is like unto the last recited, but greater: the flowers are
ofan exceeding bright red colour, and of an aromatical sweet smell.

7. The seventh kind of Gnaphalium or Cottonweed of Clusius his
description, grows nine or ten inches high, having little long leaves
like the small Mouse-Ear, woolly within, and of a hoary colour on the
outside: the stalks in like manner are very woolly, at the top whereof
cometh forth a fair flower and a strange, having such woolly leaves
bordering the flower about, that a man would think it to be nothing else
but wool itself: and in the midst of the flower come forth sundry small
heads of a pale yellow colour, like unto the other of this kind. The root
is black and somewhat fibrous.

8. There is a kind of Cottonweed, being of greater beauty than the rest,
that hath straight and upright stalks a foot high or more, covered with a
most soft and fine wool, and in such plentiful manner, that a man may
with his hands take it from the stalk in great quantity: which stalk is
beset with many small long and narrow leaves, green upon the inner side,
and hoary on the other side, fashioned somewhat like the leaves of
Rosemary, but greater. The flowers do grow at the top of the stalks in
bundles or tufts, consisting of many small flowers of a white colour, and
very double, compact, or as it were consisting of little silver scales
thrust close together, which do make the same very double. When the
flower hath long flourished, and is waxen old, then comes there in the
midst of the flower a certain brown yellow thrum, such as is in the midst
of the Daisy: which flower being gathered when it is young, may be kept
in such manner as it was gathered (I mean in such freshness and well
liking) by the space of a whole year after, in your chest or eIsewhere:
wherefore our English women have called it Live-Long, or Live-For-Ever,
which name doth aptly answer his effects. Clusius received this plant out
of England, and first set it forth by the name of Gnaphalium Americanum,
or Argyrocome.

9. This plant hath three or four small greyish cottony or woolly stalks,
growing straight from the root, and commonly divided into many little
branches: the leaves be long, narrow, whitish, softt, and woolly, like
the other of his kind: the flowers be round like buttons, growing very
many together at the top of the stalks, but nothing so yellow as Mouse-
Ear, which turn into down, and are carried away with the wind.
Fig. 963. Herb Impious (10) Fig. 964. Lion's Cudweed (11)

10. The tenth is like unto the last before mentioned, in stalks, leaves,
and flowers, but much larger, and for the most part those flowers which
appear first are the lowest and basest, and they are overtopped by other
flowers which come on younger branches, and grow higher, as children
seeking to overgrow or overtop their parents, (as many wicked children
do) for which cause it hath been called Herba impia, that is, the wicked
Herb; or Herb Impious.

11. The eleventh plant comprehended under the title of Gnaphalium, (being
without doubt a kind thereof, as may appear by the shape of his flowers
and stalks, covered over with a soft wool like unto the other kinds of
Cottonweed) is an handful high or thereabouts, beset with leaves like
Gnaphalium anglicum, but somewhat broader. At the top of the stalk
groweth a flower of a blackish brown violet colour, beset about with
rough and woolly hairy leaves, which make the whole flower to resemble
the rough haired foot of a lion, of a hare, or a bear, or rather in mine
opinion of a Rough-Footed Dove. The heads of these flowers when they are
spread abroad carry a greater circumference than is required in so small
a plant; and when the flower is faded, the seed is wrapped in such a deal
of wool that it is scarcely to be found out.


Fig. 965. Small Lion's Cudweed (12)
Fig. 966. Long-Leaved Cudweed (13)

12. This small kind of Leontopodium being likewise a kind of Cottonweed,
neither by Dioscorides or any other ancient writer once remembered, hath
one single stalk nine inches in height, and the leaves of Gnaphalium
montanum; which leaves and stalks are white, with a thick hoary
woolliness, bearing at the top pale yellow flowers like Gnaphalium
montanum; the root is slender and woody.

13. This, which Clusius calls Gnaphalium plateau 2, hath small stalks
some handful high or somewhat more, of which some stand upright, others
lie along upon the ground, being round, hairy, and unorderly set with
soft hoary leaves engirting their stalks at their setting on, and sharp
pointed at their upper ends. The tops of the stalks carry many whitith
heads full of a yellowish down; the root is thick and blackish, with some
fibres.

Fig. 967. Small Broad-Leaved Cudweed (14)

14. This sends up one stalk parted into several branches set here and
there with broad soft and hoary leaves and at the division of the
branches and amongst the leaves grow seven or eight little heads thick
thrust togethcr, being of a greyish yellow colour, and full of much down:
the root is unprofitable, and perishes as soon as it hath perfected his
seed. Clusius calls this Gnaphalium plateau 3; he having as it seems
received them both from his friend Jacques Plateau.

The Place.

The first groweth in the dark woods of Hampstead, and in the woods near
unto Deptford by London. The second groweth upon dry sandy banks. The
third groweth at a place called Mersea, six miles from Colchester, near
unto the sea side. I also had it sent me from my worshipful friend Mr.
Thomas Glynn, who gathered it upon the sea coast of Wales.

The rest grow upon mountains, hilly grounds, and barren pastures.

The kind of Gnaphalium newly set forth (to wit americanum) groweth
naturally near unto the Mediterranean sea, from whence it hath been
brought and planted in our English gardens. If this be true which our
author here affirms, it might have have had a fitter (at least a nearer)
denomination than from America: yet Bauhin affirms that it grows
frequently in Brazil, and it is not improbable that both their assertions
be true.

The Time.

They flower for the most part from June to the end of August.
The Names.

Cottonweed is called in Greek Gnaphalion; and it is called Gnaphalion,
because men use the tender leaves of it instead of bombast or cotton, as
Paulus AEgineta writeth. Pliny saith it is called Chamaexylon, as though
he should say Dwarf Cotton; for it hath a soft and white cotton like unto
bombast: whereupon also it was called of divers Tomentitia, and
Cotonaria: of others, Centunculus, Centuncularis, and Albinum; which word
is found among the bastard names: but the latter word, by reason of the
white colour, doth reasonably well agree with it. It is also called
Bombax, Humilis filago, and Herba impia, because the younger, or those
flowers that spring up later, are higher, and overtop those that come
first, as many wicked children do unto their parents, as before touched
in the description: in English, Cottonweed, Cudweed, Chaffweed, and Petty
Cotton.

The Nature.

These herbs be of an astringent or binding and drying quality.

The Virtues.

A. Gnaphalium boiled in strong lye cleanseth the hair from nits and lice:
also the herb being laid in wardrobes and presses keepeth apparel from
moths.

B. The same boiled in wine and drunken, killeth worms and bringeth them
forth, and prevaileth against the bitings and stingings of venomous
beasts.

C. The fume or smoke of the herb dried, and taken with a funnel, being
burned therein, and received in such manner as we use to take the fume of
Tobacco, that is, with a crooked pipe made for the same purpose by the
potter, prevaileth against the cough of the lungs, the great ache or pain
of the head, and cleanseth the breast and inward parts.



CHAP. 207. Of Golden Mothwort or Cudweed.

Fig. 968. Golden Mothwort

The Description.

Golden Mothwort bringeth forth slender stalks somewhat hard and woody,
divided into divers small branches; whereupon do grow leaves somewhat
rough, and of a white colour, very much jagged like Southernwood. The
flowers stand on the tops of the stalks, joined together in tufts, of a
yellow colour glittering like gold, in form resembling the leafy flowers
of Tansy, or the middle button of the flowers of Camomile; which being
gathered before they be ripe or withered, remain beautiful long time
after, as myself did see in the hands of Mr. Wade, one of the Clerks of
her Majesty's Council (which were sent him among other things from Padua
in Italy. For which cause of long lasting, the images and carved gods
were wont to wear garlands thereof: whereupon some have called it God's
Flower. For which purpose Ptolemy King of Egypt did most diligently
observe them, as Pliny writeth.

The Place.

It grows in most untilled places of Italy and Spain, in meadows where the
soil is barren, and about the banks of rivers; it is a stranger in
England.
The Time.

It flowers in August and September: notwithstanding Theophrastus and
Pliny reckon it among the flowers of the spring.

The Names.

Golden Mothwort is called of Dioscorides Elichryson. Pliny and
Theophrastus call it Helichryson: Gaza translates it Aurelia: in English,
Gold-flower, Golden Mothwort.

The Temperature.

It is (saith Galen) of power to cut and make thin.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides teacheth, that the tops thereof drunk in wine are good for
them that can hardly make water; against stingings of serpents, pains of
the huckle bones: and taken in sweet wine it dissolveth congealed blood.

B. The branches and leaves laid amongst clothes keepeth them from moths,
whereupon it hath been called of some Mothweed, or Mothwort.



CHAP. 208. Of Golden Flower-Gentle.

Fig. 969. Kinds of Golden Flower-Gentle (1-4)

The Description.

1. This yellow Everlasting or Flower-Gentle, called of the later
herbarists Yellow Stoechas, is a plant that hath stalks of a span long,
and slender, whereupon do grow narrow leaves white and downy, as are also
the stalks. The flowers stand on the tops of the stalks, consisting of a
scattered or disordered scaly tuft, of a reasonable good smell, of a
bright yellow colour; which being gathered before they be ripe, do keep
their colour and beauty a long time without withering, as do most of the
Cottonweeds or Cudweeds, whereof this is a kind. The root is black and
slender. There is some variety in the heads of this plant, for they are
sometimes very large and longish, as Camerarius notes in his Epitome of
Matthiolus; otherwhiles they are very compact and round, and of the
bigness of the ordinary.

2. This grows to some foot or more high, and hath rough downy leaves like
the former, but broader: the flowers are longer, but of the same yellow
colour and long continuance as those of the last described. This varies
somthing in the breadth and length of the leaves.

3. About Nemausium [Nmes] and Montpellier there grows another kind of
Chrysocome, or as Lobel terms it, Stoechas citrina altera, but that as
this plant is in all points like, so in all points it is lesser and
slenderer, blacker, and not of such beauty as the former, growing more
near unto an ash colour, consisting of many small twigs a foot long. The
root is lesser, and hath fewer strings annexed thereto; and it is seldom
found but in the cliffs and crags, among rubbish, and on walls of cities.
This plant is brown, without scent or savour like the other: every branch
hath his own bunch of flowers coming forth of a scaly or round head, but
not a number heaped together as in the first kind. It prospereth well in
our London gardens.

4. There is a kind hereof being a very rare plant, and as rare to be
found where it naturally groweth, which is in the woods among the Scarlet
Oaks between Sommires and Montpellier. It is a fine and beautiful plant,
in show passing the last described Stoechas citrina altera: but the
leaves of this kind are broad, and somewhat hoary, as is all the rest of
the whole plant; the stalk a foot long, and beareth the very flower of
Stoechas citrina altera, but bigger and longer, and somewhat like the
flowers of Lactuca agrestis: the root is like the former, without any
manifest smell, little known, hard to find, whose faculties be yet
unknown.

Fig. 970. Wild Goldilocks (5)

5. This is a wild kind (which Lobel setteth forth) that here may be
inferred, called Eliochrysos sylvestris. The woolly or flocky leaf of
this plant resembleth Gnaphalium vulgare, but that it is somewhat broader
in the middle: the flowers grow clustering together upon the tops of the
branches, of a yellow colour; and almost like those of Maudlin. The roots
are black and woody.

The Place.

The first mentioned grows in Italy, and other hot countries: and the
second grows in rough and gravelly places almost everywhere near unto the
Rhine, especially between Speyer and Worms.

The Time

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

Golden flower is called in Latin Coma aurea, of his golden locks or
beautiful bush, and also Tineraria: in shops, Stoechas citrina,
Amaranthus luteus, Fuchsii, & Tragi: of some, Linaria aurea, but nor
truly: in Greek, Chrysocome: in Dutch, Rennbloemen, and Motten cruyt: in
Italian, Amarantho giallo: in English, Gold-flower, God's flower,
Goldilocks, and Golden Stoechas.

The Temperature and Virtues

A. The flowers of Golden Stoechados boiled in wine and drunk, expel worms
out of the belly, and being boiled in lye made of strong ashes doth kill
lice and nits, if they be bathed therewith. The other faculties are
refered to the former plants mentioned in the last chapter.



CHAP. 209. Of Costmary and Maudlin.
Fig. 971. Costmary (1) Fig. 972. Maudlin (2)
The Description.

1. Costmary groweth up with round hard stalks two foot high, bearing long
broad leaves finely nicked in the edges, of an overworn whitish green
colour. The tuft or bundle is of a golden colour, consisting of many
little flowers like clusters, joined together in a roundel after the
manner of Golden Stoechados. The root is of a woody substance, by nature
very durable, not without a multitude of little strings hanging thereat.
The whole plant is of a pleasant smell, savour, or taste.

2. Maudlin is somewhat like to Costmary (whereof it is a kind) in colour,
smell, taste, and in the golden flowers, set upon the tops of the stalks
in round clusters. It bringeth forth a number of stalks, slender, and
round. The leaves are narrow, long, indented, and deeply cut about the
edges. The cluster of flowers is lesser than that of Costmary, but of a
better smell, and yellower colour. The roots are long lasting and many.

Fig. 973. Uncut-leaved Maudlin (3) & White-Flowered Maudlin (4)

3. There is another kind of Balsamita minor, or Ageratum, which hath
leaves lesser and narrower than the former, and those not snipped about
the edges: the umbel or tuft of flowers is yellow like as the former, and
you may call each of these last described at your pleasure, either
Ageratum, or Balsamita: the Graecians call it Agiraton, which is in Latin
Ageratum, vel non senescens, called in shops (though untruly) Eupaterium
mesuae. The flowers are of a beautiful and seemly show, which will not
lose their excellency of grace in growing, until they be very old, and
therefore called Ageratum, or Non senescens, as before; and are like in
tuft to Eliochryson, but of a white colour; and this is thought to be the
true and right Ageratum of Dioscorides although there hath been great
controversy which should be the true plant.

4. This differeth not from the common Maudlin, but in the colour of the
flowers, which are white, when as those of the ordinary sort are yellow.

The Place.

They grow everywhere in gardens, and are cherished for their sweet
flowers and leaves.

The Time.

They bring forth their tufts of yellow flowers in the summer months.

The Names.

Costmary is called in Latin Balsamita maior or mas: of some, Costus
hortorum: it is also called Mentha graeca: and Saracenica officinarum: of
Tragus, Alisma: of Matthiolus, Herba graeca: of others, Salvia romana,
and Herba lassulata: of some, Herba D. Mariae: in English, Costmary, and
Alecost: in High Dutch, Frauwenkraut: in Low Dutch, Heydnisch windkraut:
in French, Coq.

Maudlin is without doubt a kind of Costmary, called of the Italians Herba
giulia: of Valerius Cordus, Mentha corymbifera minor: and Eupatorium
mesue: It is judged to be Dioscorides his Ageratum, and it is the Costus
minor hortensis of Gesner: we call it in English Maudlin.

The Nature.

They are hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. These plants are very effectual, especially Maudlin, taken either
inwardly or else outwardly to provoke urine; and the fume thereof doth
the same, and mollifieth the hardness of the matrix.

B. Costmary is put into ale to steep, as also into the barrels and stands
amongst those herbs wherewith they do make sage ale; which drink is very
profitable for the diseases before spoken of.

C. The leaves of Maudlin and Adder's-Tongue stamped and boiled in Oil
Olive, adding thereto a little wax, rosin, and a little turpentine,
maketh an excellent healing unguent, or incarnative salve to raise or
bring up flesh from a deep and hollow wound or ulcer, whereof I have had
long experience.

D. The conserve made with the leaves of Costmary and sugar, doth warm and
dry the brain, and openeth the stoppings of the same: stoppeth all
catarrhs, rheums and distillations, taken in the quantity of a bean.

E. The leaves of Costmary boiled in wine and drunken, cureth the griping
pain of the belly, the guts and bowels, and cureth the bloody flux.

F. It is good for them that have the green sickness, or the dropsy,
especially in the beginning; and it helpeth all that have a weak and cold
liver.

G. The seed expelleth all manner of worms out of the belly, as wormseed
doth.



CHAP. 210. Of Tansy.

Fig. 974. Kinds of Tansy (-14)

The Description.

1. Tansy groweth up with many stalks, bearing on the tops of them certain
cluttered tufts, with flowers like the round buttons of yellow Roman
Camomile, or Feverfew (without any leaves paled about them) as yellow as
gold. The leaves be long, made as it were of a great many set together
upon one stalk, like those of Agrimony, or rather wild Tansy, very like
to the Female Fern, but softer and lesser, and every one of them slashed
in the edges as are the leaves of Fern. The root is tough and of a woody
substance. The whole plant is bitter in taste, and of a strong smell, but
yet pleasant.

2. The double English Tansy hath leaves infinitley jagged and nicked, and
curled withal, like unto a plume of feathers: it is altogether like unto
the other, both in smell and taste, as also in flowers, but more
pleasantly smelling by many degrees, wherein especially consisteth the
difference.

3. The third kind of Tansy hath leaves, roots, stalks, and branches like
the other, and differeth from them, in that this hath no smell or savour
at all, and the flowers are like the common single Feverfew.

4. Clusius hath described another bigger kind of unsavoury Tansy, whose
figure here we give you; it grows four cubit and half high, with crested
stalks, having leaves set upon somewhat longer stalks than those of the
last described, otherwise much like them: the flowers are much larger,
being of the bigness of the great Daisy, and of the same colour: the seed
is long and black: The root is of the thickness of one's finger, running
upon the surface of the ground, & putting forth some fibres, and it lasts
divers years, so that the plant may be increased thereby. This flowers in
May and June, and grows wild upon divers hills in Hungary and Austria.

Fig. 975. Small White Tansy (5)

5. The fifth kind of Tansy hath broad leaves, much jagged and well cut,
like the leaves of Feverfew, but smaller, and more deeply cut. The stalk
is small, a foot long, whereupon do grow little tufts of little white
flowers, like the tuft of Milfoil or Yarrow. The herb is in smell and
savour like the common Tansy, but not altogether so strong.

The Place.

The first groweth wild in fields as well as in gardens: the others grow
in my garden.

The Time.

They flower in July and August.
The Names.

The first is called Tansy; the second Double Tansy, the third Unsavoury
Tansy, the last White Tansy: in Latin, Tanacetum, and Athanasia, as
though it were immortal: because the flowers do not speedily wither: of
some, Artemisia, but untruly.

The Nature.

The Tansies which smell sweet are hot in the second degree, and dry in
the third. That without smell is hot and dry, and of a mean temperature.

The Virtues.

A. In the Springtime are made with the leaves hereof newly sprung up, and
with eggs, cakes or tansies, which be pleasant in taste, and good for the
stomach. For if any bad humours cleave thereunto, it doth perfedly
concoct them, and scour them downwards. The root preserved with honey or
sugar, is an especial thing against the gout, if every day for a certain
space, a reasonable quantity thereof be eaten fasting.

B. The seed of Tansy is a singular and approved medicine against Worms,
for in what sort soever it be taken, it killeth and driveth them forth.

C. The same pound, and mixed with oil Olive, is very good against the
pain and shrinking of the sinews.

D. Also being drunk with wine, it is good against the pain of the
bladder, and when a man cannot piss but by drops.



CHAP. 211. Of Feverfew
Fig. 976. Feverfew (1) Fig. 977. Double Feverfew (2)
The Description.

1. Feverfew bringeth forth many little round stalks, divided into certain
branches. The leaves are tender, diversly torn and jagged, and nicked on
the edges like the first and nethermost leaves of Coriander, but greater.
The flowers stand on the tops of the branches, with a small pale of white
leaves, set round about a yellow ball or button, like the wild field 
Daisy. The root is hard and tough; the whole plant is of a light whitish
green colour, of a strong smell and bitter taste

2. The second kind of Feverfew, Matricaria, or Parthenium, differeth from
the former, in that it hath double flowers; otherwise in smell, leaves,
and branches, it is all one with the common Feverfew.

Fig. 978. Mountain Feverfew (3)

3. There is a third sort called Mountain Feverfew, of Carolus Clusius his
description, that hath small and fibrous roots from which proceed slender
woody stalks, a foot high and somewhat more, beset or garnished about
with leaves like Camomile, deeply jagged or cut, of the savour or smell
of Feverfew, but not so strong; in taste hot, but not unpleasant. At the
top of the stalks there come forth small white flowers not like unto the
first, but rather like unto Absynthium album, or White Wormwood.

4. I have growing in my garden another sort, like unto the first kind;
but of a most pleasant sweet savour, in respect of any of the rest. This
seems to be the Matricaria altera ex ilva, mentioned by Camerarius in his
Hortus Medicus.

The Place.

The common single Feverfew groweth in hedges, gardens, and about old
walls, it joyeth to grow among rubbish. There is oftentimes found when it
is digged up a little coal under the strings of the root, and never
without it, where of Cardanus in his book of Subtleties setteth down
divers vain and trifling things.

The Time.

They flower for the most part all the summer long.

The Names.

Feverfew is called in Latin, Parthenium, Matricaria, and Febrifuga, of
Fuchsius, Artemisia tenuifolia: in Italian, Amarella: in Dutch,
Moedercruyt: in French, Espargoute: in English, Featherfew and Feverfew,
taken from his force of driving away agues.

The Temperature.

Feverfew doth manifestly heat, it is hot in the third degree, and dry in
the second; it cleanseth, purgeth, or scoureth, openeth and fully
performeth all that bitter things can do.

The Virtues.

A. It is a great remedy against the diseases of the matrix; it procureth
women's sickness with speed; it bringeth forth the afterbirth and the
dead child, whether it be drunk in a decoction, or boiled in a bath and
the woman sit over it; or the herbs sodden and applied to the privy part,
in manner of a cataplasm or poultice.

B. Dioscorides also teacheth, that it is profitably applied to Saint
Anthony's fire, to all hot inflammations, and hot swellings, if it be
laid unto, both leaves and flowers.

C. The same author affirmeth, that the powder of Feverfew drunk with
oxymel, or syrup of vinegar, or wine for want of the others, draweth away
phlegm and melancholy, and is good for them that are pursy, and have
their lungs stuffed with phlegm, and is profitable likewise to be drunk
against the stone, as the same author saith.

D. Feverfew dried and made into powder, and two drams of it taken with
honey or sweet wine, purgeth by siege melancholy and phlegm; wherefore it
is very good for them that are giddy in the head, or which have the
turning called vertigo, that is a swimming and turning in the head. Also
it is good for such as be melancholic, sad, pensive, and without speech.

E. The herb is good against the suffocation of the mother, that is, the
hardness and stopping of the same, being boiled in wine, and applied to
the place.

F. The decotion of the same is good for women to sit over, for the
purposes aforesaid.

G. It is used both in drinks, and bound to the wrists with bay salt, and
the powder of glass stamped together, as a most singular experiment
against the ague.



CHAP. 212. Of Poley, or Pellamountain.
Fig. 979. White Poley (1) Fig. 980. Yellow Poley (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Polium, or in English Poley of the Mountain, is a
little tender and sweet smelling herb, very hoary, whereupon it took his
name: for it is not only hoary in part, but his hoary flockiness
possesseth the whole plant, tufts and all, being no less hoary than
Gnaphalium, especially where it groweth near the Sea at the bending of
the hills, or near the sandy shores of the Mediterranean Sea: from his
woody and somewhat thready root shooteth forth straight from the earth a
number of small round stalks nine inches long, and by certain distances
from the stalk proceed somewhat long leaves like Gnaphalium, which have
light nicks about the edges, that stand one against another, enclosing
the stalk: in the top of the stalks stand spoky tufts of flowers, white
of colour like Serpillum. This plant is stronger of scent or savour than
any of the rest following, which scent is somewhat sharp, and affecting
the nose with his sweetness.

2. The tufts of the second kind of Polium are longer than the tufts or
flowers of the last before mentioned, and they are of a yellow colour;
the leaves also are broader, otherwise they are very like.

Fig. 981. Purple Poley (3)

3. From the woody roots of this third kind of Polium proceed a great
number of shoots like unto the last rehearsed, lying flat upright upon
the ground, whose slender branches take hold upon the upper part of the
earth where they creep. The flowers are like the other, but of a purple
colour.

Fig. 982. Creeping Poley (4)

4. This kind of Polium, and of all the rest the smallest, is of an
indifferent good smell, in all points like unto the common Polium, but
that it is four times lesser, having the leaves not snipped, & the
flowers white.


Fig. 983. Lavender-leaved Poley (5)
Fig. 984. Another figure of Lavender-Leaved Poley (5)

5. This sends up many branches from one root like to those of the first
described, but shorter and more shrubby, lying partly upon the ground;
the leaves grow by couples at certain spaces, somewhat like, but lesser
than those of Rosemary or Lavender, green above, and whitish beneath, not
snipped about their edges; their taste is bitter and smell somewhat
pleasant: the flowers grow plentifully upon the tops of the branches,
white of colour, and in shape not unlike those of the other Poleys: they
grow on a bunch together, and not spike fashion; the seed is blackish and
contained in small vessels: the root is hard and woody, with many fibres.
Clusius calls this Polium 7 albo flore. It is the Polium alterum of
Matthiolus, and Polium recentiorum foemina lavandula folio of Lobel; I
here give you (as Clusius also hath done) two figures to make one good
one: the former shows the flowers and their manner of growing; the other,
the seed vessels, and the leaves growing by couples, together with a
little better expression of the root.

The Place.

These plants do grow naturally upon the mountains of France, Italy,
Spain, and other hot regions. They are strangers in England,
notwithstanding I have plants of that Poley with yellow flowers by the
gift of Lobel.

The Time.

They flower from the end of May, to the beginning of August.

The Names.

Poley mountain is called in Greek Polion, of his hoariness, and n Latin
also Polium. Divers suspect that Polium is Leucas, and that Dioscorides
hath twice entreated of that herb, under divers names; the kinds, the
occasion of the name, and likewise the faculties do agree. There be two
of the Leucades, one that is of the mountain: the other, which is that
with the broader leaf: it is called Leucas of the whitish colour, and
Polio, of the hoariness, because it seemeth like to a man's hoary head;
for whatsoever waxeth hoary, is said to be white.

The Temperature.

Poley is of temperature dry in the third degree, and hot in the end of
the second.
The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, it is a remedy for them that have the dropsy, the
yellow jaundice, and that are troubled with the spleen.

B. It provoketh urine, & is put into mithridate, treacle, and
counterpoisons.

C. It profiteth much against the bitings of venomous beasts, and driveth
away all venomous beasts from the place here it is strewed or burnt.

D. The same drunk with vinegar, is good for the diseases of the milt and
spleen; it troubleth the stomach, and afflicteth the head, and provoketh
the looseness of the belly.



CHAP. 213. Of Germander.
Fig. 985. Great Germander (1) Fig. 986. Small Germander (2)
The Kinds.

The old writers have set down no certain kinds of Germander, yet we have
thought it good, and not without cause, to entreat of more sorts than
have been observed of all, dividing those under the title of Teucrium
from Chamaedryes: although they are both of one kind, but yet differing
very notably.
The Description.

1. The first Germander groweth low, with very many branches lying upon
the ground, tough, hard, and woody, spreading itself here and there:
whereupon are placed small leaves snipped about the edges like the teeth
of a saw, resembling the shape of an oaken leaf. The flowers are of a
purple colour, very small, standing close to the leaves toward the top of
the branches. The seed is little and black, the root slender and full of
strings, creeping, and always spreading within the ground, whereby it
greatly increaseth. This is sometimes found with bigger leaves,
otherwhiles with less; also the flower is sometimes white, and
otherwhiles red in the same plant, whence Tabernamontanus gave two
figures, whereof I have omitted the later, and put the two titles into
one.

2. The second Germander riseth up with a little straight stalk a span
long, and sometimes longer, woody and hard like unto a little shrub: it
is afterwards divided into very many little small branches. The leaves
are indented and nicked about the edges, lesser than the leaves of the
former, great creeping Germander: the flowers likewise stand near to the
leaves, and on the upper parts of the sprigs, of colour sometimes purple,
and oftentimes tending to blueness: the root is diversely dispersed with
many strings.

Fig. 987. Wild Germander (3)

3. Wild Germander hath little stalks, weak and feeble, edged or cornered,
somewhat hairy, and set as it were with joints; about the which by
certain distances there come forth at each joint two leaves something
broad, nicked in the edges, and something greater than the leaves of
creeping Germander, and softer. The flowers be of a gallant blue colour,
made of four small leaves apiece, standing orderly on the tops of the
tender spriggy sprays; after which come in place little husks or seed
vessels. The root is small and thready.

The Place.

These plants do grow in rocky and rough grounds, and in gardens they do
easily prosper.

The Wild Germander groweth in many places about London in meadows and
fertile fields, and in every place wheresoever I have travelled in
England.

The Time.

They flower and flourish from the end of May, to the later end of August.

The Names.

Garden Germander is called in Greek, Chamaedrys: of some, Trissago, &
Trixago: and likewise Quercula minor; notwithstanding most of these names
do more properly belong to Scordium, or Water Germander: in Italian,
Querciuola: in Englsh, Germander, or English Treacle: in French,
Germandre. Before creeping Germander was known, this wild kind bare the
name of Germander amongst the apothecaries, and was used for the right
Germander in the compositions of medicines: but after the former were
brought to light, this began to be named Chamaedrys sylvestris, and
spuria: that is wild and bastard Germander: of some, Teucrium pratense,
and without error; because all the sorts of plants comprehended under the
title Teucrium, are doubtless kinds of Germander. Of some it hath been
thought to be the plant that Dioscorides called Hierabotane; that is to
say, the Holy Herb, if so be that the Holy Herb, and Verbenaca, or
Vervain, be sundry herbs. Dioscorides maketh them sundry herbs,
describing them apart, the one after the other: but other authors, as
Paulus, Aetius, and Oribasius, make no mention of Herba sacra, the Holy
Herb, but only of Peristereon: and this same is found to be likewise
called Hierabotane or the Holy Herb, and therefore it is evident that it
is one and the self same plant, called by divers names: the which things
considered, if they say so, and say truly, this wild Germander cannot be
Hierabotane at all, as divers have written and said it to be.

The Temperature.

Garden Germander is of thin parts and hath a cutting faculty, it is hot
and dry almost in the third degree, even as Galen doth write of Teucrium,
or Wild Germander.

The Wild Germander is likewise hot and dry, and is not altogether without
force or power to open and cleanse: it may be counted among the number of
them that do open the liver and spleen.

The Virtues.

A. Germander boiled in water and drunk, delivereth the body from all
obstrucions or stoppings, divideth and cutteth tough and clammy humours:
being received as aforesaid, it is good for them that have the cough, and
shortness of breath, the strangury or stopping of urine, and helpeth
those which are entering into a dropsy.

B. The leaves stamped with honey and strained, and a drop at sundry times
put into the eyes, takes away the web and haw in the same, or any dimness
of sight.

C. It provoketh mightily the terms, being boiled in wine, and the
decoction drunk with a fomentation or bath made also thereof; and the
secret parts bathed therewith.



CHAP. 214. Of Tree Germander
Fig. 988. Broad-Leaved Tree Germander (1) Fig. 989. Hungary Germander (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Tree Germander riseth up with a little straight
stalk a cubit high, woody and hard like unto a small woody shrub. The
stalk divideth itself from the bottom unto the top into divers branches,
whereon are set indented leaves nicked about the edges, in shape not much
unlike the leaf of the common Germander. The flowers grow among the
leaves of a purple colour. The root is woody, as is all the rest of the
plant.

2. The Tree Germander of Hungary hath many tough thready roots, from
which rise up divers weak and feeble stalks, reeling this way and that 
way; whereupon are set together by couples, long leaves jagged in the
edges, not unlike those of the upright Fluellen: on the tops of the
stalks stand the flowers spike fashion, thick thrust together, of a
purple colour tending towards blueness.

Fig. 990. Kinds of Germander (3-6)

3. This (which is the fourth of Clusius' description) hath divers stalks
four cubits high, four-square, rough, and set at certain spaces with
leaves growing by couples like those of the wild Germander: the tops of
the stalks are divided into sundry branches, carrying long spokes of blue
flowers, consisting of four leaves, whereof the uppermost leaf is the
largest, and distinguished with veins: after the flowers are past follow
such flat seed vessels as in Fluellen: the root is fibrous and lives
long, sending forth every year new branches.

4. This Dwarf Germander sends up stalks some handful high, round, not
branched: the leaves grow upon these stalks by couples, thick, shining, a
little hairy and green on their upper sides, and whitish below: the tops
of the stalks carry spoky tufts of flowers, consisting of four or five
bluish leaves; which falling, there follows a seed-vessel, as in the
Veronicas. The root is knotty and fibrous, and grows so fast amongst the
rocks that it cannot easily be got out. It flowereth in July. Clusius
describes this by the name of Teucrium 6 pumilum: and Pena sets it forth
by the name of Veronica petraea sempervirens.

5. This Spanish Germander riseth up oft times to the height of a man, in
manner of a hedge bush, with one stiff stalk of the highness of a man's
little finger, covered over with a whitish bark, divided sometimes into
other branches, which are always placed by couples one right against
another, of an overworn hoary colour; and upon them are placed leaves not
much unlike the common Germander, the upper parts whereof are of a
greyish hoary colour, and the lower of a deep green; of a bitter taste,
and somewhat crooked, turning and winding themselves after the manner of
a welt. The flowers come forth from the bosom of the leaves, standing
upon small tender footstalks of a white colour, without any helmet or
hood on their tops, having in the middle many thready strings. The whole
plant keepeth green all the winter long.

6. Among the rest of the Tree Germanders this is not of least beauty and
account, having many weak and feeble branches trailing upon the ground,
of a dark reddish colour, hard and woody; at the bottom of which stalks
come forth many long broad jagged leaves not unlike the precedent, hoary
underneath, and green above, of a binding and drying taste. The flowers
grow at the top of the stalks, not unlike to those of Cistus foemina, or
Sage-Rose, and are white of colour, consisting of eight or nine leaves,
in the middle whereof do grow many thready chives without smell or
savour: which being past, there succeedeth a tuft of rough thready or
flocky matter, not unlike to those of the great Avens or Pulsatilla: the
root is woody, and set with some few hairy strings fastened to the same.

The Place.

These plants do joy in stony and rough mountains and dry places, and such
as lie open to the sun and air, and prosper well in gardens: and of the
second sort I have received one plant for my garden of Mr. Garret,
apothecary.

The Time.

They flower, flourish, and seed when the other Germanders do.

The Names.

Tree Germander is called in Latin Teucrium: in English, Great Germander,
Upright Germander, and Tree Germander.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Their temperature and faculties are referred unto the garden Germander,
but they are not of such force and working, wherefore they be not much
used in physic.


CHAP. 215. Of Water Germander, or Garlic Germander.

Fig. 991. Water Germander

The Description.

Scordium or Water Germander hath square hairy stalks creeping by the
ground, beset with soft whitish crumpled leaves, nicked and snipped round
about the edges like a saw: among which grow small purple flowers like
the flowers of Dead-Nettle. The root is small and thready, creeping in
the ground very deeply. The whole plant being bruised smelleth like
Garlic, whereof it took that name Scordium.

The Place.

Water Germander groweth near to Oxford, by Rewley, on both sides of the
water, and in a meadow by Abingdon called Nietford, by the relation of a
learned gentleman of St. John's in the said town of Oxford, a diligent
Philobotanos, my very good friend, called Mr. Richard Slater. Also it
groweth in great plenty in the Isle of Ely, and in a meadow by Harwood in
Lancashire, and divers other places.

The Time.

The flowers appear in June and July: it is best to gather the herb in
August: it perisheth not in winter, but only loseth the stalks, which
come up again in summer: the root remaineth fresh all the year.

The Names.

The Grecians call it Scordion: the Latins do keep that name Scordium: the
apothecaries have no other name: It is called of some Trixago palustris,
Quercula, and also Mithridatium, of Mithridates the finder of it out. It
took the name Scordium from the smell of Garlic, which the Grecians call
Scorodon: in High Dutch, Wasker Battenig: in French, Scordion: in
Italian, Chalamandrina palustre: in English, Scordium, Water Germander,
and Garlic Germander.

The Temperature.

Water Germander is hot and dry: it hath a certain bitter taste, harsh and
sharp, as Galen witnesseth.

The Virtues.

A. Water Germander cleanseth the entrails, and likewise old ulcers, being
mixed with honey according to art: it provoketh urine, and bringeth down
the monthly sickness: it draweth out of the chest thick phlegm and rotten
matter: it is good for an old cough, pain in the sides which cometh of
stopping and cold, and for burstings and inward ruptures.

B. The decoction made in wine and drunk, is good against the bitings of
serpents, and deadly poisons, and is used in antidotes or counterpoisons
with good success.

C. It is reported to mitigate the pain of the gout, being stamped and
applied with a little vinegar and water.

D. Some affirm, that raw flesh being laid among the leaves of Scordium,
may be preserved a long time from corruption.

E. Being drunk with wine it openeth the stoppings of the liver, the milt,
kidneys, bladder, and matrix, provoketh urine, helpeth the strangury,
that is, when a man cannot piss but by drops, and is a most singular
cordial to comfort and make merry the heart.

F. The powder of Scordion taken in the quantity of two drams in mead or
honeyed water, cureth and stoppeth the bloody flux, and comforteth the
stomach. Of this Scordium is made a most singular medicine called
Diascordium, which serveth very notably for all the purposes aforesaid.

G. The same medicine made with Scordium is given with very good success
unto children and aged people, that have the smallpox, measles, or the
purples, or any other pestilent sickness whatsoever, even the plague
itself; given before the sickness have universally possessed the whole
body.



CHAP. 216. Of Wood Sage, or Garlic Sage.

Fig. 992. Wood Sage, or Garlic Sage

The Description.

That which is called Wild Sage hath stalks four-square, somewhat hairy,
about which are leaves like those of Sage, but shorter, broader, and
softer: the flowers grow up all upon one side of the stalk, open and
forked as those of Dead-Nettle, but lesser, of a pale white colour: then
grow the seeds four together in one husk: the root is full of strings. It
is a plant that liveth but a year: it smelleth of garlic when it is
bruised, being a kind of Garlic Germander, as appeareth by the smell of
garlic wherewith it is possessed.

The Place.

It groweth upon heaths and barren places: it is also found in woods, and
near unto hedgerows, and about the borders of fields: it somewhat
delighteth in a lean soil, and yet not altogether barren and dry.

The Time.

It flowereth and seedeth in June, July, and August, and it is then to be
gathered and laid up.
The Names.

It is called of the later herbarists Salvia agrestis: of divers also
Ambrosia; but true Ambrosia, which is Oak of Cappadocia, differs from
this. Valerius Cordus names it Scordonia, or Scorodonia, and Scordium
alteram. Ruellius saith it is called Boscisalvia, or Salvia bosci: in
High Dutch Waldt salbey: in English, Wild Sage, Wood Sage, and Garlic
Sage.

It seemeth to be Theophrastus his Sphacelus, which is also taken for the
Small Sage, but not rightly.

The Temperature.

Wild Sage is of temperature hot and dry, yet less than common Sage.
Therefore it is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. It is commended against burstings, dry beatings, and against wounds:
the decoction thereof is given to them that fall, and are inwardly
bruised: it also provoketh urine.

B. Some likewise give the decoction hereof to drink, with good success,
to them that are infected with the French Pox; for it causeth sweat,
drieth up ulcers, digesteth humours, wasteth away and consumeth
swellings, if it be taken thirty or forty days together, or put into the
decoction of Guiacum, in stead of Epithymum and other adjutories
belonging to the said decoction.



CHAP. 217. Of Eyebright.

Fig. 993. Eyebright

The Description.

Euphrasia or Eyebright is a small low herb not above two handfuls high,
full of branches, covered with little blackish leaves dented or snipped
about the edges like a saw: the flowers are small and white, sprinkled
and powdered on the inner side, with yellow and purple specks mixed
therewith. The root is small and hairy.

The Place.

This plant grows in dry meadows, in green and grassy ways and pastures
standing against the sun.

The Time.

Eyebright beginneth to flower in August and continueth unto September,
and must be gathered while it flowereth for physic's use.

The Names.

It is commonly called Euphrasia, as also Euphrosyne; notwithstanding
there is another Euphrosyne, viz. Bugloss: it is called of some Ocularis,
& Ophthalmica of the effect: in High Dutch, Augen trost: in Low Dutch,
Doghen troost: in Italian, Spanish, and French, Eufrasaia, after the
Latin name: in English, Eyebright.

The Nature.

This herb is hot and dry, but yet more hot than dry.

The Virtues.

A. It is very much commended for the eyes. Being taken itself alone, or
any way else, it preserves the sight, and being feeble and lost it
restores the same: it is given most fitly being beaten into powder;
oftentimes a like quantity of Fennel seed is added thereto, and a little
Mace, to the which is put so much sugar as the weight of them all cometh
to.

B. Eyebright stamped and laid upon the eyes or the juice thereof mixed
with white wine, and dropped into the eyes, or the distilled water,
taketh away the darkness and dimness of the eyes, and cleareth the sight.

C. Three parts of the powder of Eyebright, and one part of Mace mixed
therewith, taketh away all hurts from the eyes, comforteth the memory,
and cleareth the sight, if half a spoonful be taken every morning fasting
with a cup of white wine.



CHAP. 218. Of Marjoram.
Fig. 994. Sweet Marjoram  (1) Fig. 995. Pot Marjoram  (2)
The Description.

1. Sweet Marjoram is a low and shrubby plant, of a whitish colour and
marvellous sweet smell, a foot or somewhat more high. The stalks are
slender, and parted into divers branches; about which grow forth little
leaves soft and hoary: the flowers grow at the top in scaly or chaffy
spiked ears, of a white colour like unto those of Candy Organy. The root
is compact of many small threads. The whole plant and every part thereof
is of a most pleasant taste, and aromatical smell, and perisheth at the
first approch of winter.

2. Pot Marjoram or Winter Marjoram hath many thready tough roots, from
which rise immediately divers small branches, whereon are placed such
leaves as the precedent, but not so hoary, nor yet so sweet of smell,
bearing at the top of the branches tufts of white flowers tending to
purple. The whole plant is of long continuance, and keepeth green all the
winter; whereupon our English women have called it, and that very
properly, winter Marjoram.

Fig. 996. Marjoram Gentle (3)

3. Marjoram Gentle hath many branches rising from a thready root,
whereupon do grow soft and sweet smelling leaves of an overworn russet
colour. The flowers stand at the top of the stalks, compact of divers
small chaffy scales, of a white colour tending to a blush. The whole
plant is altogether like the great Sweet Marjoram, saving that it is
altogether lesser, and far sweeter, wherein especially consisteth the
difference.

4. Epimaiorana is likewise a kind of Marjoram, differing not from the
last described, saving in that, that this plant hath in his natural
country of Candy, and not elsewhere, some laces or threads fastened unto
his branches, such, and after the same manner as those are that do grow
upon Savory, wherein is the difference.

The Place.

These plants do grow in Spain, Italy, Candy, and other islands
thereabout, wild, and in the fields; from whence we have the seeds for
the gardens of our cold countries.

The Time.

They are sown in May, and bring forth their scaly or chaffy husks or ears
in August. They are to be watered in the middle of the day, when the sun
shineth hot, even as Basil should be, and not in the evening nor morning,
as most plants are.

The Names.

Marjoram is called Mariorana and Amaracus, and also Marum and Sampsichum
of others: in High Dutch, Mayoran: in Spanish, Mayorana, Moradux, and
Almoradux: in French, Mariolaine: in English, Sweet Marjoram, Fine
Marjoram, and Marjoram Gentle; of the best sort Marjerane. The Pot
Marjoram is also called Winter Marjoram. Some have made a doubt whether
Maiorana and Sampsychum be all one; which doubt, as I take it, is because
that Galen maketh a difference between them, entreating of them apart,
and attributeth to either of them their operations. But Amaracus galeni
is Parthenium, or Feverfew. Dioscorides likewise witnesseth, that some do
call Amaracus, Parthenium; and Galen in his book Of the Faculties of
Simple Medicines, doth in no place make mention of Parthenium, but by the
name of Amaracus. Pliny in his 21st book, chap. 2. witnesseth, that
Diocles the physician, and they of Sicily did call that Amaracus, which
the Egyptians and the Syrians did call Sampsychum.

Virgil in the first book of his AEneidos showed, that Amaracus is a shrub
bearing flowers, writing thus:

 -- ubi mollis Amaracus illam
Floribus, & dulci aspirans complectitur umbra.
[" -- where the shade of the soft Amaracus surrounds him with sweetness
of its blossoms" Virgil, AEneid, Book 1, l. 692-3. ]


Likewise Catullus in his Epithalamium, or Marriage Song of Julia and
Mallius saith,

Cinge tempora floribus
Suave olentis Amaraci.
Compass the temples of the head with flowers,
Of Amarac affording sweet savours.

Notwithstanding it may not seem strange, that Majoram is used instead of
Sampsychum, seeing that in Galen's time also Marum was in the mixture of
the ointment called Amaracinum unguentum, in the place of Samprychum, as
he himself witnesseth in his first book of counterpoisons.

The Temperature.

They are hot and dry in the second degree, after some copies, hot and dry
in the third.

The Virtues.

A. Sweet Marjoram is a remedy against cold diseases of the brain and
head, being taken any way to your best liking; put up into the nostrils
it provoketh sneezing, and draweth forth much baggage phlegm: it easeth
the toothache being chewed in the mouth; being drunk it provoketh urine,
and draweth away waterish humours, and is used in medicines against
poison.

B. The leaves boiled in water, and the decoction drunk, helpeth them that
are entering into the dropsy: it easeth them that are troubled with
difficulty of making water, and such as are given to overmuch sighing,
and easeth the pains of the belly.

C. The leaves dried and mingled with honey, and given, dissolveth
congealed or clotted blood, and putteth away black and blue marks after
stripes and bruises, being applied thereto.

D. The leaves are excellent good to be put into all odoriferous
ointments, waters, powders, broths, and meats.

E. The dried leaves powdered, and finely searched, are good to be put
into cerotes, or cerecloths and ointments, profitable against cold
swellings, and members out of joint.

F. There is an excellent oil to be drawn forth of these herbs, good
against the shrinking of sinews, cramps, convulsions, and all aches
proceeding of a cold cause.



CHAP. 219. Of Wild Marjoram.

Fig. 997. Kinds of Wild Marjoram (1-4)

The Description.

1. Bastard Marjoram groweth straight up with little round stalks of a
reddish colour, full of branches, a foot high and sometimes higher. The
leaves be broad, more long than round, of a whitish green colour: on the
top of the branches stand long spiky scaled ears, out of which shoot
forth little white flowers like the flowering of wheat. The whole plant
is of a sweet smell, and sharp biting taste.

2. The White Organy, or Bastard Marjoram with white flowers, differing
little from the precedent, but in colour and stature. This plant hath
whiter and broader leaves, and also much higher, wherein consisteth the
difference.

3. Bastard Marjoram of Candy hath many thready roots; from which rise up
divers weak and feeble branches trailing upon the ground, set with fair
green leaves, not unlike those of Pennyroyal, but broader and shorter: at
the top of those branches stand scaly or chaffy ears of a purple colour.
The whole plant is of a most pleasant sweet smell. The root endured in my
garden and the leaves also green all this winter long, 1597, although it
hath been said that it doth perish at the first frost, as Sweet Marjoram
doth.

4. English Wild Marjoram is exceedingly well known to all, to have long,
stiff, and hard stalks of two cubits high, set with leaves like those of
Sweet Marjoram, but broader and greater, of a russet green colour, on the
top of the branches stand tufts of purple flowers, composed of many small
ones set together very closely umbel fashion. The root creepeth in the
ground, and is long lasting.

The Place.

These plants do grow wild in the kingdom of Spain, Italy, and other of
those hot regions The last of the four doth grow wild in the borders of
fields, and low copses, in most places of England.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in the summer months, afterward the seed is
perfected.

The Names.

Bastard Marjoram is called in Greek, Origanos, and that which is surnamed
Heracleoticum, Origanos Erakleotikon: of divers it is called Cunila: in
shops Origanum Hispanicum, Spanish Organy: our English Wild Marjoram is
called in Greek of Dioscorides, Galen, and Pliny, Onitis, of some,
Agrioriganum, or Sylvestre Origanum: in Italian, Origano: in Spanish
Oregano: in French, Mariolaine bastarde: in English, Organy, Bastard
Marjoram: and that of ours, Wild Marjoram, and Grove Marjoram.

The Temperature.

All the Organies do cut, attenuate, or make thin, dry, and heat, and that
in the third degree; and Galen teacheth that wild Marjoram is more
forceable and of greater strength; notwithstanding Organy of Candy which
is brought dry out of Spain (whereof I have a plant in my garden) is more
biting than any of the rest, and of greatest heat.
The Virtues.

A. Organy given in wine is a remedy against the bitings, and stingings of
venomous beasts, and cureth them that have drunk opium, or the juice of
black poppy, or hemlocks, especially if it be given with wine and raisins
of the sun.

B. The decoction of Organy provoketh urine, bringeth down the monthly
course, and is given with good success to those that have the dropsy.

C. It is profitably used in a lohoch, or a medicine to be licked, against
an old cough and the stuffing of the lungs.

D. It healeth scabs, itches, and scurviness, being used in baths, and it
taketh away the bad colour which cometh of the yellow jaundice.

E. The weight of a dram taken with mead or honeyed water, draweth forth
by stool black and filthy humours, as Dioscorides and Pliny write.

F. The juice mixed with a little milk, being poured into the ears,
mitigateth the pains thereof.

G. The same mixed with the oil of Ireos, or the roots of the white
Florentine Fleur-De-Lys, and drawn up into the nostrils, draweth down
water and phlegm: the herb strewed upon the ground driveth away serpents.

H. The decoction looseth the belly, and voideth choler; and drunk with
vinegar helpeth the infirmities of the spleen, and drunk in wine helpeth
against all mortal poisons, and for that cause it is put into mithridate
and treacles prepared for that purpose.

I. These plants are easy to be taken in potions, and therefore to good
purpose they may be used and ministered unto such as cannot brook their
meat, and to such as have a sour and squeamish and watery stomach, as
also against the swooning of the heart.



CHAP. 220. Of Goat's Marjoram, or Organy.

Fig. 998. Kinds of Goat's Marjoram (1-3)

The Description.

1. The stalks of Goat's Organy are slender, hard and woody, of a blackish
colour; whereon are set long leaves, greater than those of the Wild
Thyme, sweet of smell, rough, and somewhat hairy. The flowers be small,
and grow out of little crowns or whorls round about the top of the
stalks, tending to a purple colour. The root is small and thready.

2. Carolus Clusius hath set forth in his Spanish Observations another
sort of Goat's Marjoram growing up like a small shrub: the leaves are
longer and more hoary than Wild Marjoram, and also narrower, of a hot
biting taste, but of a sweet smell, though not very pleasant. The flowers
do stand at the top of the stalks in spoky roundels, of a white colour.
The root is thick and woody.

3. This differs little in form and magnitude from the last described, but
the branches are of a blacker colour, with rougher and darker coloured
leaves; the flowers also are lesser, and of a purple colour. Both this
and the last described continue always green, but this last is of a much
more fragrant smell. This flowers in March, and was found growing wild by
Cusius in the fields of Valencia: he calls it Tragoriganum hispanicum
tertium. Pena and Lobel call it Tragoriganum cretense apud venetas; that
is, the Candy Goat's Marjoram of the Venetians.

The Place.

These plants grow wild in Spain, Italy, and other hot countries. The
first of these I found growing in divers barren and chalky fields and
highways near unto Sittingbourne and Rochester in Kent, and also near
unto Cobham House and Southfleet in the same county, saith our author. I
doubt our author was mistaken, for I have not heard of this growing wild
with us.

The Time

They flower in the month of August. I remember (saith Dodonaeus) that I
have seen Tragoriganum in the Low Countries, in the gardens of those that
apply their whole study to the knowledge of plants or as we may say, in
the gardens of cunning herbarists.

The Names.

Goats Organy is called in Latin Tragoriganum: in English, Goat's Organy,
and Goat's Marjoram.

The Temperature.

Goat's Organies are hot and dry in the third degree. They are (saith
Galen) of a binding quality.

The Virtues.

A. Tragoriganum or Goat's Marjoram is very good against the wamblings of
the stomach, and the sour belchings of the same, and stayeth the desire
to vomit, especially at sea.

B. These bastard kinds of Organy or wild Marjorams have the same force
and faculties that the other Organies have for the diseases mentioned in
the same chapter.



CHAP. 221. Of Herb Mastic.
Fig. 999. Herb Mastic (1) Fig. 1000. Assyrian Mastic (2)
The Description.

1. This grows some foot high, with little longish leaves set by couples:
at the tops of the stalks amongst white downy heads come little white
flowers: the whole plant is of a very sweet and pleasing smell.

2. If any be desirous to search for the true Marum, let them be assured
that the plant last mentioned is the same: but if any do doubt thereof,
for novelty's sake here is presented unto your view a plant of the same
kind (which cannot be rejected) for a special kind thereof, which hath a
most pleasant scent or smell, and in show resembleth Marjoram and Organy,
consisting of small twigs a foot and more long; the heads tufted like the
common Marjoram; but the leaves are less, and like Myrtus: the root is of
a woody substance, with many strings hanging thereat.

Fig. 1001. Creeping Mastic (3)

3. This plant hath many creeping branches like to those of Wild Thyme,
but set with whiter and shorter leaves like to those of the smaller
Marjoram, but somewhat narrower: the flowers grow in roundels amongst the
leaves, as in Calamint, and are of a purple colour: the whole plant is of
a strong and sweet smell, and of an hot and bitter taste. Caesalpinus
thinks this to be the Sampsychum of Dioscorides and so also do the
authors of the Adversaria. Tabernamontanus calls it Marum repens.
The Place.

There plants are set and sown in the gardens of England, and there
maintained with great care and diligence from the injury of our cold
climate.

The Time.

They flower about August, and somewhat later in cold summers.

The Names.

The English and French herbarists at this day do in their vulgar tongues
call this herb Mastic or Mastich, taking this name Marum of Maro King of
Thrace; though some rather suppose the name corruptly to be derived from
this word Amaracus, the one plant being so like the other, that many
learned have taken them to be one and the self-same plant: others have
taken Marum for Sampsychus, which doubtless is a kind of Marjoram. Some
(as Dodonaeus) have called this our Marum by the name of Clinopodium;
which name rather belongs to another plant than to Mastic. Mastic is
called of the new writers Marum: and some, as Lobel and Anguillara think
it the Helenium odorum of Theophrastus. Dodonaeus judges it to be the
Clinopodium of Dioscorides. Clusius makes it his Tragoriganum 1 and saith
he received the seeds thereof by the name of Ambra dulcis.

The Nature.

These plants are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that the herb is drunk, and likewise the
decoction thereof, against the bitings of venomous beasts, cramps and
convulsions, burstings and the strangury.

B. The decoction boiled in wine till the third part be consumed, and
drunk, stoppeth the lask in them that have an ague, and unto others in
water.



CHAP. 222. Of Pennyroyal, or Pudding Grass.
Fig. 1002. Pennyroyal (1) Fig. 1003. Upright Pennyroyal (2)
The Description.

1. Pulegium regium vulgatum is so exceedingly well known to all our
English nation, that it needeth no description, being our common
Pennyroyal.

2. The second being the male Pennyroyal is like unto the former, in
leaves, flowers and smell, and differeth in that this male kind groweth
upright of himself without creeping, much like in show unto Wild
Marjoram.

Fig. 1004. Narrow-Leaved Pennyroyal (3)

3. The third kind of Pennyroyal grows like unto Thyme, and is of a woody
substance, somewhat like unto the thin leafed Hyssop, of the savour of
common Pennyroyal, but much stronger and more pleasant: the longish
narrow leaves stand upon the stalks by couples, with little leaves coming
forth of their bosoms: and towards the tops of the branches grow roundels
of small purple flowers. This grows plentifully about Montpellier, and by
the authors of the Adversaria who first set it forth, it is styled
Pulegium angustifolii sive Cervinum Monspeliensium.

The Place.

The first and common Pennyroyal groweth naturally wild in moist and
overflown places, as in the common near London called Mile End, about the
holes & ponds thereof in sundry places from whence poor women bring
plenty to sell in London markets; and it groweth in sundry other commons
near London likewise.

The second groweth in my garden: the third I have not as yet seen.

The Time.

They flower from the beginning of June to the end of August.

The Names.

Pennyroyal is called in Latin, Pulegium, and Pulegium regale, for
difference' sake between it and wild Thyme, which of some is called
Pulegium montanum: in Italian, Pulegio: in Spanish, Poleo: in Dutch,
Poley: in French, Pouliot: in English, Pennyroyal, Pudding grass, Puliall
Royal, and of some Organy.

The Nature.

Pennyroyal is hot and dry in the third degree, and of subtle parts, as
Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. Pennyroyal boiled in wine and drunken, provoketh the monthly terms,
bringeth forth the secondine, the dead child and unnatural birth: it
provoketh urine, and breaketh the stone, especially of the kidneys.

B. Pennyroyal taken with honey cleanseth the lungs, and cleareth the
breast from all gross and thick humours.

C. The same taken with honey and Aloes, purgeth by stool melancholic
humours; helpeth the cramp and drawing together of sinews.

D. The same taken with water and Vinegar assuageth the inordinate define
to vomit, & the pains of the stomach.

E. If you have when you are at the sea Pennyroyal in great quantity dry,
and cast it into corrupt water, it helpeth it much, neither will it hurt
them that drink thereof.

F. A garland of Pennyroyal made and worn about the head is of great force
against the swimming in the head, the pains and giddiness thereof.

G. The decoction of Pennyroyal is very good against ventosity, windiness,
or such like, and against the hardness & stopping of the mother, being
used in a bath or stew for the woman to sit over.



CHAP. 223. Of Basil.

Fig. 1005. Kinds of Basil (1-4)

The Description.

1. Garden Basil is of two sorts, differing one from another in bigness.
The first hath broad, thick, and fat leaves, of a pleasant sweet smell,
and of which some one here and there are of a black reddish colour,
somewhat snipped about the edges, not unlike the leaves of French
Mercury. The stalk groweth to the height of half a cubit, dividing it
self into divers branches, whereupon do stand small and base flowers
sometimes whitish, and often tending to a dark purple. The root is
thready, and dieth at the approch of winter.

2. The middle Basil is very like unto the former, but it is altogether
lesser. The whole plant is of a most odoriferous smell, not unlike the
smell of a Lemon, or Citron, whereof it took his surname.

3. Bush Basil, or Fine Basil, is a low and base plant, having a thready
root, from which rise up many small and tender stalks, branched into
divers arms or boughs; whereupon are placed many little leaves, lesser
than those of Pennyroyal. The whole plant is of a most pleasing sweet
smell.

4. This which some call Ocimum indicum, or rather (as Camerarius saith)
hispanicum, sends up a stalk a foot or more high, four-square, and of a
purple colour, set at each joint with two leaves, and out of their bosoms
come little branches: the largest leaves are some two inches broad, and
some three long, growing upon long stalks, and deeply cut in about their
edges, being also thick fat and juicy, and either of a dark purple
colour, or else spotted with more or less such coloured spots. The tops
of the branches end in spoky tufts of white flowers with purple veins
running alongst them. The seed is contained in such seed vessels as that
of the other Basils, and is round, black and large. The plant perishes
every year as soon as it hath perfected the seed. Clusius calls this
Ocimum indicum.

The Place.

Basil is sown in gardens, and in earthen pots. It cometh up quickly, and
loveth little moisture except in the middle of the day; otherwise if it
be sown in rainy weather, the seed will putrefy, and grow into a jelly or
slime, and come to nothing.

The Time.

Basil flowereth in June and July, and that by little and little, whereby
it is long a-flowering, beginning first at the top.

The Names.

Basil is called in Greek Okimon: in Latin, Ocimum. It differeth from
Ocymum which some have called Cereale as we (saith Dodonaeus) have showed
in the History of Grain. The later Graecians have called it Basilikon: in
shops likewise Basilicum, and Regium: in Spanish, Albahaca: in French,
Basilic: in English, Basil, Garden Basil, the Greater Basil Royal, the
lesser Basil Gentle, and Bush Basil: of some Basilicum gariophyllatum, or
Clove Basil.

The Temperature.

Basil, as Galen teacheth, is hot in the second degree, but it hath
adjoined with it a superfluous moisture, by reason whereof he doth not
like that it should be taken inwardly; but being applied outwardly, it is
good to digest or distribute, and to concoct.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith that if Basil be much eaten, it dulleth the sight,
it mollifieth the belly, breedeth wind, provoketh urine, drieth up milk,
and is of a hard digestion.

B. The juice mixed with fine meal of parched Barley, oil of Roses and
vinegar, is good against inflammations and the stinging of venomous
beasts.

C. The juice drunk in wine of Chios or strong Sack, is good against
headache.

D. The juice cleanseth away the dimmeness of the eyes, and drieth up the
humour that falleth into them.

E. The seed drunk is a remedy for melancholic people, for those that are
short winded, and them that can hardly make water.

F. If the same be sniffed up in the nose, it causeth often sneezing: also
the herb itself doth the same.

G. There be that shun Basil and will not eat thereof, because that if it
be chewed and laid in the sun, it engendereth worms.

H. They of Afric do also affirm, that they who are stung of the scorpion
and have eaten of it, shall feel no pain at all.

I. The later writers among whom Simeon Zethy is one, do teach, that the
smell of Basil is good for the heart and for the head. That the seed
cureth the infirmities of the heart, taketh away sorrowfulness which
cometh of melancholy, and maketh a man merry and glad.



CHAP. 224. Of Wild Basil.


Fig. 1006. Wild Basil (1)
Fig. 1007. Stone Basil (2)

The Description.

1. The wild Basil or Acynos, called of Pena, Clinopodium vulgare, hath
square hairy stems, beset with little leaves like unto the small Basil,
but much smaller, and more hairy, sharp pointed, and a little snipped
towards the end of the leaf, with small flowers of a purple colour,
fashioned like unto the garden Basil. The root is full of hairy threads,
and creepeth along the ground, and springeth up yearly anew of itself
without sowing. This is the Clinopodoium altera of Matthiolus.

2. This kind of wild Basil called amongst the Graecians Achynis, which by
interpretation is Sine semine,["seedless"] or Sterilis, hath caused
sundry opinions and great doubts concerning the words of Pliny and
Theophrastus, affirming that this herb hath no flowers nor seeds; which
opinions I am sure of mine own knowledge to be without reason: but to 
omit controversies, this plant beareth purple flowers, whorled about
square stalks, rough leaves and hairy, very like in shape unto Basil: the
stalks are some cubit and more high, parted into few branches, and set at
certain spaces with leaves growing by couples. This is the Clinopodium
vulgare of Matthiolus, and that of Cordus, Gesner, and others; it is the
Acinos of Lobel.

Fig. 1008. Fish Basil (3)

3. Serapio and others have set forth another wild Basil under the title
of Molochia; and Lobel after the mind of John Brancion, calleth it
Corcoros, which we have Englished, Fish Basil, the seeds whereof the said
Brancion received from Spain saying that Corcorus plinii hath the leaves
of Basil: the stalks are two handfuls high, the flowers yellow, growing
close to the stalks, bearing his seed in small long cods. The root is
compact and made of an innumerable company of strings, creeping far
abroad like running Thyme. This figure of Lobel's which here we give you
is (as Camerarius hath observed) unperfect, for it expresses not the long
cods wherein the seed is contained, neither the two little strings or
beards that come forth at the setting on of each leaf to the stalk.

4. This sends up many little square stalks some handful and an half high,
seldom divided into branches: at each joint stand two small greenish
leaves, little hairy, and not divided or snipped about the edges, and
much like those of the next described, as you see them expressed in the
figure: the little hollow and somewhat hooded flowers grow in roundels
towards the tops of the stalks, as in the first described, and they are
of a bluish violet colour. The seeds I have not yet observed; the root is
fibrous and woody, and lasts for many years. The whole plant hath a
pretty pleasing but weak smell. It flowers in July and August. I first
observed it Anno 1626, a little on this side Pontefract in Yorkshire, and
since by Dartford in Kent, and in the Isle of Thanet. I have sometimes
seen it brought to Cheapside market, where the herb women called it Poley
mountain, some it may be that have taken it for Polium montanum
misinforming them. Clusius first took notice of this plant, and called it
Acinos anglicum, finding it growing in Kent, Anno 1581, and he thinks it
to be the Acinos of Dioscorides: now the virtues attributed by
Disocorides to his Acinos are set down at the end of the chapter under
the letter B.
Fig. 1009. Austrian Field Basil (5) Fig. 1010. Alpine Wild Basil (6)

5. This which Clusius hath also set forth by the name of Clinopodium, or
Acinos austriacum, doth not much differ from the last described, for it
hath tender square hard stalks like those of the last described, set also
with two leaves at each joint, here and there a little snipped (which is
omitted in the figure); the flowers grow only at the tops of the stalks,
and these pretty large, and of a violet colour (yet they are sometimes
found white:) they hang commonly forward, and as is were with their upper
parts turned down. The seed vessels are like those of the first
described, and contain each of them four little black seeds: This flowers
in May, and the seed is ripe in June: It grows about the baths of Baden
and in divers places of Austria.

6. Pena also hath given us knowledge of another, that from a fibrous root
sends up many quadrangular rough branches, of the height of the two
former, set also with two leaves at each joint, and these rough and
lightly snipped about the edges; the flowers grow thick together at the
tops of the stalks of a dark red colour, and in shape like those of the
Mountain Calamint. It flowers in the beginning of July, and grows upon
mount Baldus in Italy; Pena sets it forth by the name of Clinopodium
alpinum.

7. To these I think fit to add another, whose dercription was sent me by
Mr. Goodyer, and I question whether it may not be the plant which Fabius
Columna, Phytobasani, pag. 23, sets forth by the name of Acinus
dioscoridis; for he makes his to be endued odore fragrantissimo ["of most
fragrant scent"]: but to the purpose.

Acinus odoratissimum.

This herb hath four, five, or more, four-square hard woody stalks growing
from one root, divided into many branches, covered with a soft white
hairines, two or three foot long or longer, not growing upright, but
trailing upon the ground; the leaves grow on little, short footstalks by
couples of a light green colour, somewhat like the leaves of Basil, very
like the leaves of Acinos lobelii, but smalller, about three quarters of
an inch broad, and not fully an inch long, somewhat sharp pointed,
lightly notched about the edges, also covered with a light soft hoary
hairiness; of a very sweet smell, little inferior to garden Marjoram, of
a hot biting taste: out of their bosoms grow other smaller leaves, or
else branches; the flowers also grow forth of the bosoms of the leaves
toward the tops of the stalks and branches, not in whorls like the said
Acinos, but having one little short footstalk growing forth of the bosom
of each leaf, on which is placed three, four, or more small flowers,
gaping open, and divided into four unequal parts at the top, like the
flowers of Basil, and very near of the likeness and bigness of the
flowers of garden Marjoram, but of a pale bluish colour tending towards a
purple. The seed I never observed by reason it flowered late. This plant
I first found growing in the garden of Mr. William Yalden in Sheet near
Petersfield in Hampshire, Anno 1620, amongst sweet Marjoram, and which by
chance they bought with the seeds thereof. It is to be considered whether
the seeds of sweet Marjoram degenerate and send forth this herb or not.
11 October, 1621. John Goodyer.

The Place.

The wild kinds do grow upon gravelly grounds by water sides, and
especially I found the three last in the barren plain by an house in Kent
two miles from Dartford, called Saint John's, in a village called Sutton;
and Clinopodium vulgare groweth in great plenty upon Longfield downs in
Kent. So saith our author, yet I cannot be persuaded that ever he found
any of the four he described ever wild in this kingdom, unless the
second, which grows plentifully in autumn almost by every hedge: also the
fourth being of my description grows near Dartford and in many such dry
barren places in sundry parts of the kingdom.

The Time.

These herbs flower in June and July.

The Names.

Unprofitable Basil, or Wild Basil is called by some Clinopodium.

The Nature.

The seed of these herbs are of complexion hot and dry.

The Virtues.

A. Wild Basil pound with wine appeaseth the pain of the eyes, and the
juice doth mundify the same, and putteth away all obscurity and dimness,
all catarrhs and flowing humours that fall into the eyes, being often
dropped into the same.

B. The Stone Basil howsoever it be taken stoppeth the lask, and courses;
and outwardly applied it helps hot tumours and inflammations.

C. These plants are good for all such effects as require moderate heat
and astriction.



CHAP. 225. Of Basil Valerian.
Fig. 1011. Red Valerian (1) Fig. 1022. Spattling Poppy (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Ocymastrum, called of Dodonaeus, Valeriana rubra,
bringeth forth long and brittle stalks two cubits high, full of knots or
joints, in which place is joined long leaves much like unto great Basil,
but greater, broader, and larger, or rather like the leaves of Woad. At
the top of the stalks do grow very pleasant and long red flowers, of the
fashion of the flowers of Valerian, which hath caused Dodonaeus to call
this plant Red Valerian; which being past, the seeds are caried away with
the wind being, few in number, and little in quantity, so that without
great diligence the seed is not to be gathered or preserved: for my self
have often endeavoured to see it, and yet have lost my labour. The root
is very thick, and of an excellent sweet savour.

2. The second is taken for Sprumeum papaver, in respect of that kind of
frothy spittle, or spume, which we call cuckoo spittle, that more
aboundeth in the bosoms of the leaves of these plants, than in any other
plant that is known: for which cause Pena calleth it Papaver spumeum,
that is, frothy, or Spattling Poppy: his flower doth very little resemble
any kind of Poppy, but only the seed and cod, or bowl wherein the seed is
contained, otherwise it is like the other Ocymastrum. The flowers grow at
the top of the stalks hanging downwards, of a white colour, and it is
taken generally for Behen album: the root is white, plain, and long, and
very tough and hard to break.

The Place.

The first groweth plentifully in my garden, being a great ornament to the
same, and not common in England.

The second groweth almost in every pasture.

The Time.

These plants do flower from May to the end of August.

The Names.

Red Valerian hath been so called of the likeness of the flowers and
spoked roundels with Valerian; by which name we had rather have it
called, than rashly to lay upon it an unproper name. There are some also
who would have it to be a kind of Behen of the later herbarists, naming
the same Behen rubrum, for difference between it and the other Behen
album, that of some is called Ocymastrum, and Papaver spumeum: which I
have Englished, Spattling Poppy; and is in truth another plant, much
differing from Behen of the Arabians: it is also called Valerianthon,
Saponaria altera, Struthium aldroandi, and Condurdum: in English, Red
Valerian, and Red Cow Basil.

Spattling Poppy is called Behen album, Ocymastrum alterum; of some,
Polemonium, and Papaver spumeum: in English, Spattling Poppy, Frothy
Poppy, and White Ben.

The Nature.

These plants are dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The root of Behen album drunk in wine, is good against the bloody
flux: and being pound leaves and flowers, and laid to, cureth the
stingings of scorpions and such like venomous beasts, insomuch that who
so doth hold the same in his hand, can receive no damage or hurt by any
venomous beast.

B. The decoction of the root made in water and drunk, provoketh urine, it
helpeth the strangury, and pains about the back and huckle bone.



CHAP. 226. Of Mints.

Fig. 1013. Kinds of Mint (1-4)

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Mints; some of the garden; other wild, or of the
field; and also some of the water.

The Description

1. The first tame or garden Mint cometh up with stalks four-square, of an
obscure red colour somewhat hairy, which are covered with round leaves
nicked in the edges like a saw, of a deep green colour: the flowers are
little and red, and grow about the stalks circle-wise, as those of
Pennyroyal: the root creepeth aslope in the ground, having some strings
on it, and now and then in sundry places it buddeth out afresh: the whole
herb is of a pleasant smell, and it rather lieth down than standeth up.

2. The second is like to the first in hairy stalks something round, in
blackish leaves, in creeping roots, and also in smell, but the flowers do
not at all compass the stalk about, but stand up in the tops of the
branches being orderly placed in little ears, or rather catkins or
aglets.

3. The leaves of Spearmint are long like those of the Willow tree, but
whiter, softer, and more hairy: the flowers are orderly placed in the
tops of the stalks, and in ears like those of the second. The root hereof
doth also creep no otherwise than doth that of the first, unto which it
is like.

4. There is another sort of Mint which hath long leaves like to the third
in stalks, yet in leaves and in roots lesser; but the flowers hereof,
stand not in the tops of the branches, but compass the stalks about
circle-wise as do those of the first, which be of a light purple colour.

Fig. 1014. Balsam Mint (5)


5. This hath round leaves broader than the common Mint, rounder also, and
as crisp or curled as those described in the second place (of which it
seems but a larger variety) the stalks are four-square, and the flowers
grow in ears or spoky tufts, like those of the second.

The Place.

Most use to set Mints in gardens almost everywhere.

The Time.

Mints do flower and flourish in summer, in winter the roots only remain:
being once set they continue long, and remain sure and fast in the
ground.

The Names.

The apothecaries, Italians, and Frenchmen, do keep the Latin name Mentha:
the Spaniards do call it Yerva Buena, and Ortelana: in High Dutch, Muntz:
in Low Dutch, Munte: in English, Mint.

1. The first Mint is called in High Dutch, Diement: in Low Dutch, Bruyn
Heilige: he that would translate it into Latin, must it call it Sacra
nigricans, or the holy blackish mint: in English, brown Mint; or red
Mint.

2. The second is also called in High Dutch Krausz Diement, Krausz Muntz,
and Krausz Balsam , that is to say, Mentha cruciata: in French, Beaume
Crespu: in English, Cross Mint, or curled Mint.

3. The third is called of divers Mentha sarracenica, Mentha romana: it is
called in High Duch Balsam Muntz, Onser Frawen Muntz, Spitzer Muntz,
Spitzer Balsam: it may be called Mentha angustifolia that is to say, Mint
with the narrow leaf: and in English, Spearmint, common garden Mint, our
Lady's Mint, Brown Mint, and Mackerel Mint.

4. The fourth is called in High Dutch Hertzkraut, as though it were to be
named Cardiaca, or Cardiaca Mentha: in English, Heart-wort, or Heart-
mint. This is the Sisymbrium sativum of Matthiolus, and Mentha hortensis
altera of Gesner: the Italians call it Sisembrio Domestico, and
Balsamita: the Germans, Kakenbalsam.

The Temperature.

Mint is hot and dry in the third degree. It is, saith Galen, somewhat
bitter and harsh, and it is inferior to Calamint. The smell of Mint,
saith Pliny, doth stir up the mind, and the taste to a greedy desire to
meat.

The Virtues.

A. Mint is marvellous wholesome for the stomach, it stayeth the hicket,
parbreaking, vomiting & scouring in the choleric passion, if it be taken
with the juice of a sour pomegranate.

B. It stoppeth the casting up of blood, being given with water and
vinegar, as Galen teacheth.

C. And in broth saith Pliny, it stayeth the flowers, and is singular good
against the whites, that is to say, that Mint which is described in the
first place. For it is found by experience, that many have had this kind
of flux stayed by the continual use of this only Mint: the same being
applied to the forehead, or to the temples, as Pliny teacheth, doth take 
away the headache.

D. It is good against watering eyes, and all manner of breakings out in
the head, and against the infirmities of the fundament; it is a sure
remedy for childrens sore heads.

E. It is poured into the ears with honey water. It is taken inwardly
against scolopenders, bear-worms, sea-scorpions and serpents.

F. It is applied with salt to the bitings of mad dogs. It will not suffer
milk to curdle in the stomach (Pliny addeth to wax sour) therefore it is
put in milk that is drunk for fear that those who have drunk thereof
should be strangled.

G. It is thought, that by the same virtue it is an enemy to generation,
by overthickning the seed.

H. Dioscorides teacheth, that being applied to the secret part of a woman
before the act, it hindereth conception.

I. Garden Mint taken in meat or drink warmeth and strengtheneth the
stomach, and drieth up all superfluous humours gathered in the same, and
causeth good digestion.

K. Mints mingled with the leaves of parched Barley, consumeth tumors and
hard swellings.

L. The water of Mints is of like operation in divers medicines, it cureth
the trenching and griping pains of the belly and bowels, it appeaseth
headache, stayeth yexing and vomiting.

M. It is singular against the gravel and stone in the kidneys, and
against the strangury, being boiled in wine and drunk.

N. They lay it to the stinging of wasps and bees with good success.



CHAP. 227. Of Nip, or Catmint.
Fig. 1015. Nip or Catmint (1) Fig. 1016. Great Catmint (2)
The Description.

1. Catmint or Nip groweth high; it bringeth forth stalks above a cubit
long, cornered, chamfered, and full of branches; the leaves are broad,
nicked in the edges like those of Balm, or of Horehound, but longer. The
flowers are of a whitish colour, they partly compass about the uppermost
sprigs, and partly grow on the very top, they are set in a manner like an
ear or catkin: the root is diversely parted, and full of strings, and
endureth a long time. The whole herb together with the leaves and stalks
is soft, and covered with a white down, but lesser than Horse-mint; it is
of a sharp smell, and pierceth into the head: it hath a hot taste with a
certain bitterness.

2. This hath pretty large square stalks, set at each joint with two
leaves like those of Costmary, but of a grey or overworn colour: the
flowers grow at the tops of the stalks in long spoky tufts like those of
the last described, and of a whitish colour, the smell is pleasanter than
that of the last described.

Fig. 1017. Small Catmint

3. There is also another kind hereof that hath a longer and narrower
stalk and not of so white a colour: the stalks hereof are four-square:
the flowers be more plentiful, of a red light purple colour inclining to
blue, sprinkled with little fine purple specks; the smell hereof is
stronger, but the taste is more biting.

The Place.

The first grows about the borders of gardens and fields, near to rough
banks, ditches, and common ways: it is delighted with moist and watery
places: it is brought into gardens.

The other two commonly grow in gardens with us.

The Time.

The Catmints flourish by and by after the spring: they flower in July and
August.

The Names.

The later herbarists do call it Herba cattaria, and Herba catti, because
the cats are very much delighted herewith; for the smell of it is so
pleasant to them, that they rub themselves upon it, and wallow or tumble
in it, and also feed on the branches and leaves very greedily. It is
named of the apothecaries Nepeta: but Nepeta is properly called (as we
have said) wild Pennyroyal: in High Dutch, Katzen Muntz: in Low Dutch,
Catte Cruijt: in Italian, Gattaria, or Herba Gatta: in Spanish, Yerva
Gatera: in English, Catmint and Nip. The true Nepeta is Calmintha pulegii
odore.

The Temperature.

Nip is of temperature hot and dry, and hath the faculties of the
Calamints.

The Virtues.

A. It is commended against cold pains of the head, stomach, and matrix,
and those diseases that grow of phlegm and raw humours, and of wind. It
is a present help for them that be bursten inwardly by means of some fall
received from an high place, and that are very much bruised, if the juice
be given with wine or mead.

B. It is used in baths and decoctions for women to sit over, to bring
down their sickness, and to make them fruitful.

C. It is also good against those diseases for which the ordinary Mints do
serve and are used.



CHAP. 228. Of Horse-Mint or Water-Mint.

Fig. 1018. Kinds of Horse or Water-Mint (1-4)

The Description.

1. Water-Mint is a kind of wild Mint, it is like to the first garden
Mint, the leaves thereof are round, the stalks cornered, both the leaves
and stalks are of a dark red colour: the roots creep far abroad, but
every part is greater, and the herb itself is of a stronger smell: the
flowers in the tops of the branches are gathered together into a round
ear, of a purple colour.

2. The second kind of Water-Mint in each respect is like the others,
saving that the same hath a more odoriferous savour being lightly touched
with the hand: otherwise being hardly touched, the savour is over hot to
smell unto: it beareth his flowers in sundry tufts or roundels engirting
the stalks in many places; and they are of a light purple colour: the
leaves are also less than those of the former, and of n hoary grey
colour.

3. This common Horse-Mint hath creeping roots like as the other Mints,
from which proceed stalks partly leaning, and partly growing upright: the
leaves are pretty large, thick, wrinkled, hoary and rough both above and
below, and lightly snipped about the edges; the flowers grow in thick
compact ears at the tops of the stalks, and are like those of common
Mint. The whole plant is of a more unpleasant scent than any of the other
Mints. It grows in divers wet and moist grounds, and flowers in June and
July. This by most writers is called only Mentastrum, without any other
attribute.

4. In some of our English gardens (as Pena and Lobel observed) grows
another Horse-Mint, much less, and better smelling than the last
mentioned, having the leaves partly green, and partly milk white; yet
sometimes the leaves are some of them wholly white, but more, and more
commonly all green: the stalks, flowers, and other parts are like those
of the former, but less. This is the Mentastrum niveum anglicum, of
Lobel; and Mentastrum alterum of Dodonaeus.


Fig. 1019. Small Horse-Mint (5)
Fig. 1020. Mountain Horse-Mint (6)

5. This grows in watery places, having a stalk of a cubit or cubit and
half high, set with longish hoary leaves like those of Horse-Mint: the
flowers grow in spoky tufts at the tops of the stalks, of a dusky purple
colour, and in shape like those of the common Mint: the smell of this
comes near to that of the Water-Mint. This is the Mentastrifolia aquatica
hirsuta sive Calamintha 3 dioscoridis, of Lobel: in the Historia
Lugdunensis it is called Mentastrum minus spicatum.

6. The stalk of this is some cubit and half high, square, and full of
pith: the leaves are like in shape to those of Catmint, but not hoary,
but rather green: the tops of the branches are set with roundels of such
white flowers as those of the Catmint: the smell of this plant is like to
that of the Horse-Mint; whence Clusius calls it Mentastrum montanum
primum. It flowers in August, and grows in the mountainous places of
Austria.

Fig. 1021. Turnip-Rooted Horse-Mint (7)

7. The same author hath also set forth another by the name of Mentastrum
tuberosa radice. It hath roughish stalks like the former, and longish
crumpled leaves somewhat snipped about the edges like those of the last
described: the flowers grow in roundels alongst the tops of the branches,
and are white of colour, and like those of Catmint. The root of this
(which, as also the leaves, is not well expressed in the figure) is like
a Radish, and blackish on the outside, sending forth many suckers like to
little Turnips, and also divers fibres: these suckers taken from the main
root will also take root and grow. It flowers in June. Clusius received
the seed of it from Spain.

The Place.

They grow in moist and watery places, as in meadows near unto ditches
that have water in them, and by rivers.

The Time.

They flower when the other Mints do, and revive in the spring.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Sisymbrium: in High Dutch, Roszmuntz, Wasser-
Muntz: in French, Menthe sauvage: in English, Water-Mint, Fish-Mint,
Brook-Mint, and Horse-Mint.

The Temperature.

Water-Mint is hot and dry as is the garden Mint, and is of a stronger
smell and operation.

The Virtues.

A. It is commended to have the like virtues that the garden Mint hath;
and also to be good against the stinging of Bees and Wasps, if the place
be rubbed therewith.

B. The savour or smell of the Water-Mint rejoyceth the heart of man; for
which cause they use to strew it in chambers and places of recreation,
pleasure, and repose, and where feasts and banquets are made.

C. There is no use hereof in physic whilst we have the garden Mint, which
is sweeter, and more agreeing to the nature of man.



CHAP. 229. Of Mountain Mint or Calamint.

Fig. 1022. Kinds of Calamint (1-4)

The Description.

1. Mountain Calamint is a low herb, seldom above a foot high, parted into
many branches: the stalks are four-square, and have joints as it were,
out of every one whereof grow forth leaves something round, lesser than
those of Basil, covered with a very thin hairy down, as are also the
stalks, somewhat whitish, and of a sweet smell: the tops of the branches
are gallantly decked with flowers, somewhat of a purple colour; then
groweth the seed which is black: the roots are full of strings, and
continue.

2. This most excellent kind of Calamint hath upright stalks a cubit high,
covered over with a woolly mossiness, beset with rough leaves like a
Nettle, somewhat notched about the edges; among the leaves come forth
bluish or sky-coloured flowers: the root is woody, and the whole plant is
of a very good smell.

3. There is another kind of Calamint which hath hard square stalks,
covered in like manner as the other with a certain hoary or fine cotton.
The leaves be in shape like Basil, but that they are rough; and the
flowers grow in roundels toward the tops of the branches, sometimes three
or four upon a stemme, of a purplish colour. The root is thready, and
long lasting.

4. There is a kind of strong smelling Calamint that hath also square
stalks covered with soft cotton, and almost creeping by the ground,
having evermore two leaves standing one against another, small and soft,
not much unlike the leaves of Pennyroyal, saving that they are larger and
whiter: the flowers grow about the stalks like whorls or garlands, of a
bluish purple colour; the root is small and thready: the whole plant hath
the smell of Pennyroyal; whence it hath the addition of pulegii odore.

The Place.

It delighteth to grow in mountains, and in the shadowy and gravelly sides
thereof: it is found in many places of Italy and France, and other
countries: it is brought into gardens, where it prospereth marvellous
well, and very easily soweth itself. I have found these plants growing
upon the chalky grounds and highways leading from Gravesend unto
Canterbury, in most places, or almost everywhere. So saith our author,
but I have only observed the third and fourth to grow wild with us in
England.

The Time.

It flourisheth in summer, and almost all the year through: it bringeth
forth flowers and seed from June to autumn.
The Names.

It is called in Greek Kalaminthe, as though you should say, Elegans aut
utilis Mentha, a gallant or profitable Mint: the Latins keep the name
Calamintha: Apuleius also nameth it amiss, Mentastrum, and confoundeth
the names one with another: the apothecaries call it Montana Calamintha,
Calamentum, and sometime Calamentum montanum: in French, Calament: in
English, Mountain Calamint. The fourth is certainly the second Calamint
of Dioscorides, and the true Nepeta of the ancients.

The Temperature.

This Calamint which groweth in mountains is of a fervent taste, and
biting, hot and of a thin substance, and dry after a sort in the third
degree, as Galen saith: it digesteth or wasteth away thin humours, it
cutteth, and maketh thick humours thin.

The Virtues.

A. Therefore being inwardly taken by itself, and also with mead, or
honeyed water, it doth manifestly heat, provoketh sweat, and consumeth
superfluous humours of the body; it taketh away the shiverings of agues
that come by fits.

B. The same also is performed by the salad oil in which it is boiled, if
the body be anointed and well rubbed and chafed therewith.

C. The decoction thereof drunk provoketh urine, bringeth down the monthly
sickness, and expelleth the child, which also it doth being but only
applied.

D. It helpeth those that are bruised, such as are troubled with cramps
and convulsions, and that cannot breathe unless they hold their necks
upright (that have the wheezing of the lungs, saith Galen) and it is a
remedy saith Dioscorides for a choleric passion, otherwise called the
felony.

E. It is good for them that have the yellow jaundice, for that it
removeth the stoppings of the liver and gall, and withal cleanseth: being
taken aforehand in wine, it keepeth a man from being poisoned: being
inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, it cureth them that are bitten of
serpents: being burned or strewed it drives serpents away: it takes away
black and blue spots that come by blows or dry beatings, making the skin
fair and white; but for such things (saith Galen) it is better to be laid
to green than dry.

F. It killeth all manner of worms of the belly, if it be drunk with salt
and honey: the juice dropped into the ears doth in like manner kill the
worms thereof.

G. Pliny saith, that if the juice be conveyed up into the nostrils it
stancheth the bleeding at the nose, and the root (which Diorcorides
writeth to be good for nothing) helpeth the squincy, if it be gargarised,
or the throat washed therewith, being used in cuit, and Myrtle seed
withal.

H. It is applied to those that have the Sciatica or ache in the huckle
bone, for it draws the humour from the very bottom. Paulus AEgineta
saith, that for the pain of the haunches or huckle bones it is to be used
in clysters.

I. Being much eaten it is good for them that have the leprosy, so that
the patient drink whey after it, as Dioscorides witnesseth.

K. Apuleius affirmeth, that if the leaves be often eaten, they are a sure
and certain remedy against the leprosy.

L. There is made of this an antidote or composition, which Galen in his
fourth book Of the Government of Health describes by the name of
Diacalaminthos, that doth not only notably digest or waste away
crudities, but also is marvellous good for young maidens that want their
courses, if their bodies be first well purged; for in continuance of time
it bringeth them down very gently without force.



CHAP. 230. Of Balm.
Fig. 1023. Balm (1) Fig. 1024. Turkey Balm (2)
The Description.

1. Apiastrum, or Melissa, is our common best known Balm or Bawme, having
many square stalks and blackish leaves like to Ballote, or Black
Horehound, but larger, of a pleasant smell, drawing near in smell and
savour unto a Citron: the flowers are of a Carnation colour; the root of
a woody substance.

2. The second kind of Balm was brought into my garden and others, by his
seed from the parts of Turkey, wherefore we have called it Turkey Balm:
it excelleth the rest of the kinds, if you respect the sweet savour and
goodly beauty thereof; and deserveth a more lively description than my
rude pen can deliver. This rare plant hath sundry small weak and brittle
square stalks and branches, mounting to the height of a cubit and
somewhat more, beset with leaves like to Germander or Scordium, indented
or toothed very bluntly about the edges, but somewhat sharp pointed at
the top. The flowers grow in small coronets, of a purplish blue colour:
the root is small and thready, and dieth at the first approch of winter,
and must be sown anew in the beginning of May, in good and fertile
ground.


Fig. 1025. Bastard Balm with White Flowers (3)
Fig. 1026. Bastard Balm with Purple Flowers (3)

3. Fuchsius setteth forth a kind of Balm having a square stalk, with
leaves like unto common Balm, but larger and blacker, and of an evil
savour; the flowers white, and much greater than those of the common
Balm; the root hard, and of a woody substance. This varies with the
leaves sometimes broader and otherwhiles narrower: also the flowers are
commonly purple, sometimes white, and otherwhiles of divers colours: the
leaves are also sometimes broader, otherwhiles narrower: wherefore I have
given you one of the figures of Clusius, and that of Lobel, that you may
see the several expressions of this plant. Clusius, and after him Bauhin,
referr it to the Lamium, or Archangel: and the former calls it Lamium
pannonicum: and the later, Lamium montanum melissa folio.


Fig. 1027. Smith's Balm, or Jews' All-Heal (4)
Fig. 1028. Smooth Molucca Balm (5)

4. There is a kind of Balm called Herba iudaica, which Lobel calls
Tetrahit, that hath many weak and tender square hairy branches, some
leaning backward, and others turning inward, dividing themselves into
sundry other small arms or twigs, which are beset with long rough leaves
dented about, and smaller than the leaves of Sage. And growing in another
soil or climate, you shall see the leaves like the oaken leaf; in other
places like Marrubium creticum, very hoary, which caused Dioscorides to
describe it with so many shapes, and also the flowers, which are
sometimes blue and purple, and oftentimes white: the root is small and
crooked, with some hairy strings fastened thereto. All the whole plant
draweth to the savour of Balm, called Melissa.

5. There be also two other plants comprehended under the kinds of Balm,
the one very like unto the other, although not known to many herbarists,
and have been of some called by the title of Cardiaca: the first kind
Pena calleth Cardiaca melica or molucca syriaca, so called for that it
was first brought out of Syria: it groweth three cubits high, and
yieldeth many shoots from a woody root, full of many whitish strings; the
stalks be round, somewhat thick, and of a reddish colour, which are
hollow within, with certain obscure prints or small furrows along the
stalks, with equal spaces half kneed or knotted, and at every such knee
or joint stand two leaves one against another, tufted like Melissa, but
more rough and deeply indented, yet not so deeply as our common Cardiaca,
called Motherwort, nor so sharp pointed: about the knees there come forth
small little prickles, with six or eight small open wide bells, having
many corners thin like parchment, and of the same colour, somewhat stiff
and long; and at the top of the edge of the bell it is cornered and
pointed with sharp prickles; and out of the middle of this prickly bell
riseth a flower somewhat purple tending to whiteness, not unlike our
Lamium or Cardiaca, which bringeth forth a cornered seed, the bottom
flat, and smaller toward the top like a steeple: the savour of the plant
draweth toward the scent of Lamium.

Fig. 1029. Thorny Molucca Balm (6)

6. The other kind of Melica, otherwise called Molucca asperior (whereof
Pena writeth) dffereth from the last before mentioned, in that the cups
or bells wherein the flowers grow are more prickly than the first, and
much sharper, longer, and more in number; the stalk of this is four-
square, lightly hollowed or furrowed; the seed three-cornered, sharp
upward like a wedge; the tunnels of the flowers brownish, and not so
white as the first.

The Place.

Balm is much sown and set in gardens, and oftentimes it groweth of itself
in woods and mountains, and other wild places: it is profitably planted
in gardens, as Pliny writeth lib. 21, cap. 12, about places where bees
are kept, because they are delighted with this herb above others,
whereupon it hath been called Apiastrum: for, saith he, when they are
strayed away, they do find their way home again by it, as Virgil writeth
in his Georgics:

Huc tu iussos asperge liquors,
Trita Meliphylla, & Cerinthe nobile gramen.
Use here such help as husbandry doth usually prescribe,
Balm bruised in a mortar, and base Honey-Wort beside.
[Virgil, Georgics, Bk. IV. l. 62-3]

All these I have in my garden from year to year.

The Time.

Balm flowereth in June, July, and August: it withereth in the winter; but
the root remaineth, which in the beginning of the spring bringeth forth
fresh leaves and stalks.

The other sorts do likewise flourish in June, July, and August; but they
do perish when they have perfected their seed.

The Names.

Balm is called by Pliny, Melitis: in Latin, Melissa, Apiastrum, and
Citraga: of some, Melissophyllon, and Meliphyllon: in Dutch, Consille de
greyn: in French, Poucyrade, ou Melisse: in Italian, Cedronella, and
Arantiata: in Spanish, Torongil: in English, Bawme, or Balm.

The Temperature.

Balm is of temperature hot and dry in the second degree, as Avicenna
saith: Galen saith it is like Horehound in faculty.

The Virtues.

A. Balm drunk in wine is good against the bitings of venomous beasts,
comforts the heart, and driveth away all melancholy and sadness.

B. Common Balm is good for women which have the strangling of the mother,
either being eaten or smelled unto.

C. The juice thereof glueth together green wounds, being put into oil,
unguent, or balm, for that purpose, and maketh it of greater efficacy.

D. The herb stamped, and infused in Aqua Vitae, may be used unto the
purposes aforesaid (I mean the liquor and not the herb) and is a most
cordial liquor against all the diseases before spoken of.

E. The hives of bees being rubbed with the leaves of Balm, causeth the
bees to keep together and causeth others to come unto them.

F. The later age, together with the Arabians and Mauritanians, affirm
Balm to be singular good for the heart, and to be a remedy against the
infirmities thereof; for Avicenna in his book written of the infirmities
of the heart, teacheth that Balm makes the heart merry and joyful, and
strengtheneth the vital spirits.

G. Serapio affirmeth it to be comfortable for a moist and cold stomach,
to stir up concoction, to open the stopping of the brain and to drive
away sorrow and care of the mind.

H. Dioscorides writeth, That the leaves drunk with wine, or applied
outwardly, are good against the stingings of venomous beasts, and the
bitings of mad dogs: also it helpeth the tooth-ache, the mouth being
washed with the decoction, and is likewise good for those that canot take
breath unless they hold their necks upright.

I. The leaves being mixed with salt (saith the same author) helpeth the
King's evil, or any other hard swellings and kernels, and mitigateth the
pain of the gout.

K. Smith's Balm or Carpenter's Balm is most singular to heal up green
wounds that are cut with iron. It cureth the rupture in short time; it
stayeth the whites. Dioscorides and Pliny have attributed virtues unto
this kind of Balm, which they call Ironwort. The leaves (say they) being
applied, close up wounds without any peril of inflammation. Pliny saith
that it is of so great virtue, that though it be but tied to his sword
that hath given the wound, it stancheth the blood.



CHAP. 231. Of Horehound.

Fig. 1030. Kinds of Horehound (1-4)

The Description.

1. White Horehound bringeth forth very many stalks four-square, a cubit
high, covered over with a thin whitish downiness: whereupon are placed by
couples at certain distances, thick whitish leaves somewhat round,
wrinkled and nicked on the edges, and covered over with the like
downiness; from the bosoms of which leaves come forth small flowers of a
faint purplish colour, set round about the stalk in round whorls, which
turn into sharp prickly husks after the flowers be past. The whole plant
is of a strong savour, but not unpleasant: the root is thready.

2. The second kind of Horehound hath sundry crooked slender stalks,
divided into many small branches covered over with a white hoariness or
cottony down. The leaves are likewise hoary and cottony, longer and
narrower than the precedent, lightly indented about the edges, and
sharply pointed like the Turkey Balm, and of the same bigness, having
small whorls of white flowers, and prickly roundels or seed-vessels set
about the stalks by certain distances. The root is likewise thready.

3. Spanish Horehound hath a stiff hoary and hairy stalk, dividing itself
at the bottom into two wings or more arms, and likewise toward the top
into two others; whereupon are placed by couples at certain spaces fair
broad leaves, more round than any of the rest, and likewise more woolly
and hairy. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, spike fashion,
composed of small gaping flowers of a purple colour. The whole plant hath
the savour of Stoechados.

4. Candy Horehound hath a thick and hard root, with many hairy threads
fastened thereunto; from which rise up immediately rough square stalks,
set confusedly with long leaves of a hoary colour, of a most pleasant
strong smell. The flowers grow toward the top of the stalks in chaffy
roundels, of a whitish colour.

The Place.

The first of these Horehounds, being the common kind, groweth plentifully
in all places of England, near unto old walls, highways, and beaten
paths, in untilled places. It groweth in all other countries likewise,
where it altereth according to the situation and nature of the countries;
for commonly that which grows in Candy and in Hungary is much whiter, and
of a sweeter smell, and the leaves oftentimes narrower and lesser than
that which groweth in England and these Northern regions.

The Time.

They flower in July and August, and that in the second year after the
sowing of them.

The Names.

Horehound is called in Latin, Marrubium: in shops, Prassium, and also
Marrubium. There be certain bastard names found in Apuleius, as
Melittena, Labeonia, and Ulceraria: in Italian, Marrubio: in Spanish,
Marruvio: in Dutch, Malrone: in French, Marubin: in English, Horehound.
Clusius calls the third Ocimastrum valentinum.

The Temperature.

Horehound (as Galen teacheth) is hot in the second degree, and dry in the
third, and of a bitter taste.

The Virtues.

A. Common Horehound boiled in water and drunk, openeth the liver and
spleen, cleanseth the breast and lungs, and prevails greatly against an
old cough, the pain of the side, spitting of blood, the phthisic and
ulcerations of the lungs.

B. The same boiled in wine and drunk, bringeth down the terms, expelleth
the secondine, afterbirth, or dead child, and also easeth those that have
sore and hard labour in child-bearing.

C. Syrup made of the green fresh leaves and sugar, is a most singular
remedy against the cough and wheezing of the lungs.

D. The same syrup doth wonderfully and above credit ease such as have
lain long sick of any consumption of the lungs, as hath been often proved
by the learned physicians of our London College.

E. It is likewise good for them that have drunk poison, or that have been
bitten of serpents. The leaves are applied with honey to cleanse foul and
filthy ulcers. It stayeth and keepeth back the pearl or web in the eyes.

F. The juice pressed forth of the leaves, and hardened in the sun, is
very good for the same things, especially if it be mixed with a little
wine and honey; and dropped into the eyes, it helps them, and cleareth
the sight.

G. Being drawn up into the nostrils it cleanseth the yellowness of the
eyes, and stayeth the running and watering of them.


xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
CHAP. 232. Of Wild Horehound.

Fig. 1031. Kinds of Wild Horehound (1-4)

The Description.

1. Wild Horehound is also like to common Horehound: there riseth from the
root hereof a great number of stalks high and jointed, and out of every
joint a couple of leaves opposite, or set one against another, somewhat
hard, a little longer than those of common Horehound, and whiter, as also
the stalks are set with soft hairs, and of a sweet smell: the flowers do
compass the stalk about as those do of common Horehound, but they are
yellow, and the whorls be narrower: the root is woody and durable.

2. Besides this there is also another described by Fuchsius: the stalks
hereof are thick, four-square, now and then two or three foot long: the
leaves be broad, long, hoary, nicked in the edges, hairy as are also the
stalks, and much broader than those of the common Horehound: the flowers
in the whorls which compass the stalk about, are of a purple colour; the
seed is round and blackish: the root hard & something yellow.

3. This thorny Stachys hath leaves before it comes to send forth the
stalk, like those of the lesser Sage, but more white & hairy, those that
grow upon the stalks are much narrower: the stalks are square some foot
high: and at the parting of them into branches grow always two leaves one
opposite against another: the tops of the branches end in long sharp
thorny prickles: the flowers grow about the tops of the branches like
those of Sage, but of somewhat a lighter colour. This grows naturally in
Candy, about a town called Larda, where Honorius Bellus first observed
it, there it is called Guidarothymo, or Asses' Thyme, though it agree
with Thyme in nothing but the place of growth. Clusius sets it forth by
the name of Stachys spinosa.

4. Lobel hath given us the figure and first description of this by the
name of Stachys lusitanica. It hath creeping and downy stalks some
handful and half high, set with little leaves: amongst which in roundels
grow small flowers like those of the other wild Horehounds; the whole 
plant is of somewhat a grateful smell.


Fig. 1032. Germander Ironwort (5)
Fig. 1033. Hyssop-Leaved Ironwort (6)

5. There is another wild Horehound of Mountpellier, called Sideritis
monspelliaca scordiordes, sive scordii folio; being that kind of
Sideritis or wild Horehound which is like unto Scordium, or Water
Germander, which groweth to the height of a handful and a half, with many
small branches rising upright, of a woody substance, having the tops and
spoky coronets of Hyssop, but the leaves do resemble Dioscorides his
Scordium, save that they be somewhat lesser, stiffer, more wrinkled or
curled and hairy, than Tetrahit, or the Judaical herb: the flowers do
resemble those of the common Savory, in taste bitter, and of an
aromatical smell.

6. Mountain Sideritis being also of the kinds of Horehound, was first
found by Valerandus Donraz, in the mountains of Savoy, resembling very
well the last described, but the leaves are much narrower, and like those
of Hyssop: the flowers grow in small rough roundels or tufts, pale of
colour like Marrubium or Tetrahit; the root long and bending, of a woody
substance, and purple colour, bitter in taste, but not unpleasant, whose
virtue is yet unknown.

The Place.

There herbs are foreigners, they grow in rough and barren places,
notwithstanding I have them growing in my garden. My kind friend Mr.
Buckner an apothecary of London the last year, being 1632, found the
second of these growing wild in Oxfordshire in the field joining to
Witney Park a mile from the town.

The Time.

They flower in the summer months, and wither towards winter: the root
remaineth alive a certain time.

The Names.

The former is taken for the right Stachys, it is known in shops and
everywhere: we name it in English Yellow Horehound, and Wild Horehound.
Lobel calls it Stachys lichnites spuria flandrorum.

The other wild Horehound, seeing it hath no name, is to be called Stachys
spuria: for it is not the right, neither is it Sphacelus (as most have
suspected) of which Theophrastus hath made mention. It is called in
English Purple Horehound, Bastard Wild Horehound, Fuchsius his wild
Horehound.

Fabius Columna proves the second to be the Sideritis heraclia of
Dioscorides and the ancients.

The Temperature.

These herbs are of a biting and bitter taste, and are hot in the third
degree according to Galen. The Stachys fuchsii and Sideritides seem to be
hot and dry in the first degree.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of the leaves drunk doth draw down the menses and the
secondine, as Dioscorides teacheth.

B. This is of singular use (as most of the herbs of this kind are) to
keep wounds from inflammation, and speedily to heal them up, as also to
stay all fluxes and defluctions, having a drying and moderate astrictive
faculty.

C. Aetius and AEgineta commend the use of it in medicines used in the
cure of the biting of a mad dog.



CHAP. 233. Of the Ironworts or All-heals.
Fig. 1034. Ironwort, or All-Heal (1) Fig. 1035. Narrow-Leaved All-Heal (2)
The Kinds.

There are many plants that belong to this kindred of the Sideritides, or
Ironworts, and some of them are already treated of; and one of them is
also set forth hereafter by the name of Clown's All-Heal: these that are
formerly handled, and properly belong to this Chapter, are first the
Herba iudaica lobelii, being in the fourth place of the 230th Chapter.
Secondly, the Stachys fuchsii, (being the first Sideritis of Dioscorides)
described in the second place of the last chapter. Thirdly, the Sideritis
scordiodes set forth in the fifth place: and fourthly the Sideritis
alpina hyssopifolia set forth in the sixth place of the last chapter. Now
besides all these, I will in this chapter give you the descriptions of
some others like to them in face and virtues, and all of them may be
referred to the first Sideritis of Dioscorides his description.
The Description.

1. This hath square stalks some cubit high, rough, and jointed with two
leaves at each joint which are wrinkled and hairy, of an indifferent
bigness, snipped about the edges, of a strong smell, and of a bitterish
and somewhat hottish taste: almost forth of every joint grow branches,
set with lesser leaves: the flowers which in roundels encompass the tops
of the stalks end in a spike, being somewhat hooded, whitish, well-
smelling, and marked on the inside with sanguine spots. The seed is rough
and black, being contained in five-cornered seed vessels. The root is
hard and woody, sending forth many stalks. This is the Sideritis prima of
Fuchsius, Cordus, Clusius, and others, it hath a very great affinity with
the Panax coloni, or Clown's All-Heal of our author, and the difference
between them certainly is very small.

2. The four-square stalk of this plant is not above a foot high, and it
is presently from the root divided into divers branches; the leaves are
long and narrow with some nerves or veins running alongst them, being
also very hairy, but not snipped about the edges; the flowers grow
alongst the branches, and upon the main stalk in roundels like those of
the first mentioned, but lesser, and of a dark colour, with a yellowish
spot on their insides: the seed is also contained in five-cornered
vessels like as the former. It flowers in June and July, and grows
amongst the corn in Hungary and Austria. This is only set forth by
Clusius, and that under the name of Sideritis 6. pannonica.


Fig. 1036. Branched Creeping Ironwort (3) 
Fig. 1037. Unbranched Creeping Ironwort (4)

3. This hath some branches lying along upon the ground, slender,
quadrangular & hairy, which at certain spaces are set with leaves growing
by couples, almost like those of the first, but much less, and snipped
only from the middle to the end: the flowers grow after the manner of the
former, and (as Clusius thinks) are like them, as is also the seed.
Clusius hath this by the name of Sideritis 4.

4. The same author hath also given us another, which from the top of the
root sends forth many branches, partly lying spread on the ground, and
partly standing upright, being hairy, jointed, and square like those of
the former, and such also are the leaves, but that they are less snipped
about the edges: and in their bosoms from the bottom of the stalks to the
top grow roundels of whitish flowers shaped like others of this kind.
Clusius calls this Sideritis 5. He had only the figures of these
elegantly drawn by the hand of Jacques Plateau, and so sent him.

5. This from a small woody root sends forth a square hairy stalk some
half foot high, and sometimes higher, and this stalk most commonly sends
forth some four branches, which subdivide themselves into smaller ones,
all of them sometimes lying upon the ground, and the stalk standing
upright; the leaves grow by couples at each joint, from a broader bottom,
ending in an obtuse point, the lower leaves being some inch long, and not
much less in breadth: the flowers are whitish, or light purple, small and
hooded, engirting the stalks in roundels, which falling, four longish
black seeds are contained in five-cornered vessels. I first found it
August 1626 in flower and seed amongst the corn in a field joining to a
wood side not far from Greenhithe in Kent, and I at that time, not
finding it to be written of by any, called it Sideritis humilis lato
obtuso folio; but since I find that Bauhin hath set it forth in his
Prodromus by the name of Sideritis alsine trissaginis folio.

Fig. 1038. Smooth Broad-Leaved All-Heal (6)

6. This (which Tabernamontanus calls Alyssum germanicum) grows up with
square stalks some cubit high, set with pretty large and green smooth
leaves snipped about the edges: the flowers grow in roundels at the tops
of the branches, being hooded, and of a pale yellow colour. This grows in
the corn fields in some places of Germany and Italy: and it is the
Sideritis 2 of Matthiolus in Bauhin's opinion, who cals it Sideritis
arvensis glabra.

7. There is another plant that grows frequently in the corn fields of
Kent, and by Purfleet in Essex which may fitly be joined to these, for
Camerarius calls it Sideritis arvensis flore rubro, and in the Historia
Lugdunensis it is named Tetrahit angustifolium, and thought to be Ladanum
segetum of Pliny, mentioned lib. 29. cap. 8, and lib. 26. cap. 11. It
hath a stalk some foot or better high, set with sharp pointed longish
leaves, having two or three nicks on their sides, and growing by couples;
at the top of the branches, and also the main stalk itself, stand in one
or two roundels fair red hooded flowers: the root is small and fibrous,
dying every year when it hath perfected the seed. It flowers in July and
August. This is also sometimes found with a white flower.

The Time, Place, &c.

All these are sufficiently delivered in the descriptions.

The Temperatures and Virtues.

A. These plants are dry with little or no heat, and are endued with an
astrictive faculty. They conduce much to the healing of green wounds
being beaten and applied, or put in unguents or plasters made for that
purpose.

B. They are also good for those things that are mentioned in the last
chapter, in B and C.

C. Clusius saith, the first and second are used in Styria in
fomentations, to bathe the head against the pains or aches thereof; as
also against the stiffness and weariness of the limbs or joints.

D. And the same author affirms that he hath known the decoction used with
very good success in curing the inflammations and ulcerations of the
legs.



CHAP. 234. Of Water Horehound.

Fig. 1039. Water Horehound

The Description.

Water Horehound is very like to Black and Stinking Horehound in stalk and
flowered cups, which are rough, pricking, & compassing the stalks round
about like garlands: the leaves thereof be also black, but longer,
harder, more deeply gashed in the edges than those of Stinking Horehound,
yet not hairy at all, but wrinkled: the flowers be small and whitish: the
root is fastened with many black strings.

The Place.

It grows in brooks on the brinks of water ditches and near unto moats,
for it requireth store of water, and groweth not in dry places.

The Time.

It flourishes and flowers in the summer months, in July and August.

The Names.

It is called Marrubium palustre and aquatile: In English, Water
Horehound. Matthiolus taketh it to be Species prima Sideritidis or a kind
of Ironwort, which Dioscorides hath described in the first place; but
with this doth better agree that which is called Herba iudaica, or
Glidwort; it much less agreeth with Sideritis secunda, or the second
Ironwort, which opinion also hath his favourers, for it is like in leaf
to none of the Ferns. Some also think good to call it Herba aegyptia,
because they that feign themselves Egyptians (such as many times wander
like vagabonds from city to city in Germany and other places) do use with
this herb to give themselves a swart colour, such as the Egyptians and
the people of Africa are of; for the juice of this herb doth dye every
thing with this kind of colour which also holdeth so fast, as that it can
not be wiped or wasted away: insomuch as linen cloth being dyed herewith,
doth always keep that colour.

The Temperature.

It seemeth to be cold, and withal very astringent or binding.

The Virtues.

There is little use of the Water Horehound in physic.



CHAP. 235. Of Black or Stinking Horehound.
Fig. 1040. Stinking Horehound (1) Fig. 1041. Long-Leaved Horehound (2)
The Description.

1. Black Horehound is somewhat like unto the white kind. The stalks be
also square and hairy. The leaves somewhat larger, of a dark swart or
blackish colour, somewhat like the leaves of Nettles, snipped about the
edges, of an unpleasant and stinking savour. The flowers grow about the
stalks in certain spaces, of a purple colour, in shape like those of
Archangel or Dead-Nettle. The root is small and thready. I have found
this also with white flowers.

2. To this may fitly be referred that plant which some have called
Parietaria, Sideritis, and Herba venti, with the additament of
Monspeliensium to each of these denominations: but Bauhin, who I herein
follow, calls it Marrubium nigrum longifolium. It is thus described: the
root is thick and very fibrous, sending up many square rough stalks some
cubit high, set at certain spaces with leaves longer and broader than
Sage, rough also and snipped about the edges: and out of their bosoms
come flowers, hooded, and purple of colour, engirting the stalks as in
other plants of this kind. Some have thought this to be Othonna of the
ancients, because the leaves not falling off in winter, are either eaten
by the worms, or wasted by the injury of the weather to the very nerves
or veins that run over them; so that by this means they are all
perforated, and easily blown through by each blast of wind: which called
some to give it also the name of Herba venti. It grows in the corn fields
about Montpellier.

The Place.

It is found in gardens amongst pot herbs, and oftentimes amongst stones
and rubbish in dry soils.

The Time.

It flowereth and flourisheth when the others do.

The Names.

It is called of some, Marrubiastrum, or Marrubium spurium, or bastard
Horehound: in shops, Prasium foetidum, and Ballote: in Italian, Marrubi
Nero: in Spanish, Marravio Negro: in French, Marubin Noir & Putant: in
English Stinking Horehound.

The Temperature.

Stinking Horehound is hot and dry, and as Paulus AEgineta teacheth, of a
sharp and cleansing faculty.

The Virtues.

A. Being stamped with salt and applied, it cureth the biting of a mad
dog, against which it is of great efficacy, as Dioscorides writeth.

B. The leaves roasted in hot embers do wane and consume away hard lumps
or knots in or about the fundament. It also cleanseth foul and filthy
ulcers, as the same author teacheth.



CHAP. 236. Of Archangel, or Dead-Nettle.
Fig. 1042. White Archangel or Dead-Nettle (1) Fig. 1043. Yellow Archangel
or Dead-Nettle (2)
The Description.

1. White Archangel hath four-square stalks, a cubit high, leaning this
way and that way, by reason of the great weight of his ponderous leaves,
which are in shape like those of Nettles, nicked round about the edges,
yet not stinging at all, but soft, and as it were downy. The flowers
compass the stalks round about at certain distances even as those of
Horehound do, whereof doubtless this is a kind, and not of Nettles as
hath been generally holden: which flowers are white of colour, fashioned
like to little gaping hoods or helmets. The root is very thready. There
is also a variety of this having red or purple flowers.

2. Yellow Archangel hath square stalks rising from a thready root, set
with leaves by couples, very much cut or hacked about the edges, and
sharp pointed. The uppermost whereof are oftentimes of a fair purple
colour. The flowers grow among the same leaves, of a gold yellow colour,
fashioned like those of the white Archangel, but greater, and more wider
gaping open.


Fig. 1044. Red Archangel or Dead-Nettle (3)
Fig. 1045. Hungary Dead-Nettle (4)

3. Red Archangel being called Urtica non mordax, or Dead-Nettle, hath
many leaves spread upon the ground; among which rise up stalks hollow,
and square, whereupon do grow rough leaves of an overworn colour, among
which come forth purple flowers, set about in round whorls, or roundels.
The root is small, and perisheth at the first approach of winter.

4. Dead-Nettle of Hungary hath many large rough leaves very much curled
or crumpled like those of the Stinging Nettle, of a dark green colour,
snipped about the edges like the teeth of a saw, set upon a four-square
stalk by couples; from the bosom of which leaves come forth the flowers
close to the stalks, of a perfect purple colour, in shape like those of
the White Archangel, gaping like a dragon's mouth, the lower chap whereof
is of a bright purple spotted with white, which being past, there doth
follow seed enclosed in rough husks, with fine sharp points sticking out.
The root is thick, tough, consisting of many threads and long strings.


Fig. 1046. Hedge-Nettle (5)
Fig. 1047. Variegated Hungary Dead-Nettle (6)

5. To this of Clusius, we may fitly refer 2 other plants; the first of
which Tragus and others call Urtica heraclea, or herculea, and Clusius
judges it to be the true Galeopsis of Dioscorides, as Tragus also thought
before him. The root hereof is fibrous and creeping, sending forth many
four-square stalks, upon which at each joint grow two leaves upon long
stalks very like those of Nettles, but more soft and hairy, not stinging:
the tops of the branches end as it were in a spike made of several
roundels of flowers like those of Archangel, but less, and of a purple
colour spotted with white on their insides; the seeds are contained four
in a vessel, and are black when they come to be ripe. It grows about
hedges in very many places, and flowers in June and July.

6. This hath roots like those of the last describcd, sending up also
square stalks a foot high, set at each joint with leaves growng upon long
stalks like those of the small Dead-Nettle, or rather like those of Ale-
Hoof; out of the bosoms of those come three or four stalks carrying
flowers like those of Ale-Hoof, gaping, but without a hood, but with a
lip turned up, which is variegated with blue, white, and purple. This
history Clusius (who did not see the plant, but an exact figure thereof
in colours) gives us, and he names it as you find expressed in the title.

The Place.

These plants are found under hedges, old walls, common ways, among
rubbish, in the borders of fields, and in arable grounds, oftentimes in
gardens ill husbanded.

That with the yellow flower groweth not so common as the others. I have
found it under the hedge on the left hand as you go from the village of
Hampstead near London to the Church, and in the wood thereby, as also in
many other copses about Lee in Essex, near Watford and Bushy in
Middlesex, and in the woods belonging to the Lord Cobham in Kent.

The Time.

They flower for the most part all summer long, but chiefly in the
beginning of May.

The Names.

Archangel is called of some Urtica iners, and mortua: of some, Lamium: in
English, Archangel, Nettle, and Dead-Nettle.

The Temperature.

They are hotter and drier than Nettle, approching to the temperature of
Horehound.

The virtues.

A. Archangel (or rather the hedge Nettle) stamped with vinegar, and
applied in manner of a poultice taketh away wens and hard swellings, the
King's evil, inflammation of the kernels under the ears and jaws; and
also hot fiery inflammations of the kernels of the neck, arm-holes and
flanks.

B. It is good to bathe those parts with the decoction of it, as
Dioscorides and Pliny say.

C. The later physicians think that the white flowers of Archangel do stay
the whites, and for the same purpose divers do make of them a conserve,
as they call it, of the flowers and sugar, which they appoint to be taken
for certain days together.

D. The flowers are baked with sugar as roses are, which is called sugar
roset: as also the distilled water of them, which is used to make the
heart merry; to make a good colour in the face, and to make the vital
spirits more fresh and lively.



CHAP. 237. Of Motherwort.

Fig. 1048. Motherwort

The Description.

Motherwort bringeth forth stalks four-square, thick, hard, two cubits
high, of an obscure or overworn red colour: the leaves are somewhat
black, like those of Nettles, but greater and broader than the leaves of
Horehound, deeply indented or cut on the edges. The husks are hard &
pricking, which do compass the stalks about like whorls, or little
crowns, out of which do grow purplish flowers, not unlike to those of
Dead-Nettle, but lesser: The root is compact of many small strings, the
whole plant is of a very rank smell and bitter taste.

The Place.

It joyeth among rubbish, in stony and other barren and rough places,
especially about Oxford; it profiteth well in gardens.

The Time.

It flourisheth, flowereth, and seedeth from June to September: the leaves
and stalks perish in winter, but the root endureth.

The Names.

It is called in our age Cardiaca: in High Dutch, Hertzgesport: in Low
Dutch, Hertegespan: in French, Agripaulme: in English, Motherwort. Some
there be that make it a kind of Balm, it seems that it may be also
referred to Sideritis herculana, or Hercules Ironwort.

The Temperature.

Motherwort is hot and dry in the second degree, by reason of the
cleansing and binding quality that it hath.

The Virtues.

A. Divers commend it against the infirmities of the heart: it is judged
to be so forceable, that it is thought it took his name Cardiaca of the
effect.

B. It is also reported to cure convulsions and cramps, and likewise the
palsy: to open the obstructions or stoppings of the entrails: to kill all
kinds of worms of the belly.

C. The powder of the herb given in wine, provoketh not only urine, or the
monthly course, but also is good for them that are in hard travail with
child.

D. Moreover, the same is commended for green wounds: it is also a remedy
against certain diseases in cattle, as the cough and murrain, and for
that cause divers husbandmen oftentimes much desire it.



CHAP. 238. Of Stinging Nettle.
Fig. 238. Roman Nettle (1) Fig. 1050. Common Stinging Nettle (2)
The Description.

1. The stalks of the first be now and then half a yard high, round, and
hollow within; the leaves are broad, sharp pointed, cut round about like
a saw, they be rough on both sides, and covered with a stinging down,
which with a light touch only causeth a great burning, and raiseth hard
knots in the skin like blisters, and sometimes maketh it red. The seed
cometh from the roots of the leaves in round pellets bigger than peas; it
is slippery, glittering like linseed, but yet lesser and rounder. The
root is set with strings.

2. The second Nettle being our common Nettle is like to the former in
leaves and stalks, but yet now and then higher and more full of branches:
it is also covered with a down that stingeth and burneth as well as the
other: the seed hereof is small, and groweth not in round bullets, but on
long slender strings, as it were in clusters, as those of the Female
Mercury, which grow along the stalks and branches above the leaves, very
many. The root is full of strings; of colour something yellow, and
creepeth all about. This hath the stalks and roots sometimes a little
reddish, whence Tabernamontanus and our author gave another figure
thereof by the name of Urtica rubra, Red Nettle.

Fig. 1051. Small Nettle (1)

3. The third is like to the second in stalks, leaves and seed, that
groweth by clusters, but lesser, and commonly more full of branches of a
light green, more burning and stinging; the root is small and not without
strings.

The Place.

Roman Nettles grow in untilled places, and the first in thick woods, and
is a stranger in England, notwithstanding it groweth in my garden.

The second is more common, and groweth of itself near unto hedges,
bushes, brambles, and old walls almost everywhere.

The third also cometh up in the same places, which notwithstanding
groweth in gardens and moist arable grounds.

The Time.

They all flourish in summer: the second suffereth the winter's cold: the
seed is ripe, and may be gathered in July and August.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Urtica, ab urendo, of his burning and stinging
quality; whereupon Macer saith,

 nec immerito nomen sumpsisse videtur
Tacta quod exurat digitos urtica tenentis.
Neither without desert his name he seems to get,
As that which quickly burns the fingers touching it.

In High Dutch, Nessel: in Italian, Ortica: in Spanish, Hortiga: in
French, Ortie: in English, Nettle. The first is called in Low Dutch
Roomsche Netelen, that is, Romana Urtica, or Roman Nettle: and likewise
in High Dutch Walsche Nesselen, that is, Italica urtica, Italian Nettle,
because it is rare, and groweth but in few places, and the seed is sent
from other countries, and sown in gardens for his virtues: it is also
called of divers Urtica mas: and of Dioscorides, Urtica sylvestris, or
wild Nettle, which he saith is more rough, with broader and longer
leaves, and with the seed of Flax, but lesser, Pliny maketh the wild
Nettle the male, and in his 21st book, chap. 15, saith that it is milder
and gentler: it is called in English Roman Nettle, Greek Nettle, Male
Nettle. The second is called Urtica foemina, and oftentimes Urtica maior,
tlat it may differ from the third Nettle: in English, Female Nettle,
Great Nettle or common Nettle. The third is named in High Dutch Heyter
Nessel: in the Brabanters speech, Heijte Netelen, so called of the
stinging quality: in English, Small Nettle, Small Burning Nettle: but
whether this be that or no which Pliny calleth Cania, or rather the
first, let the students consider. There is in the wild Nettle a more
stinging quality, which saith he, is called Cania, with a stalk more
stinging, having nicked leaves.

The Temperature.

Nettle is of temperature dry, a little hot, scarce in the first degree:
it is of thin and subtle parts; for it doth not therefore burn and sting
by reason it is extreme hot, but because the down of it is stiff and
hard, piercing like fine little prickles or stings, and entering into the
skin: for if it be withered or boiled it stingeth not at all, by reason
that the stiffness of the down is fallen away.

The Virtues.

A. Being eaten, as Dioscorides saith, boiled with Periwinkles, it maketh
the body soluble, doing it by a kind of cleansing quality: it also
provoketh urine, and expelleth stones out of the kidneys: being boiled
with Barley cream it bringeth up tough humours that stick in the chest,
as it is thought.

B. Being stamped, and the juice put up into the nostrils, it stoppeth the
bleeding of the nose: the juice is good against the inflammation of the
uvula.

C. The seed of Nettle stirreth up lust especially drunk with cuit: for
(as Galen saith) it hath in it a certain windiness.

D. It concocteth and draweth out of the chest raw humours.

E. It is good for them that cannot breathe unless they hold their necks
upright, and for those that have the pleurisy, and for such as be sick of
the inflammation of the lungs if it be taken in a lohoch or licking
medicine, and also against the troublesome cough that children have,
called the chincough.

F. Nicander affirmeth that it is a remedy against the venomous quality of
Hemlock, Mushrooms, and quicksilver.

G. And Apollidoris saith that it is a counterpoison for Henbane,
serpents, and scorpions.

H. As Pliny witnesseth, the same author writeth, that the oil of it takes
away the stinging which the Nettle itself maketh.

I. The same grossly pounded, and drunk in white wine, is a most singular
medicine against the stone either in the bladder or in the reins, as hath
been often proved, to the great ease and comfort of those that have been
grievously tormented with that malady.

J. It expelleth gravel, and causeth to make water.

L. The leaves of any kind of Nettle, or the seeds, do work the like
effect, but not with that good speed and so assuredly as the Roman
Nettle.



CHAP. 240. Of Hemp.
Fig. 1052. Male Hemp (1) Fig. 1053. Female Hemp (2)
The Description.

1. Hemp bringeth forth round stalks, straight, hollow, five or six foot
high, full of branches when it groweth wild of itself ; but when it is
sown in fields it hath very few or no branches at all. The leaves thereof
be hard, tough, somewhat black, and if they be bruised they be of a rank
smell, made up of divers little leaves joined together, every particular
leaf whereof is narrow, long, sharp pointed, and nicked in the edges: the
seeds come forth from the bottoms of the wings and leaves, being round,
somewhat hard, full of white substance. The roots have many strings.

2. There is another, being the female Hemp, yet barren and without seed,
contrary unto the nature of that sex; which is very like to the other
being the male, and one must be gathered before the other be ripe, else
it will wither away, and come to no good purpose.

The Place.

Hemp, as Columella writeth, delighteth to grow in a fat dunged and watery
soil, or plain and moist, and deeply digged.

The Time.

Hemp is sown in March and April; the first is ripe in the end of August,
the other in July.

The Names.

This is named of the Grecians Kannabis: also of the Latins Cannabis: the
apothecaries keep that name: in High Dutch Zamer hanff: of the Italians
Canape: of the Spaniards, Canamo: in French, Chanure: of the Brabanters,
Kemp: in English, Hemp. The male is called Carl Hemp, and Winter Hemp:
the female, Barren Hemp, and Summer Hemp.

The Temperature and virtues.

A. The seed of Hemp, as Galen writeth in his book Of the Faculties of
Simple Medicines, is hard of digestion, hurtful to the stomach and head,
and containeth in it an ill juice: notwithstanding some do use to eat the
same parched, cum aliis tragematis, with other junkets.

B. It consumeth wind, as the said author saith in his book Of the
Faculties of Medicines, and is so great a drier, as that it drieth up the
seed if too much be eaten of it.

C. Dioscorides saith, That the juice of the herb dropped into the ears
assuageth the pain thereof proceeding (as I take it) of obstruction or
stopping, as Galen addeth.

D. The inner substance or pulp of the seed pressed out in some kind of
liquor, is given to those that have the yellow jaundice, when the disease
first appears, and oftentimes with good success, if the disease come of
obstruction without an ague; for it openeth the passage of the gall, and
disperseth and concocteth the choler through the whole body.

E. Matthiolus saith, that the seed given to hens causeth them to lay eggs
more plentifully.



CHAP. 240. Of Wild Hemp.
Fig. 1054. Wild Hemp (1) Fig. 1055. Bastard Hemp (2)
The Description.

1. This wild Hemp, called Cannabis spuria, or Bastard Hemp, hath small
slender hoary and hairy stalks a foot high, beset at every joint with two
leaves, smally indented about the edges somewhat like a Nettle. The
flowers grow in roundels about the stalks, of a purple colour, and
sometimes also white: the root is little and thready.

2. There is likewise another kind of wild Hemp which hath hairy stalks
and leaves like the former, but the flowers are greater, gaping wide open
like the flowers of Lamium, or Dead-Nettle, whereof this hath been taken
for a kind: but he that knoweth any thing may easily discern the savour
of Hemp from the smell of Dead-Nettle. The flowers are of a clear and
light carnation colour, declining to purple.

Fig. 1056. Small Bastard Hemp (3)

3. There is also another kind of wild Hemp like unto the last before
mentioned, saving that it is smaller in each respect, and not so hairy.
The leaf is somewhat rounder: the root small and thready: the flower is
longer, being purple or white, with a yellow spot on the inside.

The Place.

These kinds of wild or bastard Hemp do grow upon hills and mountains, and
barren hilly grounds, especially in arable land, as I have often seen in
the corn fields of Kent, as about Gravesend, Southfleet, and in all the
tract from thence to Canterbury, and in many places about London.

The Time

These herbs do flower from July to the end of August.

The Names.

It shall suffice what hath been set down in the titles for the Latin
names: in English, Wild Hemp, Nettle Hemp, and Bastard Hemp.

The Temperature and virtues.

The temperature and faculties are referred to the manured Hemp,
notwithstanding they are not used in physic where the other may be had.



CHAP. 241. Of Water-Hemp.
Fig. 1057. Water-Hemp (1) Fig. 1058. Common Dutch Agrimony (2)
The Description.

1. Water-Hemp or Water-Agrimony is seldom found in hot regions, for which
cause it is called Eupatorium cannabinum foemina septentrionalium, and
groweth in the cold Northern countries in moist places, and in the midst
of ponds, slow running rivers, and ditches. The root continueth long,
having many long and slender strings, after the nature of water herbs:
the stalks grow a cubit and a half high, of a dark purple colour, with
many branches standing by distances one from another. The leaves are more
indented and less hairy than the male kind: the flowers grow at the top,
of a brown yellow colour, spotted with black spots like Aster atticus;
which consisteth of such a substance as is in the midst of the Daisy, or
the Tansy flower, and is set about with small and sharp leaves, such as
are about the Rose, which causeth the whole flower to resemble a star,
and it savoreth like gum elemni, rosin or Cedar wood when it is burned.
The seed is long like Pyrethrum, closely thrust together, and lightly
cleaveth to any woollen garment, that it toucheth by reason of his
roughness. This is found with the leaves whole, and also with them parted
into three parts: the second is expressed by this figure we give you
here.

2. There is another wild Hemp growing in the water, whereof there be two
sorts more, delighting to grow in the like ground, in show differing very
little. This springs up with long round stalks, and somewhat reddish,
about two cubits high, or something higher: they are beset with long
green leaves indented about the edges, whereof you shall see commonly
five or seven of those leaves hanging upon one stem like the leaves of
hemp, but yet softer. The flowers are little, of a pale reddish colour,
consisting of soft round tufts, and stand perting upon the top of the
sprigs, which at length vanish away into down: the root underneath is
full of thready strings of a mean bigness.

The Place

They grow about the brinks of ditches, running waters, and standing
pools, and in watery places almost everywhere.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in July and August: the root continues, but the
stalks and lades wither away in winter.

The Names.

The bastard or wild Hemps, especially those of the water, are commonly
called Hepatorium cannabinum: of divers also Eupatorium: Leonhard
Fuchsius nameth it Eupatorium adulterinum: of most cannabina, of the
likeness it hath with the leaves of Cannabis, Hemp, and Eupatorium
avicennae. It is thought also to be that which Baptista Sardus doth term
Terzola: in High Dutch, S. Kunigund Kraut; that is to say in Latin;
Sanctae Cunigunda herba, S. Cunigund's herb: in Low-Dutch, Boelkens
Kruit: in English, Water Hemp, Bastard and Water Agrimony. It is called
Hepatorium, of the faculty, being good for Hepar, the liver. I have named
the second Common Dutch Agrimony, because it is commonly used for
Agrimony in the shops of that country.

 The Temperature.

The leaves and roots of these herbs are bitter, also hot and dry in the
second degree: they have virtue to scour and open, to attenuate or make
thin thick and gross humours, and to expel or drive them forth by urine:
they cleanse and purify the blood.

The Virtues, which chiefly belong to the last described.

A. The decoction hereof is profitably given to those that be scabbed and
have filthy skins; and likewise to such as have their spleen and liver
stopped or swollen: for it taketh away the stoppings of both those
entrails, and also of the gall: wherefore it is good for them that have
the jaundice, especially somewhat after the beginning.

B. The herb boiled in wine or water is singular good against tertian
fevers.

C. The decoction drunk, and the leaves outwardly applied, do heal all
wounds both inward and outward.

D. Fuchsius saith that the second is very effectual against poison. And
Gesner in his Epistles affirmeth, that he boiled about a pugil of the
fibres of the root of this plant in wine, and drunk it, which an hour
after gave him one stool, and afterwards twelve vomits, whereby he cast
up much phlegm: so that it works (saith he) like White Hellebore, but
much more easily and safely, and it did me very much good.



CHAP. 242. Of Agrimony.

Fig. 1059. Agrimony

The Description.

The leaves of Agrimony are long & hairy, green above, and somewhat
greyish underneath, parted into divers other small leaves snipped round
about the edges, almost like the leaves of Hemp: the stalk is two foot
and a half long, rough & hairy, whereupon grow many small yellow flowers
one above another upwards toward the top: after the flowers come the
seeds somewhat long and rough, like to small burrs hanging downwards;
which when they be ripe do catch hold upon people's garments that pass by
it. The root is great, long, and black.

The Place.

It grows in barren places by highways, enclosures of meadows, and of corn
fields; and often times in woods and copses, and almost everywhere.

The Time.

It flowereth in June and somewhat later, and seedeth after that a great
part of summer.

The Names.

The Latins call it Eupatorium: Pliny, Eupatoria: yet there is another
Eupatorium in Apuleius, and that is Marrubium, Horehound. In like maner
the apothecaries of Germany have another Hepatorium that is there
commonly used, being described in the last chapter, and may be named
Hepatorium adulterinum. Agrimony is named Lappa inversa: and it is so
called, because the seeds which are rough like burrs do hang downwards:
of some, Philanthropos, of the cleaving quality of the seeds hanging to
men's garments: the Italians and Spaniards call it Agramonia: in High
Dutch, Odermeng, Bruckwurtz: in Low Dutch and in French, Agrimonie, and
in English, Agrimony, and Egrimony: Eupatorium taketh the name of
Eupator, the finder of it out: and (saith Pliny) it hath a royal and
princely authority.

The Temperature.

It is hot, and doth moderately bind, and is of a temperate dryness. Galen
saith that Agrimony is of fine and subtle parts, that it cutteth and
scoureth; therefore, saith he, it removes obstructions or stoppings out
of liver, and doth likewise strengthen it by reason of the binding
quality that is in it.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of the leaves of Agrimony is good for them that have
naughty livers, and for such as piss blood upon the diseases of the
kidneys.

B. The seed being drunk in wine (as Pliny affirmeth) doth help the bloody
flux.

C. Dioscorides addeth, that it is a remedy for them that have bad livers,
and for such as are bitten with serpents.

D. The leaves being stamped with old swine's grease, and applied, closeth
up ulcers that be hardly healed, as Dioscorides saith.

E. Agrimony boiled in wine and drunk, helpes inveterate hepatic fluxes in
old people.



CHAP. 243. Of Sawwort.

Fig. 1060. Sawwort (1 & 2)

The Description.

1. The plant which the new writers have called Serratula differeth from
Betonica, although the Ancients have so called Betony; It hath large
leaves somewhat snipped about the edges like a saw (whereof it took his
name) rising immediately from the root: among which come up stalks of a
cubit high, beset with leaves very deeply cut or jagged even to the
middle of the rib, not much unlike the male Scabious. The stalks towards
the top divide themselves into other small branches, at the top whereof
they bear flowers somewhat scaly, like the Knapweed, but not so great nor
hard: at the top of the knop cometh forth a bushy or thrummy flower, of a 
purple colour. The root is thready, and thereby increaseth and becometh
of a great quantity.

2. Sawwort with white flowers differeth not from the precedent, but in
the colour of the flowers: for as the other bringeth forth a bush of
purple flowers; in a manner this plant bringeth forth flowers of the same
fashion, but of a snow white colour, wherein consisteth the difference.

The Place.

Sawwort groweth in woods and shadowy places, and sometimes in meadows.
They grow in Hampstead Wood likewise. I have seen it growing in great
abundance in the wood adjoining to Islington, within half a mile from the
further end of the town, and in sundry places of Essex and Suffolk.

The Time.

They flower in July and August.

The Names.

The later age do call them Serratula, and Serratula tinctoria, it
differeth as we have said from Betony, which is also called Serratula: it
is called in English Sawwort. Caesalpinus calls it Cerretta and Serretta,
and Thalius, Centauroides, or Centaureum maius sylvestre germanicum.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Serratula is wonderfully commended to be most singular for wounds,
ruptures, burstings, and such like: and is referred unto the temperature
of Sanicle.



CHAP. 244. Of Betony.

Fig. 1061. Betony (1)

The Description.

1. Betony groweth up with long leaves and broad, of a dark green colour,
slightly indented about the edges like a saw. The stalk is slender, four-
square, somewhat rough, a foot high more or less. It beareth eared
flowers, of a purplish colour, and sometimes reddish; after the flowers,
cometh in place long cornered seed. The root consisteth of many strings.

2. Betony with white flowers is like the precedent in each respect,
saving that the flowers of this plant are white, and of greater beauty,
and the others purple or red, as aforesaid.

The Place.

Betony loves shadowy woods, hedgerows, and copses, the borders of
pastures, and such like places.

Betony with white flowers is seldom seen. I found it in a wood by a
village called Rampstead, near unto a worshipful gentleman's house, one
of the Clerks of the Queen's Council, called Mr. Wade, from whence I
brought plants for my garden, where they flourish as in their natural
place of growing.

The Time.

They flower and flourish for the most part in June and July.

The Names.

Betony is called in Latin, Betonica: of divers Vetonica: but unproperly.
There is likewise another Betonica, which Paulus AEgineta described; and
Galen in his first book Of the Government of Health sheweth that it is
called Betonica, Betony, and also Sarxiphagon: Dioscorides
notwithstanding doth describe another Sarxiphagon.

The Temperature.

Betony is hot and dry in the second degree: it hath force to cut, as
Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. Betony is good for them that be subject to the falling sickness, and
for those also that have ill heads upon a cold cause.

B. It cleanseth the lungs and chest, it taketh away obstructions or
stoppings of the liver, milt, and gall: it is good against the yellow
jaundice.

C. It maketh a man to have a good stomach and appetite to his meat: it
prevaileth against sour belchings: it maketh a man to piss well: it
mitigateth pain in the kidneys and bladder: it breaketh stones in the
kidneys, and driveth them forth.

D. It is also good for ruptures, cramps, and convulsions: it is a remedy
against the bitings of mad dogs and venomous serpents, being drunk, and
also applied to the hurts, and is most singular against poison.

E. It is commended against the pain of the sciatica, or ache of the
huckle bone.

F. There is a conserve made of the flowers and sugar good for many
things, and especially for the headache. A dram weight of the root of
Betony dried, and taken with mead or honeyed water, procureth vomit, and
bringeth forth gross and tough humours, as divers of our age do report.

G. The powder of the dried leaves drunk in wine is good for them that
spit or piss blood, and cureth all inward wounds, especially the green
leaves boiled in wine and given.

H. The powder taken with meat looseth the belly very gently, and helpeth
them that have the falling sickness with madness and headache.

I. It is singular against all pains of the head: it killeth worms in the
belly; helpeth the ague: it cleanseth the mother, and hath great virtue
to heal the body, being hurt within by bruising or such like.



CHAP. 245. Of Water-Betony.

Fig. 1062. Water-Betony

The Description.

Water Betony hath great square hollow and brown stalks, whereon are set
very broad leaves notched about the edges like unto those of Nettles, of
a swart green colour, growing, for the most part by two and two as it
were from one joint, opposite, or standing one right against another. The
flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a dark purple colour, in
shape like to little helmets. The seed is small, contained in round
bullets or buttons. The root is compact of many and infinite strings.

The Place.

It groweth by brooks and running waters, by ditch sides, and by the
brinks of rivers, and is seldom found in dry places.

The Time.

It flowereth in July and August, and from that time the seed waxeth ripe.

The Names

Water Betony is called in Latin Betonica aquatica: some have thought it
Dioscorides his Clymenum: others, his Galeopsis; it is Scrophularia
altera of Dodonaeus: of Turner, Clymenon: of some, Sesamoides minus, but
not properly: of others, Serpentaria: in Dutch, S. Antonies cruyt: in
English, Water-Betony: and by some, Brownwort: in Yorkshire, Bishop's
Leaves.

The Temperature.

Water Betony is hot and dry.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Water-Betony are of a scouring or cleansing quality, and
is very good to mundify foul and stinking ulcers, especially the juice
boiled with honey.

B. It is reported, if the face be washed with the juice` thereof, it
taketh away the redness and deformity of it.



CHAP. 246. Of Great Fig-wort, or Brownwort.
Fig. 1063. Great Fig-Wort (1) Fig. 1064. Indian Fig-Wort (2)
The Description.

1. The great Fig-Wort springeth up with stalks four-square, two cubits
high, of a dark purple colour, and hollow within: the leaves grow always
by couples, as it were from one joint, opposite, or standing one right
against another, broad, sharp pointed, snipped round about the edges like
the leaves of the greater Nettle, but bigger, blacker, and nothing at all
stinging when they be touched: the flowers in the tops of the branches
are of a dark purple colour, very like in form to little helmets: then
cometh up little small seed in pretty round buttons, but sharp at the
end: the root is whitish, beset with little knobs and bunches as it were
knots and kernels.

2. There is another Fig-wort called Scrophularia indica, that hath many
and great branches trailing here and there upon the ground, full of
leaves, in fashion like the wild or common Thistle, but altogether
without pricks: among the leaves appear the flowers in fashion like a
hood, on the outside of a faint colour, and within intermixed with
purple; which being fallen and withered, there come in place small knops
very hard to break, and sharp at the point as a bodkin: which containeth
a small seed like unto Thyme. The whole plant perisheth at the first
approch of winter, and must be sown again in April, in good and fertile
ground. This is the Scrophularia cretica 1 of Clusius.

Fig. 1065. Yellow-Flowered Fig-Wort (3)

3. The stalk of this is also square, and some yard high, set with leaves
like those of the hedge Nettle, but somewhat larger and thicker, and a
little deeper cut in: out of the bosoms of these leaves come little rough
footstalks some inch or two long, carrying some four or five hollow round
flowers of a greenish yellow colour, with some threads in them, being
open at the top, and cut in with five little gashes: the seeds are black,
and contained in vessels like those of the first described: the root is
like that of the Nettle, and lives many years: it flowers in May, and the
seeds are ripe in June. I have not found nor heard of this wild with us,
but seen it flourishing in the garden of my kind friend Mr. John
Parkinson. Clusius calls it Lamium 2 pannonicum exoticum: and Bauhin hath
set it forth by the name of Scrophularia flore luteo: whom in this I
follow.

The Place.

The great Scrophularia groweth plentifully in shadowy woods, and
sometimes in moist meadows, especially in greatest abundance in a wood as
you go from London to Hornsey, and also in Stow Wood and Shotover near
Oxford.

The strange Indian figure was sent me from Paris by John Robin the King's
herbarist, and it now groweth in my garden.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

Fig-wort or Kernel-wort is called in Latin Scrophularia maior, that it
might differ from the lesser Celandine, which is likewise called
Scrophularia, with this addition minor, the lesser: it is called of some
millemorbia, and Castrangula: in English, great Fig-Wort, or Kernel-Wort,
but most usually Brownwort.

The Virtues.

A. Fig-wort is good against the hard kernels which the the Latins call
strumae, and commonly scrophulae, that is, the King's evil: and it is
reported to be a remedy against those diseases whereof it took his name,
as also the painful piles and swelling of the haemorrhoides.

B. Divers do rashly teach, that if it be hanged about the neck, or else
carried about one, it keepeth a man in health.

C. Some do stamp the root with butter, and set it in a moist shadowy
place fifteen days together: then they do boil it, strain it, and keep
it, wherewith they anoint the hard kernels, and the haemorrhoid veins, or
the piles which are in the fundament, and that with good success.



CHAP. 247. Of Vervain.
Fig. 1066. Common Vervain (1) Fig. 1067. Creeping Vervain (2)
The Description.

1. The stalk of upright Vervain riseth from the root single, cornered, a
foot high, seldom above a cubit, and afterwards divided into many
branches. The leaves are long, greater than those of the Oak, but with
bigger cuts and deeper: the flowers along the sprigs are little, blue, or
white, orderly placed: the root is long, with strings growing on it.

2. Creeping Vervain sendeth forth stalks like unto the former, now and
then a cubit long, cornered, more slender, for the most part lying upon
the ground. The leaves are like the former, but with deeper cuts, and
more in number. The flowers at the tops of the sprigs are blue, and
purple withal, very small as those of the last described, and placed
after the same manner and order. The root groweth straight down, being
slender and long, as is also the root of the former.

The Place.

Both of them grow in untilled places near unto hedges, high-ways, and
commonly by ditches almost everywhere. So saith our author, but I have
not seen the second, and doubt it is not to be found wild in England.

The Time.

The Vervains flower in July and August.

The Names.

Vervain is called in Latin, Verbena, and Verbenaca, Herculania, Ferraria,
and Exupera: of some, Matricalis, and Hiera botane: of others, Vervena,
and Sacra herba: Verbenae are herbs that were taken from the altar, or
from some holy place, which because the Consul or Praetor did cut up,
they were likewise called Sagmina, which oftentimes are mentioned in Livy
to be grassy herbs cut up in the Capitol. Pliny also in his two and
twentieth book, and eleventh Chapter witnesseth, That Verbena and Sagmina
be all one: and this is manifest by that which we read in Andria in
Terence: Ex ara verbenas hinc sume; Take herbs here from the altar: in
which place Terence did not mean Vervain to be taken from the altar, but
some certain herbs: for in Menander, out of whom this comedy was
translated, is read Myrsine or Myrtle, as Donatus saith. In Spanish it is
called Urgebaom: in Italian, Verminacula: in Dutch, Iser Cruijt:in
French, Vervaine: in English, Juno's Tears, Mercury's Moist Blood, Holy-
Herb; and of some, Pigeon's Grass, or Columbine, because pigeons are
delighted to be amongst it, as also to eat thereof, as Apuleius writeth.

The Temperature.

Both the Vervains are of temperature very dry, and do meanly bind and
cool.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Vervain pound with oil of Roses or hog's grease, doth
mitigate and appease the pains of the mother, being applied thereto.

B. The leaves of Vervain and Roses stamped with a little new hog's
grease, and emplastered after the manner of a poultice, doth cease the
inflammation and grievous pains of wounds, and suffereth them not to come
to corruption: and the green leaves stamped with hog's grease takes away
the swelling and pain of hot impostumes and tumors, and cleanseth corrupt
and rotten ulcers.

C. It is reported to be of singular force against the tertian and quartan
fevers: but you must observe Mother Bomby's rules, to take just so many
knots or sprigs, and no more, lest it fall out so that it do you no good,
if you catch no harm by it. Many odd old wives' fables are written of
Vervaine tending to witchcraft and sorcery, which you may read elsewhere,
for I am not willing to trouble your ears with reporting such trifles, as
honest ears abhor to hear.

D. Archigenes maketh a garland of Vervain for the headache, when the
cause of the infirmity proceedeth of heat.

E. The herb stamped with oil of Roses and vinegar, or the decoction of it
made in oil of Roses, keepeth the hairs from falling, being bathed or
anointed therewith.

F. It is a remedy against putrefied ulcers, it healeth up wounds, and
perfectly cureth fistulas, it wasteth away old swellings, and taketh away
the heat of inflammations.

G. The decoction of the roots and leaves assuageth the toothache, and
fasteneth them, and healeth the ulcers of the mouth.

H. They report saith Pliny, that if the dining room be sprinkled with
water in which the herb hath been steeped, the guests will be the
merrier, which also Dioscorides mentioneth.

I. Most of the latter physicians do give the juice or decoction hereof to
them that hath the plague; but there men are deceived, not only in that
they look for some truth from the father of falsehood and leasings, but
also because instead of a good and sure remedy they minister no remedy at
all; for it is reported, that the Devil did reveal it as a secret and
divine medicine.



CHAP. 248. Of Scabious.
Fig. 1068. Common Scabious (1) Fig. 1069. Small Common Scabious (2)
The Description

l. The first kind of Scabious being the most common and best known, hath
leaves long and broad, of a greyish, hoary, and hairy colour, spread
abroad upon the ground, among which rise up round and rough stems, beset
with hairy jagged leaves, fashion like Great Valerian, which we call
Setwall. At the top of the stalks grow blue flowers in thick tufts or
buttons. The root is white and single.

2. The second is like unto the former, saving that his leaves are much
cut or jagged, and the whole plant is altogether lesser, scarcely growing
to the height of a foot.


Fig. 1070. Middle Scabious (3)
Fig. 1071. Corn Scabious (4)

3. The third kind of Scabious is in all things like unto the second,
saving that the knop or head doth not dilate itself so abroad, and is not
so thick or closely thrust together, and the lowest leaves are not so
deeply cut or jagged, but the upper are much smaller, and also the more
divided.

4. The fourth groweth with large stalks, having two leaves one set right
against another, very much jagged, almost like unto common Fern, or
rather Ash: and at the top of the stalks there grow larger flowers, like
unto the first, but greater, and the root is also like it, and it differs
no way from the first described, but only by reason of the soil.

Fig. 1072. Kinds of Scabious (5-8)

5. Purple-Flowered Scabious hath a rough hairy stalk, whereon do grow
broad leaves deeply cut in the edges, in form like those of Sow-Thistle, 
rough likewise and hairy; the flowers grow at the top of the stalks,
composed of an innumerable sort of purple thrums: after which come scaly
knops like those of Iacea, or Knapweed, wherein is the seed. The root is
small and thready.

6. The sixth sort of Scabious hath stalks some cubit high, round, and set
with leaves not cut and jagged almost to the middle rib, as in the
former, yet somewhat rough and hairy, snipped about the edges, and of a
light green colour, amongst which rise up rough stalks, on the top
whereof do grow fair red flowers consisting of a bundle of thrums. The
root is long, tough, and fibrous.

7. The seventh kind of Scabious hath sundry great, rough and round stems,
as high as a tall man, beset with leaves like the first Scabious, but far
greater. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks like unto the others,
but of a faint yellow colour, which fall as soon as it is touched with
the hand, whereby it mightily incrcaseth, notwithstanding the root
endureth for many years, and groweth to be wonderful great: and in my
garden it did grow to the bigness of a man's body.

8. The white mountain Scabious hath broad leaves spread upon the ground,
like those of the field Primrose, but greater. Amongst which riseth up a
great stiff stalk smooth and plain, garnished with leaves not like those
next the ground, but lesser, much more divided, and of a greener colour &
harder. The flowers are like those of the common Scabious, but white of
colour: the root of this perishes every year after the perfecting of the
seed.


Fig. 1073. Spanish Scabious (9)
Fig. 1074. Strange Scabious (10)

9. The ninth kind of Scabious is like unto the Mountain Scabious, but
lower and smaller, having sundry large and broad leaves next the ground,
snipped confusedly and out of order at the edges like the Oaken leaf,
among which riseth up a stem two cubits high, dividing itself into sundry
other branches. The flowers are set at the top of the naked stalks of a
whitish colour; which being past, the seed appeareth like a tuft of small
bucklers, round, and somewhat hollow within, and made as it were of
parchment, very strange to behold: and within the bucklers there are
sundry small crosses of black fastened to the bottom, as it were the
needle in a dial, running upon the point of a needle. The plant dieth at
the beginning of winter, and must be sown in April in good and fertile
ground.

10. The tenth is like unto the last before mentioned, in stalks, root, 
and flowers, and differeth that this plant hath leaves altogether without
any cuts or jags about the edges, but is smooth and plain like the leaves
of Marigolds, or Devil's-Bit, and the flowers are like unto those of the
last described.

Fig. 1075. Sheep's Scabious (11)

11. Sheep's Scabious hath small and tender branches trailing upon the
ground, whereupon do grow small leaves very finely jagged or minced even
almost to the middle rib, of an overworn colour. The flowers grow at the
top of a bluish colour, consisting of much thrummy matter, hard thrust
together like a button: the root is small, and creepeth in the ground.

Fig. 1076. Kinds of Scabious (12-15)

12. The other Sheep's Scabious of our author (according to the figure) is
greater than the last described, growing some foot or better high, with
slender rough branches set with leaves nor so much divided, but only
nicked about the edges: the flowers are in colour and shape those of the
last described, or of the blue daisy; the root is single, and like that
of a Rampion, whence Fabius Columna (the seed and milky juice inducing
him) hath referred this to the Rampions, calling it Rapuntium montanum
capitatum leptophyllon. Lobel calls it Scabiosa media: and Dodonaeus,
Scabiosa minor.

13. To these little plants we may fitly add another small one referred by
Clusius to this and called Scabiosa 10 sive repens: yet Bauhin refers it
to the Daisies, and terms it Bellis caerulea montana frutescens; but it
matters not to which we refer it: the description is thus; The root is
hard, black, and creeping; so that it spreads much upon the surface of
the ground, sending forth many thick, smooth, green leaves, like those of
the blue Daisy, not sharp pointed, but ending as we vulgarly figure an
heart, having a certain grassy but not unpleasant smell, and somewhat a
bitter and hot taste: out of the midst of these leaves grow slender naked
stalks some hand high, having round flowers on their tops, like those of
Devil's-Bit, and of the same colour, yet sometimes of a lighter blue. It
grows in the mountains of Hungary and Austria. It flowers in April and
and ripens the seed in July and August.

14. This (which is the seventh Scabious of Clusius, and which he terms
ochroleukos, of the whitish yellow colour of the flower) hath round,
slender, stiff, and green stalks set at each joint with two large and
much divided leaves of a whitish green colour: those leaves that come
from the root before the stalk grow up are broader, and less divided;
upon the tops of the branches and stalks grow flowers like those of the
common Scabious, being white or rather (before they be throughly open) of
a whitish yellow colour; which fading, there follow seeds like as in the
ordinary kind. This flowers in June and July, and grows very plentifully
in all the hilly grounds and dry meads of Austria and Moravia.

15. There is also a kind of Scabious having the leaves much cut and
divided, and the stalks and flowers like to the common sort, of a bluish
purple colour, but differing in this, that at the sides of the flower it
puts forth little stalks, bearing smaller flowers, as is seen in some
other plants, as in Daisies and Marigolds, which therefore are fitly
termed in Latin prolifera or childing. This grows only in gardens, and
flowers at the same time with the former.


Fig. 1077 Red Indian Scabious (16)
Fig. 1078. Summer Scabious (17)

16. The stalks of the red Scabious grow four cubit or more in height, and
are divided into many very slender branches, which at the tops carry
flowers composed after the manner of the other sorts of Scabious, that is
of many little flowers divided into five parts at the top, and these are
of a perfect red colour, and small threads with pendants at them coming
forth of the midle of each of these little flowers, which are of a
whitish colour, and make a pretty show. The leaves are green, and very
much divided or cut in. The starry seeds grow in long round hairy heads
handsomely set together. This is an annual, and perishes as soon as it
hath perfected the seed. Clusius makes it his sixth Scabious, and calls
it Scabiosa indica. It flowers in July, and grows in the gardens of our
prime herbarists.

17. The same author hath also given us the figure and description of
another Scabious, which sends up a stalk some three cubits or more high,
set at certain spaces with leaves large, and snipped about their edges,
and a little cut in near their stalks. The stalks are divided into
others, which at their tops carry bluish flowers in long scaly heads,
which are succeeded by long whitish seed. The root is whitish and
fibrous, and dies every year. This is the Scabiosa 9 sive aestivalis of
Clusius.
The Place.

These kinds of Scabious do grow in pastures, meadows, corn fields, and
barren sandy grounds almost everywhere.

The strange sorts do grow in my garden, yet are they strangers in
England.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in the summer months.

The Names.

Scabious is commonly called Scabiosa, divers think it is named Psora;
which signifieth a scab, and a certain herb so called by Atius: I do not
know, saith Hermolaus Barbarus, whether it be Scabious which Atius doth
call Psora, the smoke of which being burnt doth kill cankers or little
worms. The author of the Pandects doth interpret Scabiosa to be
Dioscorides his Stoebe: Dioscorides describeth Stoebe by no marks at all,
being commonly known in his time; and Galen in his first book Of
Antidotes saith thus: There is found amongst us a certain shrubby herb,
hot, very sharp and biting, having a little kind of aromatical or spicy
smell, which the inhabitants do call Colymbade, and Stoebe, singular good
to keep and preserve wine: but it seemeth that this Stoebe doth differ
from that of which he hath made mention in his book Of the Faculties of
Medicines, which agreeth with that of Dioscorides for he writeth that
this is of a binding quality without biting; so that it cannot be very
sharp.

The Temperature.

Scabious is hot and dry in the later end of the second degree, or near
hand in the third, and of thin and subtle parts: it cutteth, attenuateth,
or maketh thin, and throughly concocteth tough and gross humours.

The virtues.

A. Scabious scoureth the chest and lungs; it is good against an old
cough, shortness of breath, pain in the sides, and such like infirmities
of the chest.

B. The same provoketh urine, and purgeth now and then rotten matter by
the bladder, which happeneth when an impostume hath somewhere lain within
the body.

C. It is reported that it cureth scabs, ifthe decoction thereof be drunk
certain days, and the juice used in ointments.

D. The later herbarists do also affirm that it is a remedy against the
bitings of serpents and stingings of venomous beasts, being outwardly
applied or inwardly taken.

E. The juice being drunk procureth sweat, especially with treacle; and it
speedily consumeth plague sores, if it be given in time, and forthwith at
the beginning: but it must be used often.

F. It is thought to be forceable, and that against all pestilent fevers.



CHAP. 249. Of Devil's-Bit.

Fig. 1079. Devil's-Bit

The Description.

Devil's-Bit hath small upright round stalks of a cubit high, beset with
long leaves somewhat broad, very little or nothing snipped about the
edges, somewhat hairy and even. The flowers also are of a dark purple
colour, fashioned like the flowers of Scabious, which being ripe are
carried away with the wind. The root is black, thick, hard and short,
with many thready strings fastened thereto. The great part of the root
seemeth to be bitten away: old fantastic charmers report, that the Devil
did bite it for envy, because it is an herb that hath so many good
virtues, and is so beneficial to mankind.

The Place.

Devil's-Bit groweth in dry meadows and woods, and about waysides. I have
found great store of it growing in Hampstead Wood near London, at Lee in
Essex, and at Rayleigh in Essex, in a wood called Hammerell, and sundry
other places.

The Time.

It flowereth in August, and is hard to be known from Scabious, saving
when it flowereth.

The Names.

It is commonly called Morsus diaboli, or Devil's-Bit, of the root (as it
seemeth)that is bitten off: for the superstitious people hold opinion,
that the Devil for envy that he beareth to mankind bit it off, because it
would be otherwise good for many uses: it is called of Fuchsius, Succisa:
in High Dutch Teuffels Abbisz: in Low Dutch, Duyvelles beet: in French
Mors du Diable: in English, Devil's-Bit, and Forebit. Fabius Columna
judgeth it to be the Pycnocomon of Dioscorides, described by him lib. 4.
cap. 176.

The Temperature.

Devil's-Bit is something bitter, and of a hot and dry temperature, and
that in the later end of the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. There is no better thing against old swellings of the almonds, and
upper parts of the throat that be hardly ripened.

B. It cleanseth away slimy phlegm that sticketh in the jaws, it digesteth
and consumeth it: and it quickly taketh away the swellings in tbose
parts, if the decoction thereof be often held in the mouth and
gargarised, especially if a little quantity of mel rosarum, or honey of
Roses be put into it.

C. It is reported to be good for the infirmities that Scabious serveth
for, and to be of no less force against the stingings of venomous beasts,
poisons, and pestilent diseases, and to consume and waste away plague
sores, being stamped and laid upon them.

D. And also to mitigate the pains of the matrix or mother, and to drive
forth wind, if the decoction thereof be drunk.



CHAP. 250. Of Matfellon or Knapweed.
Fig. 1080. Black Matfellon (1) Fig. 1081. Great Matfellon (2)
The Description.

1. Matfellon or Black Knapweed is doubtless a kind of Scabious, as all
the others are, entitled with the name of Iacea; yet for distinction I
have thought good to set them down in a several chapter, beginning with
that kind which is called in English Knapweed and Matfellon, or
Materfilon. It hath long and narrow leaves, of a blackish green colour,
in shape like Devil's-Bit, but longer, set upon stalks two cubits high,
somewhat bluntly cut or snipped about the edges: the flowers do grow at
the top of the stalks, being first small scaly knops, like to the knops
of Corn-flower, or Bluebottles, but greater; out of the midst thereof
groweth a purple thrummy or thready flower. The root is thick and short.

2. The Great Knapweed is very like unto the former, but that the whole
plant is much greater, the leaves bigger, and more deeply cut, even to
the middle rib: the flowers come forth of such like scaly heads, of an
excellent fair purple colour, and much greater.

Fig. 1082. Kinds of Knapweed (3-6)

3. The third kind of Matfellon, or Knapweed is very like unto the former
great Knapweed last before mentioned, saving that the flowers of this
plant are of an excellent fair yellow colour, proceeding forth of a scaly
head or knop, beset with most sharp pricks, not to be touched without
hurt: the flower is of a pleasing smell, and very sweet; the root is long
and lasting, and creepeth far abroad, by means whereof it greatly
increaseth.

4. The Mountain Knapweed of Narbonne in France, hath a strong stem of two
cubits high, and is very plentiful about Coventry among the hedges and
bushes: the leaves are very much jagged, in form of Lonchitis, or
Spleenwort; the flowers are like the rest of the Knapweeds, of a purple
colour.

5. The white flowered Knapweed hath creeping roots, which send up pretty
large whitish green leaves, much divided or cut in almost to the middle
rib; from the midst of which rises up a stalk some two foot high, set
also with the like divided leaves, but lesser: the flowers are like those
of the common sort, but of a pleasing white colour. I first found this
growing wild in a field nigh Martin-Abbey in Surrey, and since in the
Isle of Thanet.

6. The tuberous or knobby Knapweed being set forth by Tabernamontanus,
and which is a stranger in these parts, hath many leaves spread upon the
ground, rough, deeply gashed or hacked about the edges, like those of
Sow-Thistle: among which riseth up a straight stalk, dividing itself into
other branches, whereon do grow the like leaves, but smaller: the knappy
flowers stand on the top of the branches, of a bright red colour, in
shape like the other Knapweeds. The root is great, thick and tuberous,
consisting of many cloggy parcels, like those of the Asphodel.

Fig. 1083. Rough-Headed Knapweed (7)

7. This (saith Clusius) is a comely plant, having broad and long leaves
white, soft, and lightly snipped about the edges: the taste is gummy, &
not a little bitter: it sends up many crested stalks from one root, some
cubit high or more: at the tops of them grow the heads some two or three
together, consisting of many scales, whose ends are hairy, and they are
set so orderly, that by this means the heads seem as they were enclosed
in little nets: the flowers are purple, and like those of the first
described; the seed is small and long, and of an ash colour. This Clusius
calls Iacea 4 austriaca villoso capite.

Iacea capitis hirsutis Boelii.

8. This hath many small cornered streaked hairy trailing branches growing
from the root and those again divided into many other branches, trailing
or spreading upon the ground three or four foot long, employing or
covering a good plot of ground, whereon grow hairy leaves divided or
jagged into many parts, like the leaves of Iacea maior, or Rocket, of a
very bitter taste: at the top of each branch groweth one scaly head, each
scale ending with five, six, or seven little weak prickles growing
orderly like half the rowel of a spur, but far lesser: the flowers grow
forth of the heads of a light purple colour, consisting of many small
flowers, like those of the common Iacea, the bordering flowers, being
bigger and larger than those of the middle of the flower, each small
flower being divided into five small parts or leaves, not much unlike
those of Cyanus; the seed is small, and enclosed in down. The root
perisheth when the seed is ripe.

This plant hath not been hitherto written of that I can find. Seeds of it
I received from Mr. William Coys, with whom also I observed the plant,
October 10,1621. He received it from Boehm a Low-Country man. John
Goodyer.

The Place.

The two first grow commonly in every fertile pasture: the rest grow in my
garden.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

The later age doth call it Iacea nigra, putting nigra for a difference
between it and the Heartsease or Pansy, which is likewise called Iacea:
it is called also Materfillon, and Matrefillen: in English Matfellon,
Bulweed, and Knapweed.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. These plants are of the nature of Scabious, whereof they be kinds,
therefore their faculties are like, although not so proper to physic's
use.

B. They be commended against the swellings of the uvula, as is Devil's-
Bit, but of less force and virtue.



CHAP. 251. Of Silver Knapweed.
Fig. 1084. Great Silver Knapweed (1) Fig. 1085. Little Silver Knapweed (2)
The Description.

1. The great Silver Knapweed hath at his first coming up divers leaves
spread upon the ground, of a deep green colour, cut and jagged as are the
other Knapweeds, streaked here and there with some silver lines down the
same, whereof it took his surname, Argentea: among which leaves riseth up
a straight stalk, of the height of two or three cubits, somewhat rough
and brittle, dividing itself toward the top into other twiggy branches:
on the tops whereof do grow flowers set in scaly heads or knops like the
other Matfellons, of a gallant purple colour, consisting of a number of
threads or thrums thick thrust together: after which the seeds appear,
slippery, smooth at one end, and bearded with black hairs at the other
end, which maketh it to leap and skip away when a man doth but lightly
touch it. The root is small, single, and perisheth when the seed is ripe.
Thus our author, but this is not streaked with any lines, as our author
imagined, nor called Argentea by any but himself, and that very unfitly.

2. The leaves of this are very much divided and hoary, the stalks some
two cubits high, set also with much divided leaves, that end in soft
harmless prickles: at the tops of the branches stand the heads composed
as it were of silver scales (whence Lobel and others have called this
plant Stoebe argentea) and out of these silver heads come flowers like
those of the Bluebottles, but of a light purple colour, the seed is
small, blackish, and hairy at the tops.

3. There is another like this in each respect, but that the heads have
not so white a shining silver colour: and this I have also seen growing
with Master John Tradescant at South Lambeth.


Fig. 1086. Narrow-Leaved Knapweed (4)
Fig. 1087. Thorny Knapweed (5)

4. To these may be added that plant which Pona hath set forth by the name
of Stoebe capitata rosmarini folio. It hath a whitish woody root, from
whence arise divers branches set with long narrow leaves somewhat like
those of Rosemary, but liker those of the Pine, of a greenish colour
above, and whitish below; at the tops of the branches grow such heads as
in the first described Stoebe, with flowers of somewhat a deeper purple
colour: the seed is like that of Carthamus, but blackish. The root is not
annual, but lasts many years.

5. Though these plants have of late been vulgarly set forth by the name
of Stoebes, yet are they not judged to be the true Stoebe of Dioscorrides
and the ancients, but rather another whose figure which we here give was
by Dodonaeus taken forth of a manuscript in the Emperor's library, and he
saith; Paludanus brought home some of the same out of Cyprus and Morea,
as he returned from his journey out of Syria: the bottom leaves are said
to be much divided; those on the stalks long, and only snipped about the
edges, and white: the flowers white, and contained in scaly heads like
the Bluebottles, and the tops of the branches end in sharp prickles.

The Place.

These do grow of themselves in fields near common highways, and in
untilled places, but they are strangers in England, nevertheless I have
them in my garden.

The Time.

They spring up in April, they flower in August, and the seed is ripe in
September.

The Names.

Silver Knapweed is called of Lobel, Stoebe salamantica: of Dodonaeus,
Aphyllanthes, that is, without leaves, for the flowers consist only of a
number of threads without any leaves at all: in English, Silver Knapweed,
or Silver Scabious, whereof doubtless they be kinds.

The Temperature and virtues.

The faculties of these Matfellons are not as yet found out, neither are
they used for meat or medicine.

The faculties of Stoebe out of Dioscorides.

A. The seed and leaves are astringent, wherefore the decoction of them is
cast up in dysenteries, and into purulent ears, and the leaves applied in
manner of a poultice are good to hinder the blackness of the eyes
occasioned by a blow, and stop the flowing of blood.



CHAP. 252. Of Bluebottle, or Corn-Flower.
Fig. 1088. Great Bluebottle (1) Fig. 189. Common Bluebottle (2)
The Description.

1. The great bluebottle hath long leaves, smooth, soft, downy, and sharp
pointed: among the leaves rise up crooked, and pretty thick branches,
chamfered, furrowed, and garnished with such leaves as are next the
ground: on the tops whereof stand fair blue flowers tending to purple,
consisting of divers little flowers, set in a scaly husk or knop like
those of the Knapweeds: the seed is rough or bearded at one end, smooth
at the other, and shining. The root is tough, and long lasting (contrary
to the rest of the Corn-flowers) and groweth yearly into new shoots and
springs, whereby it greatly increaseth.

2. The common Corn-Flower hath leaves spread upon the ground, of a
whitish green colour, somewhat hacked or cut in the edges like those of
Corn Scabious: among which riseth up a stalk divided into divers small
branches, whereon do grow long leaves of an overworn green colour, with
few cuts or none at all. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a
blue colour consisting of many small flowers set in a scaly or chaffy
head like those of the Knapweeds: the seed is smooth, bright shining, and
wrapped in a woolly or flocky matter. The root is small and single, and
perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.

3. This Bottle is like the last described in each respect, saving in the
colour of the flowers, which are purple, wherein consisteth the
difference.

4. The fourth Bottle is also like the precedent, not differing in any
point but in the flowers; for as the last before mentioned are of a
purple colour, contrariwise these are of a milk white colour, which
setteth forth the difference.

5. The Violet-coloured Bottle or Corn-Flower is like the precedent, in
stalks, leaves, seeds, and roots: the only difference is, that this
bringeth flowers of a violet colour, and the others not so.

6. Variable Corn-Flower is so like the others in stalks, leaves, and
proportion, that it cannot be distinguished with words; only the flowers
hereof are of two colours mixed together, that is, purple and white,
wherein it differeth from the rest.

Fig. 1090. Kinds of Bluebottle (7-10)

7. There is no difference to be found in the leaves, stalks, seed, or
roots of this Corn-flower from the other, but only that the flowers
hereof are of a fair blue colour, and very double.

8. The eighth Corn-flower is like unto the precedent, without any
difference at all, saving in the colour of the flowers, the which are of
a bright purple colour, that setteth forth the difference.

9. This from a small root sends up divers creeping branches some foot
long, set with long hoary narrow leaves: at the tops of the stalks stand
the flowers in scaly heads, like as the other Bluebottles, but of a dark
purple colour. The whole plant is very bitter and ungrateful to the
taste. Lobel calls this Cyanus repens.

10. This is like the last described, but that the leaves are much smaller
or narrower, also the scaly heads of this are of a finer white silver
colour: and this plant is not possessed with such bitterness as the
former. Lobel calls this Cyanus minimus repens.

 The Place.

The first groweth in my garden, and in the gardens of herbarists, but not
wild that I know of. The others grow in corn fields among Wheat, Rye,
Barley, and other grain: it is sown in gardens, which by cunning to
looking doth oft times become of other colours, and some also double,
which hath been touched in their several descriptions. The two last grow
wild about Montpellier in France.

The Time.

They bring forth their flowers from the beginning of May unto the end of
harvest.

The Names.

The old herbarists called it Cyanus flos, of the blue colour which it
naturally hath: most of the later sort following the common German name,
call it Flos frumentorum, for the Germans name it Corn Blumen: Low Dutch,
Corn Bloemen: in French, Blaueole, and Bluet: in Italian, Fior campese,
and Bladisiris, i.e. Seris blade["Corn bars"], and Battisecula, or
Baptisecula, as though it should be called Blaptisicula["Hurt Sickle"] ,
because it hindereth and annoyeth the reapers, by dulling and turning the
edges of their sickles in reaping of corn: in English it is called
Bluebottle, Blue-Blow, Corn-Flower, & Hurt-Sickle. Fabius Columna would
have it to be the Papaver spumeum, or heracleum of the ancients.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The faculties of these flowers are not yet sufficiently known. Sith
there is no use of them in physic, we will leave the rest that might be
said to a further consideration: notwithstanding some have thought the
common Bluebottle to be of temperature something cold, and therefore good
against the inflammation of the eyes, as some think.



CHAP. 253. Of Goat's-Beard, or Go-To-Bed-At-Noon.


Fig. 1091. Purple Goat's-Beard (1)
Fig. 1092. Yellow Goat's-Beard (2)

The Description.

1. Goat's-Beard, or Go-To-Bed-At-Noon hath hollow stalks, smooth, and of
a whitish green colour, whereupon do grow long leaves crested down the
middle with a swelling rib, sharp pointed, yielding a milky juice when it
is broken, in shape like those of Garlic; from the bosom of which leaves
thrust forth small tender stalks set with the like leaves, but lesser:
the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, consisting of a number of
purple leaves, dashed over as it were with a little yellow dust, set
about with nine or ten sharp pointed green leaves: the whole flower
resembles a star when it is spread abroad; for it shutteth itself at
twelve of the clock, and showeth not his face open until the next day's
sun doth make it flower anew, whereupon it was called Go-To-Bed-At-Noon:
when these flowers be come to their full maturity and ripeness, they grow
into a downy blow-ball like those of Dandelion, which is carried away
with the wind. The seed is long, having at the end one piece of that
downy matter hanging at it. The root is long and single, with some few
threads thereto anexed, which perisheth when it hath perfected his seed,
yielding much quantity of a milky juice when it is cut or broken, as doth
all the rest of the plant.

2. The yellow Goat's-Beard hath the like leaves, stalks, root, seed, and
downy blow-balls that the other hath, and also yieldeth the like quantity
of milk, insomuch that if the pilling while it is green be pulled from
the stalks, the milky juice followeth: but when it hath there remained a
little while it waxeth yellow. The flowers hereof are of a gold yellow
colour, and have not such long green leaves to garnish it withal, wherein
consisteth the difference.

3. There is another small sort of Goat's-Beard or Go-To-Bed-At-Noon,
which hath a thick root full of milky sap, from which rise up many leaves
spread upon the ground, very long, narrow, thin, and like unto those of
grass, but thicker and grosser: among which rise up tender stalks, on the
tops whereof do stand fair double yellow flowers like the precedent, but
lesser. The whole plant yieldeth a milky sap or juice as the others do:
it perisheth like as the other when it hath perfected his seed. This may
be called Tragopogon minus angustifolium, little narrow-leaved Goat's-
Beard.

The Place.

The first grows not wild in England that I could ever see or hear of,
except in Lancashire upon the banks of the river Calder, near to my Lady
Heskith's house, two miles from Whalley: it is sown in gardens for the
beauty of the flowers almost everywhere. The others grow in meadows and
fertile pastures in most places of England. It grows plentifully in most
of the fields about London, as at Islington, in the meadows by Redriff,
Deptford, and Putney, and in divers other places.

The Time.

They flower and flourish from the beginning of June to the end of August.

The Names.

Goat's-Beard is called in Latin, Barba hirci, and also Coma: in High
Dutch, Bocsbaert: in Low Dutch, Josephes Bloemen: in French, Barbe de
bouc, and Sassify: in Italian, Sassefrica: in Spanish, Barba cabruna: in
English, Goat's-Beard, Joseph's Flower, Star of Jerusalem, Noon-Tide, and
Go-To-Bed-At-Noon.

The Temperature.

There herbs are temperate between heat and moisture.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of Goat's-Beard boiled in wine and drunk, assuageth the pain
and pricking stitches of the sides.

B. The same boiled in water until they be tender, and buttered as
parsnips and carrots, are a most pleasant and wholsome meat, in delicate
taste far surpassing either Parsnip or Carrot: which meat procures
appetite, warmeth the stomach, prevaileth greatly in consumptions, and
strengtheneth those that have been sick of a long lingering disease.



CHAP. 254. Of Viper's-Grass.


Fig. 1093. Common Viper's-Grass (1)
Fig. 1094. Dwarf Viper's-Grass (2)

The Description.

1. The first of the Viper's-Grasses hath long broad leaves, fat, or full
bodied, uneven about the edges, sharp pointed, with a high swollen rib
down the middle, and of an overworn colour, tending to the colour of
Woad: among which riseth up a stiff stalk, smooth and plain, of two
cubits high, whereon do grow such leaves as those next the ground. The
flowers stand on the top of the stalks, consisting of many small yellow
leaves, thick thrust together, very double, as are those of Goat's-Beard,
whereof it is a kind, as are all the rest that do follow in this present
chapter: the root is long, thick, very brittle, continuing many years,
yielding great increase of roots, black without, white within, and
yielding a milky juice, as do the leaves also, like unto the Goat's-
Beard.

2. The Dwarf Viper's-grass differeth not from the precedent, saving that
it is altogether lesser, wherein especially consisteth the difference.


Fig. 1095. Austrian Viper's-Grass (3)
Fig. 1096. Hungary Viper's-Grass (4)

3. The broad-leaved Austrian Viper's-Grass hath broad leaves sharp
pointed, uneven about the edges, of a bluish green colour: the stalk
riseth up to the height of a foot or better; on the top whereof do stand
fair yellow flowers, very double, greater and broader than any of the
rest, of a resonable good smell. The seed followeth, long and sharp, like
unto those of Goat's-Beard. The root is thick, long, and full of a milky
juice, as are the leaves also.

4. The narrow-leaved Hungary Viper's-Grass hath long leaves like to those
of Goat's-Beard, but longer and narrower, among which riseth up a slender
hollow stalk, stiff and smooth, on the top whereof do stand fair double
flowers of a fair blue colour tending to purple, in shape like the other
of his kind, of a pleasant sweet smell, like the smell of sweet balls
made of benzoin. The seed is contained in small cups like those of
Goat's-beard, wrapped in a downy matter, that is caried away with the
wind. The root is not so thick nor long as the others, very single,
bearded at the top, with certain hairy thrums yielding a milky juice of a
resinous taste, and somewhat sharp withal. It endureth the winter even as
the others do.

Fig. 1097. Narrow-Leaved Viper's-Grass (5)

5. This hath leaves like those of Goat's-Beard, but stiffer and shorter,
amongst which there grows up a short hollow stalk some handful high, set
with a few short leaves, bearing a yellow flower at the top, almost like
that of the last save one, but less, the seed is contained in such cups
as the common Viper's-Grass, and being ripe is caried away with the least
wind. The root is black, with a wrinkled bark, and full of milk, having
the head hairy, as also the last described hath. This by Clusius is
called Scorsonera humilis angustifolia pannonica.

The Place and Time.

Most of these are strangers in England. The two first described do grow
in my garden. The rest are touched in their several titles.

They flower and flourish from May to the end of July.

The Names.

Viper's-Grass is called of the Spaniards Scorzonera, which soundeth in
Latin Viperaria, or Viperina, or Serpentaria, so called because it is
accounted to be of force and efficacy against the poisons of vipers and
serpents, for vipera, or a viper is called in Spanish scurzo: it hath no
name either in the high or Low Dutch, nor in any other, more than hath
been said, that I can read: in English we may call it Scorzoner, after
the Spanish name, or Viper's-Grass.

The Temperature.

They are hot and moist as are the Goat's-Beards.

The Virtues.

A. It is reported by those of great judgement, that Viper's-grass is most
excellent against the infections of the plague, and all poisons of
venomous beasts, and especially to cure the bitings of vipers, (of which
there be very many in Spain and other hot countries, yet have I heard
that they have been seen in England) if the juice or herb be drunk.

B. It helpeth the infirmities of the heart, and such as use to swoon
much: it cureth also them that have the falling sickness, and such as are
troubled with giddiness in the head.

C. The root being eaten, either roasted in embers, sodden, or raw, doth
make a man merry, and removeth all sorrow.

D. The root condited with sugar, as are the roots of Eringos and such
like, work the like effects: but more familiarly, being thus dressed.



CHAP. 255. Of Marigolds.

Fig. 1098. Kinds of Marigold (1-7)

The Description.

1. The Greater Double Marigold hath many large, fat, broad leaves,
springing immediately from a fibrous or thready root; the upper sides of
the leaves are of a deep green, and the lower side of a more light and
shining green: among which rise up stalks somewhat hairy, and also
somewhat jointed, and full of a spongeous pith. The flowers in the top
are beautiful, round, very large and double, something sweet, with a
certain strong smell, of a light saffron colour, or like pure gold: from
the which follow a number of long crooked seeds, especially the
outermost, or those that stand about the edges of the flower; which being
sown commonly bring forth single flowers, whereas contrariwise those
seeds in the middle are lesser, and for the most part bring forth such
flowers as that was from whence it was taken.

2. The Common Double Marigold hath many fat, thick, crumpled leaves set
upon a gross and spongeous stalk: whereupon do grow fair double yellow
flowers, having for the most part in the middle a bunch of threads thick
thrust together: which being past there succeed such crooked seeds as the
first described. The root is thick and hard, with some threads annexed
thereto.

3. The smaller or finer leaved double Marigold groweth upright; having
for the most part one stem or fat spongeous stalk, garnished with smooth
and fat leaves confusedly. The flowers grow at the top of the small
branches, very double, but lesser than the other, consisting of more fine
jaggedness, and of a fair yellow gold colour. The root is like the
precedent.

4. The Globe-flowering Marigold hath many large broad leaves rising
immediately forth of the ground; among which riseth up a stalk of the
height of a cubit, dividing itself toward the top into other smaller
branches, set or garnished with the like leaves, but confusedly, or
without order. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, very double;
the small leaves whereof are set in comely order by certain ranks or
rows, as sundry lines are in a globe, traversing the whole compass of the
same; whereupon it took the name orbiculata.

5. The fifth sort of double Marigold differeth not from the last
described, saving in the colour of the flowers; for this plant bringeth
forth flowers of a straw or light yellow colour, and the others not so,
wherein consisteth the difference.

All these five here described, differ nothing but in the bigness and
littleness of the plants and flowers, and in the intenseness and
remissness of their colour, which is either orange, yellow, or of a straw
colour.

6. The Marigold with single flowers differeth not from those with double
flowers, but it that it consisteth of fewer leaves, which we therefore
term single, in comparison of the rest, and that maketh the difference.

7. This Fruitful or Much-Bearing Marigold is likewise called of the
vulgar sort of women, Jackanapes-On-Horseback: it hath leaves, stalks,
and roots like the common sort of Marigold, differing in the shape of his
flowers, for this plant doth bring forth at the top of the stalk one
flower like the other Marigolds from the which start forth sundry other
small flowers, yellow likewise, and of the same fashion as the first,
which if I be not deceived cometh to pass per accidens, or by chance, as
Nature oftentimes liketh to play with other flowers, or as children are
born with two thumbs on one hand, and such like, which living to be men,
do get children like unto others; even so is the seed of this Marigold,
which if it be sown, it brings forth not one flower in a thousand like
the plant from whence it was taken.

8. The other fruitful Marigold is doubtless a degenerate kind, coming by
chance from the seed of the double Marigold, whereas for the most part
the other cometh of the seed of the single flowers, wherein consisteth
the difference. The flower of this (wherein the only difference consists)
you shall find expressed at the bottom of the fourth figure.

Fig. 1099. Mountain Marigold (9)

9. The Alpish or Mountain Marigold, which Lobel setteth down for Nardis
celtica, or Plantago alpinis, is called by Tabernamontanus, Caltha, or
Calendula alpina: and because I see it rather resembles a Marigold, than
any other plant, I have not thought it amiss to insert it in this place,
leaving the consideration thereof unto the friendly reader, or to a
further consideration, because it is a plant that I am not well
acquainted withal; yet I do read that it hath a thick root, growng aslope
under the upper crust of the earth, of an aromatical or spicy taste, and
somewhat biting, with many thready strings annexed thereto: from which
rise up broad thick and rough leaves of an overworn green colour, not
unlike to those of Plantain: among which there riseth up a rough and
tender stalk set with the like leaves; on the top wherof cometh forth a
single yellow flower, paled about the edges with small leaves of a light
yellow, tending to a straw colour. The middle of the flower is composed
of a bundle of threads, thick thrust together, such as is in the middle
of the Field Daisy, of a deep yellow colour.

This plant is all one with the two described in the next Chapter: they
vary only thus; the stalks and leaves are sometimes hairy, otherwhiles
smooth; the flower is yellow, or else blue. I having three figures ready
cut, think it not amis to give you one to express each variety.

10. The Wild Marigold is like unto the single garden Marigold, but
altogether lesser; and the whole plant perisheth at the first approach of
winter, and recovereth itself again by falling of the seed.

The Place.

These Marigolds, with double flowers especially, are set and sown in
gardens: the rest, their titles do set forth their natural being.

The Time.

The Marigold flowereth from April or May even until winter, and in winter
also, if it be warm.

The Names.

The Marigold is called Calendula: it is to be seen in flower in the
Calends almost of every month: it is also called Chrysanthemum, of his
golden colour: of some, Caltha, and Caltha poetarum: whereof Columella
and Virgil do write, saying, That Caltha is a flower of a yellow colour:
whereof Virgil in his Bucolics, the second Eclogue, writeth thus

Tum Casia atque aliis intexens suavibus herbis
Mollia Luteola pingit vaccinia Caltha
And then she'll Spike and such sweet herbs infold
And paint the Jacinth with the Marigold.

Columella also in his tenth book of gardens hath these words;

Candida Leucoia & flaventia lumina Calthae.
Stock-Gillyflowers exceeding white,
And Marigolds most yellow bright.

It is thought to be Gromphena plinii: in Low Dutch it is called Goudt
Bloemen: in High Dutch, Kingleblumen: in French, Sousii & Goude: in
Italian, Fior d'ogni mese: in English, Marigolds, and Ruds.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The flower of the Marigold is of temperature hot, almost in the second
degree, especially when it is dry: it is thought to strengthen and
comfort the heart very much, and also to withstand poison, as also to be
good against pestilent agues, being taken any way. Fuchsius hath written,
That being drunk with wine it bringeth down the terms, and that the fume
thereof expelleth the secondine or afterbirth.

B. But the leaves of the herb are hotter; for there is in them a certain
biting, but by reason of the moisture joined with it, it doth not by and
by show itself, by means of which moisture they mollify the belly, and
procure solubleness if it be used as a pot-herb.

C. Fuchsius writeth, That if the mouth be washed with the juice it
helpeth the tooth-ache.

D. The flowers and leaves of Marigolds being distilled, and the water
dropped into red and watery eyes, ceaseth the inflammation, and taketh
away the pain.

E. Conserve made of the flowers and sugar taken in the morning fasting,
cureth the trembling of the heart, and is also given in time of plague or
penitence, or corruption of the air.

F. The yellow leaves of the flowers are dried and kept throughout
Dutchland against winter, to be put into broths, in physical potions, and
for divers other purposes in such quantity, that in some grocers' or
spice-sellers' houses are to be found barrels filled with them, and
retailed by the penny more or less, insomuch that no broths are well made
without dried Marigolds.



CHAP. 256. Of German Marigolds.
Fig. 1100. Broad-Leaved Golden Marigold (1) Fig. 1101. Lesser Dutch
Marigold (2)
The Description.

1. Golden Marigold with the broad leaf doth forthwith bring from the root
long leaves spread upon the ground, broad, green, something rough in the
upper part, underneath smooth, and of a light green colour: among which
spring up slender stalks a cubit high, something hoary, having three or
four joints, out of every one whereof grow two leaves; set one right
against another, and oftentimes little slender stems; on the tops whereof
stand broad round flowers like those of Ox-Eye, or the Corn Marigold,
having a round ball in the middle (such as is in the middle of those of
Camomile) bordered about with a pale of bright yellow leaves. The whole
flower turneth into down that is carried away with the wind; among which
down is found long blackish seed. The root consisteth of thready strings.

2. The lesser sort hath four or five leaves spread upon the ground like
unto those of the last described, but altogether lesser and shorter:
among which riseth up a slender stalk two hands high; on the top whereof
stand such flowers as the precedent, but not so large, and of a blue
colour.

These two here described, and that described in the ninth place of the
foregoing chapter, are all but the varieties of one and the same plant,
differing as I have showed in the foregoing chapter.

The Place.

They be found everywhere in untilled places of Germany, and in woods, but
are strangers in England.

The Time.

They are to be seen with their flowers in June, in the gardens of the Low
Countries.

The Names.

Golden Marigold is called in High Dutch Waldiblume. There are that would
have it to be Alisma dioscoridis; which is also called Damasonium, but
unproperly; therefore we must rather call it Chrysanthemum latifolium,
than rashly attribute unto it the name of Alisma. This plant indeed is a
Doronicum, and the figure in the precedent chapter by Clusius is set
forth by the name of Doronicum 6. pannonicum: Matthiolus calls this plant
Alisma: Gesner, Caltha alpina: Dodonaeus, Chrysanthemum latifolium: Pena
and Lobel, Nardus celtica altera. Now in the Historia Lugdunensis it is
set forth in in four several places by three of the former names; and pg.
1169 by the name of Ptarmica montana dalechampii.

The Temperature.

It is hot and dry in the second degree being green, but in the third
being dry.

The Virtues.

A. The women that live about the Alps wonderfully commend the root of
this plant against the suffocation of the mother, the stoppings of the
courses, and the green sickness and such like affects in maids. Historia
Lugdunensis.



CHAP. 257. Of Corn-Marigold.
Fig. 1102. Corn Marigold (1) Fig. 1103. Valencia Corn Marigold (2)
The Description.

1. Corn Marigold or Golden Corn-flower hath a soft stalk, hollow, and of
a green colour, wherupon do grow great leaves, much hacked and cut into
divers sections, and placed confusedly or out of order: upon the top of
the branches stand fair starlike flowers yellow in the middle, and such
likewise is the pale or border of leaves that compasseth the soft ball in
the middle, like that in the middle of Camomile flowers, of a reasonable
pleasant smell. The roots are full of strings.

2. The golden flower of Valentia hath a thick fat stalk, rough, uneven,
and somewhat crooked, whereupon do grow long leaves, consisting of a long
middle rib, with divers little featherlike leaves set thereon without
order. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, composed of a yellow
thrummy matter, such as in the middle of the Camomile flowers, and is
altogether like the Corn Marigold last described, saving it doth want
that border or pale of little leaves that do compass the ball or head:
the root is thick, tough, and disperseth itself far abroad.


Fig. 1104. Small Mountain Marigold (3)
Fig. 1105. The Other Alpine Marigold (4)

3. To these may be added divers others, as the Chrysanthema alpina of
Clusius, and his Chrysanthemum creticum, and others. The first of these
small mountain Marigolds of Clusius his description hath leaves like
those of White Wormwood, but greener and thicker: the stalks grow some
handful high, set with few and much divided leaves; and at the tops, as
in an umbel, they carry some dozen flowers more or less, not much unlike
in shape, colour, and smell, to those of the common Iacobea, or Ragwort.
The root is somewhat thick, and puts forth many long white fibres. It
flowers in July and August, and grows upon the Alps of Styria. Clusius 
calls it Chrysanthemum alpinum 1.

4. The second of his description hath many leaves at the root, like to
the leaves of the male Southernwood, but of a lighter and brighter green,
and of no unpleasant smell, though the taste be bitterish and ungrateful:
in the midst of the leaves grow up stalks four foot high, divided at
their tops into sundry branches, which carry each of them two or three
flowers bigger than, yet like those of the common Camomile, but without
smell, and wholly yellow; the root is fibrous, blackish, and much
spreading. It flowers in August, and grows in the like places as the
former. Bauhin judges this to be the Achillea montana artemisia
tenuifolia facie of the Adversaria and the Ageratum ferulaceum in the
Historia Lugdunensis. But I cannot be of that opinion; yet I judge the
Achillea montana, and Ageratum ferulaceum to be but of the same plant.
But different from this, & that chiefly in that it hath many more, and
those much less flowers than those of the plant here figured and
described.

Fig. 1106. Candy Corn Marigold (5)

5. Now should I have given you the history of the Chrysanthemum creticum
of the same author, but that my friend Mr. Goodyer hath saved me the
labour, by sending an exact description thereof, together with one or two
others of this kind; which I think fit here to give you.

Chrysanthemum creticum primum clusii, pag. 334.

The stalks are round, streaked, branched, hard, of a whitish green, with
a very little pith within; near three foot high: the leaves grow out of
order, divided into many parts, and those again snipped or divided, of
the colour of the stalks: at the tops of the stalks and branches grow
great flowers, bigger than any of the rest of the Corn-flowers, forth of
scaly heads, consisting of twelve or more broad leaves apiece, notched at
the top, of a shining golden colour at the first, which after turn to a
pale, whitish, or very light yellow, and grow round about a large yellow
ball, of smell somewhat sweet. The flowers past, there cometh abundance
of seed closely compact or thrust together, and it is short, blunt at
both ends, streaked, of a salve colour, somewhat flat, & of a reasonable
bigness. The root is whitish, near a finger's bigness, short, with many
threads hanging thereat, and perisheth when the seed is ripe; and at the
spring groweth up again by the falling of the seed.

Chrysanthemum Boeticum Boelii, inscriptum.

The stalks are round, streaked, reddish brown; divided into branches,
containing a spongeous white pith within, a cubit high: the leaves grow
out of order, without footstalks, about three inches long, and an inch
broad, notched about the edges, not at all divided, of a dark green
colour: the flowers grow at the tops of the stalks and branches, forth of
great scaly heads, containing twenty leaves apiece or more, notched at
the top, of a shining yellow colour, growing about a round yellow ball,
of a reasonable good smell, very like those of the common Chrysanthemum
segetum: the seed groweth like the other, and is very small, long, round,
crooked and whitish: the root is small, whitish, thready, and perisheth
also when the seed is ripe.

Chrysanthemum tenuifolium Boeticum Boelii

The stalks are round, small, streaked, reddish, somewhat hairy, branched,
a cubit high or higher: the leaves are small, much divided, jagged, and
very like the leaves of Cotula foetida: the flowers are yellow, shining
like gold, composed of thirteen or fourteen leaves apiece, notched at the
top, set about a yellow ball, also like the common Chrysanthemum segetum:
the seed groweth amongst white flattish scales, which are closely
compacted in a round head together, and are small, flat, greyish, and
broad at the top: the root is small, whitish, with a few threads, and
dieth when the seed is ripe. July 28, 1621. John Goodyer.

The Place.

The first groweth among corn, and where corn hath been growing: it is
found in some places with leaves more jagged, and in others less.

The second is a stranger in England.

The Time.

They flower in July and August.

The Names.

These plants are called by one name in Greek, of the golden glittering
colour, Chrysanthemon: in High Dutch, Sant Johans Blum: in Low Dutch,
Uokelaer: in English, Corn Marigold, Yellow Corn-flower, and Golden Corn-
flower.

There be divers other flowers called Chrysanthemum also, as Batrachion, a
kind of yellow Crowfoot, Heliochryson, but these golden flowers differ
from them.

The Temperature.

They are thought to be of a mean temperature between heat and moisture.

The Virtues.

A. The stalks and leaves of Corn Marigold, as Dioscorides saith, are
eaten as other pot-herbs are.

B. The flowers mixed with wax, oil, rosin, and frankincense, and made up
into a cerecloth, wasteth away cold and hard swellings.

C. The herb itself drunk, after the coming forth of the bath, of them
that have the yellow jaundice, doth in short time make them well
coloured.



CHAP. 258. Of Ox-Eye.
Fig. 1107. Ox-Eye (1) Fig. 1108. True Ox-Eye (2)
The Description.

1. The plant which we have called Buphthalmum, or Ox-Eye, hath slender
stalks growing from the roots, three, four, or more, a foot high, or
higher, about which be green leaves finely jagged like to the leaves of
Fennel, but much lesser: the flowers in the tops of the stalks are great,
much like to Marigolds, of a light yellow colour, with yellow threads in
the middle, after which cometh up a little head or knop like to that of
Red Maythes before described, called Adonis, consisting of many seeds set
together. The roots are slender, and nothing but strings, like to the
roots of Black Hellebore, whereof it hath been taken to be a kind.

2. The Ox-eye which is generally holden to be the true Buphthalmum hath
many leaves spread upon the ground, of a light green colour, laid far
abroad like wings, consisting of very many fine jags, set upon a tender
middle rib: among which spring up divers stalks, stiff and brittle, upon
the top whereof do grow fair yellow leaves, set about a head or ball of
thrummy matter such as in the middle of Camomile, like a border or pale.
The root is tough and thick, with certain strings fastened thereto.

Fig. 1109. White Ox-Eye (3)

3. The White Ox-Eye hath small upright stalks of a foot high, whereon do
grow long leaves: composed of divers small leaves, and those snipped
about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The flowers grow on the tops of
the stalks, in shape like those of the other Ox-Eye; the middle part
whereof is likewise made of a yellow substance, but the pale or border of
little leaves, are exceeding white, like those of great Daisy, called
Consolida media vulnerariorum. The root is long, creeping alongst under
the upper crust of the earth, whereby it greatly increaseth. This by the
common consent of all writers that have delivered the history thereof,
hath not the pale or out leaves of the flower white, as our author
affirms, but of a bright and perfect yellow colour. And this is the
Buphthalmum of Tragus, Matthiolus, Lobel, Clusius, and others.

The Place.

The two first grow of themselves in Germany, Bohemia, and in the gardens
of the Low Countries; of the first I have a plant in my garden.

The last groweth in barren pastures and fields almost everywhere, saith
our author, but it is also a stranger with us, for any thing that I know
or can learn; neither can I conjecture what our author meant here: first
in that he said the flowers of this were white, and secondly in that it
grew in barren pastures and fields almost everywhere.

The Time.

They flower in May and June. The last in August.

The Names.

Touching the naming of the first of those plants the late writers are of
divers opinions: some would have it to be a kind of Veratrum nigrum,
Black Hellebore: other some Consiligo, or Bear-Foot; and again, others,
Sesamoides; and some, Elleborastrum:  But there be found two kinds of
Black Hellebore among the old writers, one with a leaf like unto Laurel,
with the fruit of Sesamum: the other with a leaf like that of the Plane
tree, with the seed of Carthamus or Bastard Saffron. But it is most
evident, that this Buphthalmum, in English, Ox-eye, which in this chapter
we in the first place have described, doth agree with neither of these:
what form Consiligo is of, we find not among the old writers. Pliny 26,
cap. 7, saith, That in his time it was found amongst the Marsi, and was a
present remedy for the infirmity of the lungs of swine, and of all kind
of cattle, though it were but drawn through the ear. Columella in his 6th
book, Chap. 5, doth also say, that in the mountains called Marsi there is
very great store thereof, and that it is very helpful to all kind of
cattle, and he telleth how and in what manner it must be put into the
ear; the roots also of Ox-Eye are said to cure certain infirmities of
cattle, if they be put into the slit or bored ear: but it followeth not
that for the same reason it should be Consiligo; and it is an ordinary
thing to find out plants that are of a like force and quality: for Pliny
doth testify in his 25th book, 5th chapter, That the roots also of Black
Hellebore can do the same: it cureth (saith he) the cough in cattle, if
it be drawn through the ear, and taken out again the next day at the same
hour: which is likewise most certain by experiments of the countrymen of
our age; who do cure the diseases of their cattle with the roots of
common Black Hellebore. The roots of White Hellebore also do the like, as
Absyrtus, and after him Hierocles doth write: who notwithstanding do not
thrust the roots of White Hellebore into the ear, but under the skin of
the breast called the dewlap: after which manner also Vegetius Renatus
doth use Consiligo, in his first book of the curing of cattle, chapter
12, entitled, Of the Cure of the Infirmities under the Skin: although in
his 3rd book, 2nd Chapter, de Malleo, he writeth, that they also must be
fastened through the ear: which things do sufficiently declare, that
sundry plants have oftentimes like faculties: and that it doth not at all
follow by the same reason, that our Ox-Eye is Consiligo, because it doth
cure diseases in cattle as well as Consiligo doth. But if we must
conjecture by the faculties, Consiligo then should be White Hellebore:
for Vegetius useth Consiligo in the very same manner that Absyrtus and
Hierocles do use White Hellebore. This suspicion is made the greater,
because it is thought that Vegetius hath taken this manner of curing from
the Grecians; for which cause also most do take Consiligo to be nothing
else but White Hellebore: the which if it be so, then shall this present
Ox-eye much differ from Consiligo; for it is nothing at all like to White
Hellebore.

And that the same is not Sesamoides, either the first or the second, it
is better known, than needful to be confuted.

This same also is unproperly called Helleborastrum; for that may aptly be
called Helleborastrum which hath the form and likeness of Hellebore: and
this Ox-Eye is nothing at all like to Hellebore. For all which causes it
seemeth that none of these names agree with this plant, but only the name
Buphthalmum, with whose description which is extant in Dioscorides this
plant doth most aptly agree. We take it to be the right Ox-Eye; for Ox-
Eye bringeth forth slender soft stalks, and hath leaves of the likeness
or similitude of Fennel leaves: the flower is yellow, bigger than that of 
Camomile, even such an one is this present plant, which doth so
exquisitely express that form or likeness of Fennel leaves, both in
slenderness and manifold jaggedness of the leaves, as no other little
leafed herb can do better; so that without all doubt this plant seemeth
to be the true and right Ox-Eye. Ox-Eye is called Cachla, or rather
Caltha; but Caltha is Calendula, or Marigold, which we said that our Ox-
Eye in flower did nearest represent. There are some that would have
Buphthalmum or Ox-Eye to be Chrysanthemum, Yellow Camomile, & say that
Dioscorides hath in sundry places, and by divers names entreated of this
herb; but if those men had somewhat more diligently weighed Dioscorides
his words, they would have been of another mind: for although
descriptions of either of them do in many things agree, yet there is no
property wanting that may show the plants to differ. The leaves of
Chrysanthemum are said to be divided and cut into many fine jags: and the
leaves of Buphthalmum to be like the leaves of Fennel: for all things
that be finely jagged and cut into many parts have not the likeness of
the leaves of Fennel. Moreover, Dioscorides saith, that Chrysanthemum
doth bring forth a flower much glittering, but he telleth not that the
flower of Buphthalmum or Ox-Eye is much glittering, neither doth the
flower of that which we have set down glitter, so that it can or ought
not to be said to glitter much. Do not these things declare a manifest
difference between Buphthalmum and Chrysanthemum, and confirm that which
we have set down to be the true and right Ox-Eye? We are of that mind,
let others think as they will: and they that would have Chrysanthemum to
be Buphthalmum, let them seek out another, if they deny this to be Ox-
Eye: for that which we and others have described for Chrysanthemum cannot
be the true Buphthalmum or Ox-Eye: for the leaves of it are not like
Fennel, such as those of the true Buphthalmum ought to be.

The Temperature.

But concerning the faculties Matthiolus saith, that all the physicians
and apothecaries in Bohemia, use the roots of this Ox-Eye instead of
those of Black Hellebore, namely for diseases in cattle: but he doth not
affirm that the roots hereof in medicines are substitutes, or quid pro
quo; for, saith he, I do remember that I once saw the roots hereof in a
sufficient big quantity put by certain physicians into decoctions which
were made to purge by siege, but they purged no more than if they had not
been put in at all: which thing maketh it most plain, that it cannot be
any of the Hellebores, although it hath been used to be fastened through
the ears of cattle for certain diseases, and doth cure them as Hellebore
doth. The roots of Gentian do mightily open the orifices of fistulas,
which be too narrow, so do the roots of Aristolochia, or Birthwort, or
Bryony, or pieces of sponges, which notwithstanding do much differ one
from another in other operations: wherefore though the roots of Ox-Eye
can do something like unto Black Hellebore, yet for all that they cannot
perform all those things that the same can. We know that thorns, stings,
splinters of wood, and such like, bring pain, cause inflammations, draw
unto them humours from the parts near adjoining, if they be fastened in
any part of the body; no part of the body is hurt without pain; the which
is increased if any thing be thrust through, or put into the wound:
peradventure also if any other thing beside be put into the slit or bored
ear, the same effect would follow which happened by the root of this
plant thrust in, notwithstanding we here affirm nothing, we only make way
for curious men to make more diligent search touching the operations
hereof.

Clusius affirms that when he came to Vienna in Austria, this was vulgarly
bought, sold, and used for the true Black Hellebore, the ignorance of the
physicians and apothecaries in the knowledge of simples was such to make
use of this so far different plant, when as they had the true Black
Hellebore growing plentifully wild within seven miles of the city, the
which afterward upon his admonition, they made use of.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, that the flowers of Ox-Eye made up in a cerecloth
do assuage and waste away cold hard swellings; and it is reported that if
they be drunk by and by after bathing, they make them in short time well
coloured that have been troubled with the yellow jaundice.



CHAP. 259. Of French Marigold, or African Marigold.
Fig. 1110. Great Double African Marigold (1) Fig. 1111. Great Single
African or French Marigold (3)
The Description.

1. The great double African Marigold hath a great long brown reddish
stalk, crested, furrowed and somewhat knobby, dividing itself toward the
top into other branches; whereupon do grow leaves composed of many small
leaves set upon a middle rib by couples, much like unto the leaves of
wild Valerian, bearing at the top very fair and beautiful double yellow
flowers, greater and more double than the greatest Damask Rose, of a
strong smell, but not unpleasant. The flowers being past, there
suceeedeth long black flat seed: the whole plant perisheth at the first
approach of winter.

2. There is little difference between this and the precedent, or last
described, saving that this plant is much lesser and bringeth forth more
store of flowers, which maketh the difference. And we may therefore call
it Flos aphricanus minor moltiflorus, the Small Double African Marigold.

3. The Single Great African Marigold hath a thick root, with some fibres
annexed thereto; from which riseth up a thick stalk chamfered and
furrowed, of the height of two cubits, divided into other small branches;
whereupon are set long leaves, compact or composed of many little ones
like those of the Ash tree, of a strong smell, yet not very unpleasant:
on the top of the branches do grow yellow single flowers composed in the
middle of a bundle of yellow thrums hard thrust together, paled about the
edges with a border of yellow leaves; after which cometh long black seed.
The whole plant perisheth with the first frost, and must be sown yearly
as the other sorts must be.

Fig. 1112. Small African or French Marigold (4)

4. The Common African or as they vulgarly term it French Marigold hath
small weak and tender branches trailing upon the ground, reeling and
leaning this way and that way, beset with leaves consisting of many
particular leaves, indented about the edges, which being, held up against
the sun, or to the light, are seen to be full of holes like a sieve, even
as those of Saint John's Wort: The flowers stand at the top of the
springy branches forth of long cups or husks, consisting of eight or ten
small leaves, yellow underneath, on the upper side of a deeper yellow
tending to the colour of a dark crimson velvet, as also soft in handling:
but to describe the colour in words, it is not possible, but this way;
lay upon paper with a pencil a yellow colour called massicot, which being
dry, lay the same over with a little saffron steeped in water or wine,
which setteth forth most lively the colour. The whole plant is of a most
rank and unwholesome smell, and perisheth at the first frost.

The Place.

They are cherished and sown in gardens every year: they grow everywhere
almost in Africa of themselves, from whence we first had them, and that
was when Charles the Fifth Emperor of Rome made a famous conquest of
Tunis; whereupon it was called Flos africanus, or Flos tunctanus.

The Time.

They are to be sown in the beginning of April, if the season fall out to
be warm, otherwise they must be sown in a bed of dung, as shall be showed
in the chapter of Cucumbers. They bring forth their pleasant flowers very
late, and therefore there is the more diligence to be used to sow them
very early, because they shall not be overtaken with the frost before
their seed be ripe.

The Names.

The African or French Marigold is called in Dutch, Thunis Bloemen: in
High Dutch, Indianisch Negelin, that is, the flower or Gillyflower of
India: in Latin, Cariophillus indicus; whereupon the Frenchmen call it
Oeilletz d'inde. Cordus calleth it Tanacetum peruvianum, of the likeness
the leaves have with Tansy, and of Peru a province of America, from
whence he thought, it may be, it was first brought into Europe. Gesner
calleth it Caltha aphricana, and saith that it is called in the
Carthaginian tongue, Pedua: some would have it to be Petilius flos
plinii, but not properly: for Petilius flos is an autumn flower growing
among briars and brambles. Andreas Lacuna calleth it Othonna, which is a
certain herb of the Troglodytes, growing in that part of Arabia which
lieth toward Egypt, having leaves full of holes as though they were eaten
with moths. Galen in his first book Of the Faculties of Simple Medicines,
maketh mention of an herb called Lycopersicum, the juice whereof a
certain centurion did carry out of Barbary all Egypt over with so rank a
smell, and so loathsome, as Galen himself durst not so much as talk of
it, but conjectured it to be deadly; yet that centurion did use it
against the extreme pains of the joints, and it seemeth to the patients
themselves, to be of a very cold temperature; but doubtless of a
poisonsome quality, very near to that of Hemlocks.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The unpleasant smell, especially that common sort with single flowers
(that stuffeth the head like to that of Hemlock, such as the juice of
Lycopersicum had) doth show that is of a poisonsome and cooling quality;
and also the same is manifested by divers experiments: for I remember,
saith Dodonaeus, that I did see a boy whose lips and mouth when he began
to chew the flowers did swell extremely; as it hath often happened unto
them, that playing or piping with quills or kexes of Hemlocks, do hold
them a while between their lips: likewise he saith, we gave to a cat the
flowers with their cups, tempered with fresh cheese, she forthwith
mightily swelled, and a little while after died: also mice that have
eaten of the seed thereof have been found dead. All which things do
declare that this herb is of a venomous and poisonsome faculty and that
they are not to be hearkened unto, that suppose this herb to be an
harmless plant: so to conclude, these plants are alike venomous and full
of poison, and therefore not to be touched or smelled unto, much less
used in meat or medicine.



CHAP. 259. Of the Flower of the Sun, or the Marigold of Peru.
Fig. 1113. Greater Sunflower (1) Fig. 1114. Lesser Sunflower (2)
The Description.

1. The Indian Sun or the Golden Flower of Peru is a plant of such stature
and tallness that in one summer being sown of a seed in April, it hath
risen up to the height of fourteen foot in my garden, where one flower
was in weight three pound and two ounces, and cross overthwart the flower
by measure sixteen inches broad. The stalks are upright and straight, of
the bigness of a strong man's arm, beset with large leaves even to the
top, like unto the great Clot-Bur: at the top of the stalk cometh forth
for the most part one flower, yet many times there spring out sucking
buds which come to no perfection: this great flower is in shape like to
the Camomile flower, beset round about with a pale or border of goodly
yellow leaves, in shape like the leaves of the flowers of white Lilies:
the middle part whereof is made as it were of unshorn velvet, or some
curious cloth wrought with the needle, which brave works if you do
thoroughly view and mark well, it seemeth to be an innumerable sort of
small flowers, resembling the nose or nozzle of a candlestick, broken
from the foot thereof: from which small nozzle sweateth forth excellent
fine and clear Turpentine, in sight, substance, savour and taste. The
whole plant in like manner being broken, smelleth of Turpentine: when the
plant groweth to maturity, the flowers fall away, in place whereof
appeareth the seed, black, and large, much like the seed of Gourds, set
as though a cunning workman had of purpose placed them in very good
order, much like the honeycombs of bees: the root is white, compact of
many strings, which perish at the first approch of winter, and must be
set in most perfect dunged ground: the manner how, shall be showed when
upon the like occasion I shall speak of Cucumbers and Melons.

2. The other golden Flower of Peru is like the former, saving that it is
altogether lower, and the leaves more jagged, and very few in number.

3. The male Flower of the Sun of the smaller sort hath a thick root,
hard, and of a woody substance, with many thready strings annexed
thereto, from which riseth up a grey or russet stalk, to the height of
five or six cubits, of the bigness of one's arm, whereupon are set great
broad leaves with long footstalks, very fragile or easy to break, of an
overworn green colour, sharp pointed, and somewhat cut or hacked about
the edges like a saw: the flower groweth at the top of the stalks,
bordered about with a pale of yellow leaves: the thrummed middle part is
blacker than that of the last described. The whole flower is compassed
about likewise with divers such russet leaves as those are that do grow
lower upon the stalks, but lesser and narrower. The plant and every part
therof doth smell of Turpentine, and the flower yieldeth forth most clear
Turpentine, as myself have noted divers years. The seed is also long and
black, with certain lines or streaks of white running alongst the same.
The root and every part thereof perisheth when it hath perfected his
seed.

4. The female or Marigold Sunflower hath a thick and woody root, from
which riseth up a straight stem, dividing itself into one or more
branches, set with smooth leaves sharp pointed, slightly indented about
the edges. The flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a faint yellow
colour, the middle part is of a deeper yellow tending to blackness, of
the form and shape of a single Marigold, whereupon I have named it the
Sun Marigold. The seed as yet I have not observed.

The Place.

These plants do grow of themselves without setting or sowing, in Peru,
and in divers other provinces of America, from whence the seeds have been
brought into these parts of Europe. There hath been been in Spain and
other hot regions a plant sown and nourished up from seed, to attain to
the height of 24 foot in one year.

The Time.

The seed must be set or sown in the beginning of April if the weather be
temperate, in the most fertile ground that may be, and where the sun hath
most power the whole day.

The Names.

The Flower of the Sun is called in Latin Flos solis, taking that name
from those that have reported it to turn with the sun, the which I could
never observe, although I have endeavoured to find out the truth of it;
but I rather think it was so called because it doth resemble the radiant
beams of the sun, whereupon some have called it Corona solis and Sol
indianis, the Indian Sunflower: others have called it Chrysanthemum
peruvianum or the golden flower of Peru: in English, the Flower of the
Sun, or the Sunflower.

The Temperature.

They are thought to be hot and dry of complexion.

The Virtues.

A. There hath not any thing been set down either of the ancient or later
writers concerning the virtues of these plants, notwithstanding we have
found by trial, that the buds before they be flowered, boiled and eaten
with butter, vinegar, and pepper, after the manner of Artichokes, are
exceeding pleasant meat, surpassing the Artichoke far in procuring bodily
lust.

B. The same buds with the stalks near unto the top (the hairiness being
taken away) broiled upon a gridiron, and afterward eaten with oil,
vinegar, and pepper, have the like property.



CHAP. 261. Of Jerusalem Artichoke.

Fig. 1115. Jerusalem Artichoke


One may well by the English name of this plant perceive that those that
vulgarly impose names upon plants have little either judgement or
knowledge of them. For this plant hath no similitude in leaf, stalk, root
or manner of growing with an Artichoke, but only a little similitude of
taste in the dressed root; neither came it from Jerusalem or out of Asia,
but out of America, whence Fabius Columna one of the first setters of it
forth fitly names it Aster peruvianus tuberosus, and Flos solis
farnesianus, because it so much resembles the Flos solis, and for that he
first observed it growing in the garden of Cardinal Farnesius, who had
procured roots thereof from the West Indies. Pelliterius calls this
Heliotropium indicum tuberosum; and Bauhin in his Prodromus sets this
forth by the name of Chrysanthemum latifolium brasilianum; but in his
Pinax he hath it by the name of Helianthemum indicum tuberosum. Also our
countryman Mr. Parkinson hath exactly delivered the history of this by
the name of Battatas de Canada, Englishing it Potatoes of Canada: now all
these that have written and mentioned it, bring it from America, but from
far different places, as from Peru, Brasil, and Canada: but this is not
much material, seeing it now grows so well & plentifully in so many
places of England. I will now deliver you the History, as I have received
it from my oft mentioned friend Mr. Goodyer, who, as you may see by the
date, took it presently upon the first arrival into England.

The Description.
Flos solis pyramidalis, parvo flore, tuberosa radice, Heliotropium
indicum quorundam.
["Pyramidal Sunflower, with small flowers, tuberous roots, a kind of
Indian Sunflower"]

This wonderful increasing plant hath growing up from one root, one,
sometimes two, three or more round green rough hairy streaked stalks,
commonly about twelve foot high, sometimes sixteen foot high or higher,
as big as a child's arm, full of white spongeous pith within.  The leaves
grow all alongst the stalks out of order of a light green color, rough,
sharp pointed, about eight inches broad, and ten or eleven inches long,
deeply notched or indented about the edges, very like the leaves of the
common Flos solis peruvianus, but nothing crumpled, and not so broad. The
stalks divide themselves into many long branches even from the roots to
their very tops, bearing leaves smaller and smaller toward the tops,
making the herb appear like a little tree, narrower and slenderer toward
the top, in fashion of a steeple or pyramid. The flowers with us grow
only at the tops of the stalks and branches, like those of the said Flos
solis, but no bigger than our common single Marigold, consisting of
twelve or thirteen streaked sharp pointed bright yellow bordering leaves,
growing forth of a scaly small hairy head, with a small yellow thrummy
matter within. These flowers by reason of their late flowering, which is
commonly two or three weeks after Michaelmas, never bring their seed to
perfection, & it maketh show of abundance of small heads near the tops of
the stalks and branches forth of the bosoms of the leaves, which never
open and flower with us, by reason they are destroyed with the frosts,
which otherwise it seems would be a goodly spectacle. The stalk sends
forth many small creeping roots whereby it is fed or nourished, full of
hairy threads even from the upper part of the earth,  spreading far
abroad: amongst which from the main root grow forth many tuberous roots,
clustering together, sometimes fastened to the great root itself,
sometimes growing on long strings a foot or more from the root, raising
or heaving up the earth above them, and sometimes appearing above the
earth, producing from the increase of one root, thirty, forty, or fifty
in number, or more, making in all usually about a peck, many times near
half a bushel, if the soil be good. These tuberous roots are of a reddish
colour without, of a soft white substance within, bunched or bumped out
many ways, sometimes as big as a man's fist, or not so big, with white
noses or peaks where they will sprout or grow the next year. The stalks
bowed down, and some part of them covered over with earth, send forth
small creeping thready roots, and also tuberous roots like the former,
which I have found by experience. These tuberous roots will abide alive
in the earth all winter, though the stalks and roots by the which they
were nourished utterly rot and perish away, and will begin to spring up
again at the beginning of May, seldom sooner.

The Place.

Where this plant groweth naturally I know not, in Anno 1617 I received
two small roots thereof from Master Franquevill of London, no bigger than
hen's eggs: the one I planted, and the other I gave to a friend, mine
brought me a peck of roots, wherewith I stored Hampshire.

The Virtues.

A. These roots are dressed divers ways; some boil them in water, and
after stew them with sack and butter, adding a little ginger: others bake
them in pies, putting marrow, dates, ginger, raisins of the sun, sack,
&c. Others some other way, as they are led by their skill in cookery. But
in my judgement, which way soever they be dressed and eaten they stir and
cause a filthy loathsome stinking wind within the body, thereby causing
the belly to be pained and tormented, and are a meat more fit for swine,
than men: yet some say they have usually eaten them, and have found no
such windy quality in them. 17 Oct. 1621. John Goodyer.



CHAP. 262. Of Camomile.
Fig. 1116. Camomile (1) Fig. 1117. Sweet Naked Camomile (2)
The Description.

1. To distinguish the kinds of Camomiles with sundry descriptions would
be but to enlarge the volume, and small profit would thereby redound to
the reader, considering they are so well known to all: notwithstanding it
shall not be amiss to say something of them, to keep the order and method
of the book hitherto observed. The common Camomile hath many weak and
feeble branches trailing upon the ground, taking hold upon the top of the
earth, as it runneth, whereby it greatly increaseth. The leaves are very
fine, and much jagged or deeply cut, of a strong sweet smell: among which
come forth the flowers unto the field Daisy, bordered about the edge with
a pale of white leaves: the middle part is yellow, composed of such
thrums close thrust together, as is that of the Daisy. The root is very
small and thready.

2. The second kind of Camomile hath leaves, roots, stalks, and creeping
branches like the precedent: the flowers grow at the tops of small tender
stems, which are nothing else but such yellow thrummy matter as is in the
midst of the rest of the Camomiles, without any pale or border of white
flowers, as the others have: the whole plant is of a pleasing sweet
smell; whereupon some have given it this addition, Odoratum.


Fig. 1118. Double-Flowered Camomile (3)
Fig. 1119. Roman Camomile (4)

3. This third Camomile differeth not from the former, saving that the
leaves hereof are very much doubled with white leaves, insomuch that the
yellow thrum in the middle is but little seen, and the other very small,
wherein consisteth the difference.

4. Roman Camomile hath many slender stalks, yet stiffer and stronger than
any of the others, by reason whereof it standeth more upright, and doth
not creep upon the earth as the others do. The leaves are of a more
whitish colour, tending to the colour of the leaves of Woad. The flowers
be likewise yellow in the middle, and paled about with a border of small
white flowers.

The Place.

These plants are set in gardens both for pleasure and also profit.

The Time.

They flower most part of all the summer.

The Names.

Camomile is called Chamaemelum: of some, Anthemis, and Leucanthemis, and
also Leucanthemon, especially that Double-Flowered Camomile: which Greek
name is taken from the whitenes of his flower: in English, Camomile: it
is called Camomile, because the flowers have the smell of [Greek] melon,
an apple, which is plainly perceived in common Camomile.

The Temperature.

Camomile, saith Galen, is hot and dry in the first degree, and is of thin
parts: it is of force to digest, slacken, and rarefy; also it is thought
to be like the Rose in thinness of parts, coming to the operation of oil
in heat, which are to man familiar and temperate: wherefore it is a
special help against wearisomeness, it easeth and mitigateth pain, it
mollifieth and suppleth, and all these operations are in our vulgar
Camomile, as common experience teacheth, for it heateth moderately, and
drieth little.

The Virtues.

A. Camomile is good against the colic and stone; it provoketh urine, and
is most singular in clysters which are made against the foresaid
diseases.

B. Oil of Camomile is exceeding good against all manner of ache and pain,
bruisings, shrinking of sinews, hardness, and cold swellings.

C. The decoction of Camomile made in wine and drunk, is good against
coldness in the stomach, sour belchings, voideth wind, and mightily
bringeth down the monthly courses.

D. The Egyptians have used it for a remedy against all cold agues; and
they did therefore consecrate it (as Galen saith) to their deities.

E. The decoction made in white wine and drunk, expelleth the dead child,
and secondine or afterbirth, speedily, and cleanseth those parts.

F. The herb boiled in posset ale, and given to drink, easeth the pain of
the chest coming of wind, and expelleth tough and clammy phlegm, and
helpeth children of the ague.

G. The herb used in baths provoketh sweat, rarefieth the skin, and
openeth the pores: briefly, it mitigateth gripings and gnawings of the
belly; it allayeth the pains of the sides, mollifies hard swellings and
wasteth away raw and undigested humours.

H. The oil compounded of the flowers performeth the same, and is a remedy
against all wearisomeness, and is with good success mixed with all those
things that are applied to mitigate pain.



CHAP. 263. Of Mayweed, or Wild Camomile.

Fig. 1120. Mayweed (1) Fig. 1121. Wild Mountain Camomile (3)
The Kinds.

There be three kinds of wild Camomile, which are generally called in 
Latin Cotula; one stinking, and two other not stinking: the one hath his
flower all white throughout the compass and also in the middle; and the
other yellow. Besides these there is another with very fair double
flowers void of smell, which a Kentish gentleman called Mr. Bartholomew
Lane found growing wild in a field in the Isle of Thanet, near unto a
house called Queakes, sometime the house of Sir Henry Crispe. Likewise
Mr. Hesketh, before remembered, found it in the garden of his inn at
Barnet, if my memory fail me not, at the sign of the Red Lion, or near
unto it, and in a poor woman's garden as he was riding into Lancashire.

The double flowered Mayweed, the last year, being 1632, I (being in
company with Mr. William Broad, Mr. James Clarke and four other London
apothecaries in the Isle of Thanet) found it growing wild upon the cliff
side, close by the town of Margate, and in some other places of the
island.
The Description.

1. Mayweed bringeth forth round stalks, green, brittle, and full of
juice, parted into many branches thicker and higher than those of
Camomile; the leaves in like manner are broader, and of a blackish green
colour. The flowers are like in form and colour, yet commonly larger, and
of a rank and naughty smell: the root is woody, and perisheth when the
seed is ripe. The whole plant stinketh, and giveth a rank smell.

This herb varies, in that it is found sometimes with narrower, and
otherwhiles with broader leaves; as also with a strong unpleasant smell,
or without any smell at all: the flowers also are single, or else (which
is seldom found) very double.

2. The Yellow Mayweed hath a small and tender root, from which riseth up
a feeble stalk dividing itself into many other branches, whereupon do
grow leaves not unlike to Camomile, but thinner and fewer in number. The
flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a gold yellow colour. So saith
our author, but I take this to be no other than the Buphthalmum verum of
our author, formerly described in the second place of the 258th chapter.

3. This Mountain Camomile hath leaves somewhat deeply cut in almost to
the middle rib, thick also and juicy, of a bitterish taste, and of no
pleasant smell: the stalks are weak, and some foot high, carrying at
their tops single flowers, bigger, yet like those of Camomile, yellow in
the middle, with a border of twenty or more long white leaves,
encompassing it. It increaseth much, as Camomile doth, and hath creeping
roots. It is found upon the Styrian Alps, and flowereth in July and
August. Clusius hath set this forth by the name of Leucanthemum alpinum.

The Place.

They grow in corn fields near unto pathways, and in the borders of field.

The Time.

They flower in July and August.

The Names.

Mayweed is called in shops Cotula foetida: of Leonhardus Fuchsius,
Parthenium and Virginea, but not truly: of others, High Dutch,
Krotendill; in Low Dutch, Paddebloemen, in French, Espargoutte: in
English, Mayweed, Wild Camomile, and Stinking Maythes.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Mayweed is not used for meat nor medicine, and therefore the faculties
are unknown; yet all of them are thought to be hot and dry, and like
after a sort in operation to Camomile, but nothing at all agreeing with
man's nature; notwithstanding it is commended against the infirmities of
the mother, seeing all stinking things are good against those diseases.

It is an unprofitable weed among corn, and raiseth blisters upon the
hands of the weeders and reapers.



CHAP. 264. Of Pellitory of Spain.
Fig. 1122. Pellitory of Spain (1) Fig. 1123. Wild Pellitory (2)
The Description.

1. Pyrethrum, in English, Pellitory of Spain (by the name whereof some do
unproperly call another plant, which is indeed the true Imperatoria, or
Masterwort, and not Pellitory) hath great and fat leaves like unto
Fennel, trailing upon the ground: amongst which, immediately from the
root riseth up a fat great stem, bearing at the top a goodly flower,
fashioned like the great single white Daisy, whose bunch or knob in the
midst is yellow like that of the Daisy, and bordered about with a pale of
small leaves, exceeding white on the upper side, and under of a fair
purple colour: the root is long, of the bigness of a finger, very hot,
and of a burning taste.

2. The Wild Pellitory groweth up like unto Wild Chervil, resembling the
leaves of Caucalis, of a quick and nipping taste, like the leaves of
Dittander, or Pepperwort: the flowers grow at the top of slender stalks
in small tufts or spoky umbels, of a white colour: the root is tough, and
of the bigness of a little finger, with some threads thereto belonging,
and of a quick biting taste.

The Place.

It groweth in my garden very plentifully.

The Time.

It flowereth and seedeth in July and August.

The Names.

Pellitory of Spain is called in Greek Pyrethron, by reason of his hot and
fiery taste: in shops also Pyrethrum: in Latin, Salivaris; in Italian
Pyrethro: in Spanish, Pelitre: in French, Pied d'Alexandre, that is to
say, Pes Alexandrinus, or Alexander's Foot: in High and Low Dutch,
Bertram: in English, Pellitory of Spain; and of some, Bertram, after the
Dutch name: and this is the right Pyrethrum, or Pellitory of Spain, for
that which divers here in England take to be the right, is not so, as I
have before noted.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The root of Pellitory of Spain is very hot and burning, by reason
whereof it taketh away the cold shivering of agues, that have been of
long continuance, and is good for those that are taken with a dead palsy,
as Dioscorides writeth.

B. The same is with good success mixed with antidotes or counterpoisons
which serve against if the megrim or continual pain of the head, the
dizziness called vertigo, the apoplexy, the falling sickness, the
trembling of the sinews, and palsies, for it is a singular good and
effectual remedy for all cold and continual infirmities of the head and
sinews.

C. Pyrethrum taken with honey is good against all cold diseases of the
brain.

D. The root chewed in the mouth draweth forth great store of rheum,
slime, and filthy waterish humours, and easeth the pain of the teeth,
especially if it be stamped with a little Stavesacre, and tied in a small
bag, and put into the mouth, and there suffered to remain a certain
space.

E. If it be boiled in vinegar, and kept warm in the mouth it hath same
effect.

F. The oil wherein Pellitory hath been boiled is good to anoint the body
to procure sweating, and is excellent good to anoint any part that is
bruised and black, although the member be declining to mortification: it
is good also for such as are stricken with the palsy.

G. It is most singular for the surgeons of the hospitals to put into
their unctions contra Neapolitanum morbum ["against the Neapolitan
disease" i.e. syphilis], and such other diseases that be cousin-germans
thereunto.



CHAP. 265. Of Leopard's Bane.
Fig. 1124. Small Leopard's Bane (1) Fig. 1125. Great Leopard's Bane (2)
The Description.

1. Of this plant Doronicum there be sundry kinds, whereof I will only
touch four: Dodonaeus unproperly calleth it Aconitum pardalianches, which
hath happened through the negligence of Dioscorides and Theophrastus, who
in describing Doronicum, have not only omitted the flowers thereof, but
have committed that negligence in many and divers other plants, leaving
out in many plants which they have described, the special accidents;
which hath not a little troubled the study and determination of the best
herbarists of late years, not knowing certainly what to determine and set
down in so ambiguous a matter, some taking it one way, and some another,
and some esteeming it to be Aconitum. But for the better understanding
hereof, know that this word Aconitum, as it is a name attributed to
divers plants, so it is to be considered, that all plants called by this
name are malignant and venomous, as with the juice and root whereof such
as hunted after wild and noisome beasts were wont to imbrue and dip their
arrows, the sooner and more surely to dispatch and slay the beast in
chase. But for the proof of the goodness of this Doronicum and the rest
of his kind, know also, that Lobel writeth of one called John de Vroede,
who ate very many of the roots at sundry times, and found them very
pleasant in taste, and very comfortable. But to leave controversies,
circumstances, and objections which here might be brought in and alleged,
assure yourselves, that this plant Doronicum minus officinarum, (whose
roots Pena reporteth to have found plentifully growing upon the
Pedemountain hills and certain high places in France) hath many leaves
spread upon the ground, somewhat like Plantain: among which rise up many
tender hairy stalks some handful and an half high, bearing at the top
certain single yellow flowers, which when they fade change into down, and
are caried away with the wind. The roots are thick and many, very
crookedly crossing and tangling one within another, resembling a
scorpion, and in some years do grow in our English gardens into infinite
numbers.

2. The second kind of Doronicum hath larger leaves than the former, but
round, and broader, almost like the small leaves of the Clot or Burr;
among which riseth up a stalk scarce a cubit high: the flowers are like
the former: the root is longer and bigger than the former, barred over
with many scaly barks, in colour white, and shining like white marble,
having on each side one arm or fin, not unlike to the sea shrimp called
Squilla marina, or rather like the ribs or scales of a Scorpion's body,
and is sweet in taste.


Fig. 1126. Crayfish Wolf's-Bane (3)
Fig. 1127. Winged Wolf's-Bane (4)

3. The third kind of Doronicum, growing naturally in great abundance in
the mountains of France, is also brought into and acquainted with our
English grounds, bearing very large leaves of a light yellowish green,
and hairy like Pilosella, or Cucumis agrestis. The stalks are a cubit
high, having at the top yellow flowers like Buphthalmum, or Consolida
media vulnerariorum; all the root is barred and welted over with scales
like the tail of a Scorpion, white of colour, and in taste sweet, with
some bitterness, yielding forth much clamminess, which is very
astringent.

4. The fourth kind hereof is found in the woody mountains about Turin and
Savoy, very like unto the former, saving that the leaves are somewhat
rougher, the flowers greater, and the stalks higher. But to be short,
each of these kinds are so like one another, that in show, taste, smell,
and manner of growing they seem to be as it were all one: Therefore it
were superfluous to stand upon their variety of names, Pardalianches,
Myoctonum, Thelyphonum, Camorum, and such like, of Theophrastus,
Dioscorides, Pliny, or any of the new writers, which names they have
given unto Doronicum; for by the opinion of the most skilful in plants,
they are but synonyms of one kind of plant. And though these old writers
speak of the hurtful qualities of these plants; yet experience teacheth
us that they have written what they have heard and read, and not what
they have known and proved; for it is apparent, that Doronicum (by the
consent of the old and new writers) is used as an antidote or certain
treacle, as well in the confections de Gemmis Mesuae, as in Electuario
Aromaticum. And though Matthiolus disclaimeth against the use thereof,
and calleth it Pardalianches, that is, Wolf's-bane; yet let the learned
know, that quantitas, non qualitas, nocet ["the quantity, not the nature,
causes harm"]: for though Saffron be comfortable to the heart, yet if you
give thereof, or of musk, or any such cordial thing, too great a
quantity, it killeth the party which receiveth it.


Fig. 1128. Narrow-Leaved Wolf's-Bane (5)
Fig. 1129. Large-Flowered Wolf's-Bane (6)

5. To these four formerly intended by our author, may we fitly add some
others out of Clusius. The first of these hath a stalk some foot high,
soft, rough, and crested: the leaves are few, thick, narrow, long, very
green and shining, yet hairy on their upper sides, but smooth on the
lower sides, and of a lighter green; yet those that adorn the stalk are
narrower: there groweth commonly at the top of the stalk one single
flower of the shape and bigness of the common Doronicum described in the
second place, but of a brighter yellow: the seed is little and blackish,
and is carried away with the wind: the root is small, blackish, and
jointed, having somewhat thick white fibres, and an aromatic taste. This
flowers in July and August, and grows in rocky places upon the highest
Alps. Clusius (the first and only describer thereof) calls it Doronicum 2
sive austriacum 1.

6. This grows somewhat higher than the last described, and hath much
broader and rounder leaves, and those full of veins, and snipped about
the edges. The knots and offsets of the roots deecend not down, but run
on the surface of the ground, and so send forth fibres on each side, to
fasten them and attract nourishment. The flower is like that of the
former, but much larger. This groweth in the high mountainous places of
Styria, and flowers at the same time as the former. Clusius calls this
Doronicum 4 Stiriacum.

Fig. 1130. Greatest Wolf's-Bane (7)

7. This is the largest of all the rest, and hath a stalk two cubits or
more high, of the thickness of one's little finger, crested, rough, and
towards the top divided into sundry branches. The leaves next to the root
are round, wrinkled, hairy, and fastened to a long stalk: those towards
the top of the stalk are longer and narrower, and engirt the stalk at
their setting on. The flowers are large and yellow, like to the other
plants of this kind: the seed also is carried away with the wind, and is
longish, and of a greenish colour: the root is knotty or jointed like to
a little shrimp, and of a whitish green colour. This flowers in June or
July, and grows upon the like places as the former. Clusius calls this
Doronicum 7 austriacum 3.

The Place.

The place is sufficiently set forth in the description; yet you shall
understand, that I have the two first in my garden; the second hath been
found and gathered in the cold mountains of Northumberland, by Dr. Penny
lately of London deceased, a man of much experience and knowledge in
simples, whose death myself and many others do greatly bewail.

The Time.

They flower in the months of June and July.

The Names.

Concerning their names I have already spoken; yet sith I would be glad
that our English women may know how to call it, they may term Doronicum
by this name, Crayfish Piss-a-Bed, because the flower is like Dandelion,
which is called Piss-a-Bed.

Our author certainly at the beginning of this chapter did not well
understand what he said, when he affirms, That the reason of the not well
knowing the Doronicum of the ancients was, [through the negligence of
Dioscorides and Theophrastus, who in describing, Doronicum, &c.] Now it
is manifest, that neither of these authors, nor any of the ancient Greeks
ever so much as named Doronicum: but that which he should have said, was,
That the want of exact describing the Aconitum thelyphonon in
Theophrastus, and Aconitum pardalianches in Dioscorides, (which are
judged to be the same plant and all one with our Doronicum) hath been the
cause, that the controversy which Matthiolusi and others have of late
railed cannot be fully determined; which is, Whether that the vulgar
Doronicum, used in shops, and described in this chapter, be the Aconitum
pardalianches? Matthiolus affirms it is, and much and vehemently exclaims
against the use thereof in cordial electuaries, as that which is of a
most pernicious and deadly quality because that (as he affirms) it will
kill dogs: now Dodonaeus also seems to incline to his opinion: but others
(and not without good reason) deny it; as Gesner in his Epistles, who
made often trial of it upon himself: part of his words are set down
hereafter by our author (being translated out of Dodonaeus) and some part
also you shall find added in the end of the virtues: and these are other
some: Plura alia nunc omitto, quibus ostendere liquido possem, nec
Doronicum nostrum, nec Aconitum ullo modo esse venenatum homini. Canibus
autem letiferum esse scio, non solum si drachmarum 4 sed etiam si vulnus
pondere sumant. ["Now I leave out many other things, whereof I could
speak at length, but neither our Doronicum, nor Aconitum is in any way
poisonous to men. To dogs however, I know even as little as four drachms
is deadly."] And before he said, quasi non alia multi canibus sint
venena, quae homini salubra sunt; ut de asparago fertur. ["there are not
many other things which are poison to dogs, which are healthful for men,
such as asparagus"] Of the same opinion with Gesner is Pena and Lobel,
who, in the Adversaria p. 290 & 291 do largely handle this matter, &
exceedingly deride and scoff at Matthiolus, for his vehement declaiming
against the use thereof. Now briefly my opinion is this, That the
Doronicum here mentioned is not that mentioned and written of by Serapio
and the Arabians; neither is it the Aconitumn pardalianches of
Dioscorides, nor of so malignant a quality as Matthiolus would have it;
for I myself also have often eaten of it, and that in a pretty quantity,
without the least offence.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. I have sufficiently spoken of that for which I have warrant to write,
both touching their natures and virtues; for the matter hath continued so
ambiguous and so doubtful, yea and so full of controversies, that I dare
not commit that to the world which I have read: these few lines therefore
shall suffice for this present; the rest which might be said I refer to
the great and learned Dodonaeus, and to your own consideration.

B. These herbs are mixed with compound medicines that mitigate the pain
of the eyes, and by reason of his cold quality, being fresh and green, it
helpeth the inflammation or fiery heat of the eyes.

C. It is reported and affirmed, that it killeth panthers, swine, wolves,
and all kinds of wild beasts, being given them with flesh. Theophrastus
saith, That it killeth cattle, sheep, oxen, and all four-footed beasts,
within the compass of one day, not by taking it inwardly only, but if the
herb or root be tied unto their privy parts. Yet he writeth further, That
the root being drunk is a remedy against the stinging of scorpions; which
showeth, that this herb or the root thereof is not deadly to man, but to
divers beasts only: which thing also is found out by trial and manifest
experience; for Conrad Gesner (a man in our time singularly learned, and
a most diligent searcher of many things) in a certain epistle written to
Adolphus Occo, showeth, That he himself hath oftentimes inwardly taken
the root hereof green, dry, whole, preserved with honey, and also beaten
to powder; and that even the very same day in which he wrote these
things, he had drunk with warm water two drams of the roots made into
fine powder, neither felt he any hurt thereby: and that he oftentimes
also had given the same to his sick patients, both by itself, and also
mixed with other things, and that very luckily. Moreover, the
apothecaries instead of Doronicum do use (though amiss) the roots thereof
without any manifest danger.

D. That this Aconite killeth dogs, it is very certain, and found out by
trial: which thing Matthiolus could hardly believe, but that at length he
found it out to be true by a manifest example, as he confesseth in his
Commentaries.

E. I have (saith Gesner) oft with very good success prescribed it to my
patients, both alone, as also mixed with other medicines, especially in
the vertigo and falling sickness: somtimes also I mix therewith Gentian,
the powder of Mistletoe and Astrantia: thus it works admirable effects in
the Epilepsy, if these thereof be continued for some time.



CHAP. 266. Of Sage.
Fig. 1131. Great Sage (1) Fig. 1132. Small Sage (2)
The Description.

1. The great Sage is very full of stalks, four-square, of a woody
substance, parted into branches, about the which grow broad leaves, long,
wrinkled, rough, whitish, very like to the leaves of Wild Mullein, but
rougher, and not so white, like in roughness to woollen cloth thread-
bare: the flowers stand forked in the tops of the branches like those of
Dead-Nettle, or of Clary, of a purple blue colour, in the place of which
doth grow little blackish seeds, in small husks. The root is hard and
woody, sending forth a number of little strings.

2. The lesser Sage is also a shrubby plant, spread into branches like to
the former but lesser: the stalks hereof are tenderer: the leaves be
long, lesser, narrower, but not less rough; to which there do grow in the
place wherein they are fixed to the stalk, two little leaves standing on
either side one right against another, somewhat after the manner of fins
or little ears: the flowers are eared blue like those of the former: the
root also is woody: both of them are of a certain strong smell, but
nothing at all offensive; and that which is the lesser is the better.

Fig. 1133. Kinds of Sage (3, 4, 8)

3. This Indian Sage hath divers branches of a woody substance, whereon do
grow small leaves, long, rough, and narrow, of an overworn colour, and of
a most sweet and fragrant smell. The flowers grow alongst the top of the
branches, of a white colour, in form like the precedent. The root is
tough and woody.

4. The Mountain Sage hath an upright stalk smooth and plain, whereupon do
grow broad rough and rugged leaves, slightly nicked, and unevenly
indented about the edges, of an hoary colour, sharp pointed, and of a
rank smell: the flowers grow alongst the top of the stalk in shape like
those of Rosemary, of a whitish red colour. The root is likewise woody.

5. We have in our gardens a kind of Sage, the leaves whereof are reddish;
part of those red leaves are striped with white, others mixed with white,
green, and red, even as nature list to play with such plants. This is an
elegant variety, and is called Salvia variegata elegans, Variegated or
Painted Sage.

6. We have also another, the leaves whereof are for the most part white,
somewhat mixed with green, often one leaf white, and another green, even
as nature list, as we have said. This is not so rare as the former, nor
near so beautiful, wherefore it may be termed Salvia variegata vulgaris,
Common Painted Sage.

7. There is kept in some of our chief gardens a fine Sage, which in shape
and manner of growing resembles the smaller Sage, but in smell and taste
hath some affinity with Wormwood; whence it may be termed Salvia
absinthites, or Wormwood Sage. Bauhin only hath mentioned this, and that
in the fourth place in his Pinax, pag. 237, by the name of Salvia minor
altera: and he adds, Haec odore & sapore est Absinthii, floreque rubente:
That is, This hath the smell and taste of Wormwood, and a red flower: but
ours (if my memory fail me not) hath a whitish flower: it is a tender
plant, and must be carefully preserved from the extremity of winter. I
first saw this Sage with Mr. Cannon, and by him it was communicated to
some others.

8. This which we here give you hath pretty large leaves, and those also
very hairy on the under side, but rough on the upper side like as the
ordinary Sage. The stalks are rough and hairy, four-square below, and
round at their tops. The flowers in their growing and shape are like
those of the ordinary, but of a whitish purple colour; and fading, they
are each of them succeeded by three or four seeds, which are larger than
in other Sages, and so fill their seed-vessels, that they show like
berries. The smell of the whole plant is somewhat more vehement than that
of the ordinary: the leaves also have sometimes little ears or
appendices, as in the smaller or Pig-Sage: and in Candy (the natural
place of the growth) it bears excrescences, or apples (if we may so term
them) of the bigness of large Galls or Oak-Apples: whence Clusius hath
given you two figures by the same titles as I here present the same to
your view. Matthiolus, Dodonaeus, and others also have made mention
hereof.

The Place.

These kinds of Sage grow not wild in England: I have them all in my
garden: most of them are very common.

The fine or elegant painted Sage was first found in a country garden, by
Mr. John Tradescant, and by him imparted to other lovers of plants.

The Time.

These Sages flower in June and July, or later: they are fitly removed and
planted in March.

The Names.

The Apothecaries, the Italians, and the Spaniards keep the Latin name
Salvia: in High Dutch, Salben: in French, Sauge: in Low Dutch, Savie: in
English, Sage.

The Temperature.

Sage is manifestly hot and dry in the beginning of the third degree, or
in the later end of the second; it hath adjoined no little astriction or
binding.

The Virtues.

A. Agrippa and likewise Aetius have called it the Holy-Herb; because
women with child if they be like to come before their time, and are
troubled with abortments, do eat thereof to their great good; for it
closeth the matrix, and maketh them fruitful, it retaineth the birth, and
giveth it life, and if the woman about the fourth day of her going abroad
after her childing, shall drink nine ounces of the juice of Sage with a
little salt, and then use the company of her husband, she shall without
doubt conceive and bring forth store of children, which are the blessing
of God. Thus far Agrippa.

B. Sage is singular good for the head and brain; it quickeneth the senses
and memory, strengtheneth the sinews, restoreth health to those that have
the palsy upon a moist cause, takes away shaking or trembling of the
members; and being put up into the nostrils, it draweth thin phlegm out
of the head.

C. It is likewise commended against the spitting of blood, the cough, and
pains of the sides, and bitings of serpents.

D. The juice of Sage drunk with honey is good for those that spit and
vomit blood, and stoppeth the flux thereof incontinently, expelleth wind,
drieth the dropsy, helpeth the palsy, strengtheneth the sinews, and
cleanseth the blood.

E. The leaves sodden in water, with Woodbine leaves, Plantain, Rosemary,
honey, alum, and some white wine, make an excellent water to wash the
secret parts of man or woman, and for cankers or other soreness in the
mouth, especially if you boil in the same a fair bright shining sea-coal,
which maketh it of greater efficacy.

F. No man needs to doubt of the wholesomeness of Sage Ale, being brewed
as it should be, with Sage, Scabious, Betony, Spikenard, Squinancy, and
Fennel seeds.

G. The leaves of red Sage put into a wooden dish, wherein is put very
quick coals, with some ashes in the bottom of the dish to keep the same
from burning, and a little vinegar sprinkled upon the leaves lying upon
the coals, and so wrapped in a linen cloath, and holden very hot unto the
side of those that are troubled with a grievous stitch, taketh away the
pain presently: The same helpeth greatly the extremity of the pleurisy.



CHAP. 267. Of French Sage or Woody Mullein.
Fig. 1134. French Sage (1) Fig. 1135. Lesser French Sage (2)
The Description.

1. Wild Mullein, Woody Mullein, Matthiolus his Mullein, or French Sage
groweth up like a small woody shrub, having many woody branches of a
woolly and hoary colour, soft and downy: whereupon are placed thick hoary
leaves, of a strong pontic savour, in shape like the leaves of Sage,
whereupon the vulgar people call it French Sage: toward the top of the
branches are placed roundels or crowns of yellow gaping flowers like
those of Dead-Nettle, but much greater. The root is thick, tough, and of
a woody substance, as is all the rest of the plant.

2. There is another sort hereof that is very like the other, saving that
the leaves & every other part of this plant, hath a most sweet and
pleasant smell, and the other more strong and offensive: the leaves also
are much lesser and narrower, somewhat resembling those of the lesser
Sage.

Fig. 1136. Syrian Sage-Leaved Mullein (3)

3. I think it not amiss here to insert this no less rare than beautiful
plant, which differs from the last described in the manner of growing &
shape of the flowers, which resemble those of the Lychnus chalcedonica,
or Nonesuch, but are of a yellow colour. The leaves are hairy, narrow,
and sharp pointed; the stalks square, and root woody. Lobel (to whom we
are beholden for this figure and description) calls this, Phlomos
lychnites altera syriaca.

The Place.

These wild Mulleins do grow wild in divers provinces of Spain, and also
in Languedoc, upon dry banks, and stony places. I have them both in my
garden, and many others likewise.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

They are called of the learned men of our time, Verbasca sylvestria: the
first is called in Latin, Elychnium, or after others, Elychinium, because
of the cottony substance thereof, matches, or wicks were made to keep
light in lamps: Verbascum lychnitis, as Dioscorides himself testifieth,
is named also Thryallis or Rose Campion; but the flower of Thryallis is
red of colour, as Nicander in his Counterpoisons doth show, but the
flowers of these are yellow: therefore they are neither Thryallis nor
Lychnitis, but Verbascum sylvestre, or wild Mullein, as we have already
taught in the Chapter of Rose Campion, that Thryallis is Lychnitis
sativa, or Rose Campion. There is nothing to the contrary, but that there
may be many plants with soft downy leaves fit to make candle wicks of: in
English it is generally called French Sage: we may call it Sage Mullein.

The Temperature.

As these be like in virtues to the others going before, so they be
likewise dry in temperature.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, that the leaves are stamped and laid in manner of a
poultice upon burnings and scaldings.



CHAP. 268. Of Clary.
Fig. 1137. Common Clary (1) Fig. 1138. Small Clary (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Clary which is the right, bringeth forth thick
stalks four-square, two foot long, divided into branches: it hath many
leaves growing both from the roots, and along the stalks and branches by
distances, one against another by two and two, great, a handful broad or
broader, somewhat rough, unequal, whitish and hairy, as be also the
stalks. The flowers are like those of Sage, or of Dead-Nettle, of colour
white, out of a light blue: after which grow up long toothed husks
instead of cods, in which is black seed. The root is full of strings: the
whole herb yieldeth forth a rank and strong smell that stuffeth the head:
it perisheth after the seed is ripe, which is in the second year after it
is sown.

2. The second kind of Clary hath likewise stalks four-square, a foot and
a half high: the leaves also be rough and rugged, lesser, and not so
white. The flowers be alike, of colour purple or blue: the roots be as
those of the former are. This hath not so strong a scent by a great deal.

Fig. 1139. Fuchsius' Wild Clary (3)

3. There is a kind of Clary which Fuchsius pictureth for wild Clary, that
hath shorter stalks, hairy, and also four-square: the leaves lesser,
long, deeper indented: the flowers blue of colour, sweet of smell, but
not so sweet as those of the right Clary: the husks or cods when they are
ripe bend downwards: the seed is blackish; the roots in like manner are
black and full of strings.

Fig. 1140. Jupiter's Distaff (4)

4. The fourth kind of Horminum, called Iovis colus, representeth in the
highest top of the stalk a distaff, wrapped about with yellow flax,
whereof it took his name, having knobby roots, with certain strings
annexed thereto like Galeopsis, or like unto the roots of Clary, which do
yield forth sundry four-square rough stalks, two cubits high, whereon do
grow leaves like those of the Nettle, rough, sharp pointed, and of an
overworn green colour: the flowers do grow alongst the top of the stalks,
by certain spaces, set round about in small coronets, or whorls, like
those of Sage in form, but of a yellow colour.

The Place.

These do grow wild in some places, notwithstanding they are manured and
planted in gardens, almost everywhere, except Jupiter's Distaff, being a
kind thereof, which I have in my garden.

The Time.

They flower in June, July, and August.

The Names.

Clary is called of the apothecaries Gallitricum: it is likewise named
Orvala: of some, Tota bona, but not properly: of others, Scarlea,
Sclarea, Centrum galli, and Matrisalvia: in Italian, Sciaria: in French,
Orvale: in High Dutch, Scharlach: in Low Dutch Scharleye: in English,
Clary, or Cleareye.

Jupiter's Distaff is called Colus iovis: of some, Galeopsis lutea, but
not properly: of divers, Horminum luteum, or yellow Clary, and Horminum
tridentinum, or Clary of Trent.

The Temperature.

Clary is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Clary powdered, finely searched and mixed with honey,
taketh away the dimness of the eyes, and cleareth the sight.

B. The same stamped, infused, or laid to steep in warm water, the
mucilage, or slimy substance taken and applied plasterwise, draweth forth
splinters of wood, thorns, or any other thing fixed in the body; it also
scattereth and dissolveth all kinds of swellings, especially in the
joints.

C. The seed powdered and drunk with wine, stirreth up bodily lust.

D. The leaves of Clary taken any manner of way, helpeth the weakness of
the back proceeding of the overmuch flowing of the whites, but most
effectually if they be fried with eggs in manner of a tansy, either the
leaves whole or stamped.



CHAP. 269. Of Wild Clary, or Oculus Christi.

Fig. 1141. Kinds of Wild Clary (1-4)

The Description.

1. Oculus Christi ["Christ's eye"] is also a kind of Clary, but lesser:
the stalks are many, a cubit high, squared, and somewhat hairy: the
leaves be broad, rough, and of a blackish green colour. The flowers grow
alongst the stalks, of a bluish colour. The seed is round and blackish,
the root is thick and tough, with some threads annexed thereto. This is
Hormini sylvestris 4 quinta species of Clusius.

2. The Purple Clary hath leaves somewhat round, laid over with a hoary
cottony substance, not much unlike Horehound: among which rise up small
hairy square stalks, set toward the top with little leaves of a purple
colour, which appear at the first view to be flowers, and yet are nothing
else but leaves, turned into an excellent purple colour: and among these
beautiful leaves come forth small flowers of a bluish or watchet colour, 
in fashion like unto the flowers of Rosemary; which being withered, the
husks wherein they did grow contain certain black seed, that falleth
forth upon the ground very quickly, because that every such husk doth
turn and hang down his head toward the ground. The root dieth at the
first approch of winter.

3. Broad-Leaved Clary hath a square stalk some cubit high, hairy, firm,
and jointed; the leaves are large, rough, and sharp pointed, snipped
about the edges, wrinkled, and standing by couples at each joint: upon
the branches in roundels grow purple flowers, less than those of Clary,
and scarce any bigger than those of Lavender: the seed is small and
black: the root is large, hard, black, and lives many years. It flowers
in June and July, and grows wild in many mountain places of Germany.
Clusius calls it Horminum sylvestre tertium.

4. This hath long leaves next unto the ground, growing upon pretty long
stalks, broad at their setting on, and so ending by little and little in
sharp points, they are not deeply cut in, but only lightly snipped about
the edges; they are also wrinkled on the upper side, and whitish, but
hairy on the underside. The square stalks are some cubit high, jointed,
and set with two leaves at each joint. The flowers grow alongst the tops
of the branches, and are of a snow white colour. There is a variety of
this with the leaves greener, and the flowers of an elegant deep purple
colour. This is the Horminum sylvestris quarti species prima of Clusius,
and the variety with the white flowers is his Hormini sylvestris quarti
species prima; and the figure that our author gave in the first place was
of these.

Fig. 1142. Red-Flowered Wild Clary (5)

5. There is another variety of the last described, which also hath square
stalks set with rough snipped leaves, which end in sharp points, but are
narrower at the lower end than the former, and they are green of colour:
upon the tops of the stalks grow red hooded flowers, and those not very
large: the seed is small and black, and the root lives many yeares. This
flowers in July. Clusius makes this his Hormini sylvestris quarti species
quarta.

The Place.

The first groweth wild in divers barren places, almost in every country,
especially in the fields of Holborn near unto Gray's Inn, in the highway
by the end of a brick wall: at the end of Chelsea next to London, in the
highway as you go from the Queen's palace of Richmond to the water's
side, and in divers other places.

The other is a stranger in England: it groweth in my garden.

The Time.

They flower and flourish from June to the end of August.

The Names.

Wild Clary is called after the Latin name Oculus Christi, of his effect
in helping the diseases of the eyes: in Greek Orminon, and likewise in
Latin, Horminum: of some, Geminalis: in English, Wild Clary, and Oculus
Christi.

The second is thought of some to be the right Clary, and they have called
it Horminum verum, but with greater error: it maybe called in Latin
Horminum sylvestre foliis & floribus purpureus, Clary with leaves and
flowers of a purple colour. So saith our author, but he should have shown
his reasons why this is not the Horminum verum, to have convincted the
error of Anguillaria, Matthiolus, Gesner, Dodonaeus, Lobel and others,
who have accounted it so, as I myself must needs do, until some reason be
shown to the contrary, the which I think cannot be done.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The temperature and faculties are referred unto the garden Claries:
yet Paulus AEgineta saith it is hot and moderately dry, and it also
cleanseth.

B. The seed of wild Clary, as Dioscorides writeth, being drunk with wine,
stirreth up lust, it cleanseth the eyes from films and other 
imperfections, being mixed with honey.

C. The seed put whole into the eyes, cleanseth and purgeth them
exceedingly from waterish humours, redness, inflammation, and divers
other maladies, or all that happen unto the eyes, and takes away the pain
and smarting thereof, especially being put into the eyes one seed at one
time, and no more, which is a general medicine in Cheshire and other
countries thereabout, known and used with good success.

D. The leaves are good to be put into pottage or broths among other
potherbs; for they scatter congealed blood, warm the stomach, and help
the dimness of the eyes.



CHAP. 270. Of Mullein.
Fig. 1143. Mullein (1) Fig. 1144. White-Flowered Mullein (2)
The Description.

1. The male Mullein or Hag-Taper hath broad leaves, very soft, whitish
and downy; in the midst of which riseth up a stalk, straight, single, and
the same also whitish all over, with a hoary down, and covered with the
like leaves, but lesser and lesser even to the top: among which taperwise
are set a multitude of yellow flowers, consisting of five leaves apiece:
in the places whereof come up little round vessels, in which is contained
very small seed. The root is long, a finger thick, black without and full
of strings.

2. The female Mullein hath likewise many white woolly leaves, set upon an
hoary cottony upright stalk, of the height of four or five cubits: the
top of the stalks resembleth a torch decked with infinite white flowers,
which is the special mark to know it from the male kind, being like in
every other respect.

The Place.

These plants do grow of themselves near the borders of pastures, and
ploughed fields, or causeways, and dry sandy ditch banks, and in other
untilled places. They grow in great plenty near unto a limekiln upon the
end of Blackheath next to London, as also about the Queen's house at
Eltham near unto Dartford in Kent: in the highways about Highgate near
London, and in most countries of England that are of a sandy soil.

The Time.

They are found with their flower from July to September, and bring forth
their seed the second year after the seed is sown.

The Names.

Mullein is called in shops, Tapsus barbatus: of divers, Candela regia,
Candelaria, and Lanaria: Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen, do call it
Verbascum: in Italian, Verbasco, and Tasso Barbasso: in Spanish,
Gordolobo: in High Dutch, Mullkraut: in French, Bouillon: in English,
Mullein or rather Woollen, Hag-Taper, Torches, Lung-Wort, and Bullock's 
Lung-Wort; and of some Hare's-Beard.

The Temperature.

Mullein is of temperature dry: the leaves have also a digesting and
cleansing quality, as Galen affirmeth.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Mullein being boiled in water, and laid upon hard
swellings and inflammations of the eyes, cureth and ceaseth the pain.

B. The root boiled in red wine and drunk, stoppeth the lask and bloody
flux.

C. The same boiled in water and drunk, is good for them that are broken
and hurt inwardly, and prevaileth much against the old cough.

D. A little fine treacle spread upon a leaf of Mullein and laid to the
piles or haemorrhoids, cureth the same: an ointment also made with the
leaves thereof and old hog's grease worketh the same effect.

E. The leaves worn under the feet day and night, in manner of a shoe sole
or sock, bringeth down in young maidens their desired sickness, being
kept under their feet with some socks or other thing for falling away.

F. The country people, especially the husbandmen in Kent, do give their
cattle the leaves to drink against the cough of the lungs, being an
excellent approved medicine for the same, whereupon they do call it
Bullock's Lung-wort.

G. Frankincense and Mastic burned in a chafing dish of coals, and set
within a close stool, and the fume thereof taken underneath, doth
perfectly cure the piles, haemorrhoids, and all diseases happening in
those lower parts, if also there be at every such fuming (which must be
twice every day) a leaf of the herb bound to the place, and there kept
until the next dressing.

H. There be some who think that this herb being but carried about one,
doth help the falling sickness, especially the leaves of that plant which
hath not as yet borne flowers, and that is gathered when the sun is in
Virgo, and the moon in Aries; which thing notwithstanding is vain and
superstitious.

I. The later physicians commend the yellow flowers, being steeped in oil
and set in warm dung until they be wasted into the oil and consumed away,
to be a remedy against the piles.

K. The report goeth, saith Pliny, that figs do not putrefy at all that
are wrapped in the leaves of Mullein: which thing Dioscorides also maketh
mention of.



CHAP. 271. Of Base Mullein.

Fig. 1145. Kinds of Base Mullein (1-4)

The Description.

1. The Base White Mullein hath a thick woody root, from which riseth up a
stiff and hairy stalk, of the height of four cubits, garnished with fair
greyish leaves like those of Elecampane, but lesser: the flowers grow
round about the stalks taper or torch fashion, of a white colour, with
certain golden thrums in the middle: the seed followeth, small, and of
the colour of dust.

2. Black Mullein hath long leaves, not downy at all, large and sharp
pointed, of an overworn blackish green colour, somewhat rough, and
strongly smelling: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks of a golden
yellow colour, with certain threads in the middle thereof. The root
differeth not from the precedent.

3. Candle-Wick Mullein hath large, broad, and woolly leaves, like unto
those of the Common Mullein: among which riseth up a stalk covered with
the like leaves, even to the branches wheron the flowers do grow, but
lesser and lesser by degrees. The stalk divideth itself toward the top
into divers branches, whereon is set round about many yellow flowers,
which oftentimes do change into white, varying according unto the soil
and climate. The root is thick and woody.

4. The Small Candle-wick Mullein differeth little from the last
rehearsed, saving that the whole plant of this is of a better savour,
wherein especially consisteth the difference. The flower also is much
larger, and of a straw, or pale yellow colour.

The Place.

These plants do grow where the other Mulleins do, and in the like soil.

The Time.

The time likewise answereth their flowering and seeding.

The Names.

Their capital names expressed in the titles shall serve for these base
Mulleins, considering they are all and every of them kinds of Mulleins.

The Temperature.

These Mulleins are dry without any manifest heat, yet doubtless hotter
and drier than the common Mullein or Hag-Taper.

The Virtues.

A. The Black Mullein, with his pleasant yellow flowers, boiled in water
or wine and drunken, is good against the diseases of the breast and
lungs, and against all spitting of corrupt rotten matter.

B. The leaves boiled in water, stamped and applied poultice-wise upon
cold swellings (called oedemata) and also upon the ulcers and
inflammations of the eyes, cureth the same.

C. The flowers of black Mullein are put into lye, which causeth the hair
of the head to wax yellow, if it be washed and combed therewith.

D. The leaves are put into cold ointments with good success, against
scaldings and burnings with fire or water.

E. Apuleius reporteth a tale of Ulysses, Mercury, and the enchantress
Circe, and their use of these herbs in their incantations and
witchcrafts.



CHAP. 272. Of Moth Mullein.
Fig. 1146. Pliny's Moth Mullein (1) Fig. 1147. Purple Moth Mullein (2)
The Description.

1. Pliny hath set forth a kind of Blattaria, which hath long and smooth
leaves, somewhat jagged or snipped about the edges: the stalk riseth up
to the height of three cubits, dividing itself toward the top into sundry
arms or branches, beset with yellow flowers like unto black Mullein.

2. Blattaria with purple flowers hath broad black leaves, without any
manifest snips or notches by the sides, growing flat upon the ground:
among which riseth up a stalk two cubits high, garnished with flowers
like unto the common Blattaria, but that they are of a purple colour, and
those few threads or chives in the middle of a golden colour: the root is
as thick as a man's thumb, with some threads hanging thereat, and it
endureth from year to year.


Fig. 1148. Green Moth Mullein (3)
Fig. 1149. Greenish-Purple Moth Mullein (4)

3. There is another kind like unto the black Mullein, in stalks, roots,
and leaves, and other respect, saving that his small flowers are of a
green colour.

4. There is another like unto the last before written, saving that his
leaves are not so deeply cut about the edges, and that the small flowers
have some purple colour mixed with the greenness.


Fig. 1150. White Moth Mullein (5)
Fig. 1151. Large-Flowered Moth Mullein (6)

5. This is somewhat like the first described in leaves and stalks, but
much less, the flowers also are of a whitish or greyish colour, and
therein consists the chiefest difference.

6. There is also another variety of this kind, which hath very fair and
large flowers, and these either of a bright yellow, or else of a purple
colour.

Fig. 1152. Yellow Moth Mullein (7)

7. This hath long narrow leaves like those of the second, snipped about
the edges, and of a dark green colour: the stalks grow some two cubits
high, and seldom send forth any branches; the flowers are large and
yellow, with rough threads in their middles tipped with red, and these
grow in such an order that they somewhat resemble a fly: the seed is
small, and contained in round buttons. This is an annual, and perisheth
when the seed is ripe.

The Place.

The first and fifth of these grow wild in sundry places, and the rest
only in gardens with us.

The Time.

They flower in July and August.

The Names.

The later herbarists call Moth Mullein by the name of Blattaria, and do
truly take it to be that which Pliny describeth in his 22nd book cap. 9,
in these words. "There is an herb like Mullein, or Verbascum nigrum,
which oftentimes deceiveth, being taken for the same, with leaves not so
white, more stalks, and with yellow flowers (as we have written) which do
agree with Black Mullein, but we have not as yet learned by observation
that they do gather moths and flies unto them, as we have said." Valerius
Cordus names it Verbascum leptophyllon, or Narrow-Leaved Mullein: their
several titles sufficiently set forth their English names.

The Nature and Virtues.

Concerning the plants comprehended under the titles of Blattaria, or Moth
Mulleins, I find nothing written of them, saving that moths, butterflies,
and all manner of small flies and bats do resort to the place where these
herbs are laid or strewed.

A. The decoction of the flowers or leaves of the first described opens
the obstructions of the bowels, as also of the mesaraic veins, as
Camerarius affirms.



CHAP. 273. Of Mullein of Ethiopia.

Fig. 1153. Mullein of Ethiopa.

The Description.

Mullein of Ethiopia hath many very broad hoary leaves spread upon the
ground, very soft and downy, or rather woolly, like to those of Hag-
taper, but far whiter, softer, thicker, and fuller of woolliness ; which
wool is so long,that one may with his fingers pull the same from the
leaves, even as wool is pulled from a sheep's skin: among which leaves
riseth up a four-square downy stalk, set with the like leaves, but
smaller; which stalk is divided at the top into other branches, set about
and orderly placed by certain distances, having many flowers like those
of Archangel, of a white colour tending to  blueness: which being past,
there succeedeth a three square brown seed: the root is black, hard, and
of a woody substance.

The Place.

It groweth naturally in Ethiopia, and in Ida, a hill hard by Troy, and in
Messenia a province of Morea, as Pliny showeth in his twenty-seventh
book, chap. 4, it also groweth in Mero an island in the river Nile: it
likewise groweth in my garden.

The Time.

It flowereth and flourisheth in June, and perfecteth his seed toward the
end of August.

The Names.

It is called in Greek Aithiopis and in Latin AEthiopis, of the country
and for that cause it is likewise called Meroides, of Mero, as Pliny
writeth: of some because the Greek word Aithon, signifieth in Latin
Favilla adusta, or Cinere aspersa, or covered with ashes: in English we
may call it Mullein of Ethiopia, or Woolly Mullein.

The Nature.

AEthiopis is dry without any manifest heat.

The Virtues.

A. AEthiopis is good for those that have the pleurisy, and for those that
have their breasts charged with corrupt and rotten matter, and for such
as are grieved with the asperity and roughness in the throat, and against
the sciatica, if one drink the decoction of the root thereof.

B. For the diseases of the breast and lungs it is good to lick oftentimes
of a confection made with the root hereof and honey, and so are the roots
condited with sugar, in such manner as they condite the roots of Eringos.



CHAP. 274. Of Cowslips.
Fig. 1154. Cowslips (1) Fig. 1155. Oxlips (2)
The Description.

1. Those herbs which at this day are called Primroses, Cowslips, and
Oxlips, are reckoned among the kinds of Mulleins; notwithstanding for
distinction's sake I have marshalled them in a chapter, coming in the
rearward as next neighbors to the Mulleins, for that the ancients have
named them Verbasculi, that is to say, Small Mullein. The first, which is
called in English the field Cowslip, is as common as the rest, therefore
I shall not need to spend much time about the description.

2. The second is likewise well known by the name of Oxlip, and differeth
not from the other, save that the flowers are not so thick thrust
together as the former, and they are fairer, and fewer in number, and do
not smell so pleasantly as the other: of which kind we have one lately
come into our gardens whose flowers are curled and wrinkled after a most
strange manner, which our women have named Jackanapes-On-Horseback.


Fig. 1156. Double Paigle (3)
Fig. 1157. Double Cowslips (4)

3. Double Paigle, called of Pena, Primula hortensis anglica omnium
maxima, & serotinus floribus plenis; that is, The greatest English garden
Cowslip with double yellow flowers, is so commonly known that it needeth
no description.

4. The fourth is likewise known by the name of double Cowslips, having
but one flower within another, which maketh the same once double, where
the other is many times double; called by Pena, geminata, for the
likeness of the flowers, which are brought forth as things against
nature, or twins.


Fig. 1158. Primrose (5)
Fig. 1159. Double White Primrose (6)

5. The fifth being the common white field Primrose, needeth no
description.

6. The sixth, which is our garden double Primrose, of all the rest is of
greatest beauty, the description whereof I refer unto your own
consideration.


Fig. 1160. Green Primrose (7)
Fig. 1161. Hesketh's Primrose (8)

7. The seventh kind is also very well known, being a Primrose with
greenish flowers somewhat welted about the edges: for which cause Pena
hath called it Silvarum primula, floribuss obscure virentidia fimbriatis.

8. There is a strange Primrose found in a wood in Yorkshire growing wild,
by the travail and industry of a learned gentleman of Lancashire called
Mr. Thomas Hesketh, a diligent searcher of simples, who hath not only
brought to light this amiable and pleasant kind of primrose, but many
others likewise, never before his time remembered or found out. This kind
of Primrose hath leaves and roots like the wild field Primrose in each
respect: it bringeth forth amongst the leaves a naked stalk of a greyish
or overworn greenish colour at the top whereof doth grow in the winter
time one flower and no more, like unto that single one of the field: but
in the summer time it bringeth forth a soft russet husk or hose, wherein
are contained many small flowers, sometimes four or five, and oftentimes
more, very thick thrust together, which maketh one entire flower, seeming
to be one of the common double Primroses, whereas indeed it is one double
flower made of a number of small single flowers, never ceasing to bear
flowers winter nor summer, as before is specified.

Besides these, there are kept in our gardens and set forth by Mr.
Parkinson (to whose work I refer the curious reader) two or three more
varieties; one a double Cowslip hose in hose, naked, without any husk;
the other two bear many green leaves on the tops of the stalks, the one
of them having yellowish flowers amongst the leaves, and the other only
longish narrow green leaves. The first of these he calls Paralysis
inodora flore geminato, Double Oxlips hose in hose. The second, Paralysis
fatua, the foolish Cowslip. And the last, Paralysis flore viridi roseo
calamistrato, the double green feathered Cowslip.

The Place.

Cowslips and Primroses joy in moist and dankish places, but not
altogether covered with water; they are found in woods and the borders of
fields: the Primrose found by Mr. Hesketh grows in a wood called
Clapdale, three miles from a town in Yorkshire called Settle.

The Time.

They flourish from April to the end of May, and some one or other of them
do flower all the winter long.

The Names.

They are commonly called Primula veris, because they are the first among
those plants that do flower in the spring, or because they do flower with
the first. They are also named Arthritica, and Herba paralysis, for they
are thought to be good against the pains of the joints and sinews. They
are called in Italian, Brache cuculi: in English, Petty Mulleins, or
Palsy-Worts: of most, Cowslips.

The greater sort, called for the most part Oxlips or Paigles, are named
of divers Herba s. petri. In English, Oxlip, and Paigle.

The common Primrose is usually called Primula veris: most herbarists do
refer the Primroses to the Verbascula or Petty Mulleins; but seeing the
leaves be neither woolly nor round, they are hardly drawn unto them: for
Phlomides are described by leaves, as Pliny hath interpreted it, hirsutis
rotunda, hairy and round; which Pliny, lib. 25, cap. 12, translateth
thus: Sunt & Phlomides duae Hirsutae, rotundis folii, humiles: which is
as much to say in English as, There be also two pretty Mulleins, hairy,
round leaved, low, or short. Fabius Columna refers these to the Alisma of 
Dioscorides and calls the Cowslip Alisma pratorum: and the Primrose,
Alisma sylvarum.

The Temperature.

The Cowslips and Primroses are in temperature dry, and a little hot.

The Virtues.

A. The Cowslips are commended against the pain of the joints called the
gout, and slackness of the sinews, which is the palsy. The decoction of
the roots is thought to be profitably given against the stone in the
kidneys and bladder; and the juice of the leaves for members that are
loose and out of joint, or inward parts that are hurt, rent, or broken.

B. A dram and a half of the powder of the dried roots of field Primrose
gathered in autumn, given to drink in ale or wine purgeth by vomit very
forcibly (but safely) waterish humours, choler, and phlegm, in such
manner as Azarum doth, experimented by a learned and skilful apothecary
of Colchester Mr. Thomas Buckstone, a man singular in the knowledge of
simples.

C. A conserve made with the flowers of Cowslips and sugar prevaileth
wonderfully against the palsy, convulsions, cramps, and all the diseases
of the sinews.

D. Cowslips or Paigles do greatly restrain or stop the belly in the time
of a great lask or bloody flux, if the decoction thereof be drunk warm.

E. A practitioner in London, who was famous for curing the frenzy, after
that he had performed his cure by the due observation of physic,
accustomed every year in the month of May to diet his patients after this
manner: Take the leaves and flowers of Primrose, boil them a little in
fountain water, and in some Rose and Betony waters, adding thereto sugar,
pepper, salt, and butter, which being strained, he gave them to drink
thereof first and last.

F. The roots of primrose stamped and strained, and the juice sniffed into
the nose with a quill or such like, purgeth the brain, and qualifieth the
pain of the megrim.

G. An unguent made with the juice of Cowslips and oil of Linseed cureth
all scaldings or burnings with fire, water, or otherwise.

H. The flowers of Primroses sodden in vinegar and applied, do heal the
King's evil, as also the almonds of the throat and uvula, if you
gargarise the part with the decoction thereof.

I. The leaves and flowers of Primroses boiled in wine and drunk, is good
against all diseases of the breast and lungs, and draweth forth of the
flesh any thorn or splinter, or bone fixed therein.



CHAP. 275. Of Bird's-Eye.
Fig. 1162. Red Bird's-Eye (1) Fig. 1163. White Bird's-Eye (2)
The Description.

1. Some herbarists call this plant by the name of Sanicula angustifolia,
making thereof two kinds, and distinguishing them by these terms, maior &
minor, sive media: others call them Paralytica alpina which without
controversy are kinds of Cowslips, agreeing with them as well in shape,
as in their nature and virtues, having leaves much like unto Cowslips,
but smaller, growing flat upon the ground, of a faint greenish colour on
the upper side, & underneath of a white or mealy colour: among which rise
up small and tender stalks of a foot high, having at the top of every
stalk a bush if small flowers in shape like the common Oxlip, saving that
they are of a fair stammel colour tending to purple: in the middle of
every small flower appeareth a little yellow spot, resembling the eye of
a bird; which hath moved the people of the North parts (where it
aboundeth) to call it Bird's-Eye. The seed is small like dust, and the
root white and thready.

2. The second is like the first, saving that the whole plant is greater
in each respect, and that the flowers are of a whitish colour.

The Place.

These plants grow very plentifully in moist and squally grounds in the
north parts of England, as in Harwood near to Blackburn in Lancashire,
and ten miles from Preston in Aunderness; also at Crosby, Ravenswaith,
and Crag-Close in Westmorland.

They likewise grow in the meadows belonging to a village in Lancashire
near Mawdesley, called Harwood, and at Hesketh not far from thence, and
in many other places of Lancashire, but not on this side Trent, that I
could ever have any certain knowledge of. Lobel reporteth, That doctor
Penny (a famous physician of our London College) did find them in these
Southern parts.

The Time.

They flower and flourish from April to the end of May.

The Names.

The first is called Primrose with the red flower: the second, Primrose
with the white flower, and Bird's-Eye.

The Nature and Virtues.

The nature and virtues of these red and white Primroses must be sought
out amongst those above named.



CHAP. 276. Of Bear's-Ears, or Mountain Cowslips.
Fig. 1164. Yellow Bear's-Ear (1) Fig. 1165. Purple Bear's-Ear (2)
The Kinds.

There are divers varieties of these flowers, and the chief differences
are, either from the leaves or flowers; from their leaves, which are
either smooth and green, or else grey and hoary, again they are smooth
about the edges, or snipped more or less. The flowers some are fairer
then other some, and their colours are so various, that it is hard to
find words to express them, but they may be referred to whites, reds,
yellows, and purples; for of all the varieties and mixtures of these they
chiefly consist. The gardens of Mr. Tradescant and Mr. Tuggy are at this
present furnished with very great varieties of these flowers.

The Description.

1. Auricula ursi was called of Matthiolus, Pena, and other herbarists,
Sanicula alpina, by reason of his singular faculty in healing of wounds,
both inward and outward. They do all call it Paralytica, because of his
virtues in curing the palsies, cramps, and convulsions, and is numbered
among the kinds of Cowslips, whereof no doubt they are kinds, as others
are which do hereafter follow under the same title, although there be
some difference in the colour of the flowers. This beautiful and brave
plant hath thick, green, and fat leaves, somewhat finely snipped about
the edges, not altogether unlike those of Cowslips, but smoother,
greener, and nothing rough or crumpled: among which riseth up a slender
round stem a handful high, bearing a tuft of flowers at the top, of a
fair yellow colour, not much unlike to the flowers of Oxlips, but more
open and consisting of one only leaf like Cotyledon: the root is very
thready, and like unto the Oxlip.

2. The leaves of this kind which beareth the purple flowers are not so
much snipped about the edges: these said purple flowers have also some
yellowness in the middle, but the flowers are not so much laid open as
the former, otherwise in all respects they are like.


Fig. 1166. Red bear's-Ear (3)
Fig. 1167. Scarlet Bear's-Ear (4)

3. Carolus Clusius setteth forth in the book of his Pannonic Travels two
kinds more, which he hath found in his travel over the Alps and other
mountains of Germany and Helvetia, being the third in number, according
to my computation: it hath leaves like the former, but longer, smaller,
and narrower toward the bottom, green above, and of a pale colour
underneath. The flowers are in fashion like to the former, but of a most
shining red colour within, and on the outside of the colour of a
mulberry: the middle or eye of the flower is of a whitish pale colour:
the root is like the former.

4. The fourth is a smaller plant than any of the foresaid, whose leaves
are thick and fat, nothing at all snipped about the edges, green above,
and greyish underneath. The flowers are like the former, shining about
the edges, of an overworn colour toward the middle, and in the middle
cometh a fork covered with an hairiness: the root is black and thready.


Fig. 1168. Blush-Coloured Bear's-Ear (5)
Fig. 1169. Bright Red Bear's-Ear (6)

5. The Blush-Coloured Bear's-Ear hath divers thick fat leaves spread upon
the ground, of a whitish green colour, slightly or not at all indented in
the edges: among which riseth up a naked stalk likewise hairy or whitish,
on the top whereof stand very fair flowers, in shape like those of the
common Cowslip, but of a whitish colour tending to purple, which we term
blush-colour. The root is tough and thready, as are all the rest.

6. The Bright Red Bear's-Ear of Matthiolus' description seems to late
herbarists to be rather a figure made by conceit or imagination, than by
the sight of the plant itself; for doubtless we are persuaded that there
is no such plant, but only a figure foisted for ostentation's sake, the
description whereof we leave to a further consideration, because we have
not seen any such plant, neither do we believe there is any such. So
saith our author, but he is here without cause injurious to Matthiolus,
for he figures and describes only the common first described Yellow
Bear's-Ear: yet if he had said the flowers were of a light shining red,
he had not erred; for I have seen these flowers of all the reds both
bright and dark that one may imagine.

Fig. 1170. Stammel Bear's-Ear (7)

7. Pena setteth forth a kind of Bear's-Ear under the name of Sanicula
alpina, having his uppermost leaves an inch long, somewhat jagged and
hemmed at the ends, and broad before like a shovel; the lower leaves next
the ground are somewhat shorter, but of the same form, among which riseth
a small slender footstalk of an inch long, whereon doth stand a small
flower, consisting of five little leaves of a bright red or stammel
colour.

8. The Snow White Bear's-Ear differeth not from the last described but in
the colour of the flower, for as the others are red, contrary these are
very white, and the whole plant is lesser, wherein consisteth the
difference. The root is long, tough, with some fibres thereto belonging.
Neither of these two last described will be content to grow in gardens.

The Place.

They grow naturally upon the Alpish and Helvetian mountains: most of them
do grow in our London gardens.

The Time.

These herbs do flower in April and May.

The Names.

Either the ancient writers knew not these plants, or else the names of
them were not by them or their successors diligently committed unto
posterity. Matthiolus and other later writers have given names according
to the similitude, or of the shape that they bear unto other plants,
according to the likeness of the qualities and operations: you may call
it in English, Bear's-Ear: they that dwell about the Alps do call it
Drastkrawt, and Schwindlekrawt, by reason of the effect thereof; for the
root is amongst them in great request for the strengthening of the head,
that when they are on the tops of places that are high, giddiness and the
swimming of the brain may not affect them: it is there called the Rock-
Rose, for that it groweth upon the rocks, and resembleth the brave colour
of the Rose. Fabius Columna proves this to be the Alisma or Damasonium of
Dioscorides and the ancients.

The Nature.

These herbs are dry and very astringent.

The Virtues.

A. It healeth all outward and inward wounds of the breast, and the
enterocele also, if for some reasonable space of time it be put in
drinks, or boiled by itself.

B. These plants are of the nature and temperature of Primula veris, and
are reckoned amongst the Sanicles by reason of their virtue.

C. Those that hunt in the Alps and high mountains after goats and bucks,
do as highly esteem hereof as of Doronicum, by reason of the singular
effects that it hath, but (as I said before) one espeially, even in that
it preventeth the loss of their best joints (I mean their necks) if they
take the roots hereof before they ascend the rocks or other high places.

D. The root of Damasinium (according to Dioscorides ) taken in the weight
of one or two drams, helpeth such as have devoured the Lepus marinus or
Sea Hare, or have been bitten by a Toad, or taken too great a quantity of
opium.

E. It is also profitably drunk, either by itself, or with the like
quantity of Daucus seeds, against gripings in the belly, and the bloody
flux.

F. Also it is good against convulsions and the affects of the womb.

G. The herb stays the fluxes of the belly, moves the courses, and applied
in form of a poultice assuageth oedematous tumors.



CHAP. 277. Of Mountain Sanicle.
Fig. 1171. Spotted Sanicle (1) Fig. 1172. Butterwort, or Yorkshire Sanicle
(2)
The Kinds.

There be sundry sorts of herbs contained under the name of Sanicle, and
yet not one of them agreeing with our common Sanicle, called Diapensia
any one respest, except in the virtues, whereof no doubt they took that
name; which number doth daily increase, by reason that the later writers
have put down more new plants, not written of before by the ancients,
which shall be distinguished in this chapter by several titles.

The Description.

1. Spotted Sanicle of the mountain hath small, fat & round leaves,
bluntly indented about the edges, and fashioned like unto the leaves of
Saxifragia aurea, or rather Cyclamen folio hederae, of a dark green
colour, and somewhat hairy underneath: amongst which rise up sundry
stalks, beset with like leaves, but smaller, and of a cubit high,
dividing themselves into many small arms or branches, bearing divers
little white flowers, spotted most curiously  with bloody specks or
pricks, insomuch that if you mark the admirable workmanship of the same
wrought in such glorious manner, it must needs put every creature in mind
of his Creator: the flowers are in smell like the May flowers or
Hawthorn: the seed is small and black, contained in small pointels like
unto White Saxifrage: the root is scaly and full of strings.

2. The second kind of Sanicle, which Clusius calleth Pinguicula, not
before his time remembered, hath small thick leaves, fat and full of
juice, being broad towards the root, and sharp towards the point, of a
faint green colour, and bitter in taste; out of the midst whereof
sprouteth or shooteth up a naked slender stalk, nine inches long, every
stalk bearing one flower and no more, sometimes white, and commonly of a
bluish purple colour, fashioned like unto the common Consolida regalis,
having the like spur or lark's heel anexed thereto.

Fig. 1173. Bear's-Ear Sanicle (3)

3. The third kind of mountain Sanicle some herbarists have called
Sanicula alpina flore rubro: the leaves shoot forth in the beginning of
the spring, very thick and fat, and are like a purse or round lump at
their first coming out of the ground; and when it is spread abroad, the
upper part thereof is full of veins or sinews, and hoven up or curled
like Ranunculus lusitanica, or like the crumpling of a cabbage leaf; and
are not only indented about the edges, but each leaf is divided into six
or more jags or cuts, deeply hacked, greenish above, and of an overworn
green colour underneath, hot in taste; from the middle whereof shooteth
forth a bar or naked stalk, six inches long, somewhat purple in colour,
bearing at the top a tuft of small hollow flowers, looking or hanging
downwards like little bells, not unlike in form to the common Cowslips,
but of a fine deep red colour tending to purple, having in the middle a 
certain ring or circle of white, and also certain pointels or strings,
which turn into an head wherein is contained seed. The whole plant is
covered as it were with a rough woolliness: the root is fibrous and
thready.

The Place.

These plants are strangers in England; their natural country is the
Alpish mountains of Helvetia: they grow in my garden, where they flourish
exceedingly, except Butterwort, which groweth in our English squally wet
grounds, and will not yield to any culturing or transplanting: it groweth
especially in a field called Crag-Close, and at Crosby, Ravenswaith, in
Westmorland, upon Ingleborough fells twelve miles from Lancaster, and in
Harwood in the same county near to Blackburn, ten miles from Preston in
Aunderness upon the bogs and marsh grounds, and in the boggy meadows
about Bishop's Hatfield; and also in the fens in the way to Wittlesmere
from London, in Huntingdonshire. It groweth also in Hampshire, and
abundantly in many places of Wales.

The Time

They flower and flourish from May to the end of July.

The Names.

The first is called Sanicula guttata, taken from the spots wherewith the
flowers are marked: of Lobel, Geum alpinum, making it a kind of Avens: in
English, Spotted Sanicle: of our London dames, Prattling Parnell.

The second is called Pinguicula, of the fatness or fullness of the leaf,
or of fattening: in Yorkshire, where it doth especially grow, and in
greatest abundance, it is called Butterworts, Butter-root, and White
Root; but the last name belongeth more properly to Solomon's Seal.

The Temperature and Virtues.

They are hot and dry in the third degree.

A. The husbandmen's wives of Yorkshire do use to anoint the dugs of their
kine with the fat and oleous juice of the herb Butterwort, when they are
bitten with any venomous worm, or chapped, rifted, and hurt by any other
means.

B They say it rots their sheep, when for want of other food they eat
thereof.



CHAP. 278. Of Foxgloves

Fig. 1174. Kinds of Foxgloves (1-4)

The Description

1. Foxglove with the purple flower is most common; the leaves whereof are
long, nicked in the edges, of a light green, in manner like those of
Mullein, but lesser, and not so downy: the stalk is straight, from the
middle whereof to the top stand the flowers, set in a course one by
another upon one side of the stalk, hanging downwards with the bottom
upward, in form long, like almost to finger stalls, whereof it took his
name Digitalis, of a red purple colour, with certain white spots dashed
within the flower; after which come up round heads, in which lies the
seed, somewhat brown, and as small as that of Thyme. The roots are many
slender strings.

2. The Foxglove with white flowers differs not from the precedent but in
the colour of the flowers; for as the others were purple, these
contrariwise are of a milk-white colour.

3. We have in our gardens another sort hereof, which bringeth forth most
pleasant yellow flowers, and somewhat less than the common kind, wherein
they differ. This also differs from the common kind in that the leaves
are much smoother, narrower, and greener, having the nerves or veins
running alongst it, neither are the nerves snipped, nor sinuated on their
edges.

4. We have also another sort, which we call Digitalis ferruginea, whose
flowers are of the colour of rusty iron; whereof it took his name, and
likewise maketh the difference.  Of this sort there is a bigger and a
lesser; the bigger hath the lower leaves four foot long, of a dark green
colour, with veins running along them; the stalks are some yard and half
high: the flowers large, and ending in a sharp turned up end as you see
in the figure, and they are of a rusty colour, mixed of a yellow and red.

5. The lesser dusky Foxglove hath much less leaves and those narrow,
smooth, and exceeding green: amongst which comes up a stalk some foot
high, having small flowers of the colour of the last described. This I
observed the last year 1632, in flower with Mr. John Tradescant in the
middle of July. It may fitly be called Digitalis ferruginea minor, Small
Dusky Foxglove.
The Place.

Foxglove groweth in barren sandy grounds, and under hedges almost
everywhere.

Those with white flowers do grow naturally in Londsdale, and Craven, in a
field called Crag-Close, in the North of England: likewise by Colchester
in Essex; near Exeter in the West parts, and in some few other places.
The other two are strangers in England, nevertheless they do grow with
the others in my garden.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in June and July.

The Names.

Foxgloves some call in Greek Thryallis, and make it to be Verbasci
species, or a kind of Mullein: in Latin, Digitalis: in High Dutch, 
Fingerhut, and Fingerkraut, in Low Dutch, Vinger Hoet: in French, Gantes
Nostre Dame: in English, Foxgloves. Fabius Columna thinks it to be that
Ephemerum of Dioscorides described in his fourth book, and cap. 75.

The Temperature.

The Foxgloves in that they are bitter, are hot and dry, with a certain
kind of cleansing quality joined them; yet are they of no use, neither
have they any place amongst medicines, according to the ancients.

The Virtues.

A. Foxglove boiled in water or wine, and drunken, doth cut and consume
the thick toughness of gross and slimy phlegm and naughty humours; it
openeth also the stopping of the liver, spleen, and milt, and of other
inward parts.

B. The same taken in like manner, or boiled with honeyed water or sugar,
doth scour and cleanse the breast, ripeneth and bringeth forth tough and
clammy phlegm.

C. They serve for the same purposes whereunto Gentian doth tend, and hath
been used in stead thereof, as Galen saith. So saith our author, but
where or by what name Galen either mentions, or affirms this which our
author cites him for, I must confess I am ignorant. But I probably
conjecture that our author would have said Fuchsius: for I only find him
to have these words set down by our authour, in the end of his Chapter of
Digitalis.



CHAP. 279. Of Baccharis out of Dioscorides.

Fig. 1175. Ploughman's Spikenard

The Description.

About this plant Baccharis there hath been great contention amongst the
old and new writers; Matthiolus and Dodonaeus have mistaken this plant,
for Conyza maior, or Conyza helenitis cordi; Virgil and Athenaeus have
confounded Baccharis, and Azarum together: but following the ancient
writers, it hath many blackish rough leaves, somewhat bigger than the
leaves of Primrose: amongst which riseth up a stalk two cubits high,
bearing at the top little chaffy or scaly flowers in bunches, of a dark
yellowish or purple colour, which turn into down, and are carried away
with the wind, like unto the kinds of thistles: the root is thick, gross,
and fat, spreading about in the earth, full of strings: the fragrant
smell that the root of this plant yieldeth, may well be compared unto the
savour of Cinnamon, Helenium, or Enula Campana, being a plant known unto
very many or most sorts of people, I mean in most parts of England.

The Place.

Baccharis delighteth to grow in rough and craggy places, and in a lean
soil where no moisture is: it groweth very plentifully about Montpellier
in France, and divers places in the West parts of England.

The Time.

It springeth up in April, it flowereth in June, and perfecteth his seed
in August.

The Names.

The learned herbarists of Montpellier have called this plant Baccharis:
the Grecians, Bachcharis, or after others, Pancharis, by reason of that
sweet and aromatical savour which his root containeth and yieldeth: in
English it may be called the Cinnamon Root, or Ploughman's Spikenard:
Virgil in his seventh Eclogue of his Bucolics maketh mention of
Baccharis, and doth not only show that it is a garland plant, but also
such a one as prevaileth against enchantments, saying,

-- Bacchare frontem
Cingite, ne vati nocet male lingua futuro.
With Ploughman's Nard my forehead girt,
Lest evil tongue thy poet hurt.

Baccharis is likewise an ointment in Athenaeus, in his 15th book, which
may take his name of the sweet herb Baccharis: for as Pliny writeth,
Aristophanes of old, being an ancient comical poet witnesseth, that
ointments were wont to be made of the root thereof: to be brief, Crateuas
his Asarum is the same that Dioscorides his Baccharis is. This plant here
described is the Conyza maior of Matthiolus, Tragus, and others.

The Temperature.

Baccharis or Ploughman's Spikenard is of temperature very astringent or
binding.

The Virtues.

A. Baccharis, or the decoction of the root, as Paulus AEgineta briefly
setteth down, doth open the pipes and passages that are stopped,
provoketh urine, and bringeth down the desired sickness: the leaves
thereof for that they are astringent or binding, stop the course of
fluxes and rheums.

B. Baccharis is a singular remedy to heal inflammations and Saint
Anthony's fire, called Ignis sacer, and the smell thereof provoketh
sleep.

C. The decoction of the roots of Baccharis helpeth ruptures and
convulsions, those also that have fallen from an high place, and those
that are troubled with the shortness of breath.

D. It helpeth also the old cough, and difficulty to make water.

E. When it is boiled in wine it is given with great profit against the
bitings of scorpions, or any venomous beast, being implastered and
applied thereto.

F. A bath made thereof and put into a close stool, and received hot,
mightily voideth the birth, and furthereth those that have extreme labour
in their childing, causing them to have easy deliverance.



CHAP. 280. Of Elecampane.

Fig. 1176. Elecampane

The Description

Elecampane bringeth forth presently from the root great white leaves,
sharp pointed, almost like those of great Comfrey, but soft, and covered
with a hairy down, of a whitish green colour, and are more white
underneath; slightly nicked in the edges: the stalk is a yard and a half
long, about a finger thick, not without down; divided at the top into
divers branches, upon the top of every sprig stand great flowers broad
and round, of which not only the long small leaves that compass round
about are yellow, but also the middle ball or circle, which is filled up
with an infinite number of threads, and at length is turned into fine
down; under which is slender and long seed: the root is uneven, thick,
and as much as a man may gripe, not long, oftentimes blackish without,
white within, and full of substance, sweet of smell, and bitter of taste.

The Place.

It groweth in meadows that are fat and fruitful: it is also oftentimes
found upon mountains, shadowy places, that be not altogether dry: it
groweth plentifully in the fields on the left hand as you go from
Dunstable to Puddle Hill: also in an orchard as you go from Colebrook to
Ditton ferry, which is the way to Windsor, and in sundry other places, as
at Lydden, and Folkestone, near to Dover by the sea side.

The Time.

The flowers are in their bravery in June & July: the roots be gathered in
autumn; and oftentimes in April and May.

The Names.

The Latins call it Inula and Enula; in shops Enula campana: in High
Dutch, Alantwurtz: in Low Dutch, Alandt wortele: in Italian, Enoa, and
Enola: in Spanish, Raiz del alla: in French, Enula campane: in English,
Elecampane, and Scabwort, and Horseheal: some report that this plant took
the name Helenium of Helena wife to Menelaus, who had her hands full of
it when Paris stole her away into Phrygia.

The Temperature.

The root of this Elecampane, is marvellous good for many things, being of
nature hot and dry in the third degree, especially when it is dry: for
being green and as yet full of juice, it is full of superfluous moisture,
which somewhat abateth the hot and dry quality thereof.

The Virtues.

A. It is good for shortness of breath, and an old cough, and for such as
cannot breathe unless they hold their necks upright.

B. It is of great virtue both given in a lohoch, which is a medicine to
be licked on, and likewise preserved, as also otherwise given to purge
and void out thick, tough, and clammy humours, which stick in the chest
and lungs.

C. The root preserved is good and wholesome for the stomach: being taken
after supper it doth not only help digestion, but also keepeth the belly
soluble.

D. The juice of the same boiled, driveth forth all kind of worms of the
belly, as Pliny teacheth:  who also writeth in his twentieth book, and 
fifth chapter, the same being chewed fasting, doth fasten the teeth.

E. The root of Elecampane is with good success mixed with counterpoisons:
it is a remedy against the bitings of serpents, it resisteth poison: it
is good for them that are bursten, and troubled with cramps and
convulsions.

F. Some also affirm, that the decoction thereof; and likewise the same
beaten into powder and mixed with honey in manner of an ointment, doth
cleanse and heal up old ulcers.

G. Galen saith, that herewith the parts are to be made red, which be
vexed with long & cold griefs; as are divers passions of the huckle bones
called the sciatica, and little and continual bunnies and looseness of
certain joints, by reason ofovermuch moisture.

H. The decoction of Enula drunken, provoketh urine, and is good for them
that are grieved with inward burstings, or have any member out of joint.

I. The root taken with honey or sugar, made in an electuary, cleanseth
the breast, ripeneth tough phlegm, and maketh it easy to be spat forth,
and prevaileth mightily against the cough and shortness of breath,
comforteth the stomach also, and helpeth digestion.

K. The roots condited after the manner of Eringos serveth for the
purposes aforesaid.

L. The root of Enula boiled very soft and mixed in a mortar with fresh
butter and the powder of ginger, maketh an excellent ointment against the
itch, scabs, manginess, and such like.

M. The roots are to be gathered in the end of September and kept for
sundry uses, but it is especially preserved by those that make succade
and such like.



CHAP. 281. Of Sauce-Alone, or Jack-of-the-Hedge.

Fig. 1177. Sauce-Alone

The Description.

Sauce-Alone hath affinity with Garlic in name, not because it is like it
in form, but in smell: for if it be bruised or stamped it smelleth
altogether like Garlic: the leaves hereof are broad, of a light green
colour, nicked round about, and sharp pointed: the stalk is slender,
about a cubit high, about the branches whereof grow little white flowers;
after which come up slender small and long cods, & in these black seed:
the root is long, slender, and something hard.

The place.

It groweth of itself by garden hedges, by old walls, by highways' sides,
or oftentimes in the borders of fields.

The Time.

It flowereth chiefly in June and July, the seed waxeth ripe in the mean
season. The leaves are used for a sauce in March or April.

The Names.

The later writers call it Alliaria, and Alliaris: of some, Rima Maria: it
is not Scordium, or Water Germander, which the apothecaries in times past
mistook for this herb: neither is it Scordii species, or a kind of Water
Germander, whereof we have written: it is named of some, Pes asininus; it
is called in High Dutch Knoblauch kraut Leuchel, and Saszkraut: and in
Low Dutch, Loock sonder Loock: you may name it in Latin, Allium non
bulbosum: in French, Alliayre: in English, Sauce-Alone, and Jack-of-the-
Hedge.

The Temperature.

Jack-of-the-Hedge is hot and dry, but much less than Garlic, that is to
say, in the end of the second degree, or in the beginning of the third.

The Virtues.

A. We know not what use it hath in medicine: divers eat the stamped
leaves hereof with salt fish, for a sauce, as they do those of Ramsons.

B. Some also boil the leaves in clysters which are used against the pain
of the colic and stone, in which not only wind is notably wasted, but the
pain also of the stone mitigated and very much eased.



CHAP. 282. Of Dittany.
Fig. 1178. Dittany of Candy (1) Fig. 1179. Bastard Dittany (2)
The Description.

Dittany of Crete now called Candy (as Dioscorides saith) is a hot and
sharp herb, much like unto Pennyroyal, saving that his leaves be greater
and somewhat hoary, covered over with a soft down or white woolly cotton:
at the top of the branches grow small spiky ears or scaly aglets, hanging
by little small stems, resembling the spiky tufts of Marjoram, of a white
colour: amongst which scales there do come forth small flowers like the
flowering of wheat, of a red purple colour; which being past, the knop is
found full of small seed, contrary to the saying of Dioscorides, who
saith, it neither beareth flower nor seed, but myself have seen it bear
both in my garden. The whole plant perished in the next winter following.

2. The second kind called Pseudodictamnum, that is, Bastard Dittany, is
much like unto the first saving that it is not sweet of smell, neither
doth it bite the tongue, having round soft woolly stalks with knots and
joints, and at every knot two leaves somewhat round, soft, woolly, and
somewhat bitter: the flowers be of a light purple color compassing the
stalks by certain spaces like garlands or whorls, and like the flowers of
Pennyroyal. The root is of a woody substance: the whole plant groweth to
the height of a cubit and an half, and lasteth long.

The Place.

The first Dittany cometh from Crete, an island which we call Candy, where
it grows naturally: I have sown it in my garden, where it hath flowered
and borne seed; but it perished by reason of the injury of our
extraordinary cold winter that then happened: nevertheless Dioscorides
writeth against all truth, that it neither beareth flowers nor seed:
after Theophrastus, Virgl witnesseth that it doth bear flowers in the
twelfth of his AEneidos:

Dictamnum genitrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida,
Puberibus caulem foliis, & flore comantem
Purpureo. ----
In English thus:
His mother from the Cretan Ida crops
Dictamnus having soft and tender leaves,
And purple flowers upon the bending tops, &c.
[Virgil, AEneid Bk. 12. l. 412-414]

The Time.

They flower and flourish in the summer months, their seed is ripe in
September.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Dictamnus and Dictamnum: of some, Pulegium
sylvestre, or wild Pennyroyal: the apothecaries of Germany for Dictamnum
with c, in the first syllable, do read Diptamnum with p: but (saith
Dodonaeus) this error might have been of small importance, if instead of
the leaves of Dittany, they did not use the roots of Fraxinella for
Dittany, which they falsely call Dictamnum: in English, Dittany, and
Dittany of Candy.

The other is called Pseudodictamnum, or bastard Dittany, of the likeness
it hath with Dittany, it skilleth not, though the shops know it not: the
reason why let the reader guess.

The Temperature.

These plants are hot and dry of nature.

The Virtues.

A. Dittany being taken in drink, or put up in a pessary, or used in a
fume, bringeth away dead children: it procureth the monthly terms, and
driveth forth the secondine or the afterbirth.

B. The juice taken with wine is a remedy against the stinging of
serpents.

C. The same is thought to be of so strong an operation, that with the
very smell also it driveth away venomous beasts, and doth astonish them.

D. It is reported likewise that the wild goats and deer in Candy when
they be wounded with arrows, do shake them out by eating of this plant,
and heal their wounds.

E. It prevaileth much against all wounds, and especially those made with
envenomed weapons, arrows shot out of guns, or such like, and is very
profitable for chirurgeons that use the sea and land wars to carry with
them and have in readiness: it draweth forth also splinters of wood,
bones, or such like.

F. The bastard Dittany, or Pseudodictamnum, is somewhat like in virtues
to the first, but not of so great force, yet it serveth exceeding well
for the purposes aforesaid.



CHAP. 283. Of Borage.
Fig. 1180. Garden Borage (1) Fig. 1181. White-Flowered Borage (2)
The Description.

1. Borage hath broad leaves, rough, lying flat upon the ground, of a
black or swart green colour: among which riseth up a stalk two cubits
high, divided into divers branches, whereupon do grow gallant blue
flowers, composed of five leaves apiece; out of the middle of which grow
forth black threads joined in the top, and pointed like a brooch or
pyramid: the root is thready, and cannot away [sic] with the cold of
winter.

2. Borage with white flowers is like unto the precedent, but differeth in
the flowers: for those of this plant are white, and the others of a
perfect blue colour, wherein is the difference.

Fig. 1182. Never-Dying Borage (3)

3. Never-Dying Borage hath many very broad leaves, rough and hairy, of a
black dark green colour: among which rise up stiff hairy stalks,
whereupon do grow fair blue flowers, somewhat rounder pointed than the
former: the root is black and lasting, having leaves both winter and
summer, and hereupon it was called sempervirens, and that very properly,
to distinguish it from the rest of this kind, which are but annual.

4. There is a fourth sort of Borage that hath leaves like the precedent,
but thinner and lesser, rough and hairy, dividing itself into branches at
the bottom of the plant, whereupon are placed fair red flowers, wherein
is the chiefest difference between this and the last described.

The Place.

These grow in my garden, and in others also.

The Time.

Borage flowers and flourishes most part of all summer, and till autumn be
far spent.

The Names.

Borage is called in shops Borago: of the old writers in Latin Lingua
bubula: Pliny calleth it Euphrosinum, because it maketh a man merry and
joyful: which thing also the old verse concerning Borage doth testify:
Ego Borago gaudia semper ago.
I Borage bring always courage.

It is called in High Dutch Burretsch: in Italian, Boragine: in Spanish,
Boraces: in Low Dutch, Beruagie: in English; Borage.

The Temperature.

It is evidently moist, and not in like sort hot, but seems to be in a
mean betwixt hot and cold.

The Virtues.

A. Those of our time do use the flowers in salads, to exhilarate and make
the mind glad. There be also many things made of them, used everywhere
for the comfort of the heart, for the driving away of sorrow, and
increasing the joy of the mind.

B. The leaves boiled among other pot-herbs do much prevail in making the
belly soluble, they being boiled in honeyed water be also good against
the roughness of the throat, and hoarseness, as Galen teacheth.

C. The leaves and flowers of Borage put into wine make men and women glad
and merry, and drive away all sadness, dulness, and melancholy, as
Dioscorides and Pliny affirm.

D. Syrup made of the flowers of Borage comforteth the heart, purgeth
melancholy, and quieteth the frantic or lunatic person.

E. The flowers of Borage made up with sugar do all the aforesaid with
greater force and effect.

F. Syrup made of the juice of Borage with sugar, adding thereto powder of
the bone of a stag's heart, is good against swooning, the cardiac passion
of the heart, against melancholy and the falling sickness.

G. The root is not used in medicine: the leaves eaten raw engender good
blood, especially in those that have been lately sick.



CHAP. 284. Of Bugloss.
Fig. 1183. Common Bugloss (1) Fig. 1184. Langue de Boeuf(2)
The Kinds.

Like as there be divers sorts of Borage, so are there sundry of the
Buglosss; notwithstanding after Dioscorides, Borage is the true Bugloss:
many are of opinion, and that righly, that they may be both referred to
one kind; yet will we divide them according to the custom of our time,
and their usual denominations.

The Description.

1. That which the apothecaries call Bugloss bringeth forth leaves longer
than those of Borage, sharp pointed, longer than the leaves of Beets,
rough and hairy. The stalk groweth up to the height of two cubits, parted
above into sundry branches, whereon are orderly placed bluish flowers,
tending to a purple colour before they be opened, and afterward more
blue. The root is long, thick, and gross, and of long continuance.

2. Langue de Boeuf is a kind hereof, altogether lesser, but the leaves
hereof are rougher, like the rough tongue of an ox or cow, whereof it
took his name. The leaves of Langue de Boeuf are very rough, the stalk
four cubit and half high, commonly red of colour: the tops of the
branches carry flowers in scaly rough heads: these flowers are composed
of many small yellow leaves in manner of those of Dandelion, and fly away
in down like as they do: the flowers are of a very bitter taste, whence
Lobel calls it Buglossum echioides luteum hieracio cognatum.
Tabernamontanus fitly called it Hieracium echioides.

Fig. 1185. Small Wild Bugloss (3)

3. There is another wild Bugloss which Dodonaeus, hath by the name of
Buglossa sylvestris: it hath a small white root, from which arises a
slender stalk some foot and half high, set with small rough leaves
sinuated or cut in on the edges: the stalks at the top are divided into
three or four small branches, bearing small blue flowers in rough husks.

The Place.

These do grow in gardens everywhere. The Langue de Boeuf grows wild in
many places; as between Redriffe and Deptford by the watery ditch sides.
The Small Wild Bugloss grows upon the dry ditch banks about Picadilly,
and almost everywhere.

The Time.

They flower from May, or June, even to the end of summer. The leaves
perish in winter, and new come up in the spring.

The Names.

Garden Bugloss is called of the later herbarists Buglossa, and Buglossa
domestica: or garden Bugloss.

Langue de Boeuf is called in Latine Lingua bovis, and Buglossum luteum
hieracio cognatum, and also Buglossa sylvestris or wild Bugloss.

Small Wild Bugloss is called Borago sylvestris by Tragus; Echium
germanicum spinosum by Fuchsius and Buglossa sylvestris by Dodonaeus.

Temperature and Virtues.

A. The root, saith Dioscorides, mixed with oil, cureth green wounds, and
adding thereto a little barley meal, it is a remedy against Saint
Anthony's fire.

B. It causeth sweat in agues, as Pliny saith, if the juice be mixed with
a little Aqua vitae, and the body rubbed therewith.

C. The physicians of the later time use the leaves, flowers, and roots
instead of Borage, and put them both into all kinds of medicines
indifferently, which are of force and virtue to drive away sorrow and
pensiveness of the mind, and to comfort and strengthen the heart. The
leaves are of like operation with those of Borage and are used as
potherbs for the purposes aforesaid, as well Bugloss as Langue de Boeuf,
and also to keep the belly soluble.



CHAP. 285. Of Alkanet or wild Bugloss.
Fig. 1186. Red Alkanet (1) Fig. 1187. Yellow Alkanet (2)
The Description.

These herbs comprehended under the name of Anchusa, were so called of the
Greek word Anchosein i.e Illinere succo, vel pigmentis, that is, to
colour or paint any thing: whereupon these plants were called Anchusa of
that flourishing and bright red colour which is in the root, even as red
as pure and clear blood: for that is the only mark or note whereby to
distinguish these herbs from those which be called Echium, Lycopsis, and
Buglossa, whereto they have a great resemblance: I have therefore
expressed four differences of this plant Anchusa or Alkanet from the
other kinds, by the leaves, flowers, and bigness.

1. The first kind of Alkanet hath many leaves like Echium, or small
Bugloss, covered over with a pricky hoariness, having commonly but one
stalk, which is round, rough, and a cubit high. The cups of the flowers
are of a sky colour tending to purple, not unlike the flowers of Echium;
the seed is small, somewhat long, and of a pale colour: the root is a
finger thick; the pith or inner part thereof is of a woody substance,
dyeing the hands or whatsoever toucheth the same, of a bloody colour, or
of the colour of saunders.

2. The second kind of Anchusa or Alkanet is of greater beauty and
estimation than the first; the branches are less and more bushy in the
top: it hath also greater plenty of leaves, and those more woolly or
hairy: the stalk groweth to the height of two cubits: at the top grow
flowers of a yellow colour, far different from the other: the root is
more shining, of an excellent delicate purplish colour, and more full of
juice than the first.

Fig. 1188. Small Alkanet (3)

3. There is a small kind of Alkanet, whose root is greater and more full
of juice and substance than the roots of the other kinds: in all other
respects it is less, for the leaves are narrower, smalller, tenderer, and
in number more, very green like unto Borage, yielding forth many little
tender stalks: the flowers are less than of the small Bugloss, and red of
colour: the seed is of an ash colour, somewhat long and slender, having
the taste of Bugloss.

4. There is also another kind of Alkanet, which is as the others before
mentioned, a kind of wild Bugloss, notwithstanding for distinction's sake
I have separated and severed them. This last Anchusa hath narrow leaves,
much like unto our common Summer Savory. The stalks are two handfuls
high, bearing very small flowers, and of a bluish or sky colour: the root
is of a dark brownish red colour, dyeing the hands little or nothing at
all, and of a woody substance.

The Place.

These plants do grow in the fields of Narbonne, and about Montpellier and
many other parts of France: I found these plants growing in the Isle of
Thanet near unto the sea, betwixt the house sometime belonging to Sir
Henry Crispe, and Margate; where I found some in their natural ripeness,
yet scarcely any that were come to that beautiful colour of Alkanet: but
such as is sold for very good in our apothecaries' shops I found there in
great plenty.

So saith our author, but I doubt whether he found any of these in the
place here set down, for I have sought it but failed of finding, yet if
he found any it was only the first described, for I think the other three
are strangers.

The Time

The Alkanets flower and flourish in the summer months: the roots do yield
their bloody juice in harvest time, as Dioscorides writeth.

The Names.

Alkanet is called in Greek and Latin Anchusa: of divers, Fucus herba, and
Onocleia, Buglossa hispanica, or Spanish Bugloss: in Spanish, Soagem: in
French, Orchanet: and in English likewise Orchanet and Alkanet.

The Temperature.

The roots of Alkanet are cold and dry, as Galen writeth, and binding, and
because it is bitter it cleanseth away choleric humours: the leaves be
not so forceable, yet do they likewise bind and dry.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, that the root being made up in a cerote or
cerecloth with oil, is very good for old ulcers; that with parched barley
meal it is good for the lepry, and for tetters and ring-worms.

B. That being used as a pessary it bringeth forth the dead birth.

C. The decoction being inwardly taken with mead or honeyed water, cureth
the yellow jaundice, diseases of the kidneys, the spleen and agues.

D. It is used in ointments for womens' paintings: and the leaves drunk in
wine is good against the lask.

E. Divers of the later physicians do boil with the root of Alkanet and
wine, sweet butter, such as hath in it no salt at all, until such time as
it becometh red, which they call red butter, and give it not only to
those that have fallen from some high place, but also report it to be
good to drive forth the measles and smallpox, if it be drunk in the
beginning with hot beer.

F. The roots of these are used to color syrups, waters, jellies, & such
like confections as Turnsole is.

G. John of Ardern hath set down a composition called Sanguis
Veneris,["Venus' Blood"] which is most singular in deep punctures or
wounds made with thrusts, as follows: take of oil olive a pint, the root
of Alkanet two ounces, earthworms purged, in number twenty, boil them
together & keep it to the use aforesaid.

F. The gentlewomen of France do paint their faces with  these roots, as
it is said.



CHAP. 286. Of Wall and Viper's Bugloss.

Fig. 1189. Kinds of Wall and Viper's Bugloss (1-4)

The Description.

1. Lycopsis anglica, or wild Bugloss, so called for that it doth not grow
so commonly elsewhere, hath rough and hairy leaves, somewhat lesser than
the garden Bugloss: the flowers grow for the most part upon the side of
the slender stalk, in fashion hollow like a little bell, whereof some be
blue, and others of a purple colour.

2. There is another kind of Echium that hath rough and hairy leaves
likewise, much like unto the former; the stalk is rough, charged full of
little branches, which are laden on every side with divers small narrow
leaves, sharp pointed, and of a brown colour: among which leaves grow
flowers, each flower being composed of one leaf divided into five parts
at the top, less, and not so wide open as that of Lycospis, yet of a sad
blue or purple colour at the first, but when they are open they show to
be of an azure colour, long and hollow, having certain small blue threads
in the middle: the seed is small and black, fashioned like the head of a
snake or viper: the root is long, and red without.

3. This hath a crested very rough and hairy stalk some foot high; the
leaves are like those of Viper's Bugloss, and covered over with a soft
downiness, and grow disorderly upon the stalk, which towards the top is
parted into sundry branches, which are divided into divers footstalks
carrying small hollow flowers divided by five little gashes at their
tops; and they are of a dark purple colour, and contained in rough cups
lying hid under the leaves. The seed, as in other plants of this kind,
resembles a viper's head: the root is long, as thick as one's little
finger, of a dusky colour on the outside, and it lives divers years. This
flowers in May, and grows in the dry meadows and hilly grounds of
Austria. Clusius calls it Echium pullo flore.

4. This other being also of Clusius his description hath long and narrow
leaves like those of the common Viper's Bugloss, yet a little broader:
the stalks rise up four cubit high, firm, crested, and hairy; upon which
grow abundance of leaves, shorter and narrower than those below; and
amongst these towards the top grow many flowers upon short footstalks
which twine themselves round like a scorpion's tail: these flowers are of
an elegant red colour, and in shape somewhat like those of the common
kind; and such also is the seed, but somewhat less: the root is lasting,
long also, hard, woody, and black on the outside, and it sometimes sends
up many, but most usually but one stalk. It flowers in May, and was found
in Hungary by Clusius, who first set it forth by the name of Echium rubro
flore.
The Place.

Lycopsis groweth upon stone walls, and upon dry barren stony grounds.

Echium groweth where Alkanet doth grow, in great abundance.

The Time.

They flourish when the other kinds of Bugloss do flower.

The Names.

It is called in Greek Echion, and Alkibiadon, of Alcibiades the finder of
the virtues thereof: of some it is thought to be Anchusa species, or a
kind of Alkanet: in High Dutch, Wild Ochsenzungen: in Spanith, Yerva de
la Bivora, or Chupamel: in Italian, Buglossa sylvatica: in French,
Buglosse sauvage: in English, Viper's Bugloss, Snake's Bugloss; and of
some, Viper's herb, and wild Bugloss the lesser.

The Temperature.

These herbs are cold and dry of complexion.

The virtues.

A. The root drunk with wine is good for those that be bitten with
serpents, and it keepeth such from being stung as have drunk of it
before: the leaves and seeds do the same, as Dioscorides writes. Nicander
in his book Of Treacles makes Viper's Bugloss to be one of those plants
which cure the biting of serpents, and especially of the viper, and that
drive serpents away.

B. If it be drunk in wine or otherwise it causeth plenty of milk in
womens breasts.

C. The herb chewed, and the juice swallowed down, is a most singular
remedy against poison and the bitings of any venomous beast; and the root
so chewed and laid upon the sore works the same effect.



CHAP. 287. Of Hound's-Tongue.

Fig. 1190. Kinds of Hound's-Tongue (1-4)

The Description.

1. The common Hound's-Tongue hath long leaves much like the garden
Bugloss, but broader, and not rough at all, yet having some fine
hoariness or softness like velvet. These leaves stink very filthily, much
like to the piss of dogs; wherefore the Dutch men have called it Hunds
pisse, and not Hound's-tongue. The stalks are rough, hard, two cubits
high, and of a brown colour, bearing at the top many flowers of a dark
purple colour: the seed is rough, cleaving to garments like Agrimony
seed: the root is black and thick. These plants for one year after they
come up of seed bring forth only leaves, and those pretty large; and the
second year they send up their stalks, bearing both flowers and seed, and
then usually the root perisheth. I have therefore presented you with the
figures of it, both when it flowers, and when it sendeth forth only
leaves.

2. We have received another sort hereof from the parts of Italy, having
leaves like Woad, somewhat rough, and without any manifest smell, wherein
it differeth from the common kind; the seed hereof came under the title
Cynoglossum creticum, Hound's-Tongue of Candy. The flowers are lesser and
of a lighter colour than those of the former; the seeds also are rough,
and grow four together, with a point coming out of the middle of them as
in the common kind, but yet lesser; the root is long and whitish. Clusius
hath this by the name of Cynoglossum creticum 1.

3. This second Cynoglossum creticum of Clusius hath leaves some handful
long, and some inch and better broad: among which, the next year after
the sowing, comes up a stalk some cubit or more high, crested, stiff, and
straight, and somewhat downy, as are also the leaves, which grow upon the
same, being somewhat broad at their setting on, and of a yellowish green
colour. The top of the stalk is divided into sundry branches which twine
or turn in their tops like as the Scorpion Grass, and carry shorter yet
larger flowers than the ordinary kind, and those of a whitish colour at
the first, with many small purplish veins, which after a few days become
blue. The seeds are like the former in their growing, shape, and
roughness.

Fig. 1191. Small Green-Leaved Hound's-Tongue (4)

4. We have another sort of Hound's-Tongue like unto the common kind,
saving it is altogether lesser: the leaves are of a shining green colour.

The Place.

The great Hound's-Tongue grows almost everywhere by high-ways and
untoiled ground: the small Hound's-Tongue groweth very plentifully by the
wayside as you ride Colchester highway from Londonward, between
Easterford and Witham in Essex.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

Hound's-Tongue is called in Latin, Lingua canis: of Pliny, Cynoglossos,
and he showeth two kinds thereof: in English, Hound's-Tongue, or Dog's-
Tongue, but rather Hound's-Piss, for in the world there is not any thing
smelleth so like unto dog's piss as the leaves of this plant do.

The Nature.

Hound's-Tongue, but especially his root, is cold and dry.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of Hound's-tongue roasted in the embers and laid to the
fundament, healeth the haemorrhoids, and the disease called Ignis sacer,
or wild-fire.

B. The juice boiled with honey of roses and Turpentine, to the form of an
unguent, is most singular in wounds and deep ulcers.

C. Dioscorides saith, That the leaves boiled in wine and drunk, do
mollify the belly, and that the leaves stamped with old swine's grease
are good against the falling away of the hair of the head, which
proceedeth of hot sharp humours.

D. Likewise they are a remedy against scaldings or burnings, and against
the biting of dogs, as the same author addeth.



CHAP. 288. Of Comfrey, or Great Confound.
Fig. 1192. Purple-Flowered Comfrey (1) Fig. 1193. Knobby-Rooted Comfrey
(3)
The Description.

1. The stalk of this Comfrey is cornered, thick, and hollow like that of
Sow-Thistle; it groweth two cubits or a yard high: the leaves that spring
from the root, and those that grow upon the stalks are long, broad,
rough, and pricking withal, something hairy, and being handled make the
hands itch; very like in colour and roughness to those of Borage, but
longer, and sharp pointed, as be the leaves of Elecampane: from out the
wings of the stalks appear the flowers orderly placed, long, hollow
within, of a light red colour: after them groweth the seed, which is
black. The root is long and thick, black without, white within, having in
it a clammy juice, in which root consisteth the virtue.

2. The Great Comfrey hath rough hairy stalks, and long rough leaves much
like the garden Bugloss, but greater and blacker: the flowers be round
and hollow like little bells, of a white colour: the root is black
without, and white within, and very slimy. This differeth no way from the
former but only in the colour of the flower, which is yellowish or white,
when as the other is reddish or purple.

3. There is another kind of Comfrey which hath leaves like the former,
saving that they be lesser: the stalks are rough and tender: the flowers
be like the former, but that they be of an overworn yellow colour: the
roots are thick, short, black without, and tuberous, (which in the figure
are not expressed so large and knobby as they ought to have been.)

Fig. 1194 Borage-Flowered Comfrey (4)

4. This pretty plant hath fibrous and blackish roots, from which rise up
many leaves like those of Borage, or Comfrey, but much smaller and
greener, the stalks are some eight inches high, and on their tops carry
pretty flowers like those of Borage; but not so sharp pointed, but of a
more pleasing blue colour. This flowers in the spring and is kept in same
choice gardens. Lobel calls it Symphytum pumilum repens borraginis facie,
sive Borrage minima herbariorum.
The Place.

Comfrey joyeth in watery ditches, in fat and fruitful meadows; they grow
all in my garden.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

It is called in Latin Symphytum, and Solidago: in shops, Consolida major,
and Symphytum maius: of Scribonius Largus, Inula rustica, and Alus
gallica: of others, Osteocollon: in High Dutch, Walwurtz: in Low Dutch,
Waelwortele: ltalian, Consolida maggiore: in Spanish, Suelda maiore, and
Consuelda major: in French, Cousire, and Oreille d'Asne: in English,
Comfrey, Comfrey Confound, of some, Knit-Back, and Blackwort.

The Temperature.

The root of Comfrey hath a cold quality, but yet not much: it is also of
a clammy and glueing moisture, it causeth no itch at all, neither is it
of a sharp or biting taste, unsavoury, and without any quality that may
be tasted; so far is the tough and glueing moisture from the sharp
clamminess of the Sea Onion, as that there is no comparison between them.
The leaves may cause itching not through heat or sharpness, but through
their ruggedness, as we have already written, yet less than those of the
Nettle.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of Comfrey stamped, and the juice drunk with wine, helpeth
those that spit blood, and healeth all inward wounds and burstings.

B. The same bruised and laid to in manner of a plaster, doth heal all
fresh and green wounds, and are so glutinative, that it will solder or
glue together meat that is chopped in pieces seething in a pot, and make
it in one lump.

C. The roots boiled and drunk, do cleanse the breast from phlegm, and
cure the griefs of the lungs, especially if they be confect with sugar
and syrup; it prevaileth much against ruptures or burstings.

D. The slimy substance of the root made in a posset of ale, and given to
drink against the pain in the back, gotten by any violent motion, as
wrestling, or overmuch use of women, doth in four or five days perfectly
cure the same: although the involuntary flowing of the seed in men be
gotten thereby.

E. The roots of Comfrey in number four, Knotgrass and the leaves of Clary
of each an handful, being stamped all together, and strained, and a quart
of Muscatel put thereto, the yolks of three eggs, and the powder of three
nutmegs, drunk first and last, is a most excellent medicine against a
gonorrhoea or running of the reins, and all pains and consumptions of the
back.

F. There is likewise a syrup made hereof to be used in this case, which
stayeth voiding of blood: tempereth the heat of agues: allayeth the
sharpness of flowing humours: healeth up ulcers of the lungs, and helpeth
the cough: the receipt whereof is this: Take two ounces of the roots of
Great Comfrey, one ounce of Liquorice; two handfuls of Foalfoot, roots
and all; one ounce and an half of pine-apple kernels; twenty jujubes; two
drams or a quarter of an ounce of Mallow seed; one dram of the heads of
Poppy; boil all in a sufficient quantity of water, till one pint remain,
strain it, and and add to the liquor strained six ounces of very white
sugar, and as much of the best honey, and make thereof a syrup that must
be throughly boiled.

G. The same syrup cureth the ulcers of the kidneys, though they have been
of long continuance; and stoppeth the blood that cometh from thence.

H. Moreover, it stayeth the overmuch flowing of the monthly sickness,
taken every day for certain days together.

I. It is highly commended for wounds or hurts of all the rest also of the
entrails and inward parts, and for burstings or ruptures.

K. The root stamped and applied unto them, taketh away the inflammation
of the fundament, and overmuch flowing of the haemorrhoids.



CHAP. 289. Of Cowslips of Jerusalem.
Fig. 1195. Spotted Jerusalem Cowslips (1) Fig. 1196. Bugloss Cowslips (2)
The Description.

1. Cowslips of Jerusalem, or the true and right Lungwort, hath rough,
hairy, and large leaves, of a brown green color, consufedly spotted with
divers spots, or drops of white: amongst which spring up certain stalks,
a span long, bearing at the top many fine flowers, growing together in
bunches like the flowers of Cowslips, saving that they be at the first
red, or purple and sometimes blue, and oftentimes all these colours at
once. The flowers being fallen, there come small buttons full of seed.
The root is black and thready. This is sometimes found with white
flowers.

2. The second kind of Lungwort is like unto the former, but greater in
each respect: the leaves bigger than the former, resembling wild Bugloss,
yet spotted with white spots like the former: the flowers are like the
other, but of an exceeding shining red colour.

Fig. 1197. Narrow-Leaved Jeruasalem Cowslips (3)

3. Carolus Clusius setteth forth a third kind of Lungwort, which hath
rough and hairy leaves, like unto wild Bugloss, but narrower: among which
rises up a stalk a foot high, bearing at the top a bundle of blue
flowers, in fashion like unto those of Bugloss or the last described.

The Place.

These plants do grow in moist shadowy woods, and are planted almost
everywhere in gardens. Mr. Goodyer found the Pulmonaria foliis echii,
being the second, May 25th Anno 1620, flowering in a wood by Holbury
house in the New Forest in Hampshire.

The Time.

They flower for the most part in March and April.

The Names.

Cowslips of Jeruralem, or Sage of Jerusalem, is called of the herbarists
of our time, Pulmonaria, and Pulmonaris: of Cordus, Symphitum sylvestre,
or wild Comfrey: but seeing the other is also of nature wild, it may
aptly be called Symphytus maculosum or maculatum: in high Dutch,
Lungenkraut: in Low Dutch, Onfer Wrouwen Melcruit: in English, Spotted
Comfrey, Sage of Jerusalem, Cowslip of Jerusalem, Sage of Bethlehem, and
of some Lungwort; notwithstanding there is another Lungwort, of which we
will intreat among the kinds of Mosses.

The Temperature.

Pulmonaria should be of like temperature with the great Comfrey, if the
root of this were clammy: but seeing that it is hard and woody, it is of
a more drying quality, and more binding.

The Virtues.

The leaves are used among pot-herbs. The roots are also thought to be
good against the infirmities and ulcers of the lungs, and to be of like
force with the great Comfrey.



CHAP. 290. Of Clot-Bur, or Burdock.
Fig. 1198. Great Burdock (1) Fig. 1199. Lesser Burdock (2)
The Description.

1. Clot-Bur bringeth forth broad leaves and hairy, far bigger than the
leaves of Gourds, and of greater compass, thicker also, and blacker,
which on the upper side are of a dark green colour, and on the nether
side somewhat white: the stalk is cornered, thick, beset with like
leaves, but far less, divided into very many wings and branches, bringing
forth great burs round like bullets or balls, which are rough all over,
and full of sharp crooking prickles, taking hold on men's garments as
they pass by; out of the tops whereof groweth a flower thrummed, or all
of threads, of colour purple: the seed is perfected within the round ball
or bullet, and this seed when the burs open, and the wind bloweth, is
caried away with the wind: the root is long, white within, and black
without.

There is another kind hereof which hath lesser and softer heads, with
weaker prickles; these heads are also hairy or downy, and the leaves and
whole plant somewhat less, yet otherwise like the fore-described; Lobel
calls this Arction montanum, and Lappa minor galeni: it is also the Lappa
minor altera of Matthiolus. Lobel found this growing in Somersetshire
three miles from Bath, near the house of one Mr. John Colt.

2. The lesser Bur hath leaves far smaller than the former, of a greyish
overworn colour like to those of Orach, nicked round about the edges: the
stalk is a foot and a half high, full of little black spots, dividing
itself into many branches: the flowers before the burs come forth do
compass the small stalks round about; they are but little, and quickly
fade away: then follow the burs or the fruit out of the bosom of the
leaves, in form long, on the tops of the branches, as big as an Olive or
a Cornel berry, rough like the ball of the Plane tree, and being touched
cleave fast unto men's garments: they do not open at all, but being kept
close shut bring forth long seeds. The root is fastened with very many
strings, and groweth not deep.

The Place.

The first groweth everywhere: the second I found in the highway leading
from Drayton to Iver, two miles from Colnbrook, since which time I have
found it in the highway between Stanes and Egham. It also groweth
plentifully in Southwick Sheet in Hampshire, as I have been informed by
Mr. Goodyer.

The Time.

Their season is in July and August.

The Names.

The Great Bur is called in Latin, Personata, Personatia, and Arctium: in
shops, Bardana, and Lappa maior: in High Dutch, Grosskletten: in Low
Dutch, Groote Clissen: in French, Glouteron: in English, Great Bur,
Burdock, or Clot-Bur: Apuleius besides these doth also set down certain
other names belonging to Clot-Bur, as Dardana, Bachion, Elephantosis,
Nephelion, Manifolium.

The lesser Burdock is called in Latin, Xanthium: in shops, Lappa minor,
Lappa inversa, and of divers, Strumaria: Galen saith it is also called,
Phasganion, and Phasganon or Herb Victory, being but bastard names, and
therefore not properly so called: in English, Louse Bur, Ditch Bur, and
Lesser Burdock: it seemeth to be called Xanthium of the effect, for the
bur or fruit before it be fully withered, being stamped and put into an
earthen vessel, and afterwards when need requireth the weight of two
ounces thereof and somewhat more, being steeped in warm water and rubbed
on, maketh the hairs of the head red; yet the head is first to be dressed
or rubbed with nitre, as Dioscorides writeth.

The Temperature.

The leaves of Clot-Bur are of temperature moderately dry and wasting; the
root is something hot.

The seed of the lesser Bur, as Galen saith, hath power to digest,
therefore it is hot and dry.

The Virtues.

A. The roots being taken with the kernels of pine-apples, as Dioscorides
witnesseth, are good for them that spit blood and corrupt matter.

B. Apuleius saith that the same being stamped with a little salt, and
applied to the biting of a mad dog, cureth the same, and so speedily
setteth free the sick man.

C. He also teacheth that the juice of the leaves given to drink with
honey, procureth urine, and taketh away the pains of the bladder; and
that the same drunk with old wine doth wonderfully help against the
bitings of serpents.

D. Columella declareth, that the herb beaten with salt and laid upon the
scarifying, which is made with the lancet or razor, draweth out the
poison of the viper: and that, also the root being stamped is more
available against serpents, and that the root in like maner is good
against the King's evil.

E. The stalk of Clot-bur before the burs come forth, the rind pilled off,
being eaten raw with salt and pepper, or boiled in the broth of fat meat,
is pleasant to be eaten: being taken in that manner it increaseth seed
and stirreth up lust.

F. Also it is a good nourishment, especially boiled: if the kernel of the
pine-apple be likewise added it is the better, and is no less available
against the ulcer of the lungs, and spitting of blood, than the root is.

G. The root stamped and strained with a good draught of Ale is a most
approved medicine for a windy or cold stomach.

H. Treacle of Andromachus, and the whites of eggs, of each a like
quantity, laboured in a leaden mortar, and spread upon the Bur leaf, and
so applied to the gout, have been proved many times most miraculously to
appease the pain thereof.

I. Dioscorides commendeth the decoction of the root of Arcion, together
with the seed, against the tooth-ache, if it be holden awhile in the
mouth: also that it is good to foment therewith both burnings and kibed
heels; and affirmeth that it may be drunk in wine against the strangury
and pain in the hip.

K. Dioscorides reporteth that the fruit is very good to be laid unto hard
swellings.

L. The root clean picked, washed, stamped and strained with Malmsey,
helpeth the running of the reins, the whites in women, and strengtheneth
the back, if there be added thereto the yolks of eggs, the powder of
acorns and nutmegs brewed or mixed together, and drunk first and last.



CHAP. 291. Of Coltsfoot, or Horse-Foot.
Fig. 1200. Coltsfoot in Flower (1) Fig. 1201. Coltsfoot Leaves (1)
The Description.

1. Tussilago or Coltsfoot hath many white and long creeping roots,
somewhat fat; from which rise up naked stalks (in the beginning of March
and April) about a span long, bearing at the top yellow flowers, which
change into down, and are carried away with the wind. When the stalk and
seed is perished, there appear springing out of the earth many broad
leaves, green above, and next the ground of a white hoary or greyish
colour fashioned like an horse foot; for which cause it was called Foal-
foot, and Horse-hoof: seldom or never shall you find leaves and flowers
at once, but the flowers are past before the leaves come out of the
ground; as may appear by the first picture, which setteth forth the naked
stalks and flowers, and by the second, which portrayeth the leaves only.


Fig. 1202. Mountain Coltsfoot in full flower (2)
Fig. 1203. Mountain Coltsfoot with the flower fading (2)

2. Besides the commonly growing and described Coltsfoot, there are other
two small mountain Coltsfeet described by Clusius; the first whereof I
will here present you with, but the second you shall find hereafter in
the chapter of Asarum, by the name of Asarina matthioli. This here
delineated hath five or six leaves not much unlike those of Ale-Hoof of a
dark shining green colour above, and very white and downy below: the
stalk is naked some handful high, hollow and downy, bearing one flower at
the top composed of purplish threads, and flying away in down: after
which the stalk falls away, and so the leaves only remain during the rest
of the year: the root is small and creeping. It grows on the tops of the
Austrian and Styrian mountains, where it flowers in June or August.
Brought into gardens it flowers in April. Clusius calls it Tussilago
alpina 1, and he hath given two figures thereof, both which I here give
you by the same titles as he hath them.

The Place.

This groweth of itself near unto springs, and on the brinks of brooks and
rivers, in wet furrows, by ditches' sides, and in other moist and watery
places near unto the sea, almost everywhere.

The Time.

The flowers, which quickly fade, are to be seen in the end of March, and
about the Calends of April, which speedily wither together with the
stems: after them grow forth the leaves, which remain green all summer
long: and hereupon it came that Coltsfoot was thought to be without
flowers; which thing also Pliny hath mentioned in his six and twentieth
book, cap. 6.

 The Names.

Foal-foot is called in Greek Bechion, of the Latins likewise Bechion, and
Tussilago: in shops, Farfara, and Ungula caballana: of divers, Pata
equina: in Italian, Unghia di cavallo: in Spanish, Unha d'asno: in
French, Pas d'asne: in English, Foal-Foot, Coltsfoot, Horse-Hoof, and
Bull-Foot. The same is also Chamaeleuce, which Pliny in his twenty-eighth
book, and fifteenth chapter reporteth to be likewise called Farfugium,
and Farranum, if there be not an error in the copy: which thing also
Atius in his first book affirmeth, pretermitting the name of Bechium,
and attributing unto it all the virtues and faculties of Bechium or
Coltsfoot. Whose opinion Orabasius seemeth to be of; in his fifteenth
book of his Medicinable Collections, making mention of Chamaeleuce: only
Pliny also agreeth with them, showing that some think, that Bechium is
called by another name Chamaeleuce, in his twenty-sixth book, cap. 6. and
it may be that Dioscorides hath written of one and the self-same herb in
sundry places, and by divers names. Bechium and Tussilago, which may also
be Englished Coughwort, so called of the effect, and Farfara, of the
white Poplar tree, to whose leaves it is like; which was named of the
ancients Farfarus, as Plautus writeth in his Comedy called Poenulus:

-- viscum legioni dedi.
Fundasque eos prosternebam ut folia Farfari.
-- the company I gave both lime bush and sling.
That to the ground as Poplar leaves I might them fling.

Dodonaeus (from whom our author took this) sets down this place in
Plautus as you find it here but not well; for the last verse should be
Fundasque, eo praesternebant folia Farfari. Thus it is in most editions
of Plautus, and that rightly, as the meaning words in that place declare.

The white Poplar tree is called in Greek Leuke and hereupon Bechion or
Coltsfoot was also called Chamaeleuce.

The Temperature and Virtues

A. The leaves of Coltsfoot being fresh and green are something cold, and
have withal a drying quality; they are good for ulcers and inflammations:
but the dried leaves are hot and dry, and somewhat biting.

B. A decoction made of the green leaves and roots, or else a syrup
thereof, is good for the cough that proceedeth of a thin rheum.

C. The green leaves of Foal-Foot pound with honey, do cure and heal the
hot inflammation called Saint Anthony's fire and all other inflammations.

D. The fume of the dried leaves taken through a funnel or tunnel, burned
upon coals, effectually helpeth those that are troubled with the
shortness of breath, and fetch their wind thick and often, and breaketh
without peril the impostumes of the breast.

E. Being taken in manner as they take Tobacco, it mightily prevaileth
against the diseases aforesaid.



CHAP. 292. Of Butterbur.
Fig. 1204. Butterbur in FlowerFig. 1205. The Leaves of Butterbur
The Description.

Butterbur doth in like manner bring forth flowers before the leaves, as
doth Coltsfoot, but they are small, mossy, tending to a purple colour;
which being made up into a big ear as it were, do quickly (together with
the stem, which is thick; full of substance, and brittle) wither and fall
away: the leaves are very great, like to a round cap or hat, called in
Latin Petasus, of such a wideness, as that of itself it is big and large
enough to keep a man's head from rain, and from the heat of the sun: and
therefore they be greater than the leaves of the Clot-Bur; of colour
somewhat white, yet whiter underneath: every stem beareth his leaf; the
stem is oftentimes a cubit long, thick, full of substance; upon which
standeth the leaf in the centre or middlemost part of the circumference,
or very near, like to one of the greatest mushrooms, but that it hath a
cleft that standeth about the stem, especially when they are perishing
and withering away: at the first the upper superficial or outside of the
mushroom standeth out, and when they are withering standeth more in, and
even so the leaf of Butterbur hath on the outside a certain shallow
hollowness: the root is thick; long, black without, white within, of
taste somewhat bitter, and is oftentimes worm-eaten.

The Place.

This groweth in moist places near unto rivers' sides, and upon the brinks
and banks of lakes and ponds, almost everywhere.

The Time

The ear with the flowers flourish in April or soonner: then come up the
leaves, which continue till winter, with new ones still growing up.

The Names.

Butterbur is called in Greek Petasitos, of the hugeness of the leaf that
is like to Petasion, or a hat: the Latins call it Petasites: in High
Dutch, Pestilentzwurtz: in Low Dutch, Dockebladeren: in English it is
named Butterbur: it is very manifest that this is like to Coltsfoot, and
of the same kind.

The Temperature.

Butterbur is hot and dry in the second degree, and of thin parts.

The Virtues.

A. The roots of Butterbur stamped with ale, and given to drink in
pestilent and burning fevers, mightily cooleth and abateth the heat
thereof.

B. The roots dried and beaten to powder, and drunk in wine, is a
sovereign medicine against the plague and pestilent fevers, because it
provoketh sweat, and driveth from the heart all venom and ill heat: it
killeth worms, and is of great force against the suffocation of the
mother.

C. The same cureth all naughty filthy ulcers, if the powder be strewed
therein.

D. The same kills worms in the belly: it provokes urine, and brings down
the monthly terms.



CHAP. 293. Of Mountain Horse-Foot.
Fig. 1206. Hoary-Leaved Horse-Foot (1) Fig. 1207. Smooth-Leaved Horse-Foot
(2)
The Description.

1. This plant (which the modern Writers have referred to the Cacalia of
the ancients, and to the kinds of Coltsfoot) I have thought good to name
in English, Horse-Foot, for that the leaves exceed Coltsfoot in bigness,
yet are like them in shape: and of this plant Clusius (whom I here
chiefly follow) hath described two sorts: the first of these hath many
leaves almost like unto those of Coltsfoot, but larger, very round, and
snipped about the edges, of a light green colour above, and hoary
undemeath, having also many veins or nerves running up and down them; and
these leaves are of an ungrateful taste, and grow upon long purplish
crested stalks: The stem is some two cubits high, crested likewise, and
of a purplish colour, set also at certain spaces with leaves very like
unto the other, but lesser than those next the ground, and more cornered
and sharper pointed; the tops of the stalks and branches carry bunches of
purple flowers, as in an umbel: and commonly in each bunch there are
three little flowers consisting of four leaves apiece, and a forked
pistil, and these are of a purple colour, and a weak, but not unpleasant
smell, and they at length turn into down, amongst which lies hid a
longish seed: the root, if old, sends forth divers heads, as also store
of long whitish fibres.

2. The leaves of this are more thin, tough and hard, and of a deeper
green on the upper sides, neither are they whitish below, nor come so
round or close whereas they are fastened to their stalks (which are not
crested as those of the other, but round and smooth); they are also full
of veins, and nicked about the edges, and of somewhat an ungrateful hot
and bitter taste. The stalks are also smoother, and the flowers of a
lighter colour.

The Place.

Both these grow in the Austrian and Styrian Alps under the sides of
woods, among bushes and such shadowy places: but not in England, that I
have yet heard of.

The Time.

I find it not set down when these flower and seed, but judge it about the
same time that Coltsfoot doth.

The Names.

This by Clusius, Lobel, and others, hath been called Cacalia, and
referred to that described by Dioscorides, lib. 4, cap. 123, which is
thought to be that set forth by Galen by the name of Cancanus. In the
Historia Lugdunensis pag. 1052, the latter of these two here described is
figured by the name of Tussilago alpina sive montana, and the former is
there pag. 1308, by the name of Cacalia, but the flowers are not rightly
expressed: and if my judgement fail me not, the figure which is in the
seventeenth page of the Appendix of the same author by the title of
Aconitum pardalianches primum, is of no other than this very plant. But
because I have not as yet seen the plant, I will not positively affirm
it: but refer this my opinion to those that are judicious and curious, to
know the plant that raised such controversy between Matthiolus and
Gesner, and whereof neither Camerarius nor Bauhin, who have set forth
Matthiolus his commentaries, have given us any certain or probable
knowledge.

The Temperature and virtues, out of the ancients.

A. The root of Cacalia is void of any biting quality, and moderately
dries, and it is of a gross and emplastic substance; wherefore steeped in
wine and so taken it helps the cough, the roughness of the artery or
hoarseness, like as Tragacanth: neither if you chew it and swallow down
the juice doth it less avail against those effects than the juice of
Liquorice.



CHAP. 294. Of Small Celandine or Pilewort.

Fig. 1208. Pilwort

The Kinds.

There be two kinds of Celandine, according to the old writers, much
differing in form and figure: the one greater, the other lesser, which I
intend to divide into two distinct chapters, marshalling them as near as
may be with their like, in form and figure, and first of the Small
Celandine.

The Description.

The lesser Celandine hath green round leaves, smooth, slippery, and
shining, less than the leaves of the Ivy: the stalks are slender, short,
and for the most part creeping upon the ground: they bring forth little
yellow flowers like those of Crowfoot; and after the flowers there
springeth up a little fine knop or head full of seed: the root consisteth
of slender strings, on which do hang as it were certain grains, of the
bigness of wheat corns, or bigger.

The Place.

It groweth in meadows, by common ways, by ditches and trenches, and it is
common everywhere, in moist and dankish places.

The Time.

It cometh forth about the Calends of March, and flowereth a little after:
it beginneth to fade away in April, it is quite gone in May, afterwards
it is hard to be found, yea scarcely the root.

The Name.

It is called of the Latins Chelidonium minus, and Hirundinaria minor: of
divers, Scrophularia minor, Ficaria minor: of Serapio, Memiren: in
Italian, Favoscello: in High Dutch, Feigwurtzenkraut: in French, Esclere,
and Petit Bassinet: in English, Little Celandine, Fig-Wort, and Pilewort.

The Temperature.

It is hot and dry, also more biting and hotter than the greater: it
cometh nearest in faculty to the Crowfoot. So saith our author, but this
which is here, and by most authors set forth for Chelidonium minus, hath
no such great heat and acrimony as Dioscorides and Galen affirm to be in
theirs; making it hot in the fourth degree, when as this of ours scarce
exceeds the first, as far as we may conjecture by the taste.

The Virtues.

A. It presently, as Galen and Dioscorides affirm, exulcerateth or
blistereth the skin: it maketh rough and corrupt nails to fall away.

B. The juice of the roots mixed with honey, and drawn up into the
nostils, purgeth the head of foul and filthy humours.

C. The later age use the roots and grains for the piles, which being
often bathed with the juice mixed with wine or with the sick man's urine,
are drawn together and dried up, and the pain quite taken away.

D. There be also who think, that if the herb be but carried about one
that hath the piles, the pain forthwith ceaseth.



CHAP. 295. Of Marsh Marigold.
Fig. 1209. Great Marsh Marigold (1) Fig. 1210. Small Marsh Marigold (2)
The Description.

1. Marsh Marigold hath great broad leaves somewhat round, smooth, of a
gallant green colour, slightly indented or purled about the edges: among
which rise up thick fat stalks, likewise green; whereupon do grow goodly
yellow flowers, glittering like gold, and like to those of Crowfoot, but
greater: the root is small, composed of very many strings.

2. The smaller Marsh Marigold hath many round leaves spread upon the
ground, of a dark green colour: amongst which rise up divers branches,
charged with the like leaves: the flowers grow at the tops of the
branches, of a most shining yellow colour: the root is also like the
former.

Fig. 1211. Double-Flowered Marsh Marigold (3)

3. The great Marsh Marigold with double flowers is a stranger in England,
his native country should seem to be in the furthest part of Germany, by
the relation of a man of those countries that I have had conference
withal, the which he thus described: it hath (saith he) leaves, roots,
and stalks like those of our common sort, and hath double flowers like
those of the garden Marigold, wherein consisteth the difference. So saith
our author, but Camerarius writes just contrary to that which he here
affirms; for he saith, In Anglia sua sponte non solum plenis, sed
oderatis etiam passim sese offert.["In England this flower is not only
cultivated, but grows everywhere of itself."] But I fear that both our
author and Camerarius were deceived by trusting the report of some lying,
or else ignorant persons, for I could never find it growing wild with
double flowers here, nor Camerarius there: yet I do not deny but by
chance some one with double flowers may be found both here & there, but
this is not everywhere.

The Place.

They joy in moist and marsh grounds, and in watery meadows. I have not
found the double one wild, but seen it preserved in divers gardens for
the beauty of the flower.

The Time.

They flower in the spring when the Crowfoots do, and oftentimes in summer
the leaves keep their greenness all the winter long.

The Names.

Marsh Marigold is called of Valerius Cordus Caltha palustris: of
Tabernamontanus, Populago, but not properly: in English, Marsh Marigolds:
in Cheshire and those parts it is called Boots.

The Temperature and virtues.

Touching the faculties of these plants, we have nothing to say, either
out of other men's writings, or our own experiences.



CHAP. 296. Of Frog-Bit.

Fig. 1212. Frog-Bit

The Description.

There floateth or swimmeth upon the upper parts of the water a small
plant, which we usually call Frog-Bit, having little round leaves, thick
and full of juice, very like to the leaves of Wall Pennywort: the flowers
grow upon long stems among the leaves, of a white colour, with a certain
yellow thrum in the middle, consisting of three leaves: instead of roots
it hath slender strings, which grow out of a short and small head, as it
were, from whence the leaves spring, in the bottom of the water: from
which head also come forth slopewise certain strings, by which growing
forth it multiplieth itself.

The Place.

It is found swimming or floating almost in every ditch, pond, pool, or
standing water, in all the ditches about Saint George his fields, and in
the ditches by the Thames side near to Lambeth Marsh, where any that is
disposed may see it.

The Time.

It flourisheth and flowereth most part of all the year.

The Names.

It is called of some Ranae morsus, and Morsus ranae, and Nymphaea parva.

The Temperature and Virtues.

It is thought to be a kind of Pondweed (or rather of Water-Lily) and to
have the same faculties that belong unto it.



CHAP. 297. Of Water-Lily.
Fig. 1213. White Water-Lily (1) Fig. 1214. Yellow Water-Lily (2)
The Description.

1. The white Water-Lily or Nenuphar hath great round leaves, in shape of
a buckler, thick, fat and full of juice, standing upon long round and
smooth footstalks, full of a spongeous substance, which leaves do swim or
float upon the top of the water: upon the end of each stalk groweth one
flower only, of colour white, consisting of many little long sharp
pointed leaves, in the midst whereof be many yellow threads: after the
flower it bringeth forth a round head, in which lieth blackish glittering
seed. The roots be thick, full of knots, black without, white and spongy
within, out of which groweth a multitude of strings, by which it is
fastened in the bottom.

2. The leaves of the Yellow Water-Lily be like to the other, yet are they
a little longer. The stalks of the flowers and leaves be like: the
flowers be yellow, consisting only of five little short leaves something
round; in the midst of which groweth a small round head, or button, sharp
towards the point, compassed about: with many yellow threads, in which,
when it is ripe, lie also glittering seeds, greater than those of the
other, and lesser than wheat corns. The roots be thick, long, set with
certain dents, as it were white both within and without, of a spongeous
substance.


Fig. 1215. Small White Water-Lily (3)
Fig. 1216. Dwarf Water-Lily (5)

3. The Small White Water-Lily floateth likewise upon the water, having a
single root, with some few fibres fastened thereto: from which riseth up
many long, round, smooth, and soft footstalks, some of which do bring
forth at the end fair broad round buckler leaves like unto the precedent,
but lesser: on the other footstalks stand pretty white flowers, consising
of five small leaves apiece, having a little yellow in the middle
thereof.

4. The Small Yellow Water-Lily hath a little thready root, creeping in
the bottom of the water, and dispersing itself far abroad: from which
rise small tender stalks, smooth and soft, whereon do grow little buckler
leaves like the last described: likewise on the other small stalk 
standeth a tuft of many flowers likewise floating upon the water as the
others do. This hath the flowers larger than those of the next described,
wherefore it may be fitly named Nymphaea lutea minor flore amplo.

5. This Dwarf Water-Lily differed not from the other Small Yellow Water-
Lily, saving that, that this kind hath sharper pointed leaves, and the
whole plant is altogether lesser. This hath the flowers much less than
those of the last described, wherefore it is fitly for distinction's sake
named Nymphaea lutea minor flore parvo.

The Place.

These herbs do grow in fens, standing waters, broad ditches, and in
brooks that run slowly, and sometimes in great rivers.

The Time.

They flower and flourish most of the summer months.

The Names.

Water-Lily is called in Latin also Nymphaea, so named because it loves to
grow in watery places, as Dioscorides saith: the apothecaries call it
Nenuphar: of Apuleius, Mater herculania, Alga palustris, Papaver
palustre, Clavus veneris, and Digitus veneris: Marcellus a very old
writer reporteth, that it is called in Latin Clava herculis: in French,
Badittin: in High Dutch, Wasser Mahem: in Low Dutch, Plompen: in English,
Water-Lily, Water-Rose.

The Temperature.

Both the root and seed or Water-Lily have a drying force without biting.

The Virtues.

A. Water-Lily with yellow flowers stoppeth lasks, the overflowing of seed
which cometh away by dreams or otherwise, and is good for them that have
the bloody flux.

B. But Water-Lily which hath the white flowers is of greater force,
insomuch as it stayeth the whites: but both this and the other that hath
the black root must be drunk in red wine: they have also a scouring
quality, therefore they both cleanse away the morphew, and be also good
against the pilling away of the hair of the head; against the morphew
they are steeped in water, and for the pilling away of the hair in tar;
but for these things that is fitter which hath the black root, and for
the other, that which hath the white root.

C. Theophrastus saith, that being stamped and laid upon the wound, it is
reported to stay the bleeding.

D. The physicians of our age do commend the flowers of white Nymphaea
against the infirmities of the head which come of a hot cause: and do
certainly affirm, that the root of the yellow cureth hot diseases of the
kidneys and bladder, and is singular good against the running of the
reins.

E. The root and seed of the Great Water-Lily is very good against venery
or fleshly desire, if one do drink the decoction thereof, or use the seed
or root in powder in his meats, for it dryeth up the seed of generation,
and so causeth a man to be chaste, especially used in broth with flesh.

F. The conserve of the flowers is good for the diseases aforesaid, and is
good also against hot burning fevers.

G. The flowers being made into oil, as ye do make oil of Roses, doth cool
and refrigerate, causing sweat and quiet sleep, and putteth away all
venereous dreams: the temples of the head and palms of the hands and
feet, and the breast being anointed for the one, and the genitals upon
and about them for the other.

H. The green leaves of the Great Water-Lily, either the white or the
yellow, laid upon the region of the back in the small, mightily cease the
involuntary flowing away of the seed called gonorrhoeea, or running of
the reins, being two or three tines a day removed, and fresh applied
thereto.



CHAP. 298. Of Pondweed, or Waterspike.
Fig. 1217. Broad-Leaved Pondweed (1) Fig. 1218. Narrow-Leaved Pondweed (2)
The Description.

1. Pondweed hath little stalks, slender, spreading like those of the
vine, and jointed: the leaves be long, smaller than the leaves of
Plantain, and harder, with manifest veins running alongst them as in
Plantains, which standing upon slender and long stems or footstalks, show
themselves above the water, and lie flat along upon the superficial or
upper part thereof, as do the leaves of the Water-Lily: the flowers grow
in short ears, and are of a light red purple colour, like those of Red-
Shanks or Bistort: the seed is hard.

2. This hath longer, narrower, and sharper pointed leaves than those of
the last described, having the veins running from the middle rib to the
sides of the leaves, as in a willow leaf, which they somewhat resemble;
at the tops of the stalks grow reddish spikes or ears like those of the
last described: the root is long, jointed, and fibrous.


Fig. 1229. Small Pondweed (3)
Fig. 1220. Long Sharp-Leaved Pondweed (4)

3. There is another Pondweed described thus; it shooteth forth into many
slender and round stems, which are distributed into sundry branches: his
leaves are broad, long, and sharp pointed, yet much less than the first
kind: out of the bosoms of the branches and leaves there spring certain
little stalks which bear sundry small white mossy flowers, which do turn
into plain and round seeds, like the common Tare or Vetch: his root is
fibrous, thoroughly fastened in the ground.

4. There is also another Pondweed, which hath whitish and jointed roots
creeping in the bottom of the water, and sending down some fibres, but
sending up slender jointed and long stalks, small below, and bigger
above, having long narrow and very stiff sharp pointed leaves. The
flowers grow in a reddish spike like those of the first described. This
is the Potamogeiton altera of Dodonaeus.

The Place.

These herbs do grow in standing waters, pools, ponds, and ditches, almost
everywhere.

The Time.

They do flower in June and July.

The Names.

It is called of the Grecians, Potomogeiton: in Latin, Fontalis, and
Spicata: in High Dutch, Zamkraut: in Low Dutch, Fonteyncruyt: in French,
Espi d'eau: in English, Pond-Weed, and Waterspike.

The Temperature.

Pond-Weed, saith Galen, doth bind and cool, like as doth Knot-Grass, but
his essence is thicker than that of Knot-Grass.

The Virtues.

A. It is good against the itch, and consuming or eating ulcers, as
Dioscorides writeth.

B. Also it is good being applied to the inflammation of the legs wherein
ignis sacer hath gotten the superiority.



CHAP. 299. Of Water Saligot, Water Caltrops, or Water-Nuts.
Fig. 1221. Water Caltrops (1) Fig. 1222. Small Water Caltrops, or Frog's-
Lettuce (2)
The Description.

1. Water Caltrops have long slender stalks, growing up, and rising from
the bottom of the water, and mounting above the same: the root is long,
having here and there under the water certain tassels full of small
strings and thready hairs: the stem towards the top of the water, is very
great in respect of that which is lower, the leaves are large and
somewhat round, not unlike those of the Poplar or Elm tree leaves, a
little creviced or notched about the edges: amongst and under the leaves
groweth the fruit, which is triangled, hard, sharp pointed, and prickly:
in shape like those hurtful engines in the wars, cast in the passage of
the enemy to annoy the feet of their horses, called caltrops, whereof
this took its name. Within these heads or nuts is contained a white
kernel, in taste almost like the Chestnut, which is reported to be eaten
green, and being dried and ground to serve instead of bread.

There are two other plants which are found growing in many ponds and
ditches of this kingdom, both about London and elsewhere, and I will here
give you the figures out of Lobel and Clusius, and their descriptions as
they were sent me by Mr. Goodyer, who hath saved me the labour of
describing them.

Tribulus aquaticus minor quercus floribus, Clusius p.252.
Pusillum fontila pathum, Lobel.

2. This water herb bringeth forth from the root, thin, flat, knotty
stalks, of a reddish colour, two or three cubits long, or longer,
according to the depth of the waters, (which when they are dried are
pliant and bowing) divided towards the top into many parts or branches,
bearing but one leaf at every joint, sometimes two inches long, and half
an inch broad, thin, and as it were shining, so wrinkled and crumpled by
the sides that it seemeth to be torn, of a reddish green colour: the
footstalks are something long and thick, and rise up from amongst those
leaves, which always grow two, one opposite against another, in a
contrary manner to those that grow below on the stalk: near the top of
which footstalk groweth small grape-like husks, out of which spring very
small reddish flowers, like those of the Oak, every flower having four
very small round topped leaves: after every flower cometh commonly four
sharp pointed grains growing together, containing within them a little
white kernel. The lower part of the stalk hath at every joint small white
thready roots, somewhat long, whereby it taketh hold in the mud, and
draweth nourishment unto it. The whole plant is commonly covered over
with water. It flowereth in June and the beginning of July. I found it in
the standing pools or fish-ponds adjoining to a dissolved abbey called
Durford, which ponds divide Hampshire and Sussex, and in other standing
waters elsewhere. This description was made upon sight of the plant the
2nd of June, 1622.

Fig. 1223. Small Frog's-Lettuce (3)
Tribulus aquaticus minor, muscatellae floribus.

3. This hath not flat stalks like the other, but round, kneed, and always
bearing two leaves at every joint, one opposite against another, greener,
shorter and lesser than the other, sharp pointed, not much wrinkled and
crumpled by the edges. Clusius saith, that they are not at all crumpled.
I never observed any without crumples and wrinkles: the flowers grow on
short small footstalks, of a whitish green colour, like those of
Muscatella cordi, called by Gerard, Radix cava minima viridi flore: viz.
two flowers at the top of every footstalk, one opposite against another,
every flower containing four small leaves: which two flowers being past
there come up eight small husks making six several ways a square of
flowers. The roots are like the former. This groweth abundantly in the
river by Droxford in Hampshire. It flowereth in June and July when the
other doth, and continueth covered over with water, green, both winter
and summer. John Goodyer.

The Place.

Cordus saith that it groweth in Germany in many lakes, and in city
ditches that have mud in them: in Brabant and in other places of the Low
Countries, it is found often times in standing waters, and springs:
Matthiolus writeth, that it groweth not only in lakes of sweet water, but
also in certain ditches by the sea near unto Venice.

The Time.

It flourisheth in June, July, and August.

The Names.

The Latins call it, Tribulus aquatalis and aquaticus, and Tribulus
lacustris: the apothecaries, Tribulus marinus: in High Dutch, Wassernusz:
the Brabanters, Water Noten and of the likeness of iron nails,
Minkiifers: the French men, Macres: in English it is named Water
Caltrops, Saligot, and Water-Nuts: most do call the fruit of this
Caltrops, Castaneae aquatiles, or water chestnuts.

The Temperature.

Water Caltrop is of a cold nature, it consisteth of a moist essence,
which in this is more watery than in the land Caltrops, wherein an earthy
cold is predominant, as Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. The herb used in manner of a poultice, as Dioscorides teacheth, is
good against all inflammations or hot swellings: boiled with honey and
water, it perfectly healeth cankers in the mouth, sore gums, and the
almonds of the throat.

B. The Thracians, saith Pliny, that dwell in Strymona, do fatten their
horses with the leaves of Saligot, and they themselves do feed of the
kernels, making very sweet bread thereof, which bindeth the belly.

C. The green nuts or fruit of Tribulus aquaticus or Saligot, being drunk
in wine, is good for them which are troubled with the stone and gravel.

D. The same drunk in like manner, or laid outwardly to the place, helpeth
those that are bitten with any venomous beast, and resisteth all venom
and poison.

E. The leaves of Saligot be given against all inflammations and ulcers of
the mouth, the putrefaction and corruption of the jaws, and against the
King's evil.

F. A powder made of the nuts is given to such as piss blood, and are
troubled with gravel, and it doth bind the belly very much.

G. The two lesser water Caltrops here described are in my opinion much
agreeable in temper to the great one, and are much fitter succedanea for
it then Aron, which some in the composition of Ungenteum Agrippae have
appointed for it.



CHAP. 300. Of Water Sengreen, or Fresh-Water Soldier.

Fig. 1224. Fresh-Water Soldier

The Description.

Fresh-Water Soldier or Water Houseleek, hath leaves like those of the
herb Aloe, or Sempervivum, but shorter and lesser, set round about the
edges with certain stiff and short prickles: amongst which cometh forth
divers ears or husks, very like unto crabs' claws: out of which when they
open grow white flowers consisting of three leaves, altogether like those
of Frog's-bit, having in the middle little yellowish threads: instead of
roots there be long strings, round, white, very like to great harp-
strings, or to long worms, which falling down from a short head that
brought forth the leaves, go to the bottom of the water, and yet be they
seldom there fastened: there also grow from the same other strings
aslope, by which the plant is multiplied after the manner of Frog's-Bit.
The leaves and flowers grow upon the top of the water, and the roots are
sent down through the water to the mud.

The Place.

I found this growing plentifully in the ditches about Rothesay a small
village in Holderness. And my friend Mr. William Broad observed it in the
Fens in Lincolnshire.

The Time.

It flowers in June, and sometimes in August.

The Names.

It may be called Sedum aquatile, or Water Sengreen, that is to say, of
the likeness of herb Aloe, which is also called in Latin Sedum: of some,
Cancri chela, or Cancri forficula: in English, Water Houseleek, Knight's
Pondwort; and of some, Knight's Water Sengreen, Fresh-Water Soldier or
Wading Pondweed: it seemeth to be Stratiotes aquatilis, or Stratiotes
potamios, or Knight's Water Woundwort, which may also be named in Latin
Militaris aquatica, and Militaris aizoides, or Soldier's Yarrow, for it
it groweth in the water, and floateth upon it, and if those strings which
it sendeth to the bottom of the water be no roots, it also liveth without
roots.

The Temperature.

This herb is of a cooling nature and temperament.

The Virtues.

A. This Houseleek stayeth the blood which cometh from the kidneys, it
keepeth green wounds from being inflamed, and it is good against S.
Anthony's fire and hot swellings, being applied unto them: and is equal
in the virtues aforesaid with the former.



CHAP. 301. Of Water-Yarrow, and Water Gillyflower.
Fig. 1225. Water-Violet (1) Fig. 1226. Small-Leaved Water-Violet (1a)
The Description.

1. Water Violet hath long and great jagged leaves, very finely cut or
rent like Yarrow, but smaller: among which come up small stalks a cubit
and a half high, bearing at the top small white flowers like unto Stock-
Gillyflowers, with some yellowness in the middle. The roots are long and
small like black threads, and at the end whereby they are fastened to the
ground they are white, and shining like crystal.

1a. There is another variety of this plant, which differs from it only in
that the leaves are much smaller, as you may see them expressed in the
figure.


Fig. 1227. Water-Yarrow (2)
Fig. 1228. Water Crowfoot (3)

2. Water Milfoil, or Water-Yarrow hath long and large leaves deeply cut
with many divisions like Fennel, but finelier jagged, swimming upon the
water. The root is single, long, and round, which brings up a right
straight and slender stalk, set in sundry places with the like leaves but
smaller. The flowers grow at the top of the stalk tuft fashion, and like
unto the land Yarrow.

3. This water Milfoil differeth from all the kinds aforesaid, having a
root in the bottom of the water made of many hairy strings, which
yieldeth up a naked slender stalk within the water, and the rest of the
stalk which floateth upon the water divideth itself into sundry other
branches and wings, which are bedashed with fine small jagged leaves like
unto Camomile, or rather resembling hairy tassels or fringes, than
leaves. From the bosoms whereof come forth small and tender branches,
every branch bearing one flower like unto Water Crowfoot, white of
colour, with a little yellow in the inidst: the whole plant resembleth
Water Crowfoot in all things save in the broad leaves.


Fig. 1229. Fennel-Leaved Water Milfoil (4)
Fig. 1230. Hooded Water Milfoil (5)

4. There is another kind of Water Violet very like the former, saving
that his leaves are much longer, somewhat resembling the leaves of
Fennel, fashioned like unto wings, and the Flowers are somewhat smaller,
yet white, with yellowness in their middles, and shaped like those of the
last described. And the seed also grows like unto that of the Water
Ranunculus, last described.

5. There is, also another kind of Water Milfoil, which hath leaves very
like unto Water-Violet, smaller, and not so many in number: the stalk is
small and tender, bearing yellow gaping flowers fashioned like a hood or
the small Snapdragon; which caused Pena to put unto his name this
additament galericulatum, that is, hooded. The roots are small and
thready, with some few knobs hanging thereat like the sounds of fish.

6. To these may we add a small water Milfoil, set forth by Clusius. It
hath round green stalks set with many joints, whereout come at their
lower ends many hairy fibres, whereby it taketh hold of the mud: the tops
of these stems stand some handful above the water, and at each joint
stand five long finely winged leaves, very green, and some inch long,
which wax less and less, as they stand higher or nearer the top of the
stalk: and at each of these leaves about the top of the stem grows one
small white flower consisting of six little leaves joined together, and
not opening themselves: and these at length turn into little knobs, with
four little pointels standing out of them. Clusius calls this
Myriophyllon aquaticum minus.

The Place.

They be found in lakes and standing waters, or in waters that run slowly:
I have not found such plenty of it in any one place, as in the water
ditches adjoining to Saint George his field near London.

The Time.

They flower for the most part in May and June.

The Names.

The first is called in Dutch Water Violerian, that is to say, Viola
aquatilis: in English, Water Gillyflower, or Water-Violet: in French,
Giroflees d'eau: Matthiolus makes this to be also Myriophylli species, or
a kind of Yarrow, although it doth not agree with the description
thereof; for neither hath it one stalk only, nor one single root, as
Myriophyllon or Yarrow is described to have; for the roots are full of
strings, and it bringeth forth many stalks.

The second is called in in Latin, Millefolium, and Myriophyllon, and also
Supercilium veneris: in shops it is unknown. This Yarrow differeth from
that of the land: the rest are sufficiently spoken of in their titles.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. Water Yarrow, as Dioscorides saith, is of a dry faculty; and by reason
that it taketh away hot inflammations and swellings, it seemeth to be of
a cold nature; for Dioscorides affirmeth, that Water Yarrow is a remedy a
gainst inflammations in green wounds, if with vinegar it be applied green
or dry: and it is given inwardly with vinegar and salt, to those that
have fallen from a high place.

B. Water Gillyflower or Water Violet is thought to be cold and dry, yet
hath it no use in physic at all.



CHAP. 302. Of Duck's Meat.

Fig. 1231. Duck's Meat

The Description.

Duck's Meat is as it were a certain green moss, with very little round
leaves of the bigness of Lentils: out of the midst whereof on the nether
side grow down very fine threads like hairs, which are to them instead of
roots: it hath neither stalk, flower, nor fruit.

The Place.

It is found in pounds, lakes, city ditches, and in other standing waters
everywhere.

The Time.

The time of Duck's Meat is known to all.

 The Names.

Duck's Meat is called in Latin Lens lacustris, Lens aquatilis, and Lens
palustra: of the apothecaries it is named Aqua lenticula: in High Dutch,
Meerlinsen: in Low Dutch, Waterlinsen, and more usually Enden Gruen, that
is to say, Anatum herba, Duck's herb, because Ducks do feed thereon;
whereupon also in English it is called Duck's meat: some term it after
the Greek Water Lentils; and of others it is named Grains. The Italiaans
call it Lent di palude: in French, Lentille d'eau: in Spanish, Lenteias
de agua.

The Temperature.

Galen showth that it is cold and moist after a sort in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith that it is a remedy against all manner of
inflammations, Saint Anthony's fire, and hot agues, if they be either
applied alone, or else used with parched barley meal. It also knitteth
ruptures in young children.

B. Duck's Meat mingled with fine wheaten flour and applied, prevaileth
much against hot swellings, as phlegmons, erysipelas, and the pains of
the joints.

C. The same doth help the fundament fallen down in young children.



CHAP. 303. Of Water Crowfoot.

Fig. 1232. Water Crowfoot

The Description.

1. Water Crowfoot hath slender branches trailing far abroad, whereupon
grow leaves under the water most finely cut and jagged like those of
Camomile. Those above the water are somewhat round, indented about the
edges, in form not unlike the small tender leaves of the Mallow, but
lesser: among which do grow the flowers, small, and white of colour, made
of five little leaves, with some yellowness in the middle like the
flowers of the Strawberry, and of a sweet smell: after which there come
round rough and prickly knops like those of the field Crowfoot. The roots
be very small hairy strings.

There is sometimes to be found a variety of this, with the leaves less,
and divided into three parts after the manner of an Ivy leaf; and the
flowers are also much lesser, but white of colour, with a yellow bottom.
I question whether this be not the Ranunculus hederaceus dalechampii, pg.
1031 of the Historia Lugdunensis.


Fig. 1233. Water Ivy (2)
Fig. 1234. Water Starwort (3)

2. There is another plant growing in the water, of small moment, yet not
amiss to be remembered, called Hederula aquatica, or Water Ivy: the which
is very rare to find; nevertheless I found it once in a ditch by
Bermondsey house near to London, and never elsewhere: it hath small
thready strings instead of roots and stalks, rising from the bottom of
the water to the top; wherunto are fastened small leaves swimming or
floating upon the water, triangled or three-cornered like to those of
Barren Ivy, or rather Noble Liverwort: barren of flowers and seeds.

3. There is likewise another herb ofsmall reckoning that floateth upon
the water, called Stellaria aquatica, or water Starwort, which hath many
small grassy items like threads, coming from the bottom of the water unto
the upper face of the same: whereupon do grow small double flowers of a
greenish or herby colour. I take this Stellaria to be nothing less but a
water Chickweed, which grows almost in every ditch, with two long narrow
stems at each joint, and half a dozen or more lying close together at the
top of the water, in fashion of a starr: it may be seen in this shape in
the end of April and beginning of May.

The Place.

Water Crowfoot groweth by ditches and shallow springs, and in other moist
and plashy places.

The Time.

 It flowereth in April and May, and sometimes in June.

The Names.

Water Crowfoot is called in Latin Ranunculus aquatilis, and Polyanthemum
aquatile: in English, Water Crowfoot, and White Water Crowfoot: most
apothecaries and herbarists do erroneously name it Hepatica aquatica, and
Hepatica alba; and with greater error they mix it in medicines instead of
Hepatica alba, or Grass of Parnassus. So saith our author, but I know
none that commit this great error here mentioned, neither have I known
either the one or the other ever used or appointed in medicine with us in
England, though Dodonaeus (from whom our author had this and most else)
do blame his countrymen for this mistake and error.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Water Crowfoot is hot, and like to common Crowfoot.



CHAP. 304. Of Dragons.
Fig. 1235. Great Dragon (1) Fig. 1236. Small Dragon (2)
The Description.

1. The Great Dragon riseth up, with a straight stalk a cubit and a half
high or higher, thick, round, smooth, sprinkled with spots of divers
colours, like those of the adder or snake: the leaves are great and wide,
consisting of seven or more joined together in order; every one of which
is long and narrow, much like to the leaves of Dock, smooth and slippery:
out of the top of the stalk groweth a long hose or husk greater than that
of the Cuckoo-Pint, of a greenish colour without, and within crimson,
with his pistil which is black, long, thick, and pointed like a horn; the
skin or film whereof when the seed waxeth big, being stretched or broken
asunder, there appeareth the fruit, like to a bunch or cluster of grapes:
the berries whereof at the first be green, afterwards red and full of
juice; in which is contained seed that is somewhat hard: the root
continueth fresh, thick, like to a knob, white, covered with a thin
pilling, oftentimes of the bigness of a mean apple, full of white little
threads appendant thereunto.

2. The lesser Dragon is like Aron or Wake-Robin, in leaves, hose or husk,
pistil, and berries, yet are not the leaves sprinkled with black but with
whitish spots, which perish not so soon as those of Wake-Robin, but
endure together with the berries even until winter: these berries also be
not of a deep red, but of a colour inclining to saffron. The root is not
unlike to the Cuckoo-Pint, having the form of a bulb, full of strings,
with divers rude shapes of new plants, whereby it greatly increaseth.

Fig. 1237. Water Dragon (3)

3. The root of Water Dragon is not round like a bulb, but very long,
creeping, and jointed, and of mean bigness; out of the joints whereof
arise the stalks of the leaves, which are round, smooth, and spongy
within, and there grow downwards certain white and slender strings. The
fruit springs forth at the top upon a short stalk, together with one of
the leaves, being at the beginning covered with little white threads,
which are instead of the flowers: after that it groweth into a bunch or
cluster, at the first green, and when it is ripe, red, lesser than that
of Cuckoo-Pint, but not less biting: the leaves are broad, greenish,
glib, and smooth, in fashion like those of Ivy, yet lesser than those of
Cuckoo-Pint; and that thing whereunto the clustered fruit grows is also
lesser, and in that part which is towards the fruit (that is to say the
upper part) is white.

4. The Great Dragon of Matthiolus his description is a stranger not only
in England, but elsewhere for any thing that we can learn: myself have
diligently enquired of most strangers skilful in plants, that have
resorted unto me for conference' sake, but no man can give me any
certainty thereof; and therefore I think it amiss to give you his figure
or any description, for that I take it for a feigned picture.

The Place.

The greater and the lesser Dragons are planted in gardens. The water
Dragons grow in watery and marsh places, for the most part in fenny and
standing waters.

The Time.

The berries of these plants are ripe in autumn.

The Names

The Dragon is called in Latin, Dracunculus. The greater is named
Serpentaria maior: of some, Bisaria, and Colubrina: Cordus calleth it
Dracunculus polyphyllos, and Luph crispum; in High Dutch, Schlangenkraut:
in Low Dutch, Speerwortele: in French, Serpentaire: in Italian,
Dragontea: in Spanish, Taragontia: in English, Dragons, and Dragon-wort.
Apuleius calleth Dragon Dracontea, and setteth down many strange names
thereof, which whether they agree with the greater or the lesser, or both
of them, he doth not expound; as Pythonion, Anchomanes, Sauchromaton,
Therion, Schaenos, Dorcadion, Typhonion, Theriophonon, and Eminion.
Athenaeus showeth, that Dragon is called Aronia, because it is like to
Aron.

The Temperature.

Dragon, as Galen saith, hath a certain likeness with Aron or Wake-Robin,
both in leaves, and also in root, yet more biting and more bitter than
it, and therefore hotter, and of thinner parts: it is also something
binding, which by reason that it is adjoined with the two former
qualities, that is to say, biting and bitter, is is made in like manner a
singular medicine of very great efficacy.

The Virtues.

A. The root of Dragons doth cleanse and scour all the entrails, making
thin, especially thick and tough humours; and it is a singular remedy for
ulcers that are hard to be cured.

B. It scoureth and cleanseth mightily, as well such things as have need
of scouring, as also white and black morphew, being tempered with
vinegar. The leaves also by reason that they are of like quality are good
for ulcers and green wounds: and the less dry they are, the fitter they
be to heal, for the dryer ones are of a more sharp or biting quality than
is convenient for wounds.

C. The fruit is of greater operation than either the leaves or the root:
and therefore it is thought to be of force to consume and take away
cankers and proud flesh growing in the nostrils, called in Greek Polypus:
also the juice doth cleanse away webs and spots in the eyes.

D. Furthermore, Dioscorides writeth, that it is reported that they who
have rubbed the leaves or root upon their hands, are not bitten of the
viper.

E. Pliny saith, that serpents will not come near unto him that beareth
Dragons about him, and these things are read concerning both the Dragons,
in the two chapters of Dioscorides.

F. Galen also hath made mention of Dragon in his book Of the Faculties of
Nourishments; where he saith, that the root of Dragon being twice or
thrice sod, to the end it may lose all his acrimony or sharpness, is
sometimes given as Aron, or Wake-Robin is, when it is needful to expel
the more forceable thick and clammy humours that are troublesome to the
chest and lungs.

G. And Disocorides writeth, that the root of the Lesser Dragon being both
sod and roast with honey, or taken of itself in meat, causeth the humours
which stick fast in the chest to be easily voided.

H. The juice of the garden Dragons, as saith Dioscorides, being dropped
into the eyes, doth cleanse them, and greatly amend the dimness of the
sight,

I. The distilled water hath virtue against the pestilence or any
pestilential fever or poison, being drunk blood-warm with the best
treacle or mithridate.

K. The smell of the flowers is hurtful to women newly conceived with
child.



CHAP. 305. Of Cuckoo-Pint, or Wake-Robin.
Fig. 1238. Cuckoo-Pint (1) Fig. 1239. Egyptian Cuckoo-Pint (2)
The Description

1. Arum or Cuckoo-Pint hath great, large, smooth, shining, sharp pointed
leaves, bespotted here and there with blackish spots mixed with some
blueness: among which riseth up a stalk nine inches long, bespeckled in
many places with certain purple spots. It beareth also a certain long
hose or hood, in proportion like the ear of an hare: in the middle of
which hood cometh forth a peak or clapper of a dark murry or pale purple
colour: which being past, there succeedeth in place thereof a bunch or
cluster of berries in manner of a bunch of grapes, green at the first,
but after they be ripe of a yellowish red like coral, and full of pith,
with some thready additaments annexed thereto.

2. There is in Egypt a kind of Arum which also is to be seen in Africa,
and in certain places of Lusitania, about rivers and floods, which
differeth from that which groweth in England and other parts of Europe.
This plant is large and great, and the leaves thereof are greater than
those of the Water-Lily: the root is thick and tuberous, and toward the
lower end thicker and broader, and may be eaten. It hath also pistils and
clusters of berries as the common Aron, but somewhat different: the
leaves are not cut into the stalk, but joined before the setting thereto:
the root also is very large. Those that desire to see more of this plant,
and the question which some have moved, whither this be the Colocasia, or
Faba aegyptia of the ancients, let them have recourse to the first
chapter of Fabius Columna his Minus Cognitarum Stirpium Pars Altera, and
there they shall find satisfaction.

The Place.

Cuckoo-Pint groweth in woods near unto ditches under hedges, everywhere
in shadowy places.

The Time.

The leaves appear presently after winter: the pistil showth itself out of
his husk or sheath in June, whilst the leaves are in withering: and when
they are gone, the bunch or cluster of berries becometh ripe, which is in
July and August.

The Names.

1. The common Cuckoo-Pint is called in Latin, Arum: in Greek, Aron, in
shops, Iarus, and Barba-Aron: of others, Pes vituli: of the Syrians,
Lupha: of the men of Cyprus, Colocasia, as we find among the bastard
names. Pliny in his 24th book, 16th chapter, doth witness, that there is
great difference between Aron and Dracontium, although there hath been
some controversy about the same among the old writers, affirming them to
be all one: in High Dutch it is called, Passen Pint: in Italian, Gigora:
in Spanish, Yaro: in Low Dutch, Calfsuoet: in French, Pied de veau: in
English, Cuckoo-Pint, and Cuckoo Pintle, Wake-Robin, Priest's Pintle,
Aron; Calf's foot, and Ramp; and of some Stratchwort.

2. There groweth in Egypt a kind of Aron or Cuckoo-Pint which is found
also in Africa, and likewise in certain places of Portugal near unto
rivers and streams, that differeth from those of our countries growing,
which the people of Castile call Manta de Nuestra Senora: most would have
it to be called Colocasia; but Dioscorides saith that Colocasia is the
root of Faba aegyptia, or the Bean of Egypt. Fabius Columna (in the place
formerly alleged) proves this not to be the true Colocasia, and yet
Prosper Alpinus since in his second book De Plantis Exoticis, cap. 17.
and 18, labours to prove the contrary: let the curious have recourse to
these, for it is too tedious for me in this place to insist upon it,
being so large a point of controversy, which hath so much troubled all
the late writers.

The Temperature.

The faculties of Cuckoo-Pint do differ according to the variety of 
countries: for the root hereof, as Galen in his book Of the Faculties of
Nourishments doth affirm, is sharper and more biting in some countries
than in others, almost as much as Dragons, contrariwise in Cyrene a city
in Africa, it is generally in all places hot and dry, at the least in the
first degree.

The Virtues.

A. If any man would have thick and tough humours which are gathered in
the chest and lungs to be cleansed and voided out by coughing, then that
Cuckoo-Pint is best that biteth most.

B. It is eaten being sodden in two or three waters, and fresh put to,
whereby it may lose his acrimony, and being so eaten, they cut thick
humours meanly, but Dragons is better for the same purpose.

C. Dioscorides showeth, that the leaves also are preserved to be eaten;
and that they must be eaten after they be dried and boiled; and writeth
also, that the root hath a peculiar virtue against the gout, being laid
on stamped with cow's dung.

D. Bears after they have lain in their dens forty days. without any
manner of sustenance, but what they get with licking and sucking their
own feet, do, as soon as they come forth eat the herb Cuckoo-Pint,
through the windy nature whereof the hungry gut is opened and made fit
again to receive sustenance: for by abstaining from food so long a time,
the gut is shrunk or drawn so close together, that in a manner it is
quite shut up, as Aristotle, AElianus, Plutarch, Pliny, and others do
write.

E. The most pure and white starch is made of the roots of Cuckoo-Pint;
but most hurtful to the hands of the laundress that hath the handling of
it for it choppeth, blistereth, and maketh the hands rough and rugged,
and withal smarting.



CHAP. 306. Of Friar's Cowl or Hooded Cuckoo-Pint.
Fig. 1240. Broad-Leaved Friar's Cowl (1) Fig. 1241. Narrow-Leaved Friar's
Cowl (2)
The Description.

1. Broad-Leaved Friar's Hood hath a leaf like Ivy, broad and sharp
pointed, but far less, approaching near to the form of those of Cuckoo-
Pint: the stalk thereof is small and slender: the husk or hose is little;
the pistil small, and of a black purplish colour; the cluster when it is
ripe is red; the kernels small; the root white, having the form of Aron
or Cuckoo-Pint, but lesser, whereof doubtless it is a kind.

2. The second Friar's Hood hath many leaves, long and narrow, smooth and
glittering: The husk or hose is narrow and long; the pistil that cometh
forth of it is slender, in form like a great earthworm, of a blackish
purple colour, as hath also the inside of the hose, upon which, hard to
the ground, and sometimes a little within the ground, groweth a certain
bunch or cluster of berries, green at the first, and afterwards red: the
root is round and white like the others.

The Place.

These plants are strangers in England, but common in Italy, and
especially in Tuscany, about Rome, and in Dalmatia, as Aloisius
Anguillara witnesseth: notwithstanding I have them in my garden.

The Time.

The flowers and fruit of these come to perfection with those of Cuckoo-
Pint and Dragons.

The Names.

Friar's Hood is called in Latin, Arisarum: but Pliny calleth it Aris; for
in his twenty-fourth book; cap. 16, he saith, That Aris which groweth in
Egypt is like Aron or Cuckoo-Pint: it may be called in English after the
Latin name Arisarum; but in my opinion it may be more fitly called
Friar's hood, or Friar's Cowl, to which the flowers seem to be like;
whereupon the Spaniards name it Frailillos, as Dalechampius noteth.

The Temperature.

Friar's Cowl is like in power and faculty to the Cuckoo-Pint, yet is it
more biting, as Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. There is no great use of these plants in physic; but it is reported
that they stay running or eating sores or ulcers: and likewise that there
is made of the roots certain compositions called in Greek collyria, good
against fistulas: and being put into the secret part of any living thing,
it rotteth the same, as Diororides writeth.



CHAP. 307. Of Asarabacca.
Fig. 1242. Asarabacca (1) Fig. 1243. Italian Asarabacca (2)
The Description

The leaves of Asarabacca are smooth, of a deep green colour, rounder,
broader, and tenderer than those of Ivy, and not cornered at all, not
unlike to those of Sow-Bread: the flowers lie close to the roots, hid
under the leaves, standing upon slender footstalks, of an ill-favoured
purple colour, like to the flowers and husks of Henbane, but less,
wherein are contained small seeds, cornered, and somewhat rough: the
roots are many, small and slender, growing aslope under the upper crust
of the earth, one folded within another, of an unpleasant taste, but of a
most sweet and pleasing smell, having withal a kind of biting quality.

2. This strange kind of Asarabacca, which Matthiolus hath set forth
creeping on the ground; in manner of our common Asarabacca, hath leaves
somewhat rounder and rougher, slightly indented about the edges, and set
upon long slender footstalks: the flowers grow hard unto the ground like
unto those of Camomile, but much lesser, of a mealy or dusty colour, and
not without smell. The roots are long and slender, creeping under the
upper crust of the earth, of a sharp taste, and bitter withal.

The Place.

It delighteth to grow in shadowy places, and is very common in most
gardens.

The Time.

The herb is always green; yet doth it in the spring bring forth new
leaves and flowers.

The Names.

It is called in Greek Asarum: in Latin, Nardus rustica: and of divers,
Perpensa: Perpensa is also Baccharis in Pliny, lib. 21, cap. 21. Macer
saith, That Asarum is called Vulgago, in these words:

Est Asaron Graece, Vulgago dicta Latine
This herb, Asaron do the Grecians name;
Whereas the Latins Vulgago clepe the same.

It is found also amongst the bastard names, that it was called of the
great learned Philosophers Martis sanguinis, or the blood of Mars: and of
the French men Baccar; and thereupon it seemeth that the word Asarabacca
came, which the apothecaries use, and likewise the common people: but
there is another Baccharis differing from Asarum, yet notwithstanding
Crateuas doth also call Baccharis, Asarum.

This confusion of hath the names hath been the cause, that most could not
sufficiently expound themselves concerning Asarum and Baccharis; and that
many things have been written amiss in many copies of Dioscorides, in the
chapter of Asarum: for when it is set down in the Greek copies a sweet
smelling garden herb, it belongeth not to the description of this Asarum,
but to that of Baccharis: for Asarum (as Pliny saith) is so called,
because it is not put into garlands: and so by that means it came to
pass, that oftentimes the descriptions of the old writers were found
corrupted and confused: which thing; as it is in this place manifest, so
oftentimes it cannot so easily be marked in other places. Furthermore,
Asarum is called in French Cabaret: in High Dutch, Hazelwurtz: in Low
Dutch, Mansooren: in English, Asarabacca, Foalfoot, and Hazel-Wort.

The Temperature.

The leaves of Asarabacca are hot and dry, with a purging quality adjoined
thereunto, yet not without a certain kind of astriction or binding. The
roots are also hot and dry, yet more than the leaves; they are of thin
and subtle parts: they procure urine, bring down the desired sickness,
and are like in faculty, as Galen saith, to the roots of Acorus, but yet
more forceable; and the roots of Acorus are also of a thin essence,
heating, attenuating, drying, and provoking urine, as he affirmeth: which
things are happily performed by taking the roots of Asarabacca, either by
themselves, or mixed with other things.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves draw forth by vomit, thick phlegrnatic and choleric
humours, and withal move the belly; and in this they are more forceable
and of greater effect than the roots themselves.

B. They are thought to keep in hard swelling cankers that they increase
not, or come to exulceration, or creeping any farther if they be
outwardly applied upon the same.

C. The roots are good against the stoppings of the liver, gall, and
spleen, against wens and hard swellings, and agues of long continuance:
but being taken in the greater quantity, they purge phlegm and choler not
much less than the leaves (though Galen say no) by vomit especially, and
also by siege.

D. One dram of the powder of the roots given to drink in ale or wine,
grossly beaten, provoketh vomit for the purposes aforesaid; but being
beaten into fine powder, and so given it purgeth very little by vomit,
but worketh most by procuring much urine; therefore the grosser the
powder is, so much the better.

E. But if the roots be infused or boiled, then must two, three, or four
drams be put to the infusion; and of the leaves eight or nine be
sufficient: the juice of which stamped with some liquid thing, is to be
given. The roots may be steeped in wine, but more effectually in whey or
honeyed water, as Mesues teacheth.

F. The same is good for them that are tormented with the sciatica or gout
in the huckle bones, for those that have the dropsy, and for such also as
are vexed with a quartan ague, who are cured and made whole by vomiting.


CHAP. 308. Of Sea Bindweed.
Fig. 1244. Sea Bindweed (1) Fig. 1245. Mountain Bindweed (2)
The Description.

1. Soldanella or Sea Bindweed hath many small branches, somewhat red,
trailing upon the ground, beset with small and round leaves, not much
unlike Asarabacca, or the leaves of Aristolochia, but smaller; betwixt
which leaves and the stalks come flowers formed like a bell, of a bright
red incarnate colour, in every respect answering the small Bindweed,
whereof it is a kind, albeit I have here placed the same, for the reasons
rendered in my proem. The seed is black, and groweth in round husks: the
root is long and small, thrusting itself far abroad, and into the earth
like the other Bindweeds.

2. Soldanella or Mountain Bindweed hath many round leaves spread upon the
ground, not much unlike the former, but rounder, and more full of veins,
greener, of a bitter taste like Sea Bindweed: among which cometh forth a
small and tender stalk a handful high, bearing at the top little flowers
like the small Bell-flower, of a sky colour. The root is small and
thready.

Fig. 1246. Small Mountain Bindweed (3)

3. There is of this kind another having all the parts smaller, and the
leaves redder and rounder: the flowers also blue, and composed of one
leaf divided into five parts, and succeeded by a longish cod, round and
sharp pointed.

The Place.

The first grows plentifully by the sea-shore in most places of England,
especially near to Lee in Essex, at Mersea in the same county, in most
places of the Isle of Thanet, and Sheppey, and in many places along the
Northern coast.

The second groweth upon the mountains of Gerrnany, and the Alps; it
groweth upon the mountains of Wales, not far from Cowmers Mere in North
Wales.

The Time.

These herbs do flower in June, and are gathered in August to be kept for
medicine.

 The Names.

The first called Soldanella is of the Apothecaries and the ancients
called Marina Brassica, that is to say, Sea Colewort: but what reason
hath moved them so to do I cannot conceive, unless it be penury and
scarcity of names, and because they know not otherwise how to term it: of
this I am sure, that this plant and Brassica are no more like than things
which are most unlike; for Brassica marina is the Sea Colewort, which
doth much resemble the garden Cabbage or Cole, both in shape and in
nature, as I have in his due place expressd. A great fault and oversight
therefore it hath been of the old writers and their successors which have
continued the custom of this error, not taking the pains to distinguish a
Bindweed from a Colewort. But to avoid controversies, the truth is, as I
have before showed, that this Soldanella is a Bindweed and cannot be
esteemed for a Brassica, that is a Colewort. The later Herbarists call it
Soldana, and Soldanella: in Dutch, Zeewind, that is to say, Convoluulus
marinus: of Dioscorides Brassica marina: in English, Sea Withwind, Sea
Bindweed, Sea-Bells, Sea-Cole, of some, Sea Foalfoot, and Scottish
Scurvy-Grass.

The second is called Soldanella montana: in English, Mountain Bindweed.

The Nature.

Sea Bindweed is hot and dry in the second degree: the second is bitter
and very astringent.

The Virtues.

A. Soldanella purgeth down mightily all kind of waterish humours, and
openeth the stoppings of the liver, and is given with great profit
against the dropsy, but it must be boiled with the broth of some fat meat
or flesh, and the broth drunk; or else the herb taken in powder worketh
the like effect.

B. Soldanella hurteth the stomach, and troubleth the weak and delicate
bodies which do receive it in powder, wherefore aduice must be taken to
mix the said powder with Anise seeds, cinnamon, ginger, and sugar, which
spices do correct his malignity.

C. Practitioners about Augsburg and Ravensburg (cities of Germany) do
greatly boast that they have done wonders with this herb Soldanella
montana; saying, that the leaves taken and emplastered upon the navel and
somewhat lower, draw forth water from their bellies that are hydroptic,
that is, troubled with water or the dropsy: this effect it worketh in
other parts without heating.

D. It doth also wonderfully bring flesh in wounds, and healeth them.

E. Dioscorides witnesseth, that the whole herb is an enemy to the
stomach, biting and extremely purging (both sodden and taken with meat)
and bringeth troublesome gripings thereinto, and doth oftentimes more
hurt than good.

F. My friend Mr. Goodyer hath told me, that in Hampshire at Chichester
and thereabout they make use of this for Scurvy-Grass and that not
without great error, as any that know the qualities may easily perceive.



CHAP. 309. Of the Grass of Parnassus.
Fig. 1247. Grass of Parnassus (1) Fig. 1248. Double-Flowered Grass of
Parnassus (2)
The Description.

1. The Grass or Parnassus hath small round leaves, very much differing
from any kind of Grass, much resembling the leaves of Ivy, or Asarabacca,
but smaller and not of so dark a colour: among these leaves spring up
small stalks a foot high, bearing little white flowers consisting of five
round pointed leaves, which being fallen and past, there come up round
knops or heads, wherein is contained a reddish seed. The root is somewhat
thick; with many strings annexed thereto.

2. The second kind of Gramen parnassi doth answer the former in each
respect saving that the leaves are somewhat larger, and the flowers
double, otherwise very like.

The Place.

The first groweth very plentifully in Lansdale and Craven, in the North
parts of England; at Doncaster, and in Thornton Fields in the same
country: moreover in the Moor near to Linton, by Cambridge, at Hessett
also in Suffolk, at a place named Drinkstone, in the meadow called
Butcher's Mead. Mr. Goodyer found it in the boggy ground below the red
well of Wellingborough in Northamptonshire and Mr. William Broad observed
it to grow plentifully in the Castle fields of Berwick-upon-Tweed.

The second is a stranger in England.

 The Time.

These herbs do flower in the end of July, and their seed is ripe in the
end of August.

The Names.

Valerius Cordus hath among many that have written of these herbs said
something of them to good purpose, calling them by the name of Hepatica
alba (whereof without controversy they are kinds) in English, White
Liverwort: although there is another plant called Hepatica alba, which
for distinction sake I have thought good to English, Noble White
Liverwort.

The second may be called Noble White Liverwort with the double flower.

The Nature

The seed of Parnassus Grass, or White Liverwort, is dry, and of subtle
parts.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of the leaves of Parnassus Grass drunken, doth dry and
strengthen the feeble and moist stomach, stoppeth the belly, and taketh
away the desire to vomit.

B. The same boiled in wine or water, and drunken, especially the seed
thereof, provoketh urine, breaketh the slone, and driveth it forth.



CHAP. 310. Of White Saxifrage, or Golden Saxifrage.
Fig. 1249. White Saxifrage (1) Fig. 1250. Golden Saxifrage (2)
The Description.

1. The white Saxifrage hath round leaves spread upon the ground; and
somewhat jagged about the edges, not much unlike the leaves of Ground
Ivy, but softer and smaller, and of a more faint yellowish green: among
which riseth up a round hairy stalk a cubit high, bearing at the top
small white flowers, almost like Stock-Gillyflowers: the root is compact
of a number of black strings, whereunto are fastened very many small
reddish grains or round roots as big as peppercorns, which are used in
medicine, and are called Semen Saxifragae albae; that is, the seed of
white Saxifrage, or Stone-break, although (beside there foresaid round
knobs) it hath also small seed contained in little husks, following his
flower as other herbs have.

2. Golden Saxifrage hath round compassed leaves, bluntly indented about
the borders like the former, among which rise up stalks a handful high,
at the top whereof grow two or three little leaves together: out of the
middle of them spring small flowers of a golden color; after which come
little husks, wherein is contained the red seed, not unlike the former:
the root is tender, creeping in the ground with long threads or hairs.

Fig. 1251. White Rock Saxifrage (3)

3. Pona hath set forth this plant by the name of Saxifraga alba petreaea,
and therefore I have placed it here though I think I might more fitly
have ranked him with Paronychia rutaceo folio formerly described. It hath
a small single root from which arise divers fat longish leaves, somewhat
hairy, and divided into three parts: amongst these rises up a round
knotty stallk, roughish, and of a purplish colour, some half foot high,
divided into sundry branches, which carry white flowers, consisting of
five leaves apiece, with some yellowish threads in their middles: these
falling, there remains a cup containing a very small seed. It flowers at
the end of June in the shadowy places of the Alps, whereas he first
observed it.

The Place.

The white Saxifrage groweth plentifully in sundry places of England, and
especially in a field on the left hand of the highway, as you go from the
place of execution called Saint Thomas Waterings unto Deptford by London.
It groweth also in the great field by Islington called the Mantles: also
in the green places by the seaside at Lee in Essex, along the rushes, and
in sundry other places thereabout, and elsewhere; it also grows in Saint
George's Fields behind Southwark.

The golden Saxifrage groweth in the moist and marsh grounds about Bath
and Wells, also in the moors by Bolton and Wisbech in Lincolnshire: and
Mr. George Bowles hath found it growing in divers woods at Chislehurst in
Kent: Mr. Goodyer also hath observed it abundantly on the shadowy moist
rocks by Mapledurham in Hampshire and I have found it in the like places
in Yorkshire.

The Time.

The White Saxifrage flowereth in May and June: the herb with his flower
are no more seen until the next year.

The golden Saxifrage flowereth in March and April

The Names.

The first is called in Latin Saxifraga Alba: in English, White Saxifrage,
or White Stonebreak. The second is called Golden Saxifrage or Golden
Stonebreak.

The Nature.

The first of these, especially the root and seed thereof, is of a warm or
hot complexion. Golden Saxifrage is of a cold nature as the taste doth
manifestly declare.

The Virtues.


A. The root of White Saxifrage boiled in wine and drunken, provoketh
urine, cleanseth the kidneys and bladder, breaketh the stone, and driveth
it forth, and is singular good against the strangury, and all other
griefs and imperfections in the reins.

B. The virtues of Golden Saxifrage are yet unto us unknown, notwithanding
I am of this mind, that it is a singular wound herb, equal with Sanicle.



CHAP. 311. Of Sow-Bread.
Fig. 1252. Round Sow-Bread (1) Fig. 1253. Ivy Sow-Bread (2)
The Description.

1. The first being the common kind of Sow-Bread, called in shops Panis
porcinus, and Arthanita, hath many green and round leases like unto
Asarabacca, saving that the upper part of the leaves are mixed here and
there confusedly with white spots, and under the leaves next the ground
of a purple colour: among which rise up little stems like unto the stalks
of violets, bearing at the top small purple flowers, which turn
themselves backward (being full blown) like a Turk's Cap, or Tulepan, of
a small scent or savour, or none at all: which being past there succeed
little round knops or heads which contain slender brown seeds: these
knops are wrapped after a few days in the small stalks, as thread about a
button, where it remaineth so defended from the injury of winter close
upon the ground, covered also with the green leaves aforesaid, by which
means it is kept from the frost, even from the time of his seeding, which
is in September until June: at which time the leaves do fade away, the
stalks and seed remaining bare and naked, whereby it enjoyeth the Sun
(whereof it was long deprived) the sooner to bring them unto maturity:
the root is round like a Turnip, black without and white within, with
many small strings annexed thereto.

2. The second kind of Sowbread, hath broad leaves spread upon the ground,
sharp pointed, somewhat indented about the edges, of a dark green colour,
with some little lines or streaks of white on the upper side, and of a
dark reddish colour on that side next the ground: among which rise up
slender footstalks of two or three inches long: at the tops whereof stand
such flowers as the precedent, but of a sweeter smell, and more pleasant
colour. The seed is also wrapped up in the stalk for his further defence
against the injury of winter. The root is somewhat greater, and of more
virtue, as shall be declared.

Fig. 1254. Spring Sow-Bread (3)

3. There is a third kind of Sow-Bread that hath round leaves without
peaked corners, as the last before mentioned, yet somewhat snipped about
the edges, and speckled with white about the brims of the leaves, and of
a blackish colour in the middle: the flowers are like to the rest, but of
a deeper purple: the root also like, but smaller, and this commonly
flowers in the spring.


Fig. 1255. White-flowered Sow-Bread (4)
Fig. 1256. Is this plant with Ivy-like leaves another Sow-Bread? (5)

4. This in leaves and roots is much like the last described, but the
flowers are smaller, snow white, and sweet smelling. There are divers
other varieties of these plants which I think it not necessary for me to
insist upon: wherefore I refer the curious to the garden of flowers set
forth by Mr. John Parkinson, where they shall find satisfaction.

5. There is a plant which I have set forth in this place that may very
well be called into question, and his place also, considering that there
hath been great contention about the same, and not fully determined on
either part which hath moved me to place him with those plants that most
do resemble one another, both in shape and name: this plant hath green
cornered leaves like to Ivy, long and small gaping flowers like the small
Snapdragon: more hath not been said of this plant, either of stalk or
root, but is left unto the consideration of the learned.

The plant which our author here would acquaint you with, is that which
Lobel figures with this title which I here give, and saith it was
gathered amongst other plants on the hills of Italy, but in what part or
place, or how growing he knew not; and he only questions whether it may
not be the Cyclaminos altera of Dioscorides, lib, 2, cap. 195.

The Place.

Sow-Bread groweth plentifully about Artois and Vermandois in France, and
in the Forest of Arden, and in Brabant: but the second groweth
plentifully in many places of Italy.

It is reported unto me by men of good credit, that Cyclamen or Sow-Bread
groweth upon the mountains of Wales; on the hills of Lincolnshire, and in
Somersetshire by the house of a gentleman called Mr. Hales; upon a fox-
burrow also not far from Mr. Bamfields, near to a town called Harrington.
The first two kinds do grow in my garden, where they prosper well. So
saith our author, but I cannot learn that this grows wild in England.

The Time.

Sow-Bread flowereth in September when the plant is without leaf, which
doth afterwards spring up, continuing green all the winter covering and
keeping warm the seed until Midsummer next, at what time the seed is ripe
as aforesaid. The third flowereth in the spring, for which cause it was
called Cyclamen vernum: and so doth also the fourth.

The Names

Sow-Bread is called in Greek Kyklaminos: in Latin, Tuber terrae, and
Terrae rapum: of Marcellus, Orbicularis: of Apuleius, Palalia, Rapum
porcinum, and Terrae malum: in shops, Cyclamen, Panis porcinus, and
Arthanita: in Italian, Pan Porcino: in Spanish, Mazan de Puerco: in High
Dutch, Schweinbrot: in Low Dutch Uetkins Brot: in French, Pain de
Porceau: in English, Sow-Bread. Pliny calleth the colour of this flower
in Latin, Colossinus color: in English, murrey colour.

The Nature.

Sow-Bread is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The root of Sow-Bread dried into powder and taken inwardly in the
quantity of a dram and a half, with mead or honeyed water, purgeth
downward tough and gross phlegm, and other sharp humours.

B. The same taken in wine as aforesaid, is very profitable against all
poison, and the bitings of venomous beasts, and to be outwardly applied
to the hurt place.

C. The powder taken as aforesaid, cureth the jaundice and the stoppings
of the liver, taketh away the yellow colour of the body, if the patient
after the taking hereof be caused to sweat.

D. The leaves stamped with honey, and the juice put into the eyes,
cleareth the sight, taketh away all spots and webs, pearl or haw, and all
impediments of the sight, and is put into that excellent ointment called
Unguentum Arthanitae.

E. The root hanged about women in their extreme travail with child,
causeth them to be delivered incontinent, and taketh away much of their
pain.

F. The leaves put into the place hath the like effect, as my wife hath
proved sundry times upon divers women, by my advice and commandment, with 
good success.

G. The juice of Sow-Bread doth open the haemorrhoids, and causeth them to
flow, being applied with wool or flocks.

H. It is mixed with medicines that consume or waste away knots, the
King's evil, and other hard swellings: moreover it cleanseth the head by
the nostrils, it purgeth the belly being anointed therewith, and killeth
the child. It is a strong medicine to destroy the birth, being put up as
a pessary.

I. It scoureth the skin and taketh away sun-burning, and all blemishes of
the face, pilling of the hair, and marks also that remain after the
smallpox and measles: and given in wine to drink, it maketh a man drunk.

K. The decoction there serveth as a good and effectual bath for members
out of joint, the gout, and kibed heels.

L. The root being made hollow and filled with oil, closed with a little
wax, and roasted in the hot embers, maketh an excellent ointment for the
griefs last rehearsed.

M. Being beaten and made up into trochisks or little flat cakes, it is
reported to be a good amorous medicine to make one in love if it be
inwardly taken.

The Danger.

It is not good for women with child to touch or take this herb, or to
come near unto it, or stride over the same where it groweth: for the
natural attractive virtue therein contained is such, that without
controversy they that attempt it in manner abovesaid, shall be delivered
before their time: which danger and inconvenience to avoid, I have (about
the place where it groweth in my garden) fastened sticks in the ground,
and some other sticks I have fastened also cross-ways over them, lest any
woman should by lamentable experiment find my words to be true, by their
stepping over the same.

So saith our author, but I judge him something too womanish in this, that
is, led more by vain opinion than by any reason or experience, to confirm
this his assertion, which frequent experience shows to be vain and
frivolous, especially for the touching, striding over, or coming near to 
this herb.



CHAP. 312. Of Birthworts.
Fig. 1257. Long Birthwort (1) Fig. 1258. Round Birthwort (2)
The Kinds.

Birthwort, as Dioscorides writeth, is of three sorts, Long, Round, and
Winding: Pliny hath added a fourth kind called Pistolochia, or Little
Birthwort. The later writers have joined unto them a fifth, named
Saracen's Birthwort.

The Description.

1. Long Birthwort hath many small long slender stalks creeping upon the
ground, tangling one with another very intricately, beset with round
leaves not much unlike Sow- Bread or Ivy, but larger, of a light or
overworn green colour, and of a grievous or loathsome smell and savour:
among which come forth long hollow flowers, not much unlike the flowers
of Aron, bur without any pistil or clapper in the same, of a dark purple
colour: after which do follow small fruit like unto little pears,
containing triangled seeds of a blackish colour. The root is long, thick,
of the colour of Box, of a strong savour and bitter taste.

2. The Round Birthwort in stalks and leaves is like the first, but his
leaves are rounder: the flowers differ only in this, that they be
somewhat longer and narrower, and of a faint yellowish colour, but the
small flap or point of the flower that turneth back again, is of a dark
or black purple colour. The fruit is formed like a pear, sharp toward the
top, more ribbed and fuller than the former; the root is round like unto
Sow-Bread, in taste and savour like the former.

Fig. 1259. Climbing Birthwort (3)

3. Climbing Birthwort taketh hold of any thing that is next unto it with
his long and clasping stalks, which be oftentimes branched, and windeth
it self like Bindweed: the stalks of the leaves are longer, whose leaves
be smooth, broad, sharp pointed, as be those of the others: the flowers
likewise hollow, long, yellow, or of a blackish purple colour: the fruit
differeth not from that of the others: but the roots be slender and very
long, sometimes creeping on the top of the earth, and sometimes growing
deeper, being of like colour with the former ones.


Fig. 1260. Saracen's Birthwort (4)
Fig. 1261. Small Birthwort (5)

4. There is a fourth kind of Birthwort resembling the rest in leaves and
branched stalks, yet higher, and longer than either the long or the
round: the leaves thereof be greater than those of Asarabacca; the
flowers hollow, long, and in one side hanging over, of a yellowish
colour: the fruit is long and round like a pear, in which the seeds lie
severed, of form three-square, of an ill favoured blackish colour: the
root is somewhat long, oftentimes of a mean thickness, yellow like to the
colour of Box, not inferior in bitterness either to the long or to the
round Birthwort: and sometimes there are found to be small and slender,
and that is when they were but lately digged up and gathered: for by the
little parcels of the roots which are left, the young plants bring forth
at the beginning tender and branched roots.

5. Small Birthwort is like to the long and round Birthwort both in stalks
and leaves, yet is it lesser and tenderer: the leaves thereof are broad,
and like those of Ivy: the flower is long, hollow in the upper part, and
on the outside blackish: the fruit something round like the fruit of
Round Birthwort instead of roots there grow forth a multitude of slender
strings.

Fig. 1262. Virginian Snake-Weed

6. Clusius figures and describes another small Pistolochia by the name of
Pistolochia cretica, to which I thought good to add the epithet virginia
also, for that the much admired Snake-Weed of Virginia seems no otherwise
to differ from it than an inhabitant of Candy from one of the Virginians,
which none I think will say to differ in specie. I will first give
Clusius his description and then express the little variety that I have
observed in the plants that were brought from Virginia, and grew here
with us: it sends forth many slender stalks a foot long, more or less,
and these are cornered or indented, crested, branched, tough, and bending
towards the ground, or spread thereon, and of a dark green colour: upon
which without order grow leaves, nervous, and like thote of the last
described, yet much sharper pointed, and after a sort resembling the
shape of those of Smilax aspera, but less, and of a dark and lasting
green colour, fastened to longish stalks: out of whose bosoms grow long
and hollow crooked flowers, in shape like those of the Long Birthwort,
but of a darker red on the outside, but somewhat yellowish within: and
they are also fastened to pretty long stalks; and they are succeeded by
fruit, not unlike, yet less than that of the Long Birthwort. This hath
abundance of roots, like as the former, but much smaller, and more
fibrous, and of a stronger smell. It flowers in July and August. Thus
Clusius describes his, to which that Snake-Weed that was brought from
Virginia, and grew with Mr. John Tradescant at South Lambeth, Anno 1632,
was agreeable in all points, but here and there one of the lower leaves
were somewhat broader and rounder pointed than the rest: the flower was
long, red, crooked, and a little hairy, and it did not open the top, or
shew the inner side, which I judge was by reason of the coldness and
unseasonableness of the later part of the summer when it flowered: the
stalks in the figure should have been expressed more crooking or
indenting, for they commonly grow so. How hard it is to judge of plants
by one particle or faculty may very well appear by this herb I now treat
of: for some by the similitude the root had with Asarum, and a vomiting
quality which they attributed to it (which certainly is no other than
accidental) would forthwith pronounce and maintain it an Asarum: some
also refer it to other things, as to Primroses, Vincitoxicum, &c. Others
more warily named it Serpentaria virginiana and Radix virginia, names as
it were offering themselves and easily to be fitted and imposed upon
sundry things, but yet too general, and therefore not fit any more to be
used, seeing the true and specific denomination is found.

The Place.

Pliny showeth, that the Birthworts grow in fat and champion places, the
fields of Spain are full of these three long and round Birthworts: they
are also found in Italy and Narbonne or Languedoc, a country in France.
Petrus Bellonius writeth, that he found branched Birthwort upon Ida, a
mountain in Candy. Carolus Clusius saith, that he found this same about
Hispalis [Seville], and in many other places of Granada in Spain, among
bushes and brambles: they grow all in my garden.

The Time.

They flower in May, June, and July.

The Names.

Birthwort is called in Greek and Aristolochia, because it is Aris tais
lochis, that is to say, good for women newly brought abed, or delivered
with child: in English, Birthwort, Hartwort, and of some, Aristolochia.

The first is called Aristolochia longa, or Long Birthwort, of the form of
his root, and likewise Aristolochia mas, or Male Birthwort: the second is
thought to be foemina or female Birthwort, & it is called Rotunda
aristolochia, or round Birthwort: of divers also Terrae malum, the Apple
of the Earth: yet Cyclaminus is also called Terrae malum, or the Apple of
the Earth.

The Temperature.

All these Birthworts are of temperature hot and dry and that in the third
degree, having besides a power to cleanse.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that a dram weight of Long Birthwort drunk with
wine and also applied, is good against serpents and deadly things: and
that being drunk with myrrh and pepper, it expelleth whatsoever is left
in the matrix after the child is delivered, the flowers also & dead
children; and that being put up in a pessary it performeth the same.

B. Round Birthwort serveth for all these things, and also for the rest of
the other poisons: it is likewise available against the stuffing of the
lungs, the hicket, the shakings or shiverings of agues, hardness of the
milt or spleen, burstings, cramps, and convulsions, pains of the sides,
if it be drunk with water.

C. It plucketh out thorns, splinters, and shivers, and being mixed in
plasters, or poultices, it draws forth scales or bones, removeth
rottenness or corruption, mundifieth and scoureth foul and filthy ulcers,
and filleth them up with new flesh, if it be mixed with Ireos and honey.

D. Galen saith, that branched Birthwort is of a more sweet and pleasant
smell; and therefore is used in ointments, but it is weaker in operation
than the former ones.

E. Birthwort, as Pliny writeth, being drunk with water is a most
excellent remedy for cramps and convulsions, bruises, and for such as
have fallen from high places.

F. It is good for them that are short-winded, and are troubled with the
falling sickness.

G. The round Aristolochia doth beautify, cleanse, and fasten the teeth,
if they be often fretted or rubbed with the powder thereof.

H. The root of the Virginian Pistolochia, which is of a strong and
aromatic scent, is a singular & much used antidote against the bite of
the rattle-snake, or rather adder or viper, whose bite is very deadly,
and therefore by the providence of the creator he hath upon his tail a
skinny dry substance parted into cells which contain some loose, hard dry
bodies that rattle in them (as if one should put little stones or peas
into a stiff and very dry bladder) that so be may by this noise give
warning of his approach, the better to be avoided; but if any be bitten,
they know, nor stand in need of no better antidote, than this root, which
they chew, and apply to the wound, & also swallow some of it down, by
which means they quickly overcome the malignity of this poisonous bite,
which otherwise in a very short time would prove deadly. Many also
commend the use of this against the plague, smallpox, measles, and such
like malign and contagious diseases.



CHAP. 313. Of Violets.
Fig. 1263. Purple Garden Violet (1) Fig. 1264. White Garden Violet (2)
The Kinds.

There might be described many kinds of flowers under this name of violets
if their differences should be more curiously looked into than is
necessary: for we might join hereunto the stock Gillyflowers, the
Wallflowers, Dame's Gillyflowers, Marian's Violets, and likewise some of
the bulbed flowers, because some of them by Theophrastus are termed
Violets. But this was not our charge, holding it sufficient to
distinguish and divide them as near as may be in kindred and
neighbourhood; addressing myself unto the Violets called the black or
purple violets, or March violets of the garden, which have a great
prerogative above others, not only because the mind conceiveth a certain
pleasure and recreation by smelling and handling of those most
odoriferous flowers, but also for that very many by these Violets receive
ornament and comely grace: for there be made of them garlands for the
head, nose-gays, and posies, which are delightful to look on, and
pleasant to smell to, speaking nothing of their appropriate virtues; yea
gardens themselves receive by these the greatest ornament of all,
chiefest beauty and most pliant grace; and the recreation of the mind
which is taken hereby, cannot be but very good and honest: for they
admonish and stir up a man to that which is comely and honest; for
flowers through their beauty, variety of colour, and exquisite form, do
bring to a liberal and gentle manly mind, the rememberance of honesty,
comeliness, and all kinds of virtues. For it would be an unseemly and
filthy thing (as a certain wise man saith) for him that doth look upon
and handle fair and beautiful things, and who frequenteth and is
conversant in fair and beautiful places, to have his mind not fair, but
filthy and deformed.

The Description.

1. The black or Purple Violet doth forthwith bring from the root many
leaves, broad, slightly indented in the edges, rounder than the leaves of
Ivy: among the midst whereof spring up fine slender stems, and upon every
one a beautiful flower sweetly smelling, of a blue darkish purple,
consisting of five little leaves, the lowest whereof is the greatest; and
after them do appear little hanging cups or knaps, which, when they be
ripe, do open and divide themselves into three parts. The seed is small,
long, and somewhat round withal. The root consisteth of many thready
strings.

2. The White Garden Violet hath many milk white flowers, in form and
figure like the precedent: the colour of whose flowers especially setteth
forth the difference.


Fig. 1265. Double Garden Purple Violet (3)
Fig. 1266. Yellow Violet (5)

3. The Double Garden Violet hath leaves, creeping branches, and roots
like the garden single Violet; differing in that, that this sort of
Violet bringeth forth most beautiful sweet double flowers, and the other
single.

4. The white double Violet likewise agreeth with the other of his kind,
and only differeth in the colour. For as the last described bringeth
double blue or purple flowers: contrariwise this plant beareth double
white flowers, which maketh the difference.

5. The Yellow Violet is by nature one of the wild Violets, for it groweth
seldom anywhere but upon most high and craggy mountains, from whence it
hath been divers times brought into the garden, but it can hardly be
brought to culture, or grow in the garden without great industry. And by
the relation of a gentleman often remembered, called M. Thorne Hesketh,
who found it growing, upon the hills in Lancashire, near unto a village
called Latham; and though he brought them into his garden, yet they
withered and pined. The whole plant is described to be like unto to the
field Violet, and differeth from it, in that this plant bringeth forth
yellow flowers, yet like in form and figure, but without smell.

Fig. 1267. Wild or Dog's Violet (6)

6. The wild field Violet with round leaves riseth forth of the ground
from a fibrous root, with long slender branches, whereupon do grow round
smooth leaves. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a light blue
colour: and this grows commonly in woods and such like places, and
flowers in July and August. There is another variety of this wild Violet,
which hath the leaves longer, narrower, and sharper pointed.

7. There is found in Germany about Nuremberg and Strasbourg, a kind of
Violet which is altogether a stranger in these parts. It hath (saith my
author) a thick and tough root of a woody substance, from which riseth up
a stalk dividing itself into divers branches, of a woody substance;
whereupon grow long jagged leaves like those of the Pansy. The flowers
grow at the top, compact of five leaves apiece of watchet colour.

The Place.

The Violet groweth in gardens almost everywhere: the others which are
strangers have been touched in their descriptions.

The Time.

The flowers for the most part appear in March, at the farthest in April.

The Names.

The Violet is called in Greek, Ion: in Latin, Nigra viola or black
Violet, of the blackish purple colour of the flowers. The apothecaries
keep the Latin name Viola but they call it Herba violaria, and Mater
violarum: in High Dutch, Blan Viel: in Low Dutch, Violeten: in French,
Violette de mars: in Italian, Viola mammola: in Spanish, Violeta: in
English, Violet. Nicander in his Geoponics believeth, (as Hermolaus
showeth) that the Grecians did call it Ion, because certain Nymphs of
Ionia gave that flower first to Jupiter. Others say it was called Ion,
because when Jutuper had turned the young damsel Io, whom he tenderly
loved, into a cow, the earth brought forth this flower for her food:
which being made for her sake, received the name from her; and thereupon
it is thought that the Latins also called it Viola, as though they should
say Vitula,["a calf"] by blotting out the letter t. Servius reporteth,
That for the same cause the Latins also name it Vaccinium, alleging the
place of Virgil in his Bucolics:

Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur.
["The white privets fall, the dark hyacinths are gathered"]
Virgil, Eclogues 2 l. 18

Notwithstanding Virgil in his tenth Eclogue showeth, that Vaccinium and
Viola do differ.

Et nigrae violae sunt, & vaccinia nigra.
["There were both black Violas and black Vaccinias"]
Virgil, Eclogues 10 l. 39


Vitruvius also in his seventh book Of Architecture or Building doth
distinguish Viola from Vaccinium: for he showeth that the colour called
sile atticum, or the azure of Athens, is made ex Viola; and the gallant
purple, ex Vaccinia. The dyers, saith he, when they would counterfeit
sile, or azure of Athens, put the dried Violets into a vat, kettle or
caldron, and boil them with water; afterwards when it is tempered they
pour it into a linen strainer, and wringing it with their hands, receive
into a mortar the liquor coloured with the Violets; and steeping earth of
Erethria in it, and grinding the same, they make the azure colour of
Athens. After the same manner they temper Vaccinium, and putting milk
unto it, do make a gallant purple colour. But what Vaccinia are we will
elsewhere declare.

The Temperature.

The flowers and leaves of the Violets are cold and moist.

The Virtues.

A. The flowers are good for all inflammations, especially of the sides
and lungs; they take away the hoarseness of the chest, the ruggedness of
the windpipe and jaw, allay the extreme heat of the liver, kidney, and
bladder; mitigate the fiery heat of burning agues; temper the sharpness
of choler, and take away thirst.

B. There is an oil made of Violets, which is likewise cold and moist. The
same being anointed upon the testicles, doth gently provoke sleep which
is hindered by a hot and dry distemper: mixed or laboured together in a
wooden dish with the yolk of an egg, it assuageth the pain of the
fundament and haemorrhoids: it is likewise good to be put into cooling
clysters, and into poultices that cool and ease pain.

C. But let the oil in which the Violets be steeped be either of unripe
olives, called omphacinum, or of sweet Almonds, as Mesues saith, and the
Violets themselves must be fresh and moist: for being dry, and having
lost their moisture, they do not cool, but seem to have gotten a kind of
heat.

D. The later physicians do think it good to mix dry Violets with
medicines that are to comfort and strengthen the heart.

E. The leaves of Violets inwardly taken do cool, moisten, and make the
belly soluble. Being outwardly applied, they mitigate all kind of hot
inflammations, both taken by themselves, and also applied with Barley
flour dried at the fire, after it hath lain soaking in the water. They
are likewise laid upon a hot stomach, and on burning eyes, as Galen
witnesseth. Dioscorides writeth, that they be moreover applied to the
fundament that is fallen out.

F. They may help the fundament that is fallen out, not as a binder
keeping back the fundament, but as a suppler and a mollifier. Besides,
Pliny saith that Violets are as well used in garlands, as smelt unto; and
are good against surfeiting, heaviness of the head; and being dried in
water and drunk, they remove the squinancy or inward swellings of the
throat. They cure the falling sickness, especially in young children, and
the seed is good against the stinging of scorpions.

G. There is a syrup made of Violets and Sugar, whereof three or four
ounces being taken at one time, soften the belly, and purge choler. The
manner to make it is as followeth.

H. First make of clarified sugar by boiling a simple syrup of a good
consistence or mean thickness, whereunto put the flowers clean picked
from all manner of filth, as also the white ends nipped away, a quantity
according to the quantity of the syrup, to your own discretion, wherein
let them infuse or steep four and twenty hours, and set upon a few warm
embers; then strain it, and put more Violets into the same syrup: thus do
three or four times, the oftener the better; then set them upon a gentle
fire to simmer, but not to boil in any wise: so have you it simply made
of a most perfect purple colour, and of the smell of the flowers
themselves. Some do add thereto a little of the juice of the flowers in
the boiling, which maketh it of better force and virtue. Likewise some do 
put a little quantity of the juice of lemons in the boiling, which doth
greatly increase the beauty thereof; but nothing at all the virtue.

I. There is likewise made of Violets and sugar certain plates called
sugar violet, or violet tables, or plate, which is most pleasant and
wholesome, especially it comforteth the heart and the other inward parts.

K. The decoction of Violets is good against hot fevers, and the
inflammation of the liver and all other inward parts: the like property
hath the juice, syrup, or conserve of the same.

L. Syrup of Violets is good against the inflammation of the lungs and
breast, againt the pleurisy and cough, against fevers and agues in young
children, especially if you put unto an ounce of syrup eight or nine
drops of oil of vitriol, and mix it together, and give it to the child a
spoonful at once.

M. The same given in manner aforesaid is of great efficacy in burning
fevers and pestilent diseases, greatly cooling the inward parts: and it
may seem strange to some, that so sharp a corrosive as oil of vitriol
should be given into the body; yet being delayed and given as aforesaid,
sucking children may take it without any peril.

N. The same taken as aforesaid cureth all inflammations of the throat,
mouth, uvula, squinancy and the falling evil in children.

O. Sugar-violet hath power to cease inflammations, roughness of the
throat, and comforteth the heart, assuageth the pains of the head, and
causeth sleep.

P. The leaves of Violets are used in cooling plasters, oils, and
comfortable cataplasms or poultices; and are of greater efficacy among
other herbs, as Mercury, Mallows, and such like, in clysters, for the
purposes aforesaid.



CHAP. 314. Of Heartsease, or Pansies.

Fig. 1268. Kinds of Heartsease or Pansy (1-4)

The Description.

1. The Heartsease or Pansy hath many round leaves at the first coming up;
afterward they grow somewhat longer, slightly cut about the edges,
trailing or creeping upon the ground. The stalks are weak and tender,
whereupon do grow flowers in form and figure like the Violet, and for the
most part of the same bigness, of three sundry colours; whereof it took
the surname Tricolor, that is to say, purple, yellow, and white or blue:
by reason of the beauty and bravery of which colours they are very
pleasing to the eye, for scent they have little or none at all. The seed
is contained in little knops, of the bigness of a tare, which come forth
after the flowers be fallen, and do open of themselves when the seed is
ripe. The root is nothing else but as it were a bundle of thready
strings.

2. The upright Pansy bringeth forth long leaves deeply cut in the edges,
sharp pointed, of a bleak or pale green colour, set upon slender upright
stalks, cornered, jointed, or kneed, a foot high or higher; whereupon do
grow very fair flowers of three colours, viz. of purple, blue, and
yellow, in shape like the common Heartsease, but greater and fairer:
which colours are so excellently and orderly placed, that they bring
great delectation to the beholders, though they have little or no smell
at all. For oftentimes it happeneth, that the uppermost flowers are
differing from those that grow upon the middle of the plant, and those
vary from the lowermost, as Nature list to dally with things of such
beauty. The seed is like the precedent.

3. The wild Pansy differeth from that of the garden, in leaves, roots,
and tender branches: the flowers of this wild one are of a bleak and pale
colour, far inferior in beauty to that of the garden, wherein consisteth
the difference.

4. Stony Heartsease is a base and low plant: the leaves are rounder, and
not so much cut about the edges as the others: the branches are weak and
feeble, trailing upon the ground: the flowers are likewise of three
colours, that is to say, white, blue, and yellow, void of smell. The root
perisheth when it hath perfected his seed.

5. There is found in sundry places of England a wild kind hereof,
bringing flowers of a faint yellow colour, without mixture of any other
colour, yet having a deeper yellow spot in the lowest leaf, with four or
five blackish purple lines, wherein it differeth from the other wild
kind: and this hath been taken of some young herbarists to be the yellow
Violet.

The Place.

The Heartsease groweth in fields in many places, and in gardens also, and
that oftentimes of itself: it is more gallant and beautiful than any of
the wild ones.

Matthiolus reporteth, that the upright Pansy is found on Mount Baldus in
Italy. Lobel saith that it groweth in Languedoc in France, and on the
tops of some hills in England; but as yet I have not seen the same.

Those with yellow flowers have been found by a village in Lancashire
called Latham, four miles from Kirkham, by Mr. Thomas Hesketh before
remembered.

The Time.

They flower not only in the spring, but for the most part all summer
through, even until autumn.

The Names.

Heartsease is named in Latin Viola tricolor, or the three-coloured
Violet; and of divers, Iacea; yet there is another Iacea surnamed Nigra:
in English, Knapweed, Bull-weed, and Matfellon: of others, Herba
trinitatis, or Herb Trinity, by reason of the triple colour of the
flowers: of some others, Herba clavellata: in French, Pensees: by which
name they became known to the Brabanters and others of the Low Countries
that are next adjoining. It seemeth to be Viola flammea, which
Theophrastus calleth Phloga which is also called Phlogios: in English,
Heartsease, Pansies, Live-in-idleness, Cull-me-to-you, and Three-faces-
in-a-hood.

The upright Pansy is called not unproperly Viola assurgens, or surrecta,
and withal tricolor, that is to say, straight or upright Violet, three
coloured: of some, Viola arborescens, or Tree Violet, for that in the
multitude of branches and manner of growing it resembles a little tree.

The Temperature.

It is of temperature obscurely cold, but more evidently moist, of a tough
and slimy juice, like that of the Mallow, for which cause it moisteneth
and suppleth, but not so much as the Mallow doth.

The Virtues.

A. It is good, as the later physicians write, for such as are sick of an
ague, especially children and infants, whose convulsions and fits of the
falling sickness it is thought to cure.

B. It is commended against inflammations of the lungs and chest, and
against scabs and itchings of the whole body, and healeth ulcers.

C. The distilled water of the herb or flowers given to drink for ten or
more days together, three ounces in the morning, and the like quantity at
night, doth wonderfully ease the pains of the French disease, and cureth
the same, if the patient be caused to sweat sundry times, as Costaeus
reporteth in his book De Natura Universalis Stirpis.



CHAP. 315. Of Ground-Ivy, or Ale-Hoof.
Fig. 1269. Ale-Hoof (1) Fig. 1270. Rock Ale-Hoof (2)
The Description.

1. Ground-Ivy is a low or base herb; it creepeth and spreads upon the
ground hither and thither all about, with many stalks of an uncertain
length, slender, and like those of the Vine, something cornered, and
sometimes reddish: whereupon grow leaves something broad and round,
wrinkled, hairy, nicked in the edges, for the most part two out of every
joint: amongst which come forth the flowers gaping like little hoods, not
unlike to those of Germander, of a purplish blue colour: the roots are
very thready: the whole plant is of a strong smell and bitter taste.

2. Upon the rocky and mountainous places of Provence and Dauphin grows
this other kind of Ale-Hoof, which hath leaves, stalks, flowers, and
roots like in shape to those of the former, but the flowers and leaves
are of a light purple colour, and also larger and longer. This by Lobel
is called Asarina, sive Saxatilis hedera.

The Place.

It is found as well in tilled as in untilled places, but most commonly in
obscure and dark places, upon banks, under hedges, and by the sides of
houses.

The Time.

It remaineth green not only in summer, but also in winter at any time of
the year: it flowereth from April till summer be far spent.

The Names.

It is commonly called Hedera terrestris: also Corona terrae: in High
Dutch, Gundelreb: in Low Dutch, Onderhave: in French, Lierre terrestre:
Hedera humilis of some, and Chamaecissum: in English, Ground-Ivy, Ale-
Hoof, Gill-go-by-ground, Tunhoof, and Cat's-Foot. Many question whether
this be the Chamaecissus of the ancients: which controversy Dodonaeus
hath largely handled, Pempt. 3. lib. 3. cap. 4

The Temperature.

Ground-Ivy is hot and dry, and because it is bitter it scoureth, and
removeth stoppings out of the entrails.

The Virtues.

A. Ground-Ivy is commended against the humming noise and ringing found of
the ears, being put into them, and for them that are hard of hearing.

B. Matthiolus writeth, That the juice being tempered with verdigris, is
good against fistulas and hollow ulcers.

C. Dioscorides teacheth, That half a dram of the leaves being drunk in
four ounces and a half of fair water, for forty or fifty days together,
is a remedy against the sciatica, or ache in the huckle bone.

D. The same taken in like sort six or seven days doth also cure the
yellow jaundice. Galen hath attributed (as we have said) all the virtue
unto the flowers: Seeing the flowers of Ground-Ivy (saith he) are very
bitter, they remove stoppings out of the liver, and are given to them
that are vexed with the sciatica.

E. Ground-Ivy, Celandine, and Daisies, of each a like quantity, stamped
and strained, and a little sugar and rose-water put thereto, and dropped
with a feather into the eyes, taketh away all manner of inflammation,
spots, webs, itch, smarting, or any grief whatsoever in the eyes, yea
although the sight were nigh hand gone: it is proved to be the best
medicine in the world.

F. The herbs stamped as aforesaid, and mixed with a little ale and honey,
and strained, takes away the pin and web, or any grief out of the eyes of
horse or cow, or any other beast, being squirted into the same with a
syringe, or might have said the liquor injected into the eyes with a
syringe. But I list not to be over-eloquent among gentlewomen, to whom
especially my works are most necessary.

G. The women of our Northern parts, especially about Wales and Cheshire
do tun the herb Ale-Hoof into their ale, but the reason thereof I know
not: notwithstanding without all controversy it is most singular against
the griefs aforesaid: being tunned up in ale and drunk, it also purgeth
the head from rheumatic humours flowing from the brain.

I. Hedera terrestris boiled in water stayeth the terms;. and boiled in
mutton broth it helps weak and aching backs,

K. They have used to put it into ointments against burning with fire,
gunpowder, and such like.

L. Hedera terrestris being bound in a bundle, or chopped as herbs for the
pot, and eaten or drunk as thin broth stayeth the flux in women.



CHAP. 316. Of Ivy.
Fig. 1271. Climbing Ivy (1) Fig. 1272. Creeping Ivy (2)
The Kinds.

There be two kinds of Ivy, as Theophrastus witnesseth, reckoned among the
number of those plants which have need to be propped up; for they stand
not of themselves, but are fastened to stone walls, trees, and such like,
and yet notwithstanding both of a woody substance, and yet not to be
placed among the trees, shrubs, or bushes, because of the affinity they
have with climbing herbs; as also agreeing in form and figure with many
other plants that climb, and are indeed simply to be reckoned among the
herbs that clamber up. But if any will cavil, or charge me with my
promise made in the beginning of this history, where we made our
division, namely, to place each plant as near as may be in kindred and
neighbourhood; this promise I have fulfilled, if the curious eye can be
content to read without rashness those plants following in order, and not
only this climbing Ivy that lifteth herself to the tops of trees, but
also the other Ivy that creepeth upon the ground.

Of the greater or the Climbing Ivy there are also many sorts; but
especially three, the white, the black, and that which is called Hedera
helix, or Hedera sterilis.

The Description.

1. The greater Ivy climbeth on trees, old buildings, and walls: the
stalks thereof are woody, and now and then so great as it seems to become
a tree; from which it sendeth a multitude of little boughs or branches
every way, whereby as it were with arms it creepeth and wandereth far
about: it also bringeth forth continually fine little roots, by which it
fasteneth itself and cleaveth wonderful hard upon trees, and upon the
smoothest stone walls: the leaves are smooth, shining especially on the
upper side, cornered with sharp pointed corners. The flowers are very
small and mossy; after which succeed bundles of black berries, every one
having a small sharp pointel.

There is another sort of great Ivy that bringeth forth white fruit; which
some call Acharnicam irriguam and also another lesser, the which hath
black berries. This Pliny calleth Selinitium.

We also find mentioned another sort hereof spread abroad, with a fruit of
a yellow saffron colour, called of divers Dionysias, as Dioscorides
writeth: others Bacchica, of which the poets used to make garlands, as
Pliny testifieth, lib. 6. cap. 34.

2. Barren Ivy is not much unlike unto the common Ivy aforesaid, saving
that his branches are both smaller and tenderer, not lifting or bearing
itself upward, but creeping along by the ground under moist and shadowy
ditch banks. The leaves are most commonly three-square, cornered, of a
blackish green colour, which at the end of summer become brownish red
upon the lower side. The whole plant beareth neither flowers nor fruit,
but is altogether barren and fruitless.

3. There is kept for novelty's sake in divers gardens a Virginian, by
some (though unfitly) termed a Vine, being indeed an Ivy. The stalks of
this grow to a great height, if they be planted nigh any thing that may
sustain or bear them up: and they take first hold by certain small
tendrils, upon what body soever they grow, whether stone, boards, brick,
yea glass, and that so firmly, that oftentimes they will bring pieces
with them if you pluck them off. The leaves are large, consisting of
four, five, or more particular leaves, each of them being long, and
deeply notched about the edges, so that they somewhat resemble the leaves
of the Chestnut tree: the flowers grow clustering together after the
manner of Ivy, but never with us show themselves open, so that we cannot
justly say anything of their colour, or the fruit that succeeds them. It
puts forth his leaves in April, and the stalks with the rudiments of the
flowers are to be seen in August. It may as I said be fitly called Hedera
virginiana.

The Place.

Ivy groweth commonly about walls and trees; the white Ivy groweth in
Greece, and the barren Ivy groweth upon the ground in ditch banks and
shadowy woods.

The Time.

Ivy flourisheth in autumn: the berries are ripe after the winter
solstice.

The Names.

Ivy is called in Latin Hedera: in High Dutch, Epheu: in Low Dutch, Ueyle:
in Spanish, Yedra: in French, Liarre.

The greater Ivy is called in Latin, Hedera attollens, or Hedera
assurgens: Gaza interpreteth it Hedera excelsa. The later herbarists
would have it to be Hedera arborea, or Tree Ivy, because it groweth upon
trees, and Hedera muralis, which hangeth upon walls.

Creeping or barren Ivy is called in English, Ground-Ivy: yet doth it much
differ from Hedera terrestris, or Ground-Ivy before described: of some it
is called Clavicula, Hedera helix, and Hedera sterilis, and is that herb
wherein the boar delighteth, according to Iohannes Khuenius.

The Temperature.

Ivy, as Galen saith, is compounded of contrary faculties; for it hath a
certain binding earthy and cold substance, and also a substance somewhat
biting, which even the very taste doth show to be hot. Neither is it
without a third faculty, as being of a certain warm watery substance, and
that is if it be green: for whilst it is in drying, this watery substance
being earthy, cold, and binding consumeth away, and that which is hot and
biting remaineth.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Ivy fresh and green boiled in wine, do heal old ulcers,
and perfectly cure those that have a venomous and malicious quality
joined with them; and are a remedy likewise against burnings and
scaldings.

B. Moreover, the leaves boiled with vinegar are good for such as have bad
spleens; but the flowers or fruit are of more force, being very finely
beaten and tempered with vinegar, especially so used they are commended
against burnings.

C. The juice drawn or sniffed up into the nose doth especially purge the
head, stayeth the running of the ears that hath been of long continuance,
and healeth old ulcers both in the ears and also in the nostrils; but if
it be too sharp, it is to be mixed with oil of Roses, or salad oil.

D. The gum that is found upon the trunk or body of the old stock of Ivy,
killeth nits and lice, and taketh away hair: it is of so hot a quality,
as that it doth obscurely burn: it is as it were a certain waterish
liquor congealed of those gummy drops. Thus far Galen.

E. The very same almost hath Dioscorides, but yet also somewhat more: for
over and besides he saith, that five of the berries beaten small, and
made hot in a Pomegranate rind, with oil of Roses, and dropped into the
contrary ear, doth ease the tooth-ache; and that the berries make the
hair black.

F. Ivy in our time is very seldom used, save that the leaves are laid
upon little ulcers made in the thighs, legs, or other parts of the body,
which are called issues; for they draw humours and waterish substance to
those parts, and keep them from hot swellings or inflammations, that is
to say, the leaves newly gathered, and not as yet withered or dried.

G. Some likewise affirm that the berries are effectual to procure urine;
and are given unto those that be troubled with the stone and diseases of
the kidneys.

H. The leaves laid in steep in water for a day and a night's space, help
sore and smarting waterish eyes, if they be bathed and washed with the
water wherein they have been infused.



CHAP. 317. Of Rough Bindweed.
Fig. 1273. Rough Bindweed of Peru (1) Fig. 1274. Common Rough Bindweed (2)
The Description.

1 Although we bave great plenty of the roots of this Bindweed of Peru,
which we usually cally Zarza, or Sarsa parilla, wherewith divers griefs
and maladies are cured, and that these roots are very well known to all;
yet such hath been the carelessness and small providence of such as have
travelled into the Indies, that hitherto not any have given us
instruction sufficient, either concerning the leaves, flowers, or fruit:
only Monardus saith, that it hath long roots deep thrust into the ground:
which is as much as if a great learned man should tell the simple, that
our common carrion crow were of a black colour. For who is so blind that
seeth the root itself, but can easily affirm the roots to be very long?
Notwithstanding, there is in the reports of such as say they have seen
the plant itself growing, some contradiction or contrariety: some report
that it is a kind of Bindweed, and cspecially one of the Rough Bindweeds:
others, as one Mr. White an excellent painter, who carried very many
people into Virginia (or after some Norembega) there to inhabit, at which
time he did see thereof great plenty, as he himself reported unto me,
with this bare description; It is (saith he) the root of a small shrubby
tree, or hedge tree, such as are those of our country called Hawthorns,
having leaves resembling those of Ivy, but the flowers or fruit he
remembereth not. So saith our author, but it is most certain, that Sarsa
parilla is the root of the American Smilax aspera, both by consent of
most writers, and by the relation of such as have seen it growing there.

2. The Common Rough Bindweed hath many branches set full of little sharp
prickles, with certain clasping tendrils, wherewith it taketh hold upon
hedges, shrubs, and whatsoever standeth next unto it, winding and
clasping itself about from the bottom to the top; whereon are placed at
every joint one leaf like that of Ivy,without corners, sharp pointed,
lesser and harder than those of Wood Bindweed, oftentimes marked with
little white spots, and guarded or bordered about the edges with crooked
prickles. The flowers grow at the top of crooked stalks, of a white
colour, and sweet of smell. After cometh the fruit like those of the wild
Vine, green at the first, and red when they be ripe, and of a biting
taste; wherein is contained a blackish seed in shape like that of hemp.
The root is long, somewhat hard, and parted into very many branches.

Fig. 1275. Portuguese Rough Bindweed (3)

3. This rough Bindweed, found for the most part in the barren mountains
of Portugal, differeth not from the precedent in stalks and flowers, but
in the leaves and fruit; for the leaves are softer, and less prickly, and
sometimes have no prickles at all, and they are also oftentimes much
narrower: the fruit or berry is not red but black whenas it cometh to be
ripe. The root hereof is one single root of a woody substance, with some
fibres annexed thereto, wherein consisteth the difference.

The Place.

Zarza parilla, or the prickly Bindweed of America, groweth in Peru a
province of America, in Virginia, and in divers other places both in the
East and West Indies.

The others grow in rough and untilled places, about the hedges and
borders of fields, on mountains and valleys, in Italy, Languedoc in
France, Spain, and Germany.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in the spring: their fruit is ripe in autumn, or
a little before.

The Names.

Gaza (Theophrastus his translator) names it Hedera cilicia; as likewise
Pliny, who lib. 24. cap. 10. writeth, that it is also surnamed
Nicophoron. Of the Etrurians, Hedera spinosa, and Rubus cervinus: of the
Castilians in Spain, as Lacuna saith, Zarza parilla, as though they
should say Rubus viticula, or Bramble Little Vine. Parra, as Matthiolus
interpreteth it, doth signify a Vine; and Parilla, a small or little
Vine.

Divers affirm that the root (brought out of Peru a province in America)
which the later herbarists do call Zarza, is the root of this Bindweed.
Garcius Lopius Lusitanus granteth it to be like thereunto, but yet he
doth not affirm that it is the same. Plants are oftentimes found to be
like one another, which notwithstanding are proved not to be the same by
some little difference; the diverse constitution of the weather and of
the soil making the difference.

Zarzaparilla of Peru is a strange plant, and is brought unto us from the
countries of the new world called America; and such things as are brought
from thence, although they also seem and are like to those that grow in
Europe, notwithstanding, they do often differ in virtue and operation:
for the diversity of the soil and of the weather doth not only breed an
alteration in the form, but doth most of all prevail in making the
virtues and qualities greater or lesser. Such things as grow in hot
places be of more force, and greater smell; and in cold, of lesser. Some
things that are deadly and pernicious, being removed wax mild, and are
made wholesome: so in like manner, although Zarza parilla of Peru be like
to rough Bindweed, or to Spanish Zarza parilla, notwithstanding by reason
of the temperature of the weather, and also through the nature of the
soil, it is of a great deal more force than that which groweth either in
Spain or in Africa.

The roots of Zarza parilla of Peru, which are brought alone without the
plant, be long and slender, like to the lesser roots of common liquorice,
very many oftentimes hanging from one head, in which roots the middle
string is hardest. They have little taste, and so small a smell that it
is not to be perceived. These are reported to grow in Honduras a province
of Peru. They had their name of the likeness of Rough Bindweed, which
among the inhabitants it keepeth; signifying in Spanish, a rough or
prickly vine, as Garcia Lopius witnesseth.

The Temperature.

The roots are of temperature hot and dry, and of thin and subtle parts,
insomuch as their decoction doth very easily procure sweat.

The Virtues.

A. The roots are a remedy against long continual pain of the joints and
head, and against cold diseases. They are good for all manner of
infirmities wherein there is hope of cure by sweating, so that there be
no ague joined.

B. The cure is perfected in few days, if the disease be not old or great;
but if it be, it requireth a longer time of cure. The roots here meant
are as I take it those of Zarza parilla whereof this Smilax aspera or
rough Bindweed is holden for a kind: notwithstanding this of Spain and
the other parts of Europe, though it be counted less worth, yet is it 
commended of Dioscorides and Pliny against poisons. The leaves hereof,
saith Dioscorides, are a counterpoison against deadly medicines, whether
they be drunk before or after.



CHAP. 318. Of Smooth or Gentle Bindweed.
Fig. 1276. Great Smooth Bindweed (1) Fig. 1277. Small Bindweed (2)
The Description.

1. It is a strange thing unto me, that the name of Smilax should be so
largely extended, as that it should be assigned to those plants that come
nothing near the nature, and scarcely unto any part of the form of Smilax
indeed. But we will leave controversies to the further consideration of
such as love to dance in quagmires, and come to this our common smooth
Smilax, called and known by that name among us, or rather more truly by
the name of Convolvulus maior, or Volubilis maior: It beareth the long
branches of a Vine, but tenderer, and for the length and great spreading
therof it is very fit to make shadows in arbors: the leaves are smooth
like Ivy, but somewhat bigger, and being broken are full of milk: amongst
which come forth great white and hollow flowers like bells. The seed is
three-cornered, growing in small husks covered with a thin skin. The root
is small, white and long, like the great Dog's Grass.

2. Smilax lenis minor is much like unto the former in stalks, leaves,
flowers, seed, and roots, saving that in all respects it is much smaller,
and creepeth upon the ground. The branches are small and smooth: the
little leaves tender and soft: the flowers like unto little bells, of a
purple colour: the seed three-cornered like unto the others.

Fig. 1278. Lavender-Leaved Bindweed (3)

3. This Bindweed Pena saith he never saw but in the brinks of quicksets
and olivets in Provence, Savoy, and Narbonne, notwithstanding I found it
growing in the corn fields about great Dunmow in Essex, in such
abundance, that it doth much hurt unto their corn. This kind of Bindweed
or Volubilis is like unto the small Bindweed before mentioned, but it
hath a finer flower, plaited or folded in the centre of the bell very
orderly, especially before the sun rise (for after it opens itself the
welts are not so much perceived) and it is of a dark purple colour: the
seed is not unlike the rest, cornered and flat, growing out of slender
branches which stand upright and thick together, proceeding out of a
woody white root. The leaves are long and narrow, resembling Linaria both
in colour and hairiness, in taste drying, and somewhat heating.

Fig. 1279. Silver-Leaved Bindweed (4)

4. The stalks and branches of this are four cubit long, slender, weak and
hairy, so that they lie upon the ground, if they have nothing to sustain
them: upon these without any order grow leaves, shaped like those of Ivy,
or the Marsh Mallow, but less, and covered over with a silver-like down
or hairiness, and divided somewhat deep on the edges, sometimes also
curled, and otherwhiles only snipped about. The flower grows upon long
stalks like as in other plants of this kind, and consists of one folding
leaf, like as that of the last mentioned; and it is either of a whitish
purple, or else absolute purple colour: The root is small and creeping.
It grows in many places of Spain, and there flowers in March and. April.
Clusius calls this Convolvulus altheae folio, and saith that the
Portugals name it Verdezilla, and commend it as a thing most effectual to
heal wounds.

Fig. 1280. Black Bindweed (5)

5. This kind of Bindweed hath a tough root full of thready strings, from 
which rise up immediately divers trailing branches, whereupon grow leaves
like the common field Bindweed, or like those of Orach, of a black green
colour, whereof it took his name: the flowers are small, and like those
of Orach: the seed is black, three-square, like, but less than that of
Buckwheat: The whole plant is not only a hurtful weed, but of an evil
smell also, and too frequently found amongst corn. Dodenaeus calls this
Convolvulum nigrum, and Helxine cissampelos: Tabernamontanus Volubilis
nigra: and Lobel, Helxine cissampelos altera atriplicis effigie.

The Place.

All these kinds of Bindweeds do grow very plentifully in most parts of
England, the third and fourth excepted.

The Time.

They do flower from May to the end of August.

The Names.

The great Bindweed is called in Latin Smilax laevis: it is surnamed
laevis or smooth, because the stalks and branches thereof have no
prickles at all. Dolichus called also Smilax hortensis, or Kidney bean,
doth differ from this: and likewise Smilax the tree, which the Latins
call Taxus: in English, the Yew tree. The later herbarists do call this
Bindweed Volubilis maior, Campanella, Funis arborum, Convolvulus albus
and Smilax laevis maior: in like manner Pliny, in his 21st book, 5th
chapt. doth also name it Convolvulus. It is thought to be Ligustrum, not
the shrub Privet, but that which Martial in his first book of Epigrams
speaketh of, writing against Procillus.

The small Bindweed is called Convolvulus minor, and Smilax laevis minor,
Volubilis minor: in High Dutch Windkraut: in Low Dutch, Wrange: in
French, Liseron: in Italian, Vilucchio: in Spanish, Campanilla Yerva: in
English, Withwind, Bindweed, and Hedge-Bells.

The Nature.

These herbs are of an hot and dry temperature.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Black Bindweed called Helxine cissampelos, stamped and
strained, and the juice drunken, doth loose and open the belly
exceedingly.

B. The leaves pound and laid to the grieved place, dissolveth, wasteth,
and consumeth hard lumps and swellings, as Galen saith.

C. The rest of the Bindweeds are not fit for medicine, but unprofitable
weeds, and hurtful unto each thing that groweth next unto them.



CHAP. 319. Of Blue Bindweed.
Fig. 1281. Blue Bindweed (1) Fig. 1282. Round-Leaved Blue Bindweed (2)
The Description.

1. Blue Bindweed bringeth forth long, tender, and winding branches, by
which it climbeth upon things that stand near unto it, and foldeth itself
about them with many turnings and windings, wrapping itself against the
sun, contrary to all other things whatsoever, that with their clasping
tendrils do embrace things that stand near unto them; whereupon do grow
broad cornered leaves very like unto those of Ivy, something rough and
hairy, of an overworn russet green colour: among which come forth most
pleasant flowers bell fashion, something cornered as are those of the
common Bindweed, of a most shining azure colour tending to purple: which
being past, there succeed round knobbed seed vessels, wherein is
contained long blackish seed of the bigness of a tare, and like unto
those of the great hedge Bindweed. The root is thready, and perisheth at
the first approach of winter.

2. There are also kept in our gardens two other blue flowered Bindweeds.
The one a large and great plant, the other a lesser. The great sends up
many large and long winding branches, like those of the last described,
and a little hairy: the leaves are large and roundish, ending in a sharp
point: the flowers are as large as those of the great Bindweed, and in
shape like them, but blue of colour, with five broad purplish veins
equally distant each from other: and these flowers commonly grow three
near together upon three several stalks some inch long, fastened to
another stalk four handfuls long: the cup which holds the flowers, and
afterwards becomes the seed vessel, is rough and hairy: the seed is
black; and of the bigness of a tare: the root is stringy, and lasts no 
longer than to the perfecting of the seed. I have only given the figure
of the leaf and flower largely expressed, because for the root and manner
of growing it resembles the last described.

Fig. 1283. Small Blue Bindweed (3)

3. This Small Blue Bindweed sendeth forth divers long slender creeping
hairy branches, lying flat upon the ground, unless there be something for
it to rest upon: the leaves be longish and hairy, and out of their bosoms
(almost from the bottom to the tops of the stalks) come small footstalks
carrying beautiful flowers of the bigness and shape of the common small
Bindweed, but commonly of three colours; that is, white in the very
bottom, yellow in the middle, and a perfect azure at the top; and these
twine themselves up, open and shut in five plaits like as most other
flowers of this kind do. The seed is contained in round knops or heads,
and is black and cornered: the root is small, and perishes every year.
Bauhin was the first that set this forth, and that by the name of
Convolvulus peregrinus caeruleus folio oblongo.

The Place.

The seed of this rare plant was first brought from Syria and other remote
places of the world, and is a stranger in these Northern parts; yet have
I brought up and nourished it in my garden unto flowering, but the whole
plant perished before it could perfect his seed.

The Time.

The seed must be sown as Melons and Cucumbers are, and at the same time:
it flowered with me at the end of August.

The Names.

It is called Campana lazula, and lazura: of the later Herbarists Campana
caerulea, and also Convolvulum caeruleum: it is thought to be the
Ligustrum nigrum, of which Columella in his tenth book hath made mention.

Fer calathis violam, & nigro permista ligustro
Balsama cum cassia nectens, &c.
In baskets bring thou Violets, and blue Bindweed withal,
But mixed with pleasant Balm, and Cassia medicinal.

For if the greater smooth Withwind, or Bindweed be Ligustrum, then may
this be not improperly called Ligustrum nigrum: for a blue purple colour
is oftentimes called black, as hath been said in the black Violet. But
there be some that would have this Bindweed to be Granum nil avicennae of
which he writeth in the 306th chapter; the which differeth from that Nil
that is described in the 512th chapter. For this is Isatis graecorum, or
the Grecian Woad: but that is a strange plant, and is brought from India,
as both Avicenna and Serapio do testify: Avicenna in this manner: what is
Granum nil? It is Cartamum indium: and Serapio thus: Habal nil, is Granum
indicum, in cap. 283, where the same is described in these words:
The plant thereof is like to the plant of Leblab, that is to say of
Convolvulus, or Bindweed, taking hold of trees with his tender stalks; it
hath both green branches and leaves, and there cometh out by every leaf a
purple flower, in fashion of the Bell-flowers: and when the flower doth
fall away, it yieldeth a seed in small cods (I read little heads) in
which are three grains, lesser than the seeds of Stavesacre
to which description this blue Bindweed is answerable.

There be also other sorts of Bindweeds, which be referred to Nil
avicennae; which no doubt may be kinds of Nil; for nothing gainsaith it
why they should not be so. Therefore to conclude, this beautiful
Bindweed, which we call Convolvulus caeruleus, is called of the Arabians
Nil: of Serapio, Habal nil: about Aleppo and Tripoli in Syria the
inhabitants call it Hasmisen: the Italians, Campana azurea: of the
beautiful azured flowers, and also Fior de notte, because his beauty
appears most in the night.

The Temperature.

Convolvulus Caeruleus, or Nil, as Avicenna saith, is hot and dry in the
first degree: but Serapio maketh it to be hot and dry in the third
degree.

The Virtues.

A. It purgeth and voideth forth raw, thick, phlegmatic, and melancholic
humours: it drives out all kind of worms, but it troubleth the belly, and
causeth a readiness to vomit, as Avicenna saith: it worketh slowly, as
Serapio writeth; in whom more hereof may be found, but to little purpose,
wherefore we think good to pass it over.



CHAP. 320. Of Scammony, or Purging Bindweed.
Fig. 1284. Syrian Scammony (1) Fig. 1285. Scammony of Valencia (2)
The Description.

1. Scammony of Syria hath many stalks rising from one root, which are
long, slender, and like the clasping tendrils of the vine, by which it
climbeth and taketh hold of such things as are next unto it. The leaves
be broad, sharp pointed like those of the smooth or hedge Bindweed: among
which come forth very fair white flowers tending to a blush colour, bell-
fashion. The root is long, thick, and white within: out of which is
gathered a juice that being hardened, is greatly used in physic: for
which consideration, there is not any plant growing upon the earth, the
knowledge whereof more concerneth a physician, both for his shape and
properties, than this Scammony, which Pena calleth Lactaria scansoriaque
volvula, that is, milky and climbing Windweed, whereof it is a kind;
although for distinction sake I have placed them as two several kinds.
And although this herb be suspected, and half condemned of some learned
men, yet there is not any other herb to be found, whereof so small a
quantity will do so much good: neither could those which have carped at
it, and reproved this herb, find any simple in respect of his virtues to
be put in his room: and hereof ensueth great blame to all practioners,
who have not endeavoured to be better acquainted with this herb, chiefly
to avoid the deceit of the crafty drug-seller and medicine-maker of this
confected Scammony, brought us from far places, rather to be called I
fear infected Scammony, or poisoned Scammony, than confected. But to
avoid the inconveniences hereof, by reason of the counterfeiting and ill
mixing thereof: I have therefore thought good to set down what I have
taken out of the diligent, and no less learned observations of Pena,
concerning this plant, Anno 1561, or 1562. Vide Adversaria pag. 272.

Sequintus Martinellus an apothecary of Venice, being a most diligent
searcher of simples; that he might have the right Scammony of Antioch,
travelled into Syria, where from the city of Aleppo he sent an 100 weight
of the juice of Scammony of Antioch prepared and hardened into a lump, at
the making whereof he was present himself. This man sent also of the
seeds thereof, which in all points answered the cornered seed of
Volubilis; which being sown in the beginning of the spring at Padua and
Venice, grew up to the form of a brave & goodly Convolvulus, in leaves,
flowers, and show so like unto our Cissampelos, that a man would have
taken it for the same without controversy, saving that the root was 
great, and in bigness equal to the great Bryony, as also in tenderness.
The outward bark of the root was of a dusky colour, and white within: the
inner pith being taken forth seemeth in all men's judgements to be the
same and the best allowed Turpeth officinarum: and yet it differeth from
Turpeth, in that, that it is more brittle, and will more easily be,
broken, though the pith in Scammony be no less gummy and full of milky
juice, than Turpeth. Further Pena reporteth, that afterward he sent of
this seed unto Antwerp, where it grew very bravely, the climing strings
and branches growing up to the height of five or six cubites, not
differing from that which was sown in Italy. Also William Dries of
Antwerp, a most excellent apothecary, did cut off the branches of his
Antwerpian Scammony from the root, and, dried them, planted the seeds in
his garden, and compared the superfluous branched roots with the Turpeth
of Alexandria and could not find them to differ or disagree the one from
the other in any point. But he that will know more concerning the making,
difference, choice and use of Seammony, let him read Pena in his chapter
of Scammony, in the place formerly cited, where he shall find many
excellent secrets worthy the noting of those which would know how to use
such rare and excellent medicines.

2. Scammony of Valentia (whereof l have plenty in my garden) is also a
kind of Bindweed, growing naturally by the seaside upon the gravelly
shore, by the mouth of the river Rhone, at the waters called Aquae
Marianae, where the apothecaries of Montpellier gather of it great
plenty, who have attempted to harden the milky juice thereof, to use it
instead of Scammony of Antioch. This plant bringeth forth many slender
branches, which will climb and very well run upon a pole; as being
supported therewith, and mounteth to the height of five or six cubits,
climbing & ramping like the first kind of Scammony. The leaves are green,
smooth, plain, and sharp-pointed, which being broken do yield abundance
of milk: the flowers are white, small, and star-fashion: the roots white
and many, shooting forth sundry other roots, whereby it mightily
increaseth.

Fig. 1286. French Scammony (3)

3. This strange kind of Scammony, which Clusius maketh rightly to be
Periplocae species, hath very many long branches ramping and taking hold
of such things as do grow near unto them, of a darkish ash colour:
whereupon do grow leaves sharp pointed, crooked at the setting on of the
stalk like those of the Black Bryony, and likewise of an ash colour, set
together by couples: from the bosom whereof thrust forth small tender
footstalks, whereon are placed small white flowers star-fashion: the
seeds are contained in long cods, and are wrapped up in down, like as
those of Swallowwort. The root is very long, slender and creeping, like
that of the small Bindweed, so that if it once take in any ground, it can
hardly be destroyed.

The Place.

It doth grow in hot regions, in a fat soil, as in Mysia, Syria, and other
like countries of Asia; it is likewise found in the island of Candia, as
Bellonius witnesses; from whence I had some seeds, of which seed I
received two plants that prospered exceeding well; the one whereof I
bestowed upon a learned apothecary of Colchester, which continueth to
this day, bearing both flowers and ripe seed. But an ignorant weeder of
my garden plucked mine up, and cast it away in my absence, instead of a
weed: by which mischance I am not able to write hereof so absolutely as I
determined: it likewise groweth near unto the seaside about Tripolis in
Syria, where the inhabitants do call`it Meudheudi.

The Time.

It flowered in my garden about S. James' tide,[25th July  ed.] as I
remember, for when I went to Bristol Fair, I left it in flower, but at my
return it was destroyed as aforesaid.

The Names.

The Latins call it Scammonium, so naming not only the plant itself, but
also the hard and condensed juice: of the apothecaries, Scammonea: and
when it is prepared, diagridium: as though they should say, dakrydion:
which signifieth a little tear: both the herb and juice are named
Scammony; of Rhasis, Coriziola.

The Temperature.

The juice doth mightily purge by the stool, and is the strongest purge
whatsoever; for as Oribasius saith, it is in no part overcome by those
things which stir and move the body. It worketh the same not vehemently
by any hot quality, but by some other hid and secret property of the
whole substance; for there is no extremity of heat perceived in it by
taste: for with what liquor or thing soever it is mixed, it giveth unto
it no bitterness, biting, or other unpleasant taste at all, and therefore
it is not to be accounted among the extreme hot medicines, but among
those that are moderately hot and dry.

The Virtues.

A. It cleanseth and draweth forth especially choler: also thin and
waterish humours, and oftentimes phlegm, yet is it as Paulus teacheth
more hurtful to the stomach than any other medicine.

B. Mesues thinketh that it is not only troublesome and hurtful to the
stomach, but also that it shaveth the guts, gnawing and fretting the
entrails; openeth the ends of the veins, and through the essence of his
whole substance, it is an enemy to the heart, and to the rest of the
inward parts: if it be used immoderately and in time not convenient, it
causeth swoonings, vomitings, and overturnings of the stomach, scouring,
the bloody flux and ulcers in the lower gut, which bring a continual
desire to the stool.

C. These mischiefs are prevented if the Scammony be boiled in a Quince
and mixed with the slime or mucilage of Psillium, called Fleawort, the
pap or pulp of Prunes, or other things that have a slimy juice, with a
little Mastic added, or some other easy binding thing.

D. Pliny affirmeth that the hurt thereof is taken away if Aloes be
tempered with it: Scammony (saith he) overthroweth the stomach, purgeth
choler, looseth the belly unless two drams of Aloes be put unto one
scruple of it, which also Oribasius alloweth of in the first book of his
Synopses, and the seventh book of his Medicinal Collections.

E. The old physicians were also wont to boil Scammony in a Quince, and to
give the Quince to be eaten, having cast away the Scammony: and this
Quince so taken doth move the belly without any hurt unto the stomach, as
Galen in his first book Of the Faculties of Nourishments doth set down,
and likewise in his third book Of the Faculties of Simple Medicines.

F. The apothecaries do use Scammony prepared in a quince, which as we
have said they name diagridium, and do mix it in divers compositions.

G. They keep usually in their shops two compositions, or electuaries, the
one of Psillium or Fleawort, set down by Mesue: the other of prunes
fathered upon Nicolaus, which were devised for the tempering and
correction of Scammony, and be commended for hot burning agues, and
tertians, and for what diseases soever that proceed of choler.

H. Galen hath taken Mastic and Bdellium out of the pills called Cochiae,
which also contain in them a great and sufficient quantity of Scammony,
as we may read in his first book of medicines according to the places
affected, which also we mean to touch in the chapter of Coloquintida,
where we intend to entreat at large concerning Mastic, and other binding
things, that are accustomed to be mixed for the correction of strong and
violent purgers.

I. The quantity of Scammony, or of diagridium itself, as Mesue writeth,
is from five grains to ten or twelve: it may be kept as the same author
showeth, four years: Pliny judgeth it to be after two years little worth:
it is to be used, saith he, when it is two years old, and it is not good
before, nor after. The mixing or otherwise the use thereof, more than is
set down, I think it not expedient to set forth in the physical virtues
of Scammony, upon the receipt whereof many times death ensueth: my
reasons are divers, for that the same is very dangerous either if too
great a quantity thereof be taken or if it be given without correction;
or taken at the hands of some runagate physic-monger, quacksalver, old
women-leeches, and such like abusers of physic, and deceivers of people.
The use of Scammony I commit to the learned, unto whom it especially and
only belongeth, who can very carefully and curiously use the same.



CHAP. 321. Of Bryony, or the white Vine.

Fig. 1287. White Bryony

The Kinds.

There be two kinds of Bryony, the one white, the other black: of the
White Bryony as followeth.

The Description.

White Bryony bringeth forth divers long and slender stalks with many
clasping tendrils like the Vine, wherewith it catcheth hold of those
things that are next unto it. The leaves are broad, five-cornered, and
indented like those of the Vine; but rougher, more hairy, and whiter of
colour. The flowers be small and white, growing many together. The fruit
consisteth in little clusters, the berries whereof are at the first
green, and red when they be ripe. The root is very great, long, and
thick, growing deep in the earth, of a white yellowish colour, extreme
bitter, and altogether of an unpleasant taste. The Queen's Chief Surgeon
Mr. William Godorous, a very curious and learned gentleman showd me a
root hereof, that weighed half an hundred weight, and of the bigness of a
child, of a year old.

The Place.

Bryony groweth almost everywhere among pot-herbs, hedge-bushes, and such
like places.

The Time.

It flowereth in May and bringeth forth his grapes in autumn.

The Names.

Bryony is called in Latin, Vitis alba or white Vine, and it is named
Ampelos in Greek, because it is not only like the Vine in leaves, but
also for that it bringeth forth his fruit made up after the likeness of a
little cluster, although the berries stand not close together: it is
called of Pliny, Bryonia, and Madon: of the Arabians, Alphesera: of
Matthaeus Sylvaticus, Viticella: in the Poor Man's Treasure, Rorastrum:
of Apuleius, Apiastellum, Vitis taminia, Vitis alba, and Vitalba: in High
Dutch, Suchwurtz: in Low Dutch, Brionie: in English, Bryony, White
Bryony, and Tetter Berry: in French, Coulevree: in Italian, Zucca
sylvatica: in Spanish, Nueza blanca.

The Temperature.

White Bryony is in all parts hot and dry, exceeding the third degree,
especially of heat, with an exceeding great force of cleansing and
scouring, by reason whereof it purgeth and draweth forth, not only
choleric and phlegmatic humours, but also watery.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth that the first springs or sproutings being boiled
and eaten, do purge by siege and urine. Galen saith, that all men use
accustomably to eat of it in the spring time, and that it is a
nourishment wholesome, by reason of the binding quality that it hath;
which is to be understood of those of the wild Vine, called in Latin,
Tamus; and not of the sproutings of this plant; for the sproutings of the
first springs of White Bryony are nothing binding at all, but do mightily
purge the belly, and torment the stomach.

B. Dioscorides also affirmeth, that the juice of the root being pressed
out in the spring, and drunk with mead or honeyed water, purgeth phlegm:
and not only the juice, but also the decoction of the root draweth forth
phlegm, choler, and waterish humours, and that very strongly; and it is
withal oftentimes so troublesome to the stomach, as it procureth vomit.

C. This kind of strong purgation is good for those that have the dropsy,
the falling sickness, and the dizziness and swimming of the brain and
head, which hath continued long, and is hardly to be removed: yet
notwithstanding it is not daily to be given (as  Dioscorides admonisheth)
to them that have the falling sickness, for it will be troublesome enough
to take it now and then: and it is (as we haute said) an exceeding strong
medicine, purging with violence, and very forceable for man's nature.

D. The root put up in manner of a pessary bringeth forth the dead child
and afterbirth: being boiled for a bath to sit in, it worketh the same
effect.

E. It scoureth the skin, and taketh away wrinkles, freckles, sun-burning,
black marks, spots, and scars of the face, being tempered with the meal
of Vetches or Tares, or of Fenugreek: or boiled in oil till it be
consumed; it taketh away black and blue spots which come of stripes: it
is good against whitlows: being stamped with wine and applied it breaketh
boils, and small apostumes; it draweth forth splinters and broken bones,
if it be stamped and laid thereto.

F. The same is also fitly mixed with eating medicines, as Dioscorides
writeth.

G. The fruit is good against scabs and the leprosy, if it be applied and
anointed on, as the same author affirmeth.

H. Galen writeth, that it is profitable for tanners to thicken their
leather hides with.

I. Furthermore, an electuary made of the roots and honey or sugar, is
singular good for them that are short-winded, troubled with an old cough,
pain in the sides, and for such as are hurt and bursten inwardly: for it
dissolveth and scattereth abroad congealed and cluttered blood.

K. The root stamped with salt is good to be laid upon filthy ulcers and
scabbed legs. The fruit is likewise good to the same intent if it be
applied in manner aforesaid.

L. The root of Bryony and of Wake-Robin stamped with some sulphur or
brimstone, and made up into a mass or lump and wrapped in a linen clout,
taketh away the morphew, freckles, and spots of the face, if it be rubbed
with the same, being dipped first in vinegar.



CHAP. 322. Of Black Briony, or the Wild Vine.

Fig. 1288. Black Bryony (1)

The Description.

1. The black Bryony hath long flexible branches of a woody substance,
covered with a gaping or cloven bark, growing very far abroad, winding
itself with his small tendrils about trees, hedges, and what else is next
unto it, like unto the branches of the Vine. The leaves are like unto
those of Ivy or garden Nightshade, sharp pointed, and of a shining green
colour: the flowers are white, small, and mossy; which being past, there
succeed little clusters of red berries, somewhat bigger than those of the
Ribes, which we call Currants, or small raisins. The root is very great
and thick, oftentimes as big as a man's leg, blackish without, and very
clammy or slimy within; which being but scraped with a knife, or any
other thing fit for that purpose, it seemeth to be a matter fit to spread
upon cloth or leather in manner of a plaster or cere-cloth: which being
so spread and used, it serveth to lay upon many infirmities, and unto
very excellent purposes, as shall be declared in the proper place.

2. The wild Black Bryony resembleth the former, as well in slender viny
stalks as leaves; but clasping tendrils hath it none, nevertheless by
reason of the infinite branches, and the tenderness of the same, it
taketh hold of those things that stand next unto it, although easy to be
loosed, contrary unto the other of his kind. The berries hereof are black
of colour when they be ripe. The root also is black without, and within
of a pale yellow colour like Box. This which is here described is the
Bryonia nigra of Dodonaeus; but Bauhin calleth it Bryonia alba; and saith
it differeth from the common White Bryony, only in that the root is of a
yellowish Box colour on the inside, and the fruit or berries are black
when as they come to ripeness.

3. Bryonia nigra florens non fructum ferens.  This is altogether like the
first described in roots, branches, and leaves; only the footstalks
whereon the flowers grow are about eight or nine inches long; the flowers
are something greater, having neither before or after their flowering any 
berries or show thereof; but the flowers and footstalks do soon wither
and fall away: this I have heretofore, and now this summer, 1621,
diligently observed, because it hath not been mentioned or observed by
any that I know. John Goodyer.

The Place.

The first of these plants doth grow in hedges and bushes almost
everywhere.

The second groweth in Hesse, Saxony, Westphalia, Pomerland, and Meissen,
where white Bryony doth not grow, as Valerius Cordus hath written, who
saith that it grows under Hazel-trees, near unto a city of Germany called
Argentine, or Strasbourg.

The Time.

They spring in March, bring forth their flowers in May, and their ripe
fruit in September.

The Names.

Black Bryony is called in Latin, Bryonia nigra: and Vitis sylvestris, or
wild Vine; notwithstanding it doth not a little differ from Labrusca, or
Vitis vinifera syvestris, that is to say, from the wild vine, which
bringeth forth wine, which is likewise called Ampelos agria: Why both
these were called by one name, Pliny was the cause, who could not
sufficiently expound them in his 23rd book, first chapter; but confounded
them, and made them all one, in which error are also the Arabians.

This wild Vine also is called in Latin, Tamus and the fruit thereof Uva
taminia. Pliny nameth it also Salicastrum. Ruellius saith that in certain
shops it is called Sigillum B. Mariae; it is also called Cyclaminus
altera, but not properly: in English, Black Bryony, Wild Vine, and Our
Lady's Seal.

The Temperature.

The roots of the Wild Vine are hot and dry in the third degree: the fruit
is a like temperature, but yet not so forceable: both of them scour and
waste away.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, that the roots do purge waterish humours, and are
good for such as have the dropsy, if they be boiled in wine, adding unto
the wine a little sea water, and be drunk in three ounces of fair fresh
water: he saith furthermore, that the fruit or berries doth take away the
sunburn and other blemishes of the skin.

B. The berries do not only cleanse and remove such kind of spots, but do
also very quickly waste and consume away black and blue marks that come
of bruises and dry beatings, which thing also the roots perform being
laid upon them.

C. The young and tender sproutings are kept in pickle, and reserved to be
eaten with meat as Dioscorides teacheth. Matthiolus writeth that they are
served at men's tables also in our age in Tuscany: others report the like
also to be done in Andalucia, one of the kingdoms of Granada.

D. It is said that swine seek after the roots hereof, which they dig up
and eat with no less delight than they do the roots of Cyclaminus, or
Panis porcinus, whereupon it was called Cyclaminus Altera, or Sow-Bread;
if this reason stand for good, then may we in like manner join hereunto
many other roots, and likewise call them Cyclaminus altera, or Sow-Bread:
for swine do not seek after the roots of this only, dig them up and
greedily devour them, but the roots of divers other plants also, of which
none are of the kinds of Sow-Bread. It would therefore be a point of
rashness to affirm Tamus or Our Lady's Seal to be a kind of Sow-Bread,
because the roots thereof are pleasant meat to swine.

E. The root spread upon a piece of sheep's leather, in manner of a
plaster whilst it is yet fresh and green, taketh away black or blue
marks, all sears and deformity of the skin, breaketh hard apostumes,
draweth forth splinters and broken bones, dissolveth congealed blood; and
being laid on and used upon the hip or huckle bones, shoulders, arms, or
any other part where there is great pain and ache, it taketh it away in
short space, and worketh very effectually.



CHAP. 323. Of Bryony of Mexico.
Fig. 1289. Bryony of Mexico (1) Fig. 1290. Bryony of Peru (2)
The Description.

1. That plant which is now called Mechoacan, or Bryony of Mexico, cometh
very near the kinds of Bindweeds, in leaves and trailing branches, but in
roots like the Bryonies; for there shooteth from the root thereof many
long slender tendrils, which do infinitely grasp and clasp about such
things as grow or land next unto them: whereupon grow great broad leaves
sharp pointed, of a dark green colour, in shape like those of Our Lady's
Seal, somewhat rough and hairy, and a little biting the tongue: among the
leaves come forth the flowers (as Nicolatis Monardus writeth) not unlike
those of the Orange tree, but rather of the golden Apple of Love,
consisting of five small leaves: out of the midst whereof cometh forth a
little clapper or pistil in manner of a round lump as big as a Hazelnut,
which being divided with a thin skin, or membrane, that cometh through
it, openeth into two parts, in each whereof are contained two seeds, as
big as peas, in colour black and shining. The root is thick and long,
very like unto the root of White Bryony, whereof we make this a kind,
although in the taste of the roots there is some difference: for the root
of white Bryony hath a bitter taste, and this hath little or no taste at
all.

2. The Bryony, or Mechoacan of Peru groweth up with many long trailing
flexible branches, interlaced with divers viny tendrils, which take hold
of such things as are next or near unto them, even in such manner of
clasping and climbing as doth the Black Bryony, or wine Vine, whereunto
it is very like almost in each respect, saving that his mossy flowers do
smell very sweetly. The fruit as yet I have not observed, by reason that
the plant which doth grow in my garden did not perfect the same, by
occasion of the great rain and intemperate weather that hapned in An.
1596, but I am in good hope to see it in his perfection, & then we shall
easily judge whether it be that right Mechoacan that hath been brought
from Mexico and other places of the West Indies or no? The root by the
figure should seem to answer that of the wild Vine, but as yet thereof I
cannot write certainly.

3. There is brought to us and into use of late time the root of another
plant, which seems to have much affinity with Mechoacan, and therefore
Bauhin hath called it Bryonia mechoacan nigricans, and thus delivers the
history thereof.
It is a root like Mechoacan, but covered with a blackish bark, and
reddish (or rather greyish) on the inside: and cut into slices, it was
brought same years agone out of India by the name of Chelapa or Gelapa.
It is called by those of Alexandria and Marseille Ialapium or Gelapum:
and of those of Marseille it is thought the black or male Mechoacan. The
taste is not ungrateful, but gummy, and by reason of the much gumminess,
put to the fire it quickly flames: it in faculty exceeds the common
Mechoacan; for by reason of the great gumminess it more powerfully
purgeth serous humours with a little griping, also it principally
strengthens the liver and stomach; wherefore it is safely given in the
weight of 1 dram, and performs the operation without nauseousness. It is
usually given in Succory water, or some thin broth three hours before
meat.
Thus much Bauhin, who saith it was first brought to these parts eleven
years before he set forth his Prodromus, so that was about 1611. It hath
been little used here till within this ten years.

The Place.

Some write that Mechoacan was first found in the Province of New Spain,
near unto the city of Mexico or Mexican, whereof it took his name. It
groweth likewise in a province of the West Indies called Nicaragua and
Quito, where it is thought the best doth grow.

The Names.

It beareth his name as is said, of the province in which it is found.
Some take it to be Bryonia species, or to be a kind of Bryony: but seeing
the root is nothing bitter, but rather without taste, it hath little
agreement with Bryony; for the root of Bryony is very bitter. Divers name
it Rha album, or White Rhubarb, but unproperly, being nothing like. It
cometh near unto Scammony, and if I might yield my censure, it seemeth to
be Scammonium quoddam americanum, or a certain Scammony of America.
Scammony creepeth, as we have said, after the manner of Bindweed. The
root is both white and thick: the juice hath but little taste, as also
hath this of Mechoacan: it is called in English, Mechoca and Mechocan and
may be called Indian Bryony.

The Temperature.

The root is of a mean temperature between hot and cold, but yet dry.

The Virtues.

A. It purgeth by siege, especially phlegm, and then waterish humours. It
is given from one full dram weight to two, and that with wine, or with
some distilled water (according as the disease requireth) or else in
flesh broth.

B. It is to be given with good effect to all, whose diseases proceed of
phlegm and cold humours. It is good against head-ache that hath continued
long, old coughs, hardness of breathing, the colic, pain of the kidneys
and joints, the diseases of the reins and belly.



CHAP. 324. Of the Manured Vine.

Fig. 1291. The Manured Vine

The Kinds.

The Vine may be accounted among those plants that have need of stays and
props, and cannot stand by themselves; it is held up with poles and
frames of wood, and by that means it spreadeth all about and climbeth
aloft: it joineth it self unto trees, or whatsoever standeth next unto
it.

Of Vines that bring forth wine, some be tame and husbanded; and others
that be wild: of tame Vines there are many that are greater, and likewise
another sort that be lesser.

The Description.

The trunk or body of the Vine is great and thick, very hard, covered with
many barks, and those full of clefts or chinks; from which grow forth
branches, as it were arms, many ways spreading; out of which come forth
jointed shoots and springs: and from the bosom of those joints, leaves,
and clasping tendrils and likewise bunches or clusters filled full of
grapes: the leaves be broad, something round, five-cornered, and somewhat
indented about the edges; amongst which come forth many clasping
tendrils, that take hold of such props or stays as do stand next unto it.
The grapes do differ both in colour and greatness, and also in many other
things, the which to distinguish severally were impossible, considering
the infinite sorts or kinds, and also those which are transplanted from
one region or climate to another, do likewise alter both from the form
and taste they had before; in consideration whereof it shall be
sufficient to set forth the figure of the manured grape, and speak
somewhat of the rest.

There is found in Graecia and the parts of Morea, as Pantelleria, Zante,
Cephalonia, and Petras (whereof some are islands, and the other of the
continent) a certain Vine that hath a trunk or body of a woody subsrance,
with a scaly or rugged bark, of a greyish colour, whereupon do grow fair
broad leaves, slightly indented about the edges, not unlike unto those of
the Marsh-Mallow: from the bosom whereof come forth many small clasping
tendrils, and also tough and pliant footstalks, whereon do grow very fair
bunches of grapes, of a watchet blueish colour: from the which fruit
cometh forth long tender laces or strings, such as is found among Savory.
whereupon we call that plant which hath it laced Savory, not unlike that
that groweth among, and upon Flax, which we call Dodder, or Podagra lini,
whereof is made a black wine, which is called Greek wine, yet of the
taste of Sack. The laced fruit of this Vine may be fitly termed Uva
barbata, laced or bearded grapes.

The plant that beareth those small raisins which are commonly called
corans or currants, or rather raisins of Corinth, is not that plant which
among the vulgar people is taken for currants, being a shrub or bush that
bringeth forth small clusters of berries, differing as much as may be
from currants, having no affinity with the Vine or any kind thereof. The
Vine that beareth small raisins or currants hath a body or stock as other
Vines have, branches and tendrils likewise. The leaves are larger than
any of the others, snipped about the edges like the teeth of a saw: among
which come forth clusters of grapes, in form like the other, but smaller,
of a bluish colour; which being ripe are gathered and laid upon hurdles,
carpets, mats, and such like, in the sun to dry: then are they carried to
some house and laid upon heaps, as we lay apples and corn in a garner,
until the merchants do buy them: then do they put them into large butts
or other wooden vessels, and tread them down with their bare feet, which
they call stiving, and so are they brought into these parts for our use.
And they are commonly termed in Latin, Uvae Corinthiacae, and Passulae
minores.

There is also another which beareth exceeding fair grapes, whereof they
make raisins, whiter coloured, and much exceeding the bigness of the
common raisin of the sun: yet that grape whereof the raisin of the sun is
made is a large one, and thought to be the Uva Zibibi of the Arabians;
and it is that which Tabernamontanus figured under that name.

There is another kind of Vine, which hath great leaves very broad, of an
overworn colour; whereupon do grow great bunches of grapes of a bluish
colour: the pulp or meat whereof sticketh or cleaveth so hard to the
grains or little stones, that the one is not easily divided from the
other; resembling some starved or withered berry that hath been blasted,
whereof it was named Duracina.

There be same vines that bring forth grapes of a whitish or reddish
yellow colour: others of a deep red, both in the outward skin, pulp, and
juice within.

There be others whose grapes are of a blue colour, or something red, yet
is the juice like those of the former. These grapes do yield forth a
white wine before they are put into the press, and a reddish or paler
wine when they are trodden with the husks, and so left to macerate or
ferment, with which if they remain too long they yield forth a wine of a
higher colour.

There be others which make a black and obscure red wine, whereof some
bring bigger clusters, and consist of greater grapes; others of lesser:
some grow more clustered and closer together, others looser: some have
but one stone, others more: some make a more austere or harsh wine;
others a more sweet: of some the old wine is best; of divers, the first
year's wine is most excellent: some bring forth fruit four-square, of
which sorts or kinds we have great plenty.

The Place.

A fit soil for Vines, saith Florentinus, is every black earth, which is
not very close nor clammy, having some moisture; notwith standing
Columella saith that great regard is to be had what kind or sort of Vine
you would nourish, according to the nature of the country and soil.

A wise husbandman will commit to a fat and fruitful soil a lean Vine, and
of his own nature not too fruitful: to a lean ground a fruitful vine: to
a close and compact earth a spreading vine, and that is full of matter to
make branches of: to a loose and fruitful soil a Vine of few branches.
The same Columella saith, that the Vine delighteth not in dung, of what
kind soever it be; but fresh mould mixed with some shavings of horn is
the best to be disposed about the roots, to cause fertility.

The Time.

Columella saith, that the Vines must be pruned before the young branches 
bud forth. Palladius writeth, in February: if they be pruned later they
lose their nourishment with weeping.

The Names.

The Vine is called in Greek Ampelos oinophoros, as much to say in Latin
as, Vitis vinifera or the Vine which beareth wine; Ampelos emeros, that
is, Vitis mansuefacta, sive cultiva, Tame or manured Vine.

And it is called Oinophoros, that it may differ from both the Bryonies,
the white and the black, and from Tamus, or our Lady's Seal, which be
likewise named Ampelos. It is called Vitis, because invitatur ad uvas
pariendas, "It is cherished to the intent to bring forth full clusters,"
as Varro saith Pliny maketh Uva zibeba, Alexandrina vitis, or Vine of
Alexandria, in his fourteenth book, and third chapter, describing the
same by those very words that Theophrastus doth. Dioscorides setteth it
down to be altera species Vitis sylvestris, or a second kind of wild
Vine; but we had rather retain it among the tame Vines. We may name it in
English, Raisin Vine. The fruits hereof are called in shops by the name
of Passularum de Corintho: in English, currants, or small raisins.
Sylvestris Vitis or wild Vine is called in Gree, Ampelos agria, and in
Latin Labrusca as in Virgil's Eclogues:

 -- Adspice ut antrum
Sylvestris raris sparsit labrusca racemis.
 -- See how the wild Vine
Bedecks the cave with sparsed clusters fine.

To this wild Vine doth belong those which Pliny in his sixteenth book,
chapter 27, reporteth to be called Triferae, or that bring three sundry
fruits in one year, as Insanae and mad bearing Vines, because in those
some clusters are ripe and full grown, some in swelling, and others but
flowering.

The fruit of the Vine is called in Greek botrys, and staphyle: in Latin,
racemus, and uva: in English, a bunch or cluster of grapes.

The cluster of grapes that hath been withered or dried in the sun is
named in Greek saphis: in Latin, uva passa: in shops, Passula: in
English, raisins of the sun.

The berry or grape itself is called in Latin acinus, and also granum, as
Democritus saith, speaking of the berry.

The seeds or stones contained within the berries are called in Latin,
vinacea, and sometimes nuclei: in shops, arilli as though they should say
ariduli, because they are dry, and yield no juice; notwithstanding
vinacea are also taken in Columella for the dross or remnant of the
grapes after they be pressed.

The stalk, which is in the middle of the clusters, and upon which the
grapes do hang, is called of Varro, scapis uvarum.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The tender and clasping branches of the Vine and the leaves do cool,
and mightily bind. They stay bleeding in any part of the body: they are
good against the lask, the bloody flux, the heartburn, heat of the
stomach, or readiness to vomit. It stayeth the lusting or longing of
women with child, though they be but outwardly applied, and also taken
inwardly any manner of ways. They be moreover a remedy for the
inflammation of the mouth, and almonds of the throat, if they be gargled,
or the mouth washed therewith.

B. Of the same faculty be also the clusters gathered before they be ripe;
and likewise the bunches of the wild grape, which is accounted to be more
effectual against all those infirmities.

C. Dioscorides saith, That the liquor which falleth from the body and
branches being cut, and that sometime is turned as it were into a gum
(which driveth forth stones out of the kidneys and bladder, if the same
be drunk in wine) healeth ringworms, scabs, and lepry, but the place is
first to be rubbed with nitre. Being often anointed or laid on it taketh
away superfluous hairs: but yet he saith that the same is best which
issueth forth of the green and smaller sticks, especially that liquor
which falleth away whilst the branches are burning, which taketh away
warts, if it be laid on them.

D. The stones and other things remaining after the pressing are good
against the bloody flux, the lask of long continuance, and for those that
are much subject to vomiting.

E. The ashes made of the sticks and dross that remain after the pressing,
being laid upon the piles and hard swellings about the fundament, do cure
the same, being mixed with oil of Rue or Herb-Grace, and vinegar, as the
same author affirmeth, it helpeth to strengthen members out of joint, and
such as are bitten with any venomous beast, and easeth the pain of the
spleen or milt, being applied in manner of a plaster.

F. The later age do use to make a lye of the ashes of Vine sticks, in
compositions of caustic and burning medicines, which serve instead of an
hot-iron: the one we call a potential cautery, and the other actual.

Of Grapes.

A. Of grapes, those that are eaten raw do trouble the belly, and fill the
stomach full of wind, especially such as are of a sour and austere taste;
such kinds of grapes do very much hinder the concoction of the stomach;
and while they are dispersed through the liver and veins they engender
cold and raw juice, which cannot easily be changed into good blood.

B. Sweet grapes and such as are thorough ripe are less hurtful; their
juice is hotter, and is easilier dispersed. They also sooner pass through
the belly, especially being moist, and most of all if the liquor with the
pulp be taken without the stones and skin, as Galen saith.

C. The substance of the stones, although it be drier, and of a binding
quality, doth descend through all the bowels and is nothing changed: as
also the skins, which are nothing at all altered in the body, or very
litle.

D. Those grapes which have a strong taste of wine are in a mean between
sour and sweet.

E. Such grapes as have little juice do nourish more, and those less that
have more juice: but these do sooner descend; for the body receiveth more
nourishment by the pulp than by the juice; by the juice the belly is made
more soluble.

F. Grapes have the pre-eminence among the autumn fruits, and nourish more
than they all, but yet not so much as figs: and they have in them little
ill juice, especially when they be thorough ripe.

G. Grapes may be kept thewhole year, being ordered after that manner as
Ioachimus Camerarius reporteth. You shall take (saith he) the meal of
mustard seed, and strew in the bottom of any earthen pot well leaded;
whereupon you shall lay the fairest bunches of the ripest grapes, the
which you shall cover with more of the foresaid meal, and lay upon that
another sort of grapes, so doing until the pot be full. Then shall you
fill up the pot to the brim with a kind of sweet wine called must. The
pot being very close covered, be set into some cellar or other cold
place. The grapes you may take forth at your pleasure, washing them with
fair water from the powder.

Of Raisins.

A. Of raisins most are sweet; some have an austere or harsh taste. Sweet
raisins are hotter; austere colder: both of them do moderately bind, but
the austere somewhat more, which do more strengthen the stomach. The
sweet ones do neither slacken the stomach, nor make the belly soluble, if
they be taken with their stones, which are of a binding quality:
otherwise the stones taken forth, they do make the belly loose and
soluble.

B. Raisins do yield good nourishment to the body, they have in them no
ill juice at all, but do engender somewhat a thick juice which
notwithstanding doth nourish the more.

C. There cometh of sweet and fat raisins most plenty of nourishment:
ofwhich they are the best that have a thin skin.

D. There is in the sweet ones a temperate and smoothing quality, with a
power to cleanse moderately. They are good for the chest, lungs, wind-
pipe, kidneys, bladder, and for the stomach; for they make smooth the
roughness of the wind-pipe, and are good against hoarseness, shortness of
breath, or diffculty of breathing: they serve to concoct the spittle, and
to cause it to rise more easily in any disease whatsoever of the chest,
sides, and lungs, and do mitigate the pain of the kidneys and bladder,
which hath joined with it heat and sharpness of urine: they dull and
allay the malice of sharp and biting humours that hurt the mouth of the
stomach.

E. Moreover, raisins are good for the liver, as Galen writeth in his
seventh book Of Medicines, according to the places affected: for they be
of force to concoct raw humours, and to restrain their malignity, and
they themselves do hardly putrefy: besides, they are properly and of
their own substance familiar to the entrails and cure any distemperature,
and nourish much; wherein they are chiefly to be commended, for raisins
nourish, strengthen, resist putrefaction, and if there be any
distemperature by reason of moisture or coldness, they help without any
hurt, as the said Galen affirmeth.

F. The old physicians have taught us to take forth the stones, as we may
see in divers compositions of the ancient writers; as in that composition
which is called in Galen, Arteriaca Mithridatis, which hath the seeds of
the raisins taken forth: for seeing that raisins contain in them a thick
substance, they cannot easily pass through the veins, but are apt to
breed obstructions and stoppings of the entrails: which things happen the
rather by reason of the seeds, for they so much the harder pass through
the body, and do quicklier and more easily cause obstructions, in that
they are more astringent or binding. Wherefore the seeds are to be taken
out, for so shall the juice of the raisins more easily pass, and the
sooner be distributed through the entrails.

G. Dioscorides reporteth, That raisins chewed with pepper draw phlegm and
water out of the head.

H. Of raisins is made a poultice good for the gout, rottings about the
joints, gangrenes, and mortified ulcers: being stamped with the herb All-
Heal it quickly takes away the nails that are loose in the fingers or
toes, being laid thereon.

Of Must.

A. Must, called in Latin mustum, that is to say, the liquor newly issuing
out of the grapes when they be trodden or pressed, doth fill the stomach
and entrails with wind; it is hardly digested; it is of a thick juice,
and if it do not speedily pass through the body it becometh more hurtful.
It hath only this one good thing in it (as Galen saith) that it maketh
the body soluble.

B. That which is sweetest and pressed out of ripe grapes doth soonest
pass through; but that which is made of sour and austere grapes is worst
of all: it is more windy, it is hardly concocted, it engendereth raw
humours; and although it doth descend with a looseness of the belly,
notwithstanding it oftentimes withal bringeth the colic and pains of the
stone: but if the belly be not moved all things are the worse, and more
troublesome; and it oftentimes brings an extreme lask; and the bloody
flux.

C. That first part of the wine that cometh forth of itself before the
grapes be hard pressed, is answerable to the grape itself, and doth
quickly descend; but that which issues forth afterward, having some part
of the nature of the stones, stalks, and skins, is much worse.

Of Cute.

A. Of cute that is made of must, which the Latins call sapa, and
defrutum, is that liquor which we call in English cute, which is made of
the sweetest must, by boiling it to a certain thickness, or boiling it to
a third part, as Columella writeth.

B. Pliny affirmeth, That sapa and defrutum do differ in the manner of the
boiling; and that sapa is made when the new wine is boiled away till only
a third part remaineth: and defrutum till half be boiled.

C. Sireum, (saith he in his fourteenth book, cap. 17) which others call
epsema, and we sapa, a work of wit, and not of nature, is made of new
wine boiled to a third part; which being boiled to half we call defrutum.

D. Palladius joineth to these caraenum, which as he saith is made when a
third part is boiled away, and two remain.

E. Leontius in his Geoponics showeth, that hepsema must be made of eight
parts of new wine, and an hundred of wine itself boiled to a third.

F. Galen testifieth, that ephuma is new wine very much boiled. The later
Physitians do call hepsema or sapa boiled wine.

G. Cute or boiled wine is hot, yet not so hot as wine, but it is thicker;
yet not so easily distributed or carried through the body, and it slowly
descendeth by urine, but by the belly oftentimes sooner: for it
moderately maketh the same soluble.

H. It nourisheth more, and filleth the body quickly; yet doth it by
reason of his thickness stick in the stomach for a time, and is not so
fit for the liver or for the spleen. Cute also doth digest raw humours
that stick in the chest and lungs, and raiseth them up speedily. It is
therefore good for the cough and shortness of breath.

I. The Vintners of the Low Countries (I will not say of London) do make
of cute and wine mixed in a certain proportion, a compound and
counterfeit wine, which they sell for Candy wine, commonly called
Malmsey.

K. Pliny lib. 14. cap. 9. saith, that cute was first devised for a
bastard honey.

Of Wine.

A. To speak of wine, the juice of grapes, which being newly pressd forth
is called as we have said mustum or new wine: after the dregs and dross
are setled, and now it appeareth pure and clear, it is called in Greek
oinos, in Latin vinum: in English, wine, and that not unproperly. For
certain other juices, as of Apples, Pomegranates, Pears, Medlars, or
Services, or such as otherwise made (for example's sake) of barley and
grain, be no at all simply called wines, but with the name of the thing
added whereof they do consist. Hereupon is the wine which is pressed
forth of the pomegranate berries named rhoites, or wine of pomegranates:
out of quinces, cydonites, or wine of Quinces: out of Pear, apyites or
perry: and that which is compounded of barley is called zythum, or barley
wine: in English, ale or beer.

B. And other certain wines have borrowed surnames of the plants that have
been steeped or infused in them; and yet all wines of the Vine, as
Wormwood wine, Myrtle wine, and Hyssop wine, and these are all called
artificial wines.

C. That is properly and simply called wine which is pressed out of the
grapes of the Vine, and is without any manner of mixture.

D. The kinds of wines are not of one nature, nor of one faculty or power,
but of many differing one from another: for there is one difference
thereof in taste, another in colour; the third is referred to the
consistence or substance of the wine; the fourth consisteth in the virtue
and strength thereof. Galen addeth that which is found in the smell,
which belongs to the virtue and strength of the wine.

E. That may also be joined unto them which respecteth the age: for by age
wines become hotter and sharper, and do withal change oftentimes the
colour, the substance, and the smell: for some wines are sweet of taste;
others austere or something harsh; divers of a rough taste, or altogether
harsh; and most of them sufficient sharp: there be likewise wines of a
middle sort, inclining to one or other quality.

F. Wine is of colour either white or reddish, or of a blackish deep red,
which is called black, or of some middle colour between these.

G. Some wine is of substance altogether thin; other some thick and fat;
and many also of a middle consistence.

H. One wine is of great strength, and another is weak, which is called a
waterish wine: a full wine is called in Latin vinosum. There be also
among these very many that be of a middle strength.

I. There is in all wines, be they never so weak, a certain winy substance
thin and hot. There be likewise watery parts, and also divers earthy: for
wine is not simple, but (as Galen testifieth in his fourth book Of the
Faculties of Medicines) consisteth of parts that have divers faculties.

K. Of the sundry mixedure and proportion of these substances one with
another; there rise divers and sundry faculties of the wine.

L. That is the best and fullest wine in which the hot and winy parts do
most of all abound: and the weakest is that wherein the watery have the
pre-eminence.

M. The earthy substance abounding in the mixture causeth the wine to be
austere or something harsh, as a crude or raw substance doth make it
altogether harsh. The earthy substance being severed falleth down, and in
continuance of time sinketh to the bottom; and becomes the dregs or lees
of the wine: yet it is not always wholly severed, but hath both the taste
and other qualities of this substance remaining in the wine.

N. All wines have their heat; partly from the proper nature and inward or
original heat of the vine, and partly from the sun: for there is a double
heat which ripeneth not only the grapes, but also all other fruits, as
Galen testifieth; the one is proper and natural to every thing; the other
is borrowed of the sun: which if it be perceived in any thing, it is
undoubtedly best and especially in the ripening of grapes.

O. For the heat which proceeds from the sun concocteth the grapes and the
juice of the grapes, and doth especially ripen them, stirring up and
increasing the inward and natural heat of the wine, which otherwise is so
overwhelmed with abundance of raw and waterish parts, as it seems to be
dulled and almost without life.

P. For unless wine had in it a proper and original heat, the grapes could
not be so concocted by the force of the sun, as that the wine should
become hot, no less than many other things naturally cold, which although
they be ripened and made perfect by the heat of the sun, do not for all
that lose their original nature; as the fruits, juices, or seeds of
Mandrake, Nightshade, Hemlock, Poppy, and of other such like, which
though they be made ripe, and brought to full perfection, yet still
retain their own cold quality.

Q. Wherefore seeing that wine through the heat of the sun is for the most
part brought to his proper heat, and that the heat and force is not all
alike in all regions and places of the earth; therefore by reason of the
diversity ofregions and places, the wines are made not a little to differ
in faculty.

R. The stronger and fuller wine groweth in hot countries and places that
lie to the sun; the rawer and weaker in cold regions and provinces that
lie open to the North.

S. The hotter the summer is the stronger is the wine; the less hot or the
moister it is, the less ripe is the wine. Notwithstanding not only the
manner of the weather and of the sun maketh the qualities of the wine to
differ, but the native property of the soil also; for both the taste and
other qualities of the wine are according to the manner of the soil. And
it is very well known, that not only the colour of the wine, but the
taste also dependeth upon the diversity of the grapes.

T. Wine (as Galen writeth) is hot in the second degree, and that which is
very old in the third; but new wine is hot in the first degree: which
things are especially to be understood concerning the mean between the
strongest and the weakest; for the fullest and mightiest (being but
Horna, that is as I take it of one year old) are for the most part hot in
the second degree. The weaker and the most waterish wines, although they
be old, do seldom exceed the second degree.

U. The dryness is answerable to the heat in proportion, as Galen saith in
his book Of Simples: but in his books Of the Government of Health he
showeth, that wine doth not only heat, but also moisten our bodies, and
that the same doth moisten and nourish such bodies as are extreme dry:
and both these opinions be true.

W. For the faculties of wine are of one sort as it is a medicine, and of
another as it is a nourishment; which Galen in his book Of the Faculties
of Nourishments doth plainly show, affirming that those qualities of the
wine which Hippocrates writeth of in his book Of the Manner of Diet, be
not as a nourishment, but rather as of a medicine. For wine as it is a
medicine doth dry, especially being outwardly applied; in which case, for
that it doth not nourish the body at all, the dryness doth more plainly
appear, and is more manifestly perceived.

X. Wine is a special good medicine for an ulcer, by reason of his heat
and moderate drying, as Galen teacheth in his fourth book Of the Method
of Healing.

Y. Hippocrates writeth, That ulcers, what manner of ones soever they are,
must not be moistened unless it be with wine: for that which is dry (as
Galen addeth) cometh nearer to that which is whole, and the thing that is
moist, to that which is not whole.

Z. It is manifest that wine is in power or faculty dry, and not in act;
for wine actually is moist and liquid, and also cold: for the same cause
it likewise quencheth thirst, which is an appetite or desire of cold and
moist, and by this actual moisture (that we may so term it) it is, if it
be inwardly taken, not a medicine, but a nourishment; for it nourisheth,
and through his moisture maketh plenty of blood; and by increasing the
nourishment it moisteneth the body, unless peradventure it be old and
very strong: for it is made sharp and biting by long lying, and such kind
of wine doth not only heat, but also consume and dry the body, for as
much as it is not now a nourishment, but a medicine.

AA. That wine which is neither sharp by long lying, nor made medicinable,
doth nourish and moisten, serving as it were to make plenty of
nourishment and blood, by reason that through his actual moisture it more
moisteneth by feeding, nourishing, and comforting, than it is able to dry
by his power.

BB. Wine doth refresh the inward and natural heat; comforteth the
stomach, causeth it to have an appetite to meat, moveth concoction, and
conveyeth the nourishment through all parts of the body, increaseth
strength, enlargeth the body, maketh phlegm thin, bringeth forth by urine
choleric and watery humours, procureth sweating, engendereth pure blood,
maketh the body well coloured, and turneth an ill colour into a better.

CC. It is good for such as are in a consumption by reason of some
disease, and that have need to have their bodies nourished and refreshed
(always provided they have no fever,) as Galen saith in his seventh book
Of the Method of Curing. It restoreth strength most of all other things,
and that speedily: It maketh a man merry and joyful: It putteth away
fear, care, troubles of mind, and sorrow: It moveth pleasure and lust of
the body, and bringeth sleep gently.

DD. And these things proceed of the moderate use of wine: for immoderate
drinking of wine doth altogether bring the contrary. They that are drunk
are distraughted in mind; become foolish, and oppressed with a drowsy
sleepiness, and be afterward taken with the apoplexy, the gout, or
altogether with other most grievous diseases; the brain, liver, lungs or
some other of the entrails being corrupted with too often and overmuch
drinking of wine.

EE. Moreover, wine is a remedy against taking of Hemlock or green
Coriander, the juice of black Poppy, Wolf's-Bane, and Leopard's-Bane,
Toadstools, and other cold poisons, and also against the biting of
serpents, and stings of venomous beasts, that hurt and kill by cooling.

FF. Wine also is a remedy against the over-fullness and stretching out of
the sides, windy swellings, the green sickness, the dropsy, and generally
all cold infirmities of the stomach, liver, milt, and also of the matrix.

GG. But wine which is of colour and sustance like water, through shining
bright, pure, of a thin substance, which is called white, is of all wines
the weakest; and if the same should be tempered with water it would bear
very little: and hereupon Hippocrates calleth it oligophoros, that is to
say, bearing little water to delay it withal.

HH. This troubleth the head and hurteth the sinews less than others do,
and is not unpleasant to the stomach: it is easily and quickly dispersed
through all parts of the body: it is given with far less danger than any
other wine to those that have the ague (except some inflammation or hot
swelling be suspected) and oftentimes with good success to such as have
intermitting fevers; for as Galen, lib. 8. of his Method saith, it
helpeth concoction, digesteth humours that be half raw, procureth urine
and sweat, and is good for those that cannot sleep, and that be full of
care and sorrow, and for such as are overwearied.

II. Black wine, that is to say wine of a deep red colour, is thick; and
hardly dispersed, and doth easily pass through the bladder: it quickly
taketh hold of the brain, and makes a man drunk: it is harder of
digestion: it remaineth longer in the body; it easily stoppeth the liver
and spleen; for the most part it binds, notwithstanding it nourisheth
more, and is more fit to engender blood: it filleth the body with flesh 
sooner than others do.

KK. That which is of a light crimson red colour is for the most part more
delightful to the taste, fitter for the stomach; it is sooner and easier
dispersed: it troubleth the head less, it remains not so long under the
short ribs, and easilier descendeth to the bladder than black wine doth:
it doth also make the belly costive, if so be that it be not ripe. For
such crude and rough wines do oftentimes molest weak stomachs, and are
troublesome to the belly.

LL. Reddish yellow wine seemeth to be in a mean between a thin and thick
substance: otherwise it is of all wines the hottest; and suffereth most
water to be mixed with it, as Hippocrates writeth.

MM. The old wine of this kind, being of a thin substance and good smell,
is a singular medicine for all those that are much subject to swooning,
although the cause thereof proceed of choler that hurteth the mouth of
the stomach, as Galen testifieth in the 11th book of his Method.

NN. Sweet wine the less hot it is, the less doth it trouble the head, and
offend the mind; and it better passeth through the belly, making it
oftentimes soluble: but it doth not so easily pass or descend by urine.

OO. Again, the thicker it is of substance, the harder and slowlier it
passeth through: it is good for the lungs, and for those that have the
cough. It ripeneth raw humours that stick in the chest and causeth them
to be easilier spit up; but it is not so good for the liver, whereunto it
bringeth no small hurt when either it is inflamed, or schirrous, or when
it is stopped. It is also an enemy to the spleen, it sticketh under the
short ribs, and is hurtful to those that are full of choler. For this
kind of wine, especially the thicker it is, is in them very speedily
turned into choler: and in others when it is well concocted, it
increaseth plenty of nourishment.

PP. Auster ewine, or that which is somewhat harsh in taste, nourisheth
not much; and if so be that it be thin and white, it is apt to provoke
urine, it less troubleth the head, it is not quickly digested, for which
cause it is the more to be shunned, as Galen saith in his 2nd book of his
Method.

QQ. That wine which is altogether harsh or rough in taste, the less ripe
it is, the nearer it cometh to the qualities of verjuice made of sour
grapes, being evidently binding. It strengheneth a weak stomach; it is
good against the unkindly lusting or longing of women with child; it
slayeth the lask, but it sticketh in the bowels: breedeth stoppings of
the liver and milt; it slowly descendeth by urine, and something
troubleth the head.

RR. Old wine which is also made sharp by reason of age, is not only
troublesome to the brain, but also hurteth the sinews: it is an enemy to
the entrails, and maketh the body lean.

SS. New wine, and wine of the first year, doth easily make the body to
swell, and engendereth wind; it causeth troublesome dreams, especially
that which is not throughly refined, or thick; or very sweet: for such do
sooner stick in the entrails than others do. Other wines that are in a
mean in colour, substance, taste, or age, as they do decline in virtues
and goodness from the extremes; so also they be free from their faults
and discommodities. They come near in faculties to those wines whereunto
they be next, either in colour, taste, or substance, or else in smell or
in age.

TT. Wine is fittest for those that be of nature cold and dry; and also
for old men, as Galen showeth in his fifth book Of the Government of
Health: for it heateth all the members of their bodies, and purgeth away
the watery part of the blood, if there be any.

UU. The best wines are those that be of a fat substance: for those both
increase blood, and nourish the body; both which commodities they bring
to old men, especially at such time as they have no serous humour in
their veins, and have need of much nourishment. It happeneth that
oftentimes there doth abound in their bodies a waterish excrement, and
then stand they in most need of all of such wines as do provoke urine.

WW. As wine is best for old men, so it is worst for children: by reason
that being drunk, it both moisteneth and dryeth overmuch, and also
filleth the head with vapours, in those who are of a moist and hot
complexion, or whose bodies are in a mean between the extremes, whom
Galen in his book Of the Government of Health doth persuade, that they
should not so much as taste of wine for a very long time: for neither is
it good for them to have their heads filled, nor to be made moist and
hot, more than is sufficient, because they are already of such a heat and
moisture, as if you should but little increase either quality, they would
forthwith fall into the extreme.

XX. And seeing that every excess is to be shunned, it is expedient most
of all to shun this, by which not only the body, but also the mind
receiveth hurt.

YY. Wherefore we think, that wine is not fit for men that be already of
full age, unless it be moderately taken, because it carrieth them
headlong into fury and lust, and troubleth and dulleth the reasonable
part of the mind.

Of the Delaying, or Tempering of Wine.

A. It was an ancient custom and of long continuance in old time, for
wines to to be mixed with water, as it is plain and evident not only by
Hippocrates, but also by other old men's writings. Wine first began to be
mixed with water for health and wholesomeness' sake: for as Hippocrates
writeth in his book Of Ancient Physic, being simply and of itself much
drunk, it maketh a man in some sort weak and feeble: which thing said,
seemeth also to allow of writing thus.

Ut Venus enervat vires, sic copia vini
Et tentat gressus, debilitatque pedes.
As Venery the vigour spends, so store of wine
Makes man to stagger, makes his strength decline.
 -- Vitalis, Carmina Duodecim Sapientum

B. Moreover, wine is the sweeter, having water poured into it, as
Athenaeus saith. Homer likewise commendeth that wine which is well and
fitly allayed. Philocorus writeth (as Athanaeus reporteth) that
Amphictyon king of Athens was the first that allayed wine, as having
learned the same of Dionysius: wherefore he saith, that those who in that
manner drunk it remained in health, that before had their bodies feebled
and overweakened with pure and unmixed wine.

C. The maner of mingling or tempering of wine was divers: for sometimes
to one part of wine, there were added two, and sometimes three or four of
water; or two parts of wine three of water: of a less delay was that
which consisted of equal parts of wine and water.

D. The old comedians did think that this lesser mixture was sufficient to
make men mad, among whom was Mnesitheus, whose words be extant in
Athenaeus.

E. Hippocrates in the seventh book of his Aphorisms saith, that this
manner of tempering of wine and water by equal parts bringeth as it were
a light pleasant drunkenness, and that it is a kind of remedy against
disquietness, yawnings, and shiverings, and this mingling belongeth to
the strongest wines.

F. Such kind of wines they might be which in times past the Scythians
were reported of the old writers to drink, who for this cause do call
unmixed wine the Scythians' drink. And they that drink simple wine say,
that they will Scythizare, or do as the Scythians do; as we may read in
the tenth book of Athenaeus.

G. The Scythians, as Hippocrates and divers other of the old writers
affirm, be people of Germany beyond the flood Danubius, which is also
called Ister: Rhene is a river of Scythia: and Cyrus having passed over
Ister is reported to have come into the borders of the Scythians.

H. And in this our age all the people of Germany do drink unmixed wine,
which groweth in their own country, and likewise other people of the
North parts, who make no scruple at all to drink of the strongest wines
without any mixture.

Of the Liquor which is Distilled out of Wine, Commonly Called, Aqua
vitae.

A. There is drawn out of wine a liquor, which in Latin is commonly called
Aqua vitae, or water of life, and also Aqua ardens, or burning water,
which as distilled waters are drawn out of herbs and other things, is
after the same manner distilled out of strong wine, that is to say, by
certain instruments made for this purpose, which are commonly called
limbecks.

B. This kind of liquor is in colour and substance like unto waters
distilled out of herbs, and also resembleth clear simple water in colour,
but in faculty it far differeth.

C. It beareth the surname of life, because that it serveth to preserve
and prolong the life of man.

D. It is called ardens, burning, for that it is easily turned into a
burning flame: for seeing it is not any other thing than the thinnest and
strongest part of the wine, it being put to the flame of fire, is quickly
burned.

E. This liquor is very hot, and of most subtle and thin parts, hot and
dry in the latter end of the third degre, especially the purest spirits
thereof: for the purer it is, the hotter it is, the dryer, and of thinner
parts: which is made more pure by often distilling.

F. This water distilled out of wine is good for all those that are made
cold either by a long disease, or through age, as for old and impotent
men: for it cherisheth and increaseth natural heat, upholdeth strength,
repaireth and augmenteth the same: it prolongeth life, quickeneth all the
senses, and doth not only preserve the memory, but also recovereth it
when it is lost: it sharpeneth the sight.

G. It is fit for those that are taken with the catalepsy (which is a
disease in the brain proceeding of dryness and cold) and are subject to
dead sleeps, if there be no fever joined; it serveth for the weakeness,
trembling, and beating of the heart; it strengtheneth and heateth a
feeble stomach; it consumeth wind both in the stomach, sides, and bowels;
it maketh good concoction of meat, and is a singular remedy against cold
poisons.

H. It hath such force and power, in strengthening of the heart and
stirreth up the instruments of the senses; that it is most effectual, not
only inwardly taken to the quantity of a little spoonful, but also
outwardly applied: that is to say, set to the nostrils, or laid upon the
temples of the head, and to the wrists of the arms; and also to foment
and bath sundry hurts and griefs.

I. Being held in the mouth it helpeth the toothache: it is also good
against cold cramps and convulsions, being chafed and rubbed therewith.

K. Some are bold to give it in quartans before the fit, especially after
the height or prime of the disease.

L. This water is to be given in wine with great judgement and discretion;
for seeing it is extreme hot, and of most subtle parts, and nothing else
but the very spirit of the wine, it most speedily pierceth through, and
doth easily assault and hurt the brain.

M. Therefore it may be given to such as have the apoplexy and falling
sickness, the megrim, the headache of long continuance, the vertigo, or
giddiness proceeding through a cold cause: yet can it not be always
safely given, for unless the matter the efficient cause of the disease be
small, and the sick man of temperature very cold, it cannot be ministered
without danger: for that it spreadeth and disperseth the humours, it
filleth or stuffeth the head, and maketh the sick man worse: and if
humours be hot, as blood is, it doth not a little increase inflammations
also.

N. This water is hurtful to all that be of nature and complexion hot, and
most of all to choleric men: it is also offensive to the liver, and
likewise unprofitable for the kidneys, being often and plentifully taken.

O. If I should take in hand to write of every mixture, of each infusion,
of the sundry colours, and every other circumstance that the vulgar
people do give unto this water, and their diversity, I thould spend much
time but to small purpose.

Of Argol, Tartar, or Wine Lees.

A. The lees of wine which is become hard like a crust, and sticketh to
the sides of the vessel, and wine casks, being dried, hard, sound, and
well compact, and which may be beaten into powder, is called in shops
Tartarum: in English, Argol, and Tartar.

B. These lees are used for many things; the silversmiths polish their
silver herewith: the dyers use it: and it is profitable in medicine.

C. It doth greatly dry and waste away, as Paulus AEgineta saith: it hath
withal a binding faculty, proceeding from the kind of wine, of which it
cometh.

D. The same serveth for moist diseases of the body: it is good for them
that have the green sickness and the dropsy, especially that kind that
lieth in the flesh, called in Latin, Leucophlagmatica: being taken every
day fasting half a pennyweight or a full pennyweight (which is a dram and
nine grains after the Romans' computation) doth not only dry up the
waterish excrements, and voideth them by urine, but it prevaileth much to
cleanse the belly by siege.

E. It would work more effectually, if it were mixed either with hot
spices, or with other things that break wind; or else with diuretics,
which are medicines that provoke urine; likewise to be mixed with gentle
purgers, as the sick man's case shall require.

F. The same of itself, or tempered with oil of Myrtles, is a remedy
against soft swellings, as Dioscorides teacheth: it stayeth the lask, and
vomiting, being applied outwardly upon the region of the stomach in a
poultice; and if it be laid to the bottom of the belly and secret parts,
it stoppeth the whites, wasteth away hot swellings of the kernels in the
flanks, and other places which be not yet exulcerated: it assuageth great
breasts, and dryeth up the milk, if it be anointed on with vinegar.

G. These lees are oftentimes burnt: if it become all white it is a sign
of right and perfect burning, for till then it must be burned: being so
burnt, the apothecaries call it, Tartaram ustum, and Tartarum calcinatum:
that it to say, burnt or calcined tartar.

H. It hath a very great caustic or burning quality: it cleanseth and
throughly heateth, bindeth, eateth, and very much drieth, as Dioscorides
doth write: being mixed with rosin, it maketh rough and ill nails to fall
away: Paulus saith, that it is mixed with caustics or burning medicines
to increase their burning quality: it must be used whilst it is new made,
because it quickly vanisheth: for the lees of wine burned, do soon relent
or wax moist, and are speedily resolved into liquor, therefore he that
would use it dry, must have it put in a glass, or glassed vessel well
stopped, and set in a hot and dry place. It melteth and is turned into
liquor if it be hanged in a linen bag in some place in a cellar under the
ground.

I. The apothecaries call this liquor that droppeth away from it, oil of
tartar. It retaineth a caustic and burning quality, and also a very dry
faculty: it very soon taketh away lepry, scabs, tetters, and other filth
and deformity of the skin and face: with an equal quantity of rose-water
added, and as much ceruse as is sufficient for a liniment, wherewith the
blemished or spotted parts must be anointed overnight.

The Brief Sum of that Hath Been Said of the Vine.

A. The juice of the green leaves, branches, and tendrils of the Vine
drunken, is good for those that vomit and spit blood, for the bloody
flux, and for women with child that vomit overmuch. The kernel within the
grapes boiled in water and drunk hath the same effect.

B. Wine moderately drunk profiteth much, and maketh good digestion, but
it hurteth and distempereth them that drink it seldom.

C. White wine is good to be drunk before meat; it preserveth the body,
and pierceth quickly into the bladder: but upon a full stomach it rather
maketh oppilations or stoppings, because it doth swiftly drive down meat
before Nature hath of herself digested it.

D. Claret wine doth greatly nourish and warm the body, and is wholesome
with meat, especially unto phlegmatic people; but very unwholesome for
young children, as Galen saith, because it heateth above nature, and
hurteth the head.

E. Red wine stops the belly, corrupteth the blood, breedeth the stone, is
hurtful to old people, and good or profitable to few, save to such as are
troubled with the lask, bloody flux, or any other looseness of the body.

F. Sack or Spanish wine hath been used of a long time to be drunk after
meat, to cause the meat the better to digest; but common experience hath
found it to be more beneficial to the stomach to be drunk before meat.

G. Likewise Malmsey, Muscatel, Bastard, and such like sweet wines have
been used before meat, to comfort the cold and weak stomach, especially
being taken fasting: but experience teacheth, that Sack drunk instead
thereof is much better, and warmeth more effectually.

H. Almighty God for the comfort of mankind ordained wine; but decreed
withal, That it should be moderatly taken; for so it is wholsome and
comfortable: but when measure is turned into excess, it becometh
unwholesome, and a poison most venomous, relaxing the sinews, bringing
with it the palsy and falling sickness: to those of a middle age it
bringeth hot fevers, frenzy, and lechery; it consumeth the liver and
other of the inward parts: besides, how little credence is to be given to
drunkards it is evident; for though they be mighty men, yet it maketh
them monsters, and worse than brute beasts. Finally in a word to
conclude; this excessive drinking of wine dishonoreth noblemen, beggareth
the poor, and more have been destroyed by surfeiting therewith, than by
the sword.



CHAP. 325. Of Hops.

Fig. 1292. Hops

The Kinds.

1. There be two sorts of Hops: one the manured or the garden Hop; the
other wild or of the hedge.

The Description.

1. The Hop doth live and flourish by embracing and taking hold of poles,
perches, and other things upon which it climbeth. It bringeth forth very
long stalks, rough, and hairy; also rugged leaves broad like those of the
Vine, or rather of Bryony, but yet blacker, and with fewer dented
divsions: the flowers hang down by clusters from the tops of the
branches, puffed up, set as it were with scales like little canes, or
sealed pineapples, of a whitish colour tending to yellowness, strong of
smell: the roots are slender, and diversly folded one within another.

2. The wild Hop differeth not from the manured Hop in form or fashion,
but is altogether lesser, as well in the clusters of flowers, as also in
the frank shoots, and doth not bring forth such store of flowers, wherein
especially consisteth the difference.

The Place.

The Hop joyeth in a fat and fruitful ground: it prospereth the better by
manuring: also it groweth among briars and thorns about the borders of
fields, I mean the wild kind.

The Time.

The flowers of hops are gathered in August and September, and reserved to
be used in beer: in the spring time come forth new shoots or buds: in the
winter only the roots remain alive.

The Names.

It is called in shops and in all other places Lupulus: of some, Lupus
salictarius, or Lupulus salictarius: in High Dutch, Hopffen: in Low
Dutch, Hoppe: in Spanish, Hombrezillos: in French, Houblon: in English,
Hops.

Pliny, lib. 21. cap. 15, maketh mention of Hops among the prickly plants.

The Temperature.

The flowers of the hop are hot and dry in the second degree: they fill
and stuff the head, and hurt the same with their strong smell. Of the
same temperature also are the leaves themselves, which do likewise open
and cleanse.

The Virtues.

A. The buds or first sprouts which come forth in the spring are used to
be eaten in salads; yet are they, as Pliny saith, more toothsome than
nourishing, for they yield but very small nourishment: notwithstanding
they be good for the entrails, both in opening and procuring of urine,
and likewise in keeping the body soluble.

B. The leaves and little tender stalks, and also the  flowers themselves
remove stoppings out of the liver and spleen, purge by urine, help the
spleen, cleanse the blood, and be profitable against long lingering
agues, scabs, and such like filth of the skin, if they be boiled in whey.

C. The juice is of more force, and doth not only remove obstructions out
of the entrails, but it is also thought to avoid choler and phlegm by the
stool. It is written, that the same dropped into the ears taketh away the
stench and corruption thereof.

D. The flowers are used to season beer or ale with, and too many do cause
bitterness thereof, and are ill for the head.

E. The flowers make bread light, and the lump to be sooner and easilier
leavened, if the meal be tempered with liquor wherein they have been
boiled.

F. The decoction of hops drunk openeth the stoppings of the liver, the
spleen, and kidney, and purgeth the blood fron all corrupt humours,
causing the same to come forth with the urine.

G. The juice of Hops openeth the belly, and driveth forth yellow and
choleric humours, and purgeth the blood from all filthiness.

H. The manifold virtues of Hops do manifestly argue the wholesomeness of
beer above ale; for the hops rather make it a physical drink to keep the
body in health, than an ordinary drink for the quenching of our thirst.



CHAP. 326. Of Traveller's Joy.
Fig. 1293. Traveller's Joy (1) Fig. 1294. Spanish Traveller's Joy (2)
The Description.

1. The plant which Lobel setteth forth under the title Viorna, Dodonaeus
makes Vitis alba, but not properly; whose long woody and viny branches
extend themselves very far, and into infinite numbers, decking with his
clasping tendrils and white star-like flowers (being very sweet) all the
bushes, hedges, and shrubs that are near unto it. It sends forth many
branched stalks, thick, tough, full of shoots and clasping tendrils,
wherewith it foldeth itself upon the hedges, and taketh hold and climbeth
upon every thing that standeth near unto it. The leaves are fastened for
the most part by fives upon one rib or stem, two on either side, and one
in the midst or point standing alone; which leaves are broad like those
of Ivy, but not cornered at all: among which come forth clusters of white
flowers, and after them great tufts of flat seeds, each seed having a
fine white plume like a feather fastened to it, which maketh in the
winter a goodly show, covering the hedges white all over with his
feather-like tops. The root is long, tough, and thick, with many strings
fasined thereto.

2. Clusius hath set forth a kind of Clematis, calling it Clematis
boetica, having a marvellous long small branch full of joints, with many
leaves indented about the edges like those of the pear tree, but stiffer
and smaller, coming from every joint; from whence also at each joint
proceed two small clasping tendrils, as also the small footstalks whereon
the seeds do stand, growing in great tufted plumes or feathers, like unto
the precedent, whereof it is a kind. The flowers are not expressed in the
figure, nor seen by the author, and therefore what hath been said shall
suffice.

The Place.

The Traveller's Joy is found in the borders of fields among thorns and
briars, almost in every hedge as you go from Gravesend to Canterbury in
Kent; in many places of Essex, and in most of these southerly parts about
London, but not in the North of England that I can hear of.

The second is a stranger in these parts: yet have I found it in the Isle
of Wight, and in a wood by Waltham Abbey.

The Time.

The flowers come forth in July: the beauty thereof appears in November
and December.
The Names.

The first is called commonly Viorna, quasi vias ornans, of decking and
adorning ways and hedges, where people travel; and thereupon I have named
it the Traveller's Joy: of Fuchsius it is called Vitis nigra: of
Dodonaeus, Vitalba: of Matthiolus, Clematis altera: of Cordus, Vitis
alba: of Dioscorides, Vitis sylvestris: of Theophrastus, Atragene: in
Dutch, Linen: in French, as Ruellius writeth, Viorne.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These plants have no use in physic as yet found out, but are esteemed
only for pleasure, by reason of the goodly shadow which they make with
their thick bushing and climbing, as also for the beauty of the flowers,
and the pleasant scent or savour of the same.



CHAP. 327. Of Lady's Bower.
Fig. 1295. Lady's Bower (1) Fig. 1296. Double-Flowered Lady's Bower (3)
The Description.

1. That which Lobel describeth by the name Clematis peregrina, hath very
long and slender stalks like the Vine, which are jointed, of a dark
colour; it climbeth aloft, and taketh hold with his crooked claspers upon
every thing that standeth near unto it: it hath many leaves divided into
divers parts; among which come the flowers that hang upon slender
footstalks, something like to those of Periwinckle, consisting only of
four leaves, of a blue colour, and sometimes purple, with certain threads
in the middle: the seeds be flat, plain, and sharp pointed. The roots are
slender and spreading all about.

2. The second differeth not from the other, in leaves, stalks, branches
nor seed. The only difference consisteth in that, that this plant
bringeth forth red flowers, and the other blue.

3. There is preserved also in some gardens another sort of this Clematis,
which in roots, leaves, branches, and manner of growing differs not from
the former: but the flower is much different, being composed of abundance
of longish narrow leaves, growing thick together, with four broader or
larger leaves lying under, or bearing them up, and these leaves are of a
dark bluish purple colour. Clusius calls this Clematis altera flore
pleno.

The Place.

Thest plants delight to grow in sunny places: they prosper better in a
fruitful soil than in barren. They grow in my garden, where they flourish
exceedingly.

The Time.

They flower in July and August, and perfect their seed in September.

The Names.

Lady's Bower is called in Latin, Ambuxum: in English you may call it
Lady's Bower, which I take from his aptness in making of arbours, bowers,
and shady covertures in gardens.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The faculty and the use of these in physic is not yet known.



CHAP. 328. Of Purging Periwinkle, Or Virgin's Bower.
Fig. 1297. Virgin's Bower (1) Fig. 1298. Upright Virgin's Bower (2)
The Description.

1. Among these plants which are called Clematides these be also to be
numbered, as having certain affinity, because of the spreading,
branching, and semblance of the Vine; and this is called Flammula urens,
by reason of his fiery and burning heat, because that being laid upon the
skin it burneth the place, and maketh an eschar, even as our common
caustic or corrosive medicines do. The leaves hereof answer both in
colour and smoothness, Vinca, Pervinca, or Periwinkle, growing upon long
clambering tender branches, like the other kinds of climbing plants. The
flowers are very white, star-fashion, and of an exceeding sweet smell,
much like unto the smell of Hawthorn flowers, but more pleasant and less
offensive to the head: having in the middle of the flowers certain small
chives or threads. The root is tender, and disperseth itself far under
the ground.

2. Upright Clamberer or Virgins Bower is also a kind of Clematis, having
long tough roots not unlike to those of Liquorice, from which riseth up a
straight upright stalk, of the height of three or four cubits, set about
with winged leaves, composed of divers small leaves, set upon a middle
rib, as are those of the Ash tree, or Valerian, but fewer in number: at
the top of the stalks come forth small white flowers very like the
precedent, but not of so pleasant a sweet smell; after which come the
seeds, flat and sharp pointed.

3. There is another Clematis of the kind of the white Clematis or burning
Clemitis, which I have recovered from seed, that hath been sent me from a
curious and learned citizen of Strasbourg, which is like unto the others
in each respect, saving that, that the flowers hereof are very double,
wherein consisteth the special difference.


Fig. 1299. Bush Bower (4)
Fig. 1300. Great Bush Bower (5)

4. Amongst the kinds of climbing or clambering plants, Carolus Clusius,
and likewise Lobel have numbered these two, which approach near unto them
in leaves and flowers, but are far different in clasping tendrils, or
climbing otherwise, being low and base plants in respct of the others of
their kind. The first hath for his roots a bundle of tough tangling
threads, in number infinite, and thick thrust together; from which rise
up many small stalks, of a brownish colour, four-square, and of a woody
substance: whereupon do grow long leaves, of a biting taste, set together
by couples, in shape like those of Asclepias, or Silken Swallow-Wort. The
flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a fair blue or sky colour,
consisting of four parts in manner of a cross, having in the middle a
bunched pointel, like unto the head of field Poppy when it is young, of a
whitish yellow colour, having little or no smell at all. The flowers
being past, then cometh the seed, such as is to be seen in the other
kinds of Clematis. The whole plant dieth at the approch of winter, and
recovereth it self again from the root, which endureth, whereby it
greatly increaseth.

5. The Great Bush Bower differeth not from the former last described, but
in greatness: which name of greatness setteth forth the difference.

Fig. 1301. Alpine Virgin's Bower (6)

6. Of these there is another, whose bending crested stalks are some three
cubits high, which send forth sundry small branches, set with leaves
growing together by threes upon short footstalks, and they are like
myrtle leaves, but bigger, more wrinkled, dark coloured, and snipped
about the edges: the flower resembles a cross, with four sharp pointed
rough leaves of a whitish blue colour, which contain divers small loose
little leaves in their middles. The root is long and lasting. It grows
upon the rocky places of Mount Baldus in Italy, where Pona found it, and
he calls it Clematis cruciata alpina.
 The Place.

These plants do not grow wild in England, that I can as yet learn;
notwithstanding I have them all in my garden, where they flourish
exceedingly.

The Time.

These plants do flower from August to the end of September.

The Names.

There is not much more found of their names than is expressed in their
several titles, notwithstanding there hath been somewhat said, as I
think, by hearsay, but nothing of certainty: wherefore let that which is
set down suffice. We may in English call the first, Biting Clematis, or
White Clematis, Biting Periwinkle or Purging Periwinkle, Lady's Bower,
and Virgin's Bower.

The Temperature.

The leaf hereof is biting, and doth mightily blister, being, as Galen
saith, of a caustic or burning quality: it is hot in the beginning of the
fourth degree.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that the leaves being applied do heal the scurf
and lepry, and that the seed beaten and the powder drunk with fair water
or with mead, purgeth phlegm and choler by the stool.



CHAP. 329. Of Woodbine, or Honeysuckle.
Fig. 1302. Woodbine or Honeysuckle (1) Fig. 1303. Italian or Double
Woodbine (2)
The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Woodbines, some of them shrubs with winding
stalks, that wrap themselves unto such things as are near about them.
Likewise there be other sorts or kinds found out by the later herbarists,
that climb not at all, but stand upright, the which shall be set forth
among the shrubby plants. And first of the common Woodbine.

The Description.

1. Woodbine or Honeysuckle climbeth up aloft, having long slender woody
stalks, parted into divers branches: about which stand by certain
distances smooth leaves, set together by couples one right against
another; of a light green colour above, underneath of a whitish green.
The flowers show themselves in the tops of the branches many in number,
long, white, sweet of snaell, hollow within; in one part standing more
out, with certain threads growing out of the middle. The fruit is like to
little bunches of grapes, red when they be ripe, wherein is contained
small hard seed. The root is woody, and not without strings.

2. This strange kind of Woodbine hath leaves, stalks, and roots like unto
the common Woodbine or Honeysuckle, saving that near unto the place where
the flowers come forth, the stalks do grow through the leaves, like unto
the herb Thoroughwax, called Perfoliata; which leaves do resemble little
saucers: out of which broad round leaves proceed fair, beautiful, and
well smelling flowers, shining with a whitish purple colour, and somewhat
dashed with yellow, by little and little stretched out like the nose of
an elephant, garnished within with small yellow chives or threads: and
when the flowers are in their flourishing, the leaves and flowers do
resemble saucers filled with the flowers of Woodbine: many times it
falleth out, that there is to be found three or four saucers one above
another, filled with flowers, as the first, which hath caused it to be
called double Honeysuckle, or Woodbine.

The Place.

The Woodbine groweth in woods and hedges, and upon shrubs and bushes,
oftentimes winding itself so straight and hard about, that it leaveth his
print upon those things so wrapped.

The double Honeysuckle groweth now in my garden and many others likewise
in great plenty, although not long since, very rare and hard to be found,
except in the garden of some diligent Herbarists.

The Time.

The leaves come forth betimes in the spring: the flowers bud forth in May
and June: the fruit is ripe in autumn.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Volvucrum maius: of Scribonius Largus, Sylvae
mater: in shops, Caprifolium, and Matrisylva: of some, Lilium inter
spinas: in Italian, Vincibosco: in High Dutch, Geysbladt: in Low Dutch,
Gheytenbladt, and Mammekens Cruyt: in French, Cheure-fueille: in Spanish,
Madreselva: in Englilh, Woodbine, Honeysuckle, and Caprifoly.

The Temperature.

There hath an error in times past grown amongst a few, and now almost
past recovery to be called again, being grown an error universal, which
error is, how the decoction of the leaves of Honeysuckles, or the
distilled water of the flowers, are rashly given for the inflammations of
the mouth and throat, as though they were binding and cooling. But
contrariwise Honeysuckle is neither cold nor binding; but hot, and
attenuating or making thin. For as Galen saith, both the fruit of
Woodbine and also the leaves, do so much attenuate and heat, as if
somewhat too much of them be drunk, they will cause the urine to be as
red as blood, yet do they at the first only provoke urine.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth that the ripe seed gathered and dried in the
shadow, and drunk unto the quantity of one dram weight, forty days
together, doth waste and consume away the hardness of the spleen,
removeth wearisomeness, helpeth the shortness and difficulty of
breathing, cureth the hicket, procureth bloody urine after the sixth day,
and causeth women to have speedy travail in child bearing.

B. The leaves be of the same force: which being drunk thirty days
together, are reported to make men barren and destroy their natural seed.

C. The flowers steeped in oil and set in the sun, is good to anoint the
body that is benumbed, and grown very cold.

D. The distilled water of the flowers are given to be drunk with good
success against the pissing of blood.

E. A syrup made of the flowers is good to be drunk against the diseases
of the lungs and spleen that is stopped, being drunk with a little wine.

F. Notwithstanding the words of Galen (or rather of Dodonaeus) it is
certainly found by experience that the water of Honeyuckles is good
against the soreness of the throat and uvula: and with the same leaves
boiled, or the leaves and flowers distilled, are made divers good
medicines against cankers and sore mouths, as well in children as elder
people, and likewise for ulcerations and scaldings in the privy parts of
man or woman; if there be added to the decoction hereof some alum or
verdigris, if the sore require greater cleansing outwardly, provided
always that there be no verdigris put into the water that must be
injected into the secret parts.




CHAP. 330. Of Jasmine, or Gelsemine.
Fig. 1304. White Jasmine (1) Fig. 1305. Great White Jasmine (2)
The Description.

1. Jasmine, or Gelsemine, is of the number of those plants which have
need to be supported or propped up, and yet notwithstanding of itself
claspeth not or windeth his stalks about such things as stand next unto
it, bur only leaneth and lieth upon those things that are prepared to
sustain it about arbors and banqueting houses in gardens, by which it is
held up. The stalks therof are long, round, branched, jointed or kneed,
and of a green colour, having within a white spongeous pith. The leaves
stand upon a middle rib, set together by couples like those of the Ash
tree, but much smaller, of a deep green colour. The flowers grow at the
uppermost part of the branches, standing in a small tuft, far set one
from another, sweet in smell, of colour white. The seed is flat and broad
like those of Lupins, which seldom come to ripeness. The root is tough
and thready.

2. Lobel reporteth that he saw in a garden at Brussels, belonging to a
reverend person called Mr. John Boisot, a kind of Gelsemine, very much
differing from our Jasmine, which he nourished in an earthen pot: it grew
not above, saith he, to the height of a cubit, divided into divers
branches, whereupon did grow leaves like those of the common white
Jasmine, but blacker and rounder. The flowers to the show were most
beautiful, in shape like those of the common Jasmine, but four times
bigger, gaping wide open, white on the upper side, and of a bright red on
the under side.

Fig. 1306. Yellow Jasmine (3)

3. There is a kind hereof with yellow flowers: but some do describe for
the yellow Jasmines, the shrubby Trefoil, called of some Trifolium
fruticans: and of others, Polemonium. But this yellow Jasmine is one, and
that is another plant, differing from the kinds of Jasmine as shall be
declared in his proper place. The yellow Jasmine differeth not from the
common white Gelsemine, in leaves, stalks, nor fashion of the flowers:
the only difference is, that this plant bringeth forth yellow flowers,
and the other white.

4. There is likewise another sort that differeth not from the former in
any respect, but in the colour of the flower; for this plant hath flowers
of a blue colour, and the others not so, wherein consisteth the
difference.

The Place

Gelsamine is fostered in gardens, and is used for arbours, and to cover
banquetting houses in gardens: it groweth not wild in England that I can
understand of, though Mr. Lyte be of another opinion: the white Jasmine
is common in most places of England: the rest are strangers, and not seen
in these parts as yet.

The Time.

They bring forth their pleasant flowers in July and August.

The Names.

Among the Arabians Serapio was the first that named Gelsemine, Zambach:
it is called Iasminum, and Ieseminum, and also Gesseminum: in English,
Jasmine, Gessemine, and Jess.

There is in Dioscorides a composition of oil of Jasmine, which he saith
is made in Persia of the white flowers of Violets, which Violets seem to
be none other than the flowers of this Gessemine: for Dioscorides
oftentimes hath reckoned fair and elegant flowers amongst the Violets, so
that it must not seem strange that he calleth the flowers of Gessemine
Violets, especially seeing that the plant itself was unknown unto him, as
it is evident.

The Temperature.

Gessemine, and especially the flowers thereof be hot in the beginning of
the second degree, as Serapia reporteth out of Mesue.

The Virtues.

A. The oil which is made of flowers hereof, wasteth away raw humours, and
is good against cold rheums; but in those that are a hot constitution it
causeth headache, and the overmuch smell thereof maketh the nose to
bleed, as the same author affirmeth. It is used (as Dioscorides writeth
and after him Aetius) of the Persians in their banquets for pleasure's
sake: it is good to be anointed after baths, in those bodies that have
need to be suppled and warmed, but by reason of smell it is not much
used.

B. The leaves boiled in wine until they be soft, and made up to the form
of a poultice, and applied, dissolve cold swellings, wens, hard lumps,
and such like outgoings.



CHAP. 331. Of Periwinkle.
Fig. 1307. Periwinkle (1) Fig. 1308. Great Periwinkle (2)
The Description.

1. Periwinkle hath slender and long branches trailing upon the ground,
taking hold here and there as it runneth; small like to rushes, with
naked or bare spaces between joint and joint. The leaves are smooth, not
unlike to the Bay leaf, but lesser. The flowers grow hard by the leaves,
spreading wide open, composed of five small blue leaves.

We have in our London gardens a kind hereof bearing white flowers, which
maketh it to differ from the former.

There is another with purple flowers, doubling itself somewhat in the
middle, with smaller leaves, wherein is the difference.

2. There is another sort, greater than any of the rest, which is called
of some Clematis daphnoides, of the similitude the leaves have with those
of the Bay. The leaves and flowers are like those of the precedent, but
altogether greater; wherein consisteth the difference.

The Place.

They grow in most of our London gardens; they love a moist and shadowy
place: the branches remain always green.

The Time.

The flowers of them do flourish in March, April and May, and oftentimes
later.

The Names.

Periwinkle is called in Greek Klematis daphnoeides: becausc it bringeth
forth stalks, which creep like those of the Vine, and daphnoeides by
reason that the leaves are like those of the Bay, as aforesaid. Pliny
calleth it Vitis pervinca, and Chamaedaphne: notwithstanding there is
another Chamaedaphne, of which in his place. The same author likewise
calleth it Centunculus: in High Dutch, Ingrun: in Low Dutch, Vincoorte,
Maegden Cruyt: in French, Pucellage, Vauche & Pervauche: in Italian,
Provenca: in Spanish, Pervinqua: in shops, Clematis pervinca: in English,
Pervinkle, and Periwinkle.

The Temperature.

Periwinkle is something hot, but within the second degree, something dry
and astringent.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves boiled in wine and drunken, stop the lask and bloody flux.

B. An handful of the leaves stamped, and the juice given to drink in red
wine, stoppeth the lask and bloody flux, spitting of blood, which never
faileth in anybody, either man or woman: it likewise stoppeth the
inordinate course of the monthly sickness.



CHAP. 332. Of Capers.
Fig. 1309. Sharp-Leaved Caper (1) Fig. 1310. Round-Leaved Caper (2)
The Kinds

There be two sorts of Capers especially, one with broad leaves sharp
pointed: the other with rounder leaves. The Brabanters have also another
sort, called Capparis fabago, or Bean Capers.

The Description.

1. The Caper is a prickly shrub, the shoots or branches whereof be full
of sharp prickly thorns, trailing upon the ground if they be not
supported or propped up: whereupon do grow leaves like those of the
Quince tree, but rounder: amongst the which come forth long slender
footstalks, whereon do grow round knops, which do open or spread abroad
into fair flowers, after which cometh in place long fruit, like to an
olive, and of the same colour, wherein is contained flat rough seeds, of
a dusky colour. The root is woody, and covered with a thick bark or rind,
which is much used in physic.

2. The second kind or Caper is likewise a prickly plant much like the
Bramble bush, having many slender branches set full of sharp prickles.
The whole plant traileth upon the place where it groweth, beset with
round blackish leaves disorderly placed, in shape like those of
Asarabacca, but greater, approaching to the form of Foal-Foot: among
which cometh forth a small and tender naked twig, charged at the end with
a small knop or bud, which openeth itself to a small star-like flower, of
a pleasant sweet smell, in place whereof comes a small fruit, long and
round like the Cornel berry, of a brown colour. The root is long and
woody, and covered with a thick bark or rind, which is likewise used in
medicine.

The Place.

The Caper groweth in Italy, Spain, and other hot regions without
manuring, in a lean soil, in rough places amongst rubbish, and upon old
walls, as Dioscorides reporteth.

Theophrastus writeth, that it is by nature wild, and refuseth to be
husbanded, yet in these our days divers use to cherish the same and to
set it in dry and stony places: myself at the impression hereof, planted
some seeds in the brick walls of my garden, which as yet do spring and
grow green, the success I expect.

The Time.

The Caper flowereth in summer, even until autumn. The knops of the
flowers before they open are those Capers or sauce that we eat, which are
gathered and preserved in pickle or salt.

The Names.

It is called in Greek and Latin Capparis: but properly Cynosbatos, or
Canirubus: which is also taken for the wild Rose; it is generally called
Cappers in most languages: in English, Cappers, Caper, and Capers.

The Temperature.

Capers, or the flowers not yet fully grown, be of temperature hot, and of
thin parts; if they be eaten green, they yield very little nourishment,
and much less if they be salted. And therefore they be rather a sauce and
medicine, than a meat.

The Virtues.

A. They stir up an appetite to meat, they be good for a moist stomach,
and stay the watering thereof, and cleanseth away the phlegm that
cleaveth unto it. They open the stoppings of the liver and milt, with
meat; they are good to be taken of those that have a quartan ague and ill
spleens. They are eaten boiled (the salt first washed off) with oil and
vinegar, as other salads be, and sometimes are boiled with meat.

B. The rind or bark of the root consisteth of divers faculties, it
heateth, cleanseth, purgeth, cutteth and digesteth, having withal a
certain binding quality.

C. This bark is of a singular remedy for hard spleens, being outwardly
applied, and aslo inwardly taken, and the same boiled in vinegar or
oxymel, or being beaten and mixed with other simples: for after this
manner it expelleth thick and gross humours, and conveyeth away the same
mixed with blood, by urine, and also by siege, whereby the milt or spleen
is helped, and the pain of the huckle bones taken away: moreover it
bringeth down the desired sickness, purgeth and draweth phlegm out of the
head, as Galen writeth.

D. The same bark (as Dioscorides teacheth) doth cleanse old filthy sores,
and scoureth away the thick lips and crusts about the edges, and being
chewed it taketh away the toothache.

E. Being stamped with vinegar, it scoureth away tetters or ringworms,
hard swellings, and cures the King's evil.

F. The bark of the roots of Capers is good against the hardness and
stopping of the spleen, and profiteth much if it be given in drink to
such as have the Sciatica, the Palsy, and those that are bursten or
bruised by falling from some high place: it doth mightily provoke urine,
insomuch that if it be used overmuch, or given in too great a quantity,
it procureth blood to come with the urine.

End of Volume 3

2

