

The Herbal
Or
General History of Plamts
By
John Gerard
and
Thomas Johnson
Volume 2
(Book 2 Part 1)

Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2018
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF PLANTS
Containing the description, place, time, names, nature, and virtues of
all sorts of Herbs for meat, medicine, or sweet smelling use, &c.



We have in our first book sufficiently described the grasses, rushes,
flags, corn, and bulbous rooted plants, which for the most part are such
as with their brave and gallant flowers deck and beautify gardens, and
feed rather the eyes than the belly. Now there remains certain other
bulbs, whereof the most (though not all) serve for food: of which we will
also discourse in the first place in this book, dividing them in such
sort, that those of one kind shall be separated from another. In handling
these and such as next succeed them we shall treat of divers, yea the
most part of those herbs that the Latins call Olera: and we in English,
salad herbs. When we have passed over these, we shall speak of other
plants, as they shall have resemblance each to other in their external
form.


CHAP. 1. Of Turnips.



Fig. 389. Great Turnip (1) 

Fig. 390. Long-rooted Turnip (2)
The Kinds.

There be sundry sorts of turnips; some wild; some of the garden; some
with round roots globe fashion; other oval or pear fashion; and another
sort longish or somewhat like a Radish: and of all these there are sundry
varieties, some being great, and some of a smaller sort.

The Description.

1. The Turnip hath long rough and green leaves, cut or snipped about the
edges with deep gashes. The stalk divideth itself into sundry branches or
arms, bearing at the top small flowers of a yellow colour, and sometimes
of a light purple: which being past, there do succeed long cods full of
small blackish seed like rape seed. The root is round like a bowl, and
sometimes a little stretched out in length, growing very shallow in the
ground, and often showing itself above the face of the earth.

2. This is like the precedent in each respect, but that the root is not
made so globous or bowl-fashioned as the former, but slenderer, and much
longer, as you may perceive by the figure we here give you.

3. The Small Turnip is like unto the first described, saving that it is
lesser. The root is much sweeter in taste, as myself hath often proved.

4. There is another sort of small Turnip said to have red roots; and
there are other some whose roots are yellow both within and without; some
also are green on the outside, and other some blackish.

The Place.

The Turnip prospereth well in a light, loose, and fat earth, and so
loose, as Petrus Crescentius saith, that it may be turned almost into
dust. It groweth in fields and divers vineyards or hop gardens in most
places of England.

The small Turnip groweth by Hackney, in a sandy ground; and those that
are brought to Cheapside market from that village are the best that ever
I tasted.

The Time.

Turnips are sown in the spring, as also in the end of August. They flower
and seed the second year after they are sown: for those which flower the
same year that they are sown are a degenerate kind, called in Cheshire
about Nantwitch, Mad Neeps, of their evil quality in frenzy and giddiness
of the brain for a season.

The Names.

The Turnip is called in Latin, Rapum: the name commonly used in shops and
everywhere is Rapa: in High Dutch, Ruben: in Low Dutch, Rapen; in French,
Naveau rond: in Spanish, Nabo: in English, Turnip, and Rape.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The bulbous or knobbed root, which is properly called Rapum or Turnip,
and hath given the name to the plant, is many times eaten raw, especially
of the poor people in Wales, but most commonly boiled. The raw root is
windy, and engendereth gross and cold blood; the boiled doth cook less,
and so little, that it cannot be perceived to cool at all, yet it is
moist and windy.

B. It availeth not a little after what manner it is prepared; for being
boiled in water, or in a certain broth, it is more moist, and sooner
descendeth, and maketh the body more soluble; but being roasted or baked
it drieth, and engendereth less wind, and yet it is not altogether
without wind. But howsoever they be dressed, they yield more plenty of
nourishment than those that are eaten raw: they do increase milk in
women's breasts, and natural seed, and provoke urine.

C. The decoction of Turnips is good against the cough and hoarseness of
the voice, being drunk in the evening with a little sugar, or a quantity
of clarified honey.

D. Dioscorides writeth, That the Turnip itself being stamped, is with
good success applied upon mouldy or kibed heels, and that also oil of
roses boiled in a hollow turnip under the hot embers doth cure the same.

E. The young and tender shoots or springs of Turnips at their first
coming forth of the ground, boiled and eaten as a salad, provoke urine.

F. The seed is mixed with counterpoisons and treacles: and being drunk it
is a remedy against poisons.

G. They of the Low Countries do give the oil which is pressed out of the
seed, against the after throes of women newly brought to bed, and also
minister it to young children against the worms, which it both killeth
and driveth forth.

H. The oil washed with water doth allay the fervent heat and ruggedness
of the skin.


CHAP. 2. Of Wild Turnips.




Fig. 391. Wild Turnip (1) 

Fig. 392. Charlock (2)
The Kinds

There be three sorts of wild Turnips, one our common Rape which beareth
the seed whereof is made rape oil, and feedeth singing birds, the other
the common enemy to corn, which we call Charlock; whereof there be two
kinds, one with a yellow or else purple flower, the other with a white
flower: there is also another of the water and marsh grounds.

The Description.

1. Wild Turnips or Rapes, have long, broad, and rough leaves like those
of Turnips, but not so deeply gashed in the edges. The stalks are slender
and brittle, somewhat hairy, of two cubits high, dividing themselves at
the top into many arms or branches, whereon do grow little yellowish
flowers: which being past, there do succeed small long cods which contain
the seed like that of the Turnip, but smaller, somewhat reddish, and of a
fiery hot and biting taste as is the mustard, but bitterer. The root is
small, and perisheth when the seed is ripe.

2. Charlock, or the wild rape, hath leaves like unto the former, but
lesser, the stalk and leaves being also rough. The stalks be of a cubit
high, slender, and branched; the flowers are sometimes purplish, but more
often yellow. The roots are slender, with certain threads or strings
hanging on them.

There is also another variety hereof with the leaves less divided, and
much smoother than the two last described, having yellow flowers and cods
not so deeply jointed as the last described: this is that, which is set
forth by Matthiolus under the name of Lampsana.




Fig. 392. Another Wild Charlock (2) 

Fig. 394. Water Charlock (3) 


3. Water Charlock groweth up to the height of three foot or somewhat
more, with branches slender and smooth in respect of any of the rest of
his kind, set with rough ribbed leaves, deeply indented about the lower
part of the leaf. The flowers grow at the top of the branches, umbel or
tuft fashion, sometimes of one colour, and sometimes of another. The root
is long, tough, and full of strings, creeping and putting forth many
stalks: the seed vessels are short and small. Bauhin hath this under the
title of Raphanus aquaticus alter.

The Place.

Wild Turnips or Rapes, do grow of themselves in fallow fields, and
likewise by highways near unto old walls, upon ditch-banks, and near unto
towns and villages, and in other untoiled and rough places.

The Charlock groweth for the most part among corn in barren grounds, and
often by the borders of fields and such like places.

Water Charlock groweth in moist meadows and marsh grounds, as also in
water ditches, and such like places.

The Time.

These do flower from March, till summer be far spent, and in the mean
season the seed is ripe.

The Names

Wild Turnip is called in Latin Rapistrum, Rapum sylvestre, and of some,
Sinapi sylvestre, or wild mustard: in High Dutch, Hederich: in Low Dutch,
Herick: in French, Velar: in English, Rape, and Rape seed. Rapistrum
arvorum is called Charlock, and Carlock.

The Temperature.

The seed of these wild kinds of Turnips as also the water Charlock, are
hot and dry as mustard seed is. Some have thought that Charlock hath a
drying and cleansing quality, and somewhat digesting.

The Virtues.

A. Divers use the seed of Rape instead of mustard seed, who either make
hereof a sauce bearing the name of mustard, or else mix it with mustard
seed: but this kind of sauce is not so pleasant to the taste, because it
is bitter.

B. Galen writeth that these being eaten engender evil blood: yet
Dioscorides saith, they warm the stomach and nourish somewhat.


CHAP. 3. Of Navews.




Fig. 395. Navew Gentle. 

Fig. 396. Wild Navew.
The Kinds.

The sundry kinds of Nape or Navews degenerating from the kinds of Turnip;
of which some are of the garden and other wild, or of the field.

The Description.

1. Navew Gentle is like unto Turnips in stalks, flowers, and seed, as
also in the shape of the leaves, but those of the Navew are much
smoother; it also differeth in the root: the Turnip is round like a
Globe, the Navew root is somewhat stretched forth in length.

2. The small or wild Navew is like unto the former, saving that it is
altogether lesser. The root is small, somewhat long, with threads long
and tough at the end thereof.

The Place.

1. Navew Gentle requireth a loose and yellow mould even as doth the
Turnip, and prospereth in a fruitful soil: he is sown in France, Bavaria,
and other places in the fields for the seeds' sake, as is likewise that
wild Colewort called of the old writers Crambe: for the plentiful
increase of the seeds bringeth no small gain to the husbandmen of that
country, because that being pressed they yield an oil which is used not
only in lamps, but also in the making of soap; for of this oil and a lye
made of certain ashes, is boiled a soap which is used in the Low
Countries everywhere to scour and wash linen clothes. I have heard it
reported that it is at this day sown in England for the same purpose.

2. The Wild Navew groweth upon ditch banks near unto villages and good
towns, as also upon fresh marshy banks in most places.

The Time.

The Navew is sown, flowereth and seedeth at the same time that the Turnip
doth.

The Names.

The Navew is called in Latin Napus, the Germans call it Steckruben: the
Brabanters, Steckropen: in Spanish, Naps: in Italian, Navo: the
Frenchmen, Naveau: in English, Navew-Gentle, or French Naveau. The other
is called Napus sylvestris, or Wild Navew.

The Temperature and virtues.

The Navew and the Turnip are all one in temperature and virtues, yet some
suppose that the Navew is a little drier, and not so soon concocted, nor
passeth down so easily, and doth withal engender less wind. In the rest
it is answerable to the Turnip.

A. The seeds of these taken in drink or broth are good against poison,
and are usually put into antidotes for the same purpose.


CHAP. 4. Of Lion's Turnip, or Lion's Leaf.


Fig. 397. Lion's Turnip or Lion's Leaf

The Description.

Lion's Turnip or Lion's Leaf, hath broad leaves like unto Coleworts, or
rather like the Peonies cut and divided into sundry great gashes: the
stalk is two foot long, thick, and full of juice, dividing itself into
divers branches or wings; in the tops whereof stand red flowers:
afterward there appeareth long cods in which lie the seeds like unto
tares, or wild chiches. The root is great, bumped like a Turnip, and
black without.

The Place.

It groweth among corn in divers places of Italy, in Candia also, and in
other provinces towards the South and East. The right honorable Lord
Zouch brought a plant hereof from Italy at his return into England, the
which was planted in his garden. But as far as I do know, it perished.

The Time.

It flowereth in winter, as witnesseth Petrus Bellonius.

The Names.

Pliny doth call it Leontopetalon: Apuleius, Leontopodion: yet there is
another plant called by the same name. There be many bastard names given
unto it, as Rapeium, Papaverculum, Semen Leoninum, Pes Leoninus, and
Brumaria: in English Lion's Leaf, and Lion's Turnip.

The Temperature.

Lion's Turnip is of force to digest; it is hot and dry in the third
degree, as Galen teacheth.

The Virtues.

A. The root (saith Dioscorides) taken in wine doth help them that are
bitten of serpents, and it doth most speedily allay the pain. It is put
into clysters which are made for them that be tormented with the
sciatica.


CHAP. 5. Of Radish.




Fig. 398. Garden Radish (1) 

Fig. 399. Small Garden Radish (2)
The Kinds.

There be sundry sorts of Radish, whereof some be long and white; others
long and black; some round and white; others round, or of the form of a
pear, and black of colour; some wild, or of the field; and some tame, or
of the garden, whereof we will intreat in this present chapter.

The Description.

1. The garden Radish sendeth forth great and large leaves, green, rough,
cut on both sides with deep gashes, not unlike to the garden Turnip, but
greater. The stalks be round and parted into many branches; out of which
spring small flowers of a light purple colour, made of four little
leaves: and when they be past, there do come in place sharp pointed cods 
huffed or blown up toward the stalk, full of spongeous substance, wherein
is contained the seed, of a light brown colour, somewhat greater than the
seeds of Turnips or Coleworts. The root is gross, long, and white both
without and within, and of a sharp taste.

2. The small garden Radish hath leaves like the former, but smaller, and
more brittle in handling. The stalk of two cubits high, whereon be the
flowers like the former. The seed is smaller, and not so sharp in taste.
The root is small, long, white both within and without, except a little
that showeth itself above the ground of a reddish colour.




Fig. 400. Round Radish (3) 

Fig. 401. Black, or Pear-fashion Radish


3. Radish with a round root hath leaves like the garden Turnip: among
which leaves springeth up a round and smooth stalk, dividing itself
toward the top into two or three branches, whereon do grow small purplish
flowers made of four leaves apiece: which being past, there do come in
place small long cods puffed up or bunched in two, and sometimes three
places, full of pith as the common Radish; wherein is contained the seed,
somewhat smaller than the Colewort seed, but of a hotter taste. The root
is round and firm, nothing waterish like the common Radish, more pleasant
in taste, wholsomer, not causing such stinking belchings as the garden
Radish doth.

4. The Radish with a root fashioned like a pear, groweth to the height of
three or four cubits, of a bright reddish colour. The leaves are deeply
cut or jagged like those of the Turnip, somewhat rough. The flowers are
made of four leaves, of a light carnation or fleshy colour. The seed is
contained in small bunched cods like the former. The root is fashioned
like a pear or long Turnip, black without and white within, of a firm and
solid substance. The taste is quick and sharp, biting the tongue is the
other kinds of Radish, but more strongly.

The Place.

All the kinds of Radish require a loose ground which hath been long
manured and is somewhat fat. They prosper well in sandy ground, where
they are not so subiect to worms, as in other grounds.

The Time.

These kinds of Radish are most fitly sown after the Summer Solstice in
June or July: for being sown betimes in the spring they yield not their
roots so kindly nor profitably, for then they do for the most part
quickly run up to stalk and seed, where otherwise they do not flower and
seed till the next spring following. They may be sown ten months in the
year, but as I said before, the best time is in June and July.

The Names.

Radish is called in shops Raphanus, and Sativa Radicula: in High Dutch,
Rettich: in Low Dutch, Radus: in French, Raisort: in Italian, Raphano: in
Spanish, Ravano: in English, Radish, and Rabone: in the Bohemian tongue
Rzedfew. Cælius affirmeth that the seed of Radish is called of Marcellus
Empericus, Bacanon; and so likewise Aëtius in the second chapter of the
second book of his Tetrabible; yet Cornarius doth not read Bacanon, but
Cacanon: The name of Bacanum is in also found in N. Mirepsus in the 255th
composition of his first book.

The Temperature.

Radish doth manifestly heat and dry, open and make thin by reason of the
biting quality that ruleth in it. Galen maketh them hot in the third
degree, and dry in the second, and showeth that it is rather a sauce than
a nourishment.

The Virtues.

A. Radish are eaten raw with bread instead of other food, but being eaten
after that manner, they yield very little nourishment, and that faulty
and ill. But for the most part, they are used as sauce with meats to
procure appetite, and in that sort they engender blood less faulty, than
eaten alone or with bread only: but seeing they be of a harder digestion
than meats, they are also many times troublesome to the stomach;
nevertheless they serve to distribute and disperse the nourishment,
especially being taken after meat; and taken before meat, they cause
belchings, and overthrow the stomach.

B. Before meat they cause vomiting, and especially the rind: the which as
it is more biting than the inner substance, so doth it with more force
cause that effect if it be given with oximel, which is a syrup made with
vinegar and honey.

C. Moreover, Radish provoketh urine, and dissolveth cluttered sand, and
driveth it forth, if a good draught of the decoction thereof be drunk in
the morning. Pliny writeth, and Dioscorides likewise, that it is good
against an old cough; and to make thin, thick and gross phlegm which
sticketh in the chest.

D. Instead hereof the physicians of our age do use water distilled
thereof: which likewise procureth urine mightily, and driveth forth
stones in the kidneys.

E. The root sliced and laid overnight in white or Rhenish wine, and drunk
in the morning, driveth out urine and gravel mightily but in taste and
smell it is very loathsome.

F. The root stamped with honey and the powder of a sheep's heart dried,
causeth hair to grow in a short space.

G. The seed causeth vomit, provoketh urine: and being drunk with honeyed
vinegar, it killeth and driveth forth worms.

H. The root stamped with the meal of Darnel and a little white wine
vinegar, taketh away all blue and black spots, and bruised blemishes of 
the face.

I. The root boiled in broth, and the decotion drunk, is good against an
old cough: it moveth women's sickness, and causeth much milk.


CHAP: 6. Of Wild Radish.



Fig. 402. Wild Radish (1) 

Fig. 403. Water Radish (2)
The Description.

1. Wild Radish hath a shorter narrower leaf than the common Radish, and
more deeply cut or jagged, almost like the leaves of Rocket, but much
greater. The stalk is slender and rough, of two cubits high, divided
toward the top into many branches. The flowers are small and white: the
cod is long, slender, and jointed, wherein is the seed. The root is of
the bigness of the finger, white within and without, of a sharp and
biting taste.

2. The Water Radish hath long and broad leaves, deeply indented or cut
even to the middle rib. The stalk is long, weak, and leaneth this way and
that way, being not able to stand upright without a prop, in so much that
ye shall never find it, no not when it is very young, but leaning down
upon the mud or mire where it groweth. The flowers grow at the top made
of four small yellow leaves. The root is long, set in sundry spaces with
small fibres or threads like the rowel of a spur, hot and burning in
taste more than any of the garden Radishes.

The Place.

The first grows upon the borders of banks and ditches cast up, and in the
borders of fields. The second grows in ditches, standing waters, and
rivers; as on the stone wall that bordereth upon the river Thames by the
Savoy in London.

The Time.

They flower in June, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.

1. The first of these is Rapistrum flore albo erucæ foliis, of Lobel;
Armoratia, or Rapistrum album of Tabernamontanus: and Raphanus
sylvestris, of our author: in English, Wild Radish.

2. The second is Radicula sylvestris of Dodonæus: and Rhaphanus
aquaticus, or palustris of others: in English, Water Radish.

The Temperature.

The wild Radishes are of like temperature with the garden Radish, but
hotter and drier.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that the leaves are received among the pot herbs,
and likewise the boiled root, which as he saith, doth heat, and provoke
urine.


CHAP. 7. Of Horse-Radish.



Fig. 404. Horse-Radish (1) 

Fig. 405. Dittander, or Pepperwort (2)
The Description.

1. Horse-Radish bringeth forth great leaves, long, broad, sharp pointed
and snipped about the edges, of a deep green colour like those of the
great garden Dock, called, of some Monk's Rhubarb, of others Patience,
but longer and rougher. The stalk is slender and brittle, bearing at the
top small white flowers: which being past, there follow small cods,
wherein is the seed. The root is long and thick, white of colour, in
taste sharp, and very much biting the tongue like mustard.

2. Dittander or Pepperwort, hath broad leaves, long, and sharp pointed,
of a bluish green colour like woad, somewhat snipped or cut about the
edges like a saw. The stalk is round and tough: upon the branches whereof
grow little white flowers. The root is long and hard, creeping far abroad
in the ground, in such sort that when it is once taken in a ground, it is
not possible to root it out, for it will under the ground creep and shoot
up and bud forth in many places far abroad. The root also is sharp and
biteth the tongue like pepper, whereof it took the name pepperwort.


Fig. 406. Annual Dittander (3)


3. This which we give you in the third place hath a small fibrous root,
the stalk grows up to the height of two cubits, and it is divided into
many branches furnished with white flowers, after which follow seeds like
in shape and taste to Thlaspi, or Treacle Mustard. The leaves are
somewhat like those of Woad. This is nourished in some gardens of the Low
Countries, and Lobel was the first that gave the figure hereof; and that
under the same title as we here give you it.

The Place.

Horse-Radish for the most part groweth and is planted in gardens, yet
have I found it wild in sundry places, as at Nantwich in Cheshire, in a
place called the Milne eye, and also at a small village near London
called Hogsdon, in the field next unto a farmhouse leading to Kingsland,
where my very good friend Master Bredwell practitioner in physic, a
learned and diligent searcher of simples, and Master William Martin one
of the Fellowship of Barbers and Chirurgeons, my dear and loving friend,
in company with him found it, and gave me knowledge of the place, where
it flourisheth to this day.

Dittander is planted in gardens, and is to be found wild also in England
in sundry places, as at Clare by Ovenden in Essex, at the Hall of Brinne
in Lancashire, and near unto Exeter in the West parts of England. It
delighteth to grow in sandy and shadowy places somewhat moist.

The Time.

Horse-Radish for the most part flowereth in April or May, and the seed is
ripe in August, and that so rare or seldom seen, as that Petrus
Placentius hath written, that it bringeth forth no seed at all. Dittander
flowers in June and July.

The Names.

Horse-radish is commonly called Raphanus Rusticanus, or Magnus, and of
divers simply Raphanus sylvestris: of the High Dutch men, Merrettich
krain or kren, in French, Grand Raifort, of the low Germans, Merradus: in
English, Mountain Radish, Great Raifort, and Horse-radish. It is called
in the North part of England, Redcole.

Divers think that this Horse-Radish is an enemy to Vines, and that the
hatred between them is so great, that if the roots hereof be planted near
to the Vine it bendeth backward from it, as not willing to have
fellowship with it.

It is also reported that the root hereof stamped, and cast into good and
pleasant wine doth forthwith turn it into vinegar: but the old writers do
ascribe this enmity to the vine and Brassica, our coleworts.

Dittander is described of Pliny by the name of Lepidium in his 19th book,
9th chapter: likewise Ægineta maketh mention of this plant, by the name
Lepidium: in shops, Raphanus sylvestris, and Piperitis: the Germans call
it, Pfefferkraut: the Low Dutchmen, Pepper cruyt: the English men,
Dittander, Dittany, and Pepperwort.

The Temperature.

These kinds of wild Radishes, are hot and dry in the third degree: they
have a drying and cleansing quality, and somewhat digesting.

The Virtues.

A. Horse-Radish stamped with a little vinegar put thereto, is commonly
used among the Germans for sauce to eat fish with, and such like meats,
as we do mustard; but this kind of sauce doth heat the stomach better,
and causeth better digestion than mustard.

B. Oximel or syrup made with vinegar and honey, in which the rinds of
Horse-Radish have been infused three days, causeth vomit, and is
commended against the quartan ague.

C. The leaves boiled in wine, and a little olive oil added thereto and
laid upon the grieved parts in manner of a poultice, do mollify and take
away the hard swellings of the liver and milt; and being applied to the
bottom of the belly is a remedy for the strangury.

D. It profiteth much in the expulsion of the secondine or after-birth.

E. It mitigateth and assuageth the pain of the hip or haunch, commonly
called sciatica.

F. It profiteth much against the colic, strangury, and difficulty of
making water, used instead of mustard as aforesaid.

G. The root stamped and given to drink, killeth the worms in children:
the juice given doth the same: an ointment made thereof, doth the like,
being anointed upon the belly of the child.

H. The leaves of Pepperwort, but especially the roots, be extreme hot,
for they have a burning, and bitter taste. It is of the number of
scorching and blistering simples, saith Pliny in his 20th book, the 17th
chap., and therefore by his hot quality, it mendeth the skin in the face,
and taketh away scabs, scars, and manginess, if anything remain after the
healing of ulcers and such like.


CHAP. 8. Of Winter Cresses.


Fig. 407. Winter Cresses.
The Description.

The Winter Cresses hath many green, broad, smooth and flat leaves like
unto the common turnips, whose stalks be round, and full of branches,
bringing forth at the top small yellow flowers: after them do follow
small cods, wherein is contained small reddish seed.

The Place.

It groweth in gardens among pot herbs, and very common in the fields,
near to paths and highways, almost everywhere.

The Time.

This herb is green all winter long, it flowereth in May, and seedeth in
June.

The Names.

Winter Cress is called of the Latins, Cardamum, or Nasturtium Hibernum,
of some, Barbarea, and Pseudobunium: the Germans call it St. Barbaren
Kraut: in Low Dutch, Winter Kersse: in English, Winter Cresses, or Herb
Saint Barbara.

The Nature.

This herb is hot and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Winter Cress caused one to make water, and driveth forth
gravel, and helpeth the strangury.

B. The juice thereof mundifieth corrupt and filthy ulcers, being made in
form of an unguent with wax, oil, and turpentine.

C. In winter when salad herbs be scarce, this herb is thought to be equal
with Cresses of the garden, or Rocket.

D. This herb helpeth the scurvy, being boiled among scurvy grass, called
in Latin Cochlearia, causing it to work the more effectually.


CHAP. 9. Of Mustard.


Fig. 408. Kinds of Mustard (1, 3-5)

The Description.

1. The tame or garden Mustard, hath great rough leaves like to those of
the Turnip, but rougher and lesser. The stalk is round, rough, and hairy,
of three cubits high, divided into many branches, whereon do grow small
yellow flowers, and after them long cods, slender and rough, wherein is
contained round seed bigger than Rape seed, of colour yellow, of taste
sharp, and biting the tongue as doth our common field Mustard.

2. Our ordinary Mustard hath leaves like Turnips, but not so rough, the
stalks are smooth, and grow sometimes to three, four, or five cubits
high, they have many branches, and the leaves upon these branches,
especially the uppermost, are long and narrow, and hang downward on small
stalks; the cods are short, and lie flat and close to the branches, and
are somewhat square; the seed is reddish or yellow.

3. The other tame Mustard is like to the former in leaves, and branched
stalks, but lesser, and they are more whitish and rough. The flowers are
likewise yellow, and the seed brown like the Rape seed, which is also not
a little sharp or biting.

4. This which I give you here being the Sinapi sativum alterum, of Lobel;
and the Sinapi album of the shops, grows but low, and it hath rough
crooked cods, and whitish seeds; the stalks, flowers, and leaves, are
much like the first described.

5. The wild Mustard hath leaves like those of Shepherd's Purse, but
larger, and more deeply indented, with a stalk growing to the height of
two foot, bearing at the top small yellow flowers made of four leaves:
the cods be small and slender, wherein is contained reddish seed, much
smaller than any of the others, but not so sharp or biting.

The Place.

Our ordinary Mustard (whose description I have added) as also the wild
and small grow wild in many places of this kingdom, and may all three be
found on the banks about the back of Old Street, and in the way to
Islington.

The Time.

Mustard may be sown in the beginning of the spring: the seed is ripe in
July or August: It cometh to perfection the same year that it is sown.

The Names.

The Latins call Mustard, Sinapi: the rude and barbarous, Sinapium: the
Germans, Senff: the French, Seneve and Moustarde: the Low Dutchmen,
Mostaert saet: the Spaniards, Mostaza, and Mostalla: the Bohemians,
Horcice: Pliny calls it Thlaspi, whereof doubtless it is a kind: and some
have called it Saurion.

These kinds of Mustard have been so briefly treated of by all writers,
that it is hard to give the right distinctions of them, and a matter of
more difficulty than is expected in a thing so vulgarly known and used: I
will therefore endeavour in a few words to distinguish those kinds of
mustard which are vulgarly written of.

1. The first is Sinapi primum of Matthiolus and Dodonæus; and Sinapi
sativum erucæ aut rapifolio of Lobel.

2. The second I cannot justly refer to any of those which are written of
by authors; for it hath not a cod like Rape, as Pena and Lobel describe
it; nor a seed bigger than it, as Dodonæus affirmeth; yet I suspect, and
almost dare affirm that it is the same with the former mentioned by them,
though much differing from their figures and description.

3. The third (which also I suspect is the same with the fourth) is Sinapi
alterum of Matthiolus, and Sinapi agreste apii, aut potius laveris folio,
of Lobel: and Sinapi sativum alterum of Dodonæus.

4. The fourth is by Lobel called Sinapi alterum sativum; and this is
Sinapi album officinarium, as Pena and Lobel affirm, Advers. pag. 68.

5. The fifth is Sinapi sylvestre of Dodonæus: and Sinapi sylvestre minus
bursæ pastoris folio, of Lobel. It is much like Rocket, and therefore
Bauhin fitly calls it Sinapi erucæ folio: in English it may be called
Small Wild Mustard.

The Temperature.

The seed of Mustard, especially that which we chiefly use, doth heat and
make thin, and also draweth forth. It is hot and dry in the fourth
degree, according to Galen.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Mustard pounded with vinegar, is an excellent sauce, good
to be eaten with any gross meats either fish or flesh, because it doth
help digestion, warmeth the stomach, and provoketh appetite.

B. It is given with good success in like manner to such as be short-
winded, and are stopped in the breast with tough phlegm from the head and
brain.

C. It appeaseth the tooth-ache being chewed in the mouth.

D. They use to make a gargarism with honey, vinegar, and mustard seed,
against the tumours and swellings of the uvula, and the almonds about the
throat and root of the tongue.

E. Mustard drunk with water and honey provoketh the terms and urine.

F. The seed of mustard beaten and put into the nostrils, causeth
sneezing, and raiseth women sick of the mother out of their fits.

G. It is good against the falling sickness, and such as have the
lethargy, if it be laid plaster-wise upon the head (after shaving) being
tempered with figs.

H. It helpeth the sciatica, or ache in the hip or huckle bone: it also
cureth all manner of pains proceeding of a cold cause.

I. It is mixed with good success with drawing plasters, and with such as
waste and consume nodes and hard swellings

K. It helpeth those that have their hair pulled off; it taketh away the
blue and black marks that come of bruisings.

L. The seed of the white Mustard is used in some antidotes, as
Electuarium de ovo, &c.


CHAP. 10. Of Rocket.



Fig. 409. Garden Rocket (1) 

Fig. 410. Wild Rocket (2)
The Kinds.

There be sundry kinds of Rocket; some tame, or of the garden; some wild,
or of the field; some of the water, and of the sea.

The Description.

1. Garden Rocket, or Rocket-Gentle, hath leaves like those of Turnips,
but not near so great nor rough. The stalks rise up of a cubit, &
somtimes two cubits high, weak and brittle; at the top whereof grow the
flowers of a whitish colour, and sometimes yellowish; which being past,
there do succeed long cods, which contain the seed, not unlike to Rape
seed, but smaller.

2. The common Rocket, which some keep in gardens, and which is usually
called the Wild Rocket, is lesser than the Romaine Rocket, or Rocket-
Gentle, the leaves and stalks narrower, and more jagged. The flowers be
yellow, the cods also slenderer, the seed thereof is reddish, and biteth
the tongue.



Fig. 411. Narrow-Leaved Wild Rocket (3) 

Fig. 412. Cressy-Rocket (4) 
	3. This kind of Rocket hath long narrow leaves almost such as those
of Tarragon, but thicker and fatter, resembling rather the leaves of
Myagrum, altogether unlike any of the rest of the Rockets, saving that
the branch, flower, and seed are like the garden Rocket.

4. There is another kind of Rocket, thought by that reverend and
excellent herbarist Carolus to be a kind of Cresses; if not Cresses
itself, yet cousin-german at the least. Unto whose censure Lobel is
indifferent; whether to call it Rocket with thin and narrow leaves, or to
call it cousin to the kinds of Cresses, having the taste of the one, and
the shape of the other. The leaves are much divided, and the flowers
yellow.



Fig. 413. Sea Rocket (5) 

Fig. 414. Water Rocket (6) 
	5. There is is a wild kind of Sea Rocket which hath long weak and
tender branches trailing upon the ground, with long leaves like unto
common Rocket, or rather Groundsel, having small and whitish blue
flowers; in whose place cometh small cods, wherein is contained seed like
that of Barley.

6. Besides these there is another plant, which I have sometimes found in
wet places: The root is woody: the stalk four foot long, crested, and
having many branches, lying on the ground: the leaf is much divided, and
that after the manner of the wild Rocket: the flowers are of a bright
yellow, and are succeeded by short crooked cods, wherein is contained a
yellowish seed.

The Place.

Romaine Rocket is cherished in gardens.

Common or wild Rocket groweth in most gardens of itself: you may see most
brick and stone walls about London and elsewhere covered with it.

The narrow-Leaved Rocket groweth near unto water sides, in the chinks and
crevices of stone walls among the mortar. I found it as ye go from
Lambeth bridge to the village of Lambeth, under a small bridge that you
must pass over hard by the Thames side.

I found Sea Rocket growing upon the sands near unto the sea in the Isle
of Thanet, hard by a house wherein Sir Henry Crispe did sometimes dwell,
called Queake's House.

The Time.

These Kinds of Rocket flower in the months of June and July, and the seed
is ripe in September.

The Romaine Rocket dieth every year, and recovereth itself again by the
falling of his own seed.

The Names.

Rocket is called in Latin, Eruca: in High Dutch, Raukenkraut: in French,
Roquette: in Low Dutch, Rakett: in Italian, Ruchetta in Spanish: Oruga,
in English, Rocket, and Racket. The poets do oft times name it
Herbasalax: Eruca doth signify likewise a certain canker worm, which is
an enemy to pot-herbs, but especially to Coleworts.

1. The first is called Eruca sativa, or hortensis maior: Great Garden
Rocket.

2. The second, Eruca sylvestris: Wild Rocket.

3. This third is by Lobel called Eruca sylvestris angustifolia: Narrow-
Leaved Wild Rocket.

4. Clusius fitly calls this, Nasturtium sylvestre: and he reprehendeth
Lobel for altering the name into Eruca Nasturtio cognata tenuifolia:
Cressy-Rocket.

5. The fifth is Eruca marina, (thought by Lobel and others to be Cakile
Serapionis) Sea Rocket.

6. Eruca aquatica: Water Rocket.

The Temperature.

Rocket is hot and dry in the third degree, therefore saith Galen it is
not fit nor accustomed to be eaten alone.

The Virtues.

A. Rocket is a good salad herb, if it be eaten with Lettuce, Purslane,
and such cold herbs; for being so eaten it is good and wholesome for the
stomach, and causeth that such cold herbs do not over-cool the same:
otherwise, to be eaten alone, it causeth head-ache, and heateth too much.

B. The use of Rocket stirreth up bodily lust, especially the seed.

C. It provoketh urine, and causeth good digestion.

D. Pliny reporteth, That whosoever taketh the seed of Rocket before he be
whipped, shall be so hardened, that he shall easily endure the pains.

E. The root and seed stamped, and mixed with vinegar and the gall of an
ox, taketh away freckles, lentils, black and blue spots, and all such
deformities of the face.


CHAP. 11. Of Tarragon.


Fig. 415. Tarragon.

The Description.

Tarragon the salad herb hath long and narrow leaves of a deep green
colour, greater and longer than those of common Hyssop, with slender
brittle round stalks two cubits high: about the branches whereof hang
little round flowers, never perfectly opened, of a yellow colour mixed
with black, like those of common Wormwood. The root is long and fibrous,
creeping far abroad under the earth, as do the roots of Couch-Grass, by
which sprouting forth it increaseth, yielding no seed at all, but as it
were a certain chaffy or dusty matter that flieth away with the wind.

The Place.

Tarragon is cherished in gardens, and is increased by the young shoots:
Ruellius and such others have reported many strange tales hereof scarce
worth the noting, saying, that the seed of flax put into a radish root or
sea Onion, and so set, doth bring forth this herb Tarragon.

The Time.

It is green all summer long, and a great part of autumn, and flowereth in
July.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Draco, Dracunculus hortensis, and Tragum vulgare
by Clusius; Of the Italians, Dragoncellum; in French, Dragon; in English,
Tarragon.

It is thought to be that Tarchon which Avicenna mentioneth in his 686th
chapter: but he writeth so little thereof, as that nothing can certainly
be affirmed of it. Simeon Sethi the Greek also maketh mention of Tarchon.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Tarragon is hot and dry in the third degree, and not to be eaten alone in
salads, but joined with other herbs, as Lettuce, Purslane, and such like,
that it may also temper the coldness of them, like as Rocket doth,
neither do we know what other use this herb hath.


CHAP. 12. Of Garden Cresses.



Fig. 416. Garden Cresses (1) 

Fig. 417. Spanish Cresses (3) 
The Description.

1. Garden Cresses or Town Cresses hath small narrow jagged leaves, sharp
and burning in taste. The stalks be round, a cubit high, which bring
forth many small white flowers, and after little flat husks or seed
vessels, like to those of Shepherd's Purse, wherein are contained seeds
of a brown reddish colour. The root dieth when the seed is ripe.

2. There is another kind in taste like the former, but in leaves far
different, which I recovered of seeds, sent me from Robinus dwelling in
Paris. The stalks rise up to the height of a foot, garnished with many
broad leaves deeply cut or indented about the edges: the middle of the
leaf is decked and garnished with many little small leaves or rather
shreds of leaves, which make the same like a curled fan of feathers. The
seed is like the former in shape.

3. Spanish Cresses riseth forth of the ground like unto Basil, afterwards
the leaves grow larger and broader, like those of Marigolds; among the
which riseth up a crooked limber stalk, whereupon do grow small tufts or
spoky roundels of white flowers. The seed followeth, brown of colour, and
bitter in taste. The whole plant is of a loathsome smell and savour.


Fig. 418. Stone Cresses (4)


4. Stone-Cress groweth flat upon the ground, with leaves jagged and cut
about the edges like the oak leaf, resembling well the leaves of
Shepherd's Purse. I have not seen the flowers, and therefore they be not
expressed in the figure; notwithstanding it is reported unto me, that
they be small and white of colour, as are those of the garden Cresses.
The seed is contained in small pouches or seed vessels, like those of
Treacle Mustard or Thlaspi.

The Place.

Cresses are sown in gardens, it skills not what soil it be; for that they
like any ground, especially if it be well watered. Mr. Bowles found the
fourth growing in Shropshire in the fields about Birch in the parish of
Ellesmere, in the grounds belonging to Mr. Richard Herbert, and that in
great plenty.

The Time.

It may be sown at any time of the year, unless it be in winter; it
groweth up quickly, and bringeth forth betimes both stalk and seed: it
dieth every year, and recovereth itself of the fallen or shaken seed.

The Names.

Cresses is called in Latin, Nasturtium; in English Cresses: the Germans
call it Kersse: and in French, Cresson: the Italians, Nasturtio, and
Agretto: of some, town Cresses, and Garden Karsse. It is called
Nasturtium, as Varro and Pliny think à narribus torquendis, that is to
say, of writhing the nostrils, which also by the loathsome smell and
sharpness of the seed doth cause sneezing.

1. The first is called Nasturtium hortense, Garden Cresses.

2. Nasturtium hortense crispum, Garden Cresses with crisp, or curled
leaves.

3. Nasturtium hispanicum, or latifolium; Spanish Cresses, or Broad-Leaved
Cresses.

4. This is Nasturtium petræum of Tabernamontanus, Stone Cresses.

The Temperature.

The herb of garden Cresses is sharp and biting the tongue; and therefore
it is very hot and dry, but less hot whilst it is young and tender, by
reason of the watery moisture mixed therewith, by which the sharpness is
somewhat allayed.

The seed is much more biting than the herb, and is hot and dry almost in
the fourth degree.

The Virtues.

A. Galen saith that the Cresses may be eaten with bread Veluti obsonium
[like a relish], and so the ancient Spartans usually did; and the Low
Country men many times do, who commonly use to feed of Cresses with bread
and butter. It is eaten with other salad herbs, as Tarragon and Rocket:
and for this cause it is chiefly sown.

B. It is good against the disease which the Germans call Scorbuch and
Scorbuye: in Latin, Scorbutus: which we in England call the Scurvy, and
Scurby, and upon the seas the Skyrby: it is as good and as effectual as
the Scurvy-Grass, or water-cresses.

C. Diosciorides saith, if the seed be stamped and mixed with honey, it
cureth the hardness of the milt: with vinegar and barley meal parched it
is a remedy against the sciatica, and taketh away hard swellings and
inflammations. It scoureth away tetters, mixed with brine: it ripeneth
felons: it forcibly cutteth and raiseth up thick and tough humours of the
chest, if it be mixed with things proper against the stuffing of the
lungs.

Dioscorides saith it is hurtful to the stomach, and troubleth the belly.

D. It driveth forth worms, bringeth down the flowers, killeth the child
in the mother's womb, and provoketh bodily lust.

E. Being inwardly taken, it is good for such as have fallen from high
places: it dissolveth cluttered blood, and preventeth the same that it do
not congeal and thicken in any part of the body: it procureth sweat, as
the later physicians have found and tried by experience.


CHAP. 13. Of Indian Cresses.


Fig. 419. Indian Cresses with Flower and Seed.

The Description.

Cresses of India have many weak and feeble branches, rising immediately
from the ground, dispersing themselves far abroad; by means whereof one
plant doth occupy a great circuit of ground, as doth the great Bindweed.
The tender stalks divide themselves into sundry branches, trailing
likewise upon the ground, somewhat bunched or swollen up at every joint
or knee, which are in colour of a light red, but the spaces between the
joints are green. The leaves are round like Wall Pennywort, called
Cotyledon, the footstalk of the leaf cometh forth on the backside almost
in the midst of the leaf, as those of Frogbit, in taste and smell like
the garden Cresses. The flowers are dispersed throughout the whole plant,
of colour yellow, with a crossed star overthwart the inside, of a deep
orange colour; unto the back part of the same doth hang a tail or spur,
such as hath the Lark's Heel, called in Latin Consolida regalis, but
greater, and the spur or heel longer; which being past there succeed
bunched and knobbed cods or seed vessels, wherein is contained the seed;
rough, brown of colour, and like unto the seeds of the beet; but smaller.

The Place

The seeds of this rare and fair plant came first from the Indies into
Spain, and thence into France and Flanders, from whence I received seed
that bore with me both flowers and seed; especially those I received from
my loving friend John Robin of Paris.

The Time.

The seeds must be sown in the beginning of April, upon a bed of hot horse
dung and some fine sifted earth cast thereon of an handful thick. The bed
must be covered in sundry places with hoops or poles, to sustain the mat
or such like thing that it must be covered with in the night, and laid
open to the sun in the day time. The which being sprung up, and having
gotten three leaves, you must replant them abroad in the hottest place of
the garden, and most fine and fertile mold. Thus may you do with Musk-
Melons, Cucumbers, and all cold fruits that require haste; for that
otherwise the frost will overtake them before they come to fruit-bearing.

So saith our author, but I have found that they may also be sown in good
mould like as other seeds, and usually are.

The Names.

This beautiful plant is called in Latin, Nasturtium indicum: in English,
Indian Cresses. Although some have deemed it a kind of Convolvulus, or
Bindweed; yet I am well contented that it retain the former name, for
that the smell and taste show it to be a kind of Cresses.

The Nature and Virtues.

We have no certain knowledge of his nature or virtues, but are content to
refer it to the kinds of Cresses, or to a further consideration.


CHAP. 14. Of Sciatica Cresses.


Fig. 420. Sciataca Cresses (2)

The Description.

1. Sciatica Cresses hath many slender branches growing from a stalk of a
cubit high, with small long and narrow leaves like those of Garden
Cresses. The flowers be very small, and yellow of colour, the seed-
vessels be little flat chaffy husks, wherein is the seed of a reddish
gold colour, sharp and very bitter in taste. The root is small, tough,
white within and without, and of a biting taste.

2. The plant whose figure I here give you hath leaves somewhat like
Rocket, but not so deep cut in, being only snipped about the edges: the
upper leaves are not snipped, nor divided at all, and are narrower. The
flowers decking the tops of the branches are small and white, the seed
vessels are less than those of Cresses, and the seed itself exceeding
small, and of a blackish colour; the root is woody, sometimes single,
otherwhiles divided into two branches.

The Place.

It groweth upon old walls and rough places by highways' sides and such
like: I have found it in corn fields about Southfleet near to Gravesend
in Kent.

The Time.

It flowereth according to the late or early sowing of it in the fields,
in June and July.

The Names.

Sciatica Cresses is called in Latin Iberis: of Pliny, Heberis and
Nasturtium sylvestre; and in like manner also Lepidum. There is another
Lepidium of Pliny: in English, Sciatica Cress. The first described may be
called Iberis cardamantica tenuifolia, Small-Leaved Sciatica Cresses. The
second, Iberis latiore folio, broad-Leaved Sciatica Cresses.

The Nature.

Sciatica Cress is hot in the fourth degree, and like to garden Cresses
both in smell and in taste.

The Virtues.

A. The roots gathered in autumn, saith Dioscorides, do heat and burn, and
are with good success with swine's grease made up in manner of a plaster,
and put upon such as are tormented with the sciatica: it is to lie on the
grieved place but four hours at the most, and then taken away, and the
patient bathed with warm water, and the place afterwards anointed with
oil, and wool laid on it; which things Galen in his ninth book of
medicines, according to the place grieved, citeth out of Democrates, in
certain verses tending to that effect.


CHAP. 15. Of Bank Cresses.



Fig. 421. Bank Cresses (1) 	
Fig. 422. Italian Bank Cresses (2)

The Description.

1. Bank Cresses hath long leaves, deeply cut or jagged upon both sides,
not unlike to those of Rocket or wild mustard. The stalks be small,
limber or pliant, yet very tough, and will twist and writhe as doth the
Osier or Water Willow, whereupon do grow small yellow flowers, which
being past there do succeed little slender cods, full of small seeds, in
taste sharp and biting the tongue as those of Cresses.

2. The second kind of Bank Cresses hath leaves like unto those of
Dandelion, somewhat resembling Spinach. The branches be long, tough, and
pliant like the other. The flowers be yellowish, which are succeeded by
small long cods, having leaves growing amongst them: in these cods is
contained small biting seed like the other of this kind. The smell of
this plant is very ungrateful.

The Place.

Bank Cresses is found in stony places among rubbish, by pathways, upon
earth or muddy walls, and in other untoiled places.

The second kind of Bank Cresses groweth in such places as the former
doth: I found it growing at a place by Chelmsford in Essex called Little
Baddow, and in sundry other places.

The Time.

They flower in June and July, and the seed is ripe in August and
September.

The Names.

Bank Cresses is called in Latin Irio and Erysimum: Theophrastus hath an
other Erysimum. The first is called Irio, or Erysimum by Matthiolus,
Dodonæus, and others. Turner, Fuchsius and Tragus call it Verbena fœmina,
or recta. The second is Irio alter of Matthiolus, and Saxifraga
romanorum, in the Historia Lugdunensis. It may be called Italian Bank
Cresses, or Roman Saxifrage.

The Nature.

The seed of bank Cresses is like in taste to garden Cresses, and is as
Galen saith of a fiery temperature, and doth extremely attenuate or make
thin.

The virtues.

A. The seed of bank Cresses is good against the rheum that falleth into
the chest, by rotting the same.

B. It remedieth the cough, the yellow jaundice, and the sciatica or ache
of the hucklebones, if it be taken with honey in manner of a lohoch and
often licked.

C. It is also drunk against deadly poisons, as Dioscorides addeth: and
being made up in a plaster with water and honey and applied, it is a
remedy against hidden cankerous apostumes behind the ears, hard swellings
and inflammations of the paps and stones.

D. The seeds of the Italian Bank Cresses, or Roman Saxifrage taken in the
weight of a dram, in a decoction of Grass roots, effectally cleanse the
reins, and expel the stone, as the author of the Hist. Lugd. affirms.


CHAP. 16. Of Dock-Cresses.


Fig. 423. Dock-Cresses

The Description.

Dock-Cresses is a wild wort or pot-herb having roughish hairy leaves of
an overworn green colour, deeply cut or indented upon both sides like the
leaves of small Turnips. The stalks grow to the height of two or three
cubits, and sometimes higher, dividing themselves toward the top into
sundry little branches, whereon do grow many small yellow flowers like
those of Hieracium, or Hawkweed; which decaying, are succeeded by little
crested heads containing a longish small seed somewhat like Lettuce seed,
but of a yellowish colour: the plant is also milky, the stalk woody, and
the root small, fibrous, and white.

The Place.

Dock-Cresses grow everywhere by highways, upon walls of mud or earth, and
in stony places.

The Time.

It flowereth from May to the end of August; the seed is ripe in
September.

The Names.

Dock-Cresses are called in Latin, Lampsana, and Napium by Dodonæus:
Tabernomontanus calleth this, Sonchus sylvaticus: Camerarius affirms,
That in Prussia they call it Papillaris.

The Nature.

Dock-Cresses are of nature hot, and somewhat abstersive or cleansing.

The Virtues.

A. Taken in meat, as Galen and Dioscorides affirm, it engendereth evil
juice and naughty nourishment.

B. Camerarius affirmeth, That it is used with good success in Prussia
against ulcerated or sore breasts.


CHAP. 17. Of Water-Parsnip, and Water-Cresses.



Fig. 424. Great Water-Parsnip (1) 

Fig. 425. Lesser Water-Parsnip (2)
The Description.

1. Great Water-Parsnip groweth upright, and is described to have leaves
of a pleasant savour, fat and full of juice as those of Alexanders, but
somewhat lesser, resembling the Garden Parsnip: the stalk is round,
smooth, and hollow, like to Kexe or Cashes: the root consisteth of many
small strings or threads fastened unto the stalk within the water or miry
ground: at the top grow many white flowers, in spoky roundels like
Fennel; which being bruised do yield a very strong savour, smelling like
petroleum, as doth the rest of the plant.

2. This plant much resembles the last described, and grows up some cubit
and a half high, with many leaves finely snipped about the edges, growing
upon one rib, and commonly they stand bolt upright. The umbel consists of
little white flowers: the root is small, and consisteth of many strings.

3. There is another very like this, but they thus differ: the stalks and
leaves of this later are less than those of the precedent, and not so
many upon one rib; the other grows upright, to some yard or more high:
this never grows up, but always creeps, and almost at every joint puts
forth an umbel of flowers.



Fig. 426. Long-Leaved Water-Cresses (4) 

Fig. 427. Common Water-Cresses (5) 


4. To these may be added another, whose root consists of abundance of
writhing and small black fibres; the stalks are like Hemlock, some three
cubits high; the leaves are long, narrow, and snipped about the edges,
growing commonly two or three together: the umbel of flowers is commonly
of a yellowish green: the seed is like parsley seed, but in taste
somewhat resembles Cumin, Daucus Creticus, and the rind of a Citron, yet
seemeth somewhat hotter.

5. Water-Cress hath many fat and weak hollow branches trailing upon the
gravel and earth where it groweth, taking hold in sundry places as it
creepeth; by means whereof the plant spreadeth over a great compass of
ground. The leaves are likewise compact and winged with many small leaves
set upon a middle rib one against another, except the point leaf, which
stands by itself, as doth that of the ash, if it grow in his natural
place, which is in a gravelly spring. The upper face of the whole plant
is of a brown colour, and green under the leaves, which is a perfect mark
to know the physical kind from the others. The white flowers grow alongst
the stalks, and are succeeded by cods wherein the seed is contained. The
root is nothing else but as it were a thrum or bundle of threads.


Fig. 428. Italian Water-Cress (6)

6. There is also another kind hereof, having leaves growing many on one
stalk, snipped about the edges, being in shape between the garden Cresses
and Cuckoo-flowers: the stalk is crested, and divided into many branches,
the flowers white, and are succeeded by cods like those of our ordinary
Water-Cress last described.

The Place.

1. The first of these I have not found growing, nor as yet heard of
within this kingdom.

2. The second I first found in the company of Mr. Robert Larkin, going
between Redriffe and Deptford, in a rotten boggy place on the right hand
of the way.

3. The third grows almost in every watery place about London.

4. This is more rare, and was found by Mr. Goodyer in the ponds about
Moore Park; and by Mr. George Bowles in the ditches about Ellesmere, and
in divers ponds in Flintshire.

3. The fifth is as frequent as the third, and commonly they grow near
together.

6. This Lobel saith he found in Piemont, in rivulets amongst the hills: I
have not yet heard that it grows with us.

The Time.

They spring and wax green in April, and flower in July.

The Water-Cress to be eaten in salads showeth itself in March, when it is
best, and flowereth in summer with the rest.

The Names.

1. The first of these is Sium maius latifolium of Tabernamontanus.

2. This is Sion odoratum tragi: Sium, of Matthiolus, Dodonæus, and
others: it is taken to be Sium, or Læver, of Dioscorides. Lobel calls it
also Pastinaca aquatica, or water Parsnip.

3. This may be called Sium umbellatum repens, Creeping Water Parsnip. Of
this there is a reasonable good figure in the Historia Lugdunensis, pag.
1092, under the title of Sium verum matthioli; but the description is of
that we here give you in the sixth place.

4. This is Sium alterum of Dodonæus: and Sium alterum olusatri facie of
Lobel.

5. Many judge this to be the Sisymbrium alterum, or Cardamine of
Dioscorides: as also the Sion of Crateuas: and therefore Lobel terms it
Sion crateuæ erucæ folium. It is called by Dodonæus, and vulgarly in
shops known by the name of Nasturtium aquaticum, or Water-Cresses.

6. This is called Sium vulgare by Matthiolus: Lobel also terms it Sium
Matthioli & Italorum. This was thought by our countryman Doctor Turner to
be no other than the second here described: of which opinion I must
confess I also was; but upon better consideration of that which Lobel and
Bauhin have written, I have changed my mind.

The Temperature.

Water-cress is evidently hot and dry.

The Virtues.

A. Water-Cress being boiled in wine or milk, and drunk for certain days
together, is very good against the Scurvy or Scorbute.

B. Being chopped or boiled in the broth of flesh, and eaten for thirty
days together, at morning, noon, and night, it provoketh urine, wastes
the stone, and driveth it forth. Taken in the same manner, it doth cure
young maidens of the green sickness, bringeth down the terms, and sendeth
into the face their accustomed lively colour, lost by the stopping of
their menstrua.


CHAP. 18. Of Wild Water-Cresses, or Cuckoo-flowers.


Fig. 429. Cuckoo-Flowers and Lady-Smocks (1-4)

The Description.

1. The first of the Cuckoo-flowers hath leaves at his springing up
somewhat round, and those that spring afterward grow jagged like the
leaves of Greek Valerian: among which riseth up a stalk a foot long, set
with the like leaves, but smaller, and more jagged, resembling those of
Rocket. The flowers grow at the top in small bundles, white of colour,
hollow in the middle, resembling the white Sweet-John: after which do
come small chaffy husks or seed vessels, wherein the seed is contained.
The root is small and thready.

2. The second sort of Cuckoo-flowers hath small jagged leaves like those
of small Water Valerian, agreeing with the former in stalks and roots:
the flowers be white, overdashed or declining toward a light carnation.

3. The leaves and stalks of this are like those of the last described;
neither are the flowers which first show themselves much unlike them; but
when as they begin to fail in their middle rise up heads of pretty double
flowers made of many leaves, like in colour to these of the single.

4. The fourth sort of Cuckoo-flowers groweth creeping upon the ground,
with small thready stalks, whereon do grow leaves like those of the field
Claver, or three-leaved Grass: amongst which do come up small and tender
stalks two handfuls high, having flowers at the top in greater quantity
than any of the rest, of colour white; and after them follow cods
containing a small seed. The root is nothing else but as it were a bundle
of thrums or threads.

5. Milk-white Lady-Smock hath stalks rising immediately from the root,
dividing themselves into sundry small twiggy and hard branches, set with
leaves like those of Serpillum. The flowers grow at the top, made of four
leaves of a yellowish colour: the root is tough and woody, with some
fibres annexed thereto. This is no other than the first described,
differing only therefrom in that the flowers are milk white.



Fig. 430. Mountain Lady-Smock (6) 

Fig. 431. Impatient Lady-Smock.
	6. Mountain Lady-Smock hath many roots, nothing else but as it were
a bundle of thready strings, from the which do come forth three or four
small weak or tender leaves made of sundry small leaves, in show like to
those of small water Valerian. The stalks be small and brittle, whereupon
do grow small flowers like the first kind.

7. I should be blameworthy if in this place I omitted that pretty
conditioned Sium which is kept in divers of our London gardens, and was
first brought hither by that great treasurer of nature's rarities, Mr.
John Tradescant. This plant hath leaves set many upon a rib, like as the
other Sium described in the second place hath; but they are cut in with
two or three pretty deep gashes: the stalk is some cubit high, & divided
into many branches, which have many small white flowers growing upon
them: after these flowers are past there follow small long cods
containing a small white seed. Now the nature of this plant is such, that
if you touch but the axis when as the seed is ripe, though you do it
never so gently, yet will the seed fly all abroad with violence, as
disdaining to be touched: whence they usually call it Noli me tangere
["Don't touch me"]; as they for the like quality name the Persicaria
siliquosa. The nature of this plant is somewhat admirable, for if the
seeds (as I said) be fully ripe, though you put but your hand near them,
as proffering to touch them, though you do it not, yet will they fly out
upon you, and if you expect no such thing, perhaps make you afraid by
reason of the suddenness thereof. This herb is written of only by Prosper
Alpinus, under the title of Sium Minimum and it may be called in English,
Impatient Lady-smock, or Cuckoo-flower. It is an annual, and yearly sows
itself by the falling seeds.


Fig. 432. Dwarf Daisy-Leaved Lady-Smock of the Alps (8)

8. The leaves of this somewhat resemble those of Daisies, but less, and
lie spread upon the ground, amongst which rises up a weak and slender
stalk set with 3 or 4 leaves at certain distances, it being some handful
high, the top is adorned with small white flowers consisting of four
leaves apiece, after which follow large and long cods, considering the
smallness of the plant; within these in a double order is contained a
small reddish seed, of somewhat a biting taste. The root creeps upon the
top of the ground, putting up new buds in divers places. Clusius found
this growing upon the rocks on the Etscherian mountain in Austria, and
hath given us the history and figure thereof under the name of Plantula
cardamines emula, and Sinapi pumulum alpinum.

The Time and Place.

That of the Alpish mountains is a stranger in these cold countries: the
rest are to be found everywhere, as aforesaid, especially in the castle
ditch at Clare in Essex. The seventh grows naturally in some places of
Italy.

These flower for the most part in April and May, when the Cuckoo doth
begin to sing her pleasant notes without stammering.

The Names.

They are commonly called in Latin, Flos cuculi, by Brunfelsius and
Dodonæus, for the reason aforesaid; and also some call them Nasturtium
aquaticum minus, or lesser water-cress: of some, Cardamine, and
Sisymbrium alterum of Dioscorides: it is called in the German tongue,
Wildercresz: in French, Passerage sauvage: in English, Cuckoo-flowers; in
Norfolk, Canterbury Bells: at Nantwich in Cheshire, where I had my
beginning, Lady-Smocks, which hath given me cause to christen it after my
country fashion.

The Nature and Virtues.

These herbs be hot and dry in the second degree: we have no certain proof
or authority of their virtues, but surely from the kinds of Water-Cress
they cannot much differ, and therefore to them they may be referred in
their virtues.


CHAP. 19. Of Treacle Mustard.


Fig. 433. Sorts of Mustard (1-4)

The Description.

1. Treacle Mustard hath long broad leaves, especially those next the
ground, the others lesser, slightly indented about the edges like those
of Dandelion. The stalks be long and brittle, divided into many branches
even from the ground to the top, where grow many small idle flowers tuft
fashion, after which succeed large, flat, thin, chaffy husks or seed
vessels heart fashion, wherein are contained brown flat seeds, sharp in
taste, burning the tongue as doth mustard seed, leaving a taste or savour
of Garlic behind for a farewell.

2. Mithridate Mustard hath long narrow leaves like those of Woad, or
rather Cow Basil. The stalks be enclosed with small snipped leaves even
to the branches, Pyramidis fashion, that is to say, smaller and smaller
toward the top, where it is divided into sundry branches, whereon do grow
small flowers: which being past, the cods, or rather thin chaffy husks,
do appear, full of sharp seed, like the former. The root is long and
slender.

3. The third kind of Treacle Mustard, named Knave's Mustard, (for that it
is too bad for honest men) hath long, fat, and broad leaves, like those
of Dwale or Deadly Nightshade: in taste like those of Uvularia or
Stinking Orach, set upon a round stalk two cubits high, divided at the
top into small arms or branches, whereon do grow small foolish white
spoky flowers. The seed is contained in flat pouches like those of
Shepherd's Purse, brown, sharp in taste, and of an ill savour.

4. Bowyer's Mustard hath the lower leaves resembling the ordinary
Thlaspi, but the upper are very small like Toad-Flax but smaller. The
stalks be small, slender, and many. The flowers be small, and white, each
consisting of four leaves. The seeds be placed upon the branches from the
lowest part of them to the top, exceeding sharp and hot in taste, and of
a yellowish colour. The root is small and woody.


Fig. 434. Kinds of Mustard (5-8)

5. Grecian Mustard hath many leaves spread upon the ground, like those of
the common Daisy, of a dark greenish colour: from the midst whereof
spring up stalks two foot long, divided into many small branches,
whereupon grow small white flowers composed of four leaves, after which
succeed round flat husks or seed vessels, set upon the stalk by couples,
as it were sundry pairs of spectacles, wherein the seed is contained,
sharp and biting as the other. This is sometimes seen with yellow
flowers.

6. Clown's Mustard hath a short white fibrous root, from whence ariseth
up a stalk of the height of a foot, which a little above the root divides
itself into some four or five branches, and these again are subdivided
into other, smaller so that it resembles a little shrub: longish narrow
leaves notched after the manner of Sciatica Cresses by turns garnish
these branches, and these leaves are as bitter as the smaller Centaury.
The flowers stand thick together at the tops of these branches in manner
of little umbels, and are commonly of a light blue and white mixed
together (being seldom only white, or yellow.) After the flowers succeed
seed vessels after the manner of the other plants of this kind, and in
them is contained a small hot seed.

7. Buckler Mustard hath many large leaves, spread upon the ground like
Hieracium or Hawkweed, somewhat more toothed or snipped about the edges:
among which comes up stalks small and brittle, a cubit high, garnished
with many small pale yellowish flowers: in whose place succeed many round
flat cods or pouches, buckler fashion, containing a seed like unto the
others.

8. Small Buckler Mustard, is a very small, base, or low plant, having
whitish leaves like those of wild Thyme, set upon small, weak and tender
branches. The flowers grow at the top like the other Buckler Mustard. The
seed vessels are like, but not so round, somewhat sharp pointed, sharp in
taste, & burning the tongue. The whole plant lieth flat upon the ground,
like wild Thyme.

The Place.

Treacle or rather Mithridate Mustard grows wild in sundry places in corn
fields, ditch banks, and in sandy, dry, and barren ground. I have found
it in corn fields between Croydon & Godstone in Surrey, at Southfleet in
Kent, by the path that leadeth from Hornsey (a small village by London)
unto Waltham Cross, and in many other places.

The others do grow under hedges, oftentimes in fields and in stony and
untoiled places; they grow plentifully in Bohemia and Germany: they are
seen likewise on the stony banks of the river Rhine. They are likewise to
be found in England in sundry places wild, the which I have gathered into
my garden. So saith our author, but I have found none but the first and
second growing wild in any part of England as yet; but I deny not, but
that some of the other may be found, though not all.

The Time.

These treacle Mustards are found with their flowers from May to July, and
the seed is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.

The Grecians call these kinds of herbs Thlaspi, Thlaspidion, or Sinum
agreion, of the husk or seed vessel, which is like a little shield. They
have also other names which be found among the bastard words: as
Scandulaceum, Capsella, Pes gallinaceus. Neither be the later writers
without their names, as Nasturtium tectorum, and Sinapi rusticum: it is
called in Dutch, Wild kerse: in French, Seneve sauvage: in English,
Treacle Mustard, dish Mustard, Bowyer's Mustard: of some, Thlaspi, after
the Greek name, Churl's mustard, and wild Cresses.

1. This is Thlaspi dioscoridis drabæ, aut chamelinæ folio of Lobel:
Thlaspi latius of Dodonæius: and the second Thlaspi of Matthiolus.

2. This, Thlaspi vulgatissimum vaccariæ folio of Lobel: the first Thlaspi
of Matthiolus, and second of Dodonæus; and this is that Thlaspi whose
seed is used in shops.

3. This is Thlaspi maius of Tabernamontanus.

4. This is Thlaspi minus of Dodonæus: Thlaspi angustifolium of Fuchsius:
Thlaspi minus hortensi osyridis folia, &c. of Lobel: and Nasturtium
sylvestre of Thalius.

 5. This is Alysson of Matthiolus: Thlaspi græcum polygonati folio, of
Lobel and Tabernamontanus.

6. This the author of the Hist. Lugd. calls Nasturtium sylvestre;
Tabernamontanus calls it Thlaspi amarum.

7. Lobel terms this Thlaspi parvum hieracifolium, and Lunaria lutea
monspeliensium.

8. This is Thlaspi minus clypeatum serpillifolio of Lobel.

The Temperature.

The seed of these kinds of Treacle Mustards be hot and dry in the end of
the third degree.

The Virtues.

The seed of Thlaspi or Treacle Mustard eaten, purgeth choler both upward
and downward, provoketh flowers, and breaketh inward aposthumes.

The same used in clysters, helpeth the sciatica, and is good unto those
purposes for which Mustard seed serveth.

The Danger.

The seed of these herbs be so extreme hot and vehement in working, that
being taken in too great a quantity, purgeth and scoureth even unto
blood, and is hurtful to women with child, and therefore great care is to
be had in giving them inwardly in any great quantity.


CHAP. 20. Of Candy Mustard.



Fig. 435. Candy Mustard (1) 

Fig. 436. Small Candy Mustard with a white flower (2)
The Description.

1. Candy Mustard excelleth all the rest, as well for the comely flowers
that it bringeth forth for the decking up of gardens and houses, as also
for that it goeth beyond the rest in his physical virtues. It riseth up
with a very brittle stalk of a cubit high, which divideth itself into
sundry bows or branches, set with leaves like those of Stock-
Gillyflowers, of a grey or overworn green colour. The flowers grow at the
top of the stalk, round, thick, clustering together, like those of
Scabious or Devil's Bit, sometimes blue, often purple, carnation or
horse-flesh, but seldom white for any thing that I have seen; varying
according to the soil or climate. The seed is reddish, sharp, and biting
the tongue, wrapped in little husks fashioned like an heart.

2. There is a lesser variety of this with white well smelling flowers, in
other respects little differing from the ordinary.

The Place.

This grows naturally in some places of Austria, as also in Candy, Spain,
& Italy, from whence I received seeds by the liberality of the Right
Honorable the Lord Edward Zouch, at his return into England from those
parts. Clusius found the latter as he travelled through Switzerland into
Germany.

The Time.

It flowereth from the beginning of May unto the end of September, at
which time you shall have flowers and seeds upon one branch, some ripe,
and some that will not ripen at all.

The Name.

This plant is called by Dodonæus (but not rightly) Arabis and Draba: as
also Thlaspi Candiæ: which last name is retained by most writers: in
English, Candy Thlaspi, or Candy Mustard.

The Temperature.

The seed of Candy Mustard is hot and dry at the end of the third degree,
as is that called Scorodothlaspi, or Treacle Mustard.


CHAP. 21. Of Divers Other Mustards.



Fig. 437. Round-Leaved Mustard (1) 

Fig. 438. Hungary Mustard (2)
The Description.

1. Round-Leaved Mustard hath many large leaves laid flat upon the ground
like the leaves of the wild Cabbage, and of the same colour; among which
rise up many slender stalks of some two handfuls high or thereabouts,
which are set with leaves far unlike to those next the ground, enclosing
or embracing the stalks as do the leaves of Perfoliatum, or Thorough-wax.
The flowers grow at the top of the branches, white of colour; which being
past, there do succeed flat husks or pouches like unto those of
Shepherd's Purse, with hot seed biting the tongue.

2. Hungary Mustard bringeth forth slender stalks of one cubit high: the
leaves which first appear are flat, somewhat round like those of the wild
Beet; but those leaves which after do garnish the stalks are long and
broad like those of the garden Colewort, but lesser and softer, green on
the upper side, and under declining to whiteness, smelling like Garlic.
The flowers be small and white, consisting of four small leaves, which in
a great tuft or umbel do grow thick thrust together: which being past
there followeth in every small husk one duskish seed and no more, bitter
and sharp in taste. The root is white and small, creeping under the
ground far abroad like the roots of Couch-Grass; preparing new shoots and
branches for the year following, contrary to all the rest of his kind,
which are increased by seed, and not otherwise.



Fig. 439. Churl's Mustard (3) 

Fig. 440. Peasant's Mustard of Narbonne (4) 
	3. Churl's Mustard hath many small twiggy stalks, slender, tough,
and pliant, set with small leaves like those of Cudweed, or Lavender,
with small white flowers: the husks and seeds are small, few, sharp,
bitter, and unsavoury: the whole plant is of a whitish colour.

4. Peasant's Mustard hath many pretty large branches, with thin and
jagged leaves like those of Cresses, but smaller, in savour and taste
like to the ordinary Thlaspi: the flowers be whitish, and grow in a small
spoky tuft. The seed in taste and savour is equal with the other of his
kind and country, or rather exceeds them in sharpness.



Fig. 441. Yellow Mustard (5)

5. Yellow Mustard hath an exceeding number of whitish leaves spread upon
the ground in manner of a tuft or hassock, from the midst whereof riseth
up an upright stalk of three foot high, putting forth many small branches
or arms: at the top whereof grow many small yellow flowers like those of
the Wallflower, but much smaller: which being past, the husks appear
flat, pouch-fashion, wherein is the seed like Treacle Mustard, sharp also
and biting.


Fig. 442. Kinds of Mustard (6-8)

6. White Treacle Mustard hath leaves spread upon the ground like the
other, but smaller: the stalks rise up from the midst thereof, branched,
set with leaves smaller than those that lie upon the ground even to the
top, where doth grow a tuft of white flowers in fashion like to those of
the other Thlaspies: the seed is like the other: the cods of this are
sometimes flat, and otherwhiles round; the flowers also grow sometimes
spike-fashion, otherwhiles in an umbel. I have given you two figures
expressing both these varieties.

7. This small kind of Mustard hath a few small leaves spread upon the
ground like those of the lesser Daisy, but of a bluisher green colour;
from which rise up small tender stalks set with three, and sometimes four
small sharp pointed leaves: the flowers grow at the top, small and white;
the cods are flat, pouch-fashion, like those of Shepherd's Purse, and in
each of them there is contained two or three yellowish seeds.

8. To these we may fitly add another small mountain Thlaspi, first
described by that diligent and learned apothecary John Pona of Verona, in
his description of Mount Baldus. This from a thready root brings forth
many small whitish leaves lying spread upon the ground, and a little
nicked about their edges: among these riseth up a stalk some two or three
handfuls high, divaricated toward the top into divers small branches,
upon which grow white little flowers consisting of four leaves apiece:
which fading, there follow round seed-vessels, like to those of Myagrum:
whence Pona, the first describer thereof, calls it Thlaspi petræum
myagrodes. The seed is as sharp and biting as any of the other Thlaspies.
This grows naturally in the chinks of the rocks, in that part of Baldus
that is termed Vallis frigida, or, the Cold Valley.

The Place.

These kinds of Treacle Mustard grow upon hills and mountains in corn
fields, in stony barren and gravelly grounds.

The Time.

These flower in May, June, and July: the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.

1. This is Thlaspi oleraceum of Tabernamontanus: Thlaspi primum, of
Dalechampius: Thlaspi mitius rotundifolium of Columna.

2. Thlaspi montanum peltatum of Clusius: and Thlaspi pannonicum of Lobel
and Tabernamontanus.

3. Thlaspi narbonense centunculi angustifolio, of Lobel: and Thlaspi
maritimum of Dalechampius.

4. Thlaspi umbellatum nasturtii hortensis folio narbonense, of Lobel.

5. Thlaspi supinum luteum of Lobel.

6. Thlaspi album supinum of Lobel: Thlaspi montanum secundum of Clusius.

7. Thlaspi pumilum of Clusius: Thlaspi minimum of Tabernamontanus.

8. Thlaspi petræum myagrodes of Pona: Thlaspi tertium saxatile of
Camerarius, in his Epitome of Matthiolus.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The seeds of these churlish kinds of Treacle Mustard have a sharp or
biting quality, break inward apostumes, bring down the flowers, kill the
birth, and helpeth the sciatica or pain in the hip. They purge choler
upward and downward, if you take two ounces and a half of them, as
Dioscorides writeth. They are mixed in counterpoisons, as Treacle,
Mithridate, and such like.


CHAP. 22. Of Woody Mustard.


Fig. 443. Kinds of Woody Mustard (1-4)

The Description.

1. Woody Mustard hath long narrow leaves declining to whiteness like
those of the Stock-Gillyflower, but smaller, very like the leaves of
Rosemary, but somewhat broader, with rough stalks very tough and pliant,
being of the substance of wood: the flowers grow at the top, white of
colour: the seeds do follow, in taste sharp and biting. The husks or
seed-vessels are round and somewhat longish.

2. Small Woody Mustard groweth to the height of two cubits, with many
stalks set with small narrow leaves like those of Hyssop, but rougher;
and at the top grow flowers like those of Treacle Mustard, or Thlaspi.
The whole plant groweth as a shrub or hedge-bush.

3. Thorny Mustard groweth up to the height of four cubits, of a woody
substance, like unto a hedge-bush, or wild shrub, with stalks beset with
leaves, flowers, and seeds like the last before mentioned; agreeing in
all points, saving in the cruel pricking sharp thorns wherewith this
plant is armed; the other not. The root is tough, woody, and some strings
or fibres annexed thereto.

4. There is another sort of woody Mustard growing in shadowy and obscure
mountains, and rough stony places resembling the last described; saving
that this plant hath no pricks at all, but many small branches set thick
with leaves, resembling those of the lesser sea Leucoion: the flowers are
many and white; the seed like the other Thlaspies: the root is woody and
fibrous.


Fig. 444. Ivy Mustard (5)

5. There is (saith Lobel) in Portland and about Plymouth, and upon other
rocks on the sea coast of England, a creeping little herb having small
red crested stalks about a span high: the leaves are thick and fashioned
like ivy; the white flowers and small seeds do in taste and shape
resemble the Thlaspies.

The Place.

1. The first of there groweth about Mechelen.

2, 3, 4. These plants grow upon the Alpish and Pyrenee mountains: in
Piedmont and in Italy, in stony and rocky grounds.

The Time.

They flower when the other kinds of Thlaspies do; that is, from May to
the end of August.

The Names.

1. This Clusius and Lobel call Thlaspi incanum mechliniesne. Bauhin
thinks it to be the Iberis prima of Tabernamontanus.

2. This is Thlaspi fruticosum alterum of Lobel: Thlaspi 5. hispanicum of
Clusius.

3. Lobel calls this, Thlaspi fruticosum spinosum.

4. Camerarius calls this, Thlapi sempervirens biflorum folio leucoii, &c.
Lobel, Thlaspi fruticosum folio leucoii, &c.

5. This Lobel calls Thlaspi hederaceum.

The Nature.

I find nothing extant of their nature or virtues, but they may be
referred to the kinds of Thlaspies, whereof no doubt they are of kindred
and affinity, as well in faculty as form.


CHAP. 23. Of Towers Mustard.



Fig. 445. Towers Mustard (1) 

Fig. 446. Great Towers Mustard
The Description.

1. Towers Mustard hath been taken of some for a kind of Cresses, and
referred by them to it: of some, for one of the Mustards, and so placed
among the Thlaspies as a kind thereof; and therefore myself must needs
bestow it somewhere with others. Therefore I have with Clusius and Lobel
placed it among the Thlaspies, as a kind thereof. It cometh out of the
ground with many long and large rough leaves, like those of Hounds-
Tongue, especially those next the ground: amongst which riseth up a long
stalk of a cubit or more high, set about with sharp pointed leaves like
those of Woad. The flowers grow at the top, if I may term them flowers,
but they are as it were a little dusty chaff driven upon the leaves and
branches with the wind: after which come very small cods, wherein is
small reddish seed like that of Cameline or English Wormseed, with a root
made of a tuft full of innumerable threads or strings.

2. This second kind hath a thicker and harder root than the precedent,
having also fewer fibres; the leaves are bigger than those of the last
described, somewhat curled or sinuated, yet less, rough, and of a lighter
green; in the midst of these there rise up one or two stalks or more,
usually some two cubits high, divided into four branches, which are
adorned with leaves almost ingirting them round at their setting on. The
flowers are like those of the former, but somewhat larger, and the colour
is either white, or a pale yellow: after these succeed many long cods
filled with a seed somewhat larger than the last described.



Fig. 447. Gold of Pleasure (3) 

Fig. 448. Treacle Wormseed
	3. Gold of Pleasure is an herb with many branches set upon a
straight stalk, round, and divided into sundry wings, in height two
cubits. The leaves be long, broad, and sharp pointed, somewhat snipped or
indented about the edges like those of Sow-Thistles, The flowers along
the stalks are white; the seed contained in round little vessels is fat
and oily.

4. Treacle Wormseed riseth up with tough and pliant branches, whereupon
do grow many small yellow flowers; after which come long slender cods
like Flux-weed, or Sophia, wherein is contained small yellowish seed,
bitter as Wormseed or Coliquintida. The leaves are small and dark of
colour, in shape like those of the wild Stock-Gillyflowers, but not so
thick, nor fat. The root is small and single.

The Place.

Towers Treacle groweth in the West part of England, upon dunghills and
such like places. I have likewise seen it in sundry other places, as at
Pyms by a village called Edmonton near London, by the City Ovals of
Westchester in corn fields, and where flax did grow about Cambridge. The
second is a stranger with us; yet I am deceived if I have not seen it
growing in Mr. Parkinson's garden.

The other grow in the territory of Leiden in Zeeland, and many places of
the Low Countries; and likewise wild in sundry places of England.

The Time.

These herbs do flower in May and June, and their seed is ripe in
September.

The Names.

1. This is Turritis of Lobel: Turrita vulgatior of Clusius.

2. This is Turrita maior of Clusius, who thinks it to be Brassica virgata
of Cordus.

3. Matthiolus calls this, Pseudomyagrum: Tragus calls it, Sesamum:
Dodonæus, Lobel, and others call it Myagrum.

4. This Lobel calls Myagrum thlaspi effigio. Tabernamontanus hath it
twice; first under the name of Erysimum tertium: secondly, of Myagrum
secundum.

The Temperature.

These plants be hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. It is thought, saith Dioscorides, that the roughness of the skin is
polished and made smooth with the oily fatness of the seed of Myagrum.

B. Ruellius teacheth, That the juice of the herb healeth ulcers of the
mouth; and that the poor peasant doth use the oil in banquets, and the
rich in their lamps.

C. The seed of Camelina stamped, and given children to drink, killeth the
worms, and driveth them forth both by siege and vomit.


CHAP. 24. Of Turkey Cresses.



Fig. 449. Turkey Cresses (1) 

Fig. 450. The First Creeping Cress (2)
The Description.

1. The first hath crested slender, yet firm stalks of some foot long,
which are set with leaves of some inch in length, broad at the setting
on, sinuated about the edges, and sharp pointed, their colour is a
whitish green, and taste acrid; the leaves that are at the bottom of the
stalk are many, and larger. The tops of the stalks are divided into many
branches of an unequal length, and sustain many flowers; each whereof
consists of four little white leaves, so that together they much resemble
the umbel of the Elder when it is in flower. Little swollen seed vessels
divided into two cells follow the fading flowers: the seed is whitish,
about the bigness of millet, the root also is white, slender and
creeping.

2. This hath creeping roots, from which arise many branches lying upon
the ground here and there, taking root also; the leaves, which upon the
lower branches are many, are in form and colour much like those of the
last described, but less, and somewhat snipped about the edges. The
stalks are about a handful high, or somewhat more, round, green, and
hairy, having some leaves growing upon them. The flowers grow spoke
fashion at the top of the stalks, white, and consisting of four leaves;
which fallen, there follow cods containing a small red seed.


Fig. 451. The other Creeping Cress (3)

3. From a small and creeping root rise up many shoots, which while they
are young have many thick juicy and dark green leaves Rose-fashion
adorning their tops, out of the midst of which spring out many slender
stalks of some foot high, which at certain spaces are encompassed (as it
were) with leaves somewhat lesser than the former, yet broader at the
bottom: the flowers, cods, and seed are like the last mentioned.

4. There is a plant also by some referred to this classis; and I for some
resons think good to make mention thereof in this place. It hath a strong
and very long root of colour whitish, and of as sharp a taste as Cresses;
the stalks are many, and oft times exceed the height of a man, yet
slender, and towards their tops divided into some branches, which make no
umbel, but carry their flowers dispersed; which consist of some small
yellow leaves: after the flower is past there follow long slender cods
containing a small, yellowish, acrid seed. The leaves which adorn this
plant are long, sharp pointed, and snipped about the edges, somewhat like
those of Saracen's Confound, but that these towards the top are more
unequally cut in.

The Time.

The first of these flowers in May and the beginning of June. The 2 and 3
in April. The fourth in June and July.

The Place.

None of these (that I know of) are found naturally growing in this
kingdom; the last excepted, which I think may be found in some places.

The Names.

1. This by a general consent of Matthiolus, Anguillara, Lobel, &c. is
judged to be the Arabis, or Draba of the ancients.

2. Draba altera of Clusius.

3. Draba tertia succulento folio, of Clusius: Eruca Muralis of
Dalechampius.

4. This by Camerarius is set forth under the name of Arabis quorundam,
and he affirms in his Hor. Med. that he had it out of England under the
name of Solidago; The which is very likely, for without doubt this is the
very plant that our author mistook for Solidago Sarracenica, for he
bewrays himself in the chapter of Epimedium, whereas he saith it hath
cods like Saracen's Confound; when as both he, and all other give no cods
at all to Saracen's Confound. My very good friend Mr. John Goodyer was
the first, I think, that observed this mistake in our author; for which
his observation, together with some others formerly and hereafter to be
remembered, I acknowledge myself beholden to him.

The Virtues, attributed to the first.

A. Dioscorides saith, that they use to eat the dried seed of this herb
with meat, as we do pepper, especially in Cappadocia.

B. They use likewise to boil the herb with the decoction of Barley,
called ptisana; which being so boiled, concocteth and bringeth forth of
the chest tough and raw phlegm which sticketh therein.

C. The rest are hot, and come near to the virtues of the precedent.


CHAP. 25. Of Shepherd's Purse.



Fig. 452. Shepherd's Purse (1) 

Fig. 453. Small Shepherd's Purse (2)
The Description.

1. The leaves of Shepherd's Purse grow up at the first long, gashed in
the edges like those of Rocket, spread upon the ground: from these spring
up very many little weak stalks divided into sundry branches, with like
leaves growing on them, but lesser; at the top whereof are orderly placed
small white flowers: after these come up little seed vessels, flat, and
cornered, narrow at the stem like to a certain little pouch or purse, in
which lieth the seed. The root is white not without strings. There is
another of this kind with leaves not sinuated, or cut in.

2. The Small Shepherd's Purse cometh forth of the ground like the Cuckoo-
flower, which I have Englished Lady-smocks, having small leaves deeply
indented about the edges; among which rise up many small tender stalks
with flowers at the top, as it were chaff. The husks and seed is like the
other before mentioned.

The Place.

These herbs do grow of themselves for the most part, near common
highways, in desert and untiled places, among rubbish and old walls.

The Time.

They flower, flourish, and seed all the summer long.

The Names

Shepherd's Purse is called in Latin; Pastoris bursa, or Pera pastoris: in
High Dutch, Seckel; in Low Dutch, Borsekens cruyt: in French, Bourse de
pasteur ou curé; in English, Shepherd's Purse or Scrip: of some,
Shepherd's Pouch, and Poor Man's Parmacety: and in the North part of
England, Toy-wort, Pick-purse, and Case-weed.

The Temperature.

They are of temperature cold and dry, and very much binding, after the
opinion of Ruellius, Matthiolus, and Dodonæus; but Lobel and Pena hold
them to be hot and dry, judging the same by their sharp taste: which hath
caused me to insert them here among the kinds of Thlaspi, considering the
fashion of the leaves, cods, seed, and taste thereof: which do so well
agree together, that I might very well have placed them as kinds thereof.
But rather willing to content others that have written before, than to
please myself, I have followed their order in marshalling them in this
place, where they may stand for cousin germans.

The Virtues.

A. Shepherd's Purse stayeth bleeding in any part of the body, whether the
juice or the decoction thereof be drunk, or whether it be used poultice-
wise, or in bath, or any other way else.

B. In a clyster it cureth the bloody flux: it healeth green and bleeding
wounds: it is marvellous good for inflammations new begun, and for all
diseases which must be checked back and cooled.

C. The decoction doth stop the lask, the spitting and pissing of blood,
and all other fluxes of blood.


CHAP. 26. Of Italian Rocket



Fig. 454. Italian Rocket (1) 

Fig. 455. Crambling Rocket (2)
The Description.

1. Italian Rocket hath long leaves cut into many parts or divisions like
those of the Ash tree, resembling Ruellius his Buck's-Horn: among which
rise up stalks weak and tender, but thick and gross, two foot high,
garnished with many small yellowish flowers like the middle part of Tansy
flowers, of a naughty savour or smell. The seed is small like sand or
dust, in taste like Rocket seed, whereof in truth we suspect it to be a
kind. The root is long and woody.

2. Crambling Rocket hath many large leaves cut into sundry sections,
deeply divided to the middle rib, branched like the horns of a stag or
hart: among which there do rise up long fat and fleshy stalks two cubits
high, lying flat upon the ground by reason of his weak and feeble
branches. The flowers grow at the top, clustering thick together, white
of colour, with brownish threads in them. The seed is like the former.
Lobel affirms it grows in the Low Country gardens with writhing stalks,
sometimes ten or twelve cubits high, with leaves much divided.

The Place.

These plants grow in sandy, stony, gravelly, and chalky barren grounds. I
have found them in sundry places of Kent, as at Southfleet, upon
Longfield downs, which is a chalky and hilly ground very barren. They
grow at Greenhithe upon the hills, and in other places of Kent. The first
grows also upon the Wolds in Yorkshire. The second I have not seen
growing except in gardens, and much doubt whether it grow wild with us or
no.

The Time.

These plants do flourish in June, July and August.

The Names.

The first is called of Pliny, Reseda, Eruca peregrina, & Eruca
cantabrica: in English, Italian Rocket.

The second is called Reseda maxima: of Anguillara, Pignocomon, whereof I
find nothing extant worthy the memory, either of temperature or virtues.


CHAP. 27. Of Groundsel.



Fig. 456. Groundsel (1) 

Fig. 457. Cotton Groundsel (2)

The Description.

1. The stalk of Groundsel is round, chamfered and divided into many
branches: the leaves be green, long, and cut in the edges almost like
those of Succory, but lesser, like in a manner to the leaves of Rocket.
The flowers be yellow, and turn to down, that is carried away with the
wind. The root is full of strings and threads.

2. Cotton Groundsel hath a straight stalk of a brown purple colour,
covered with a fine cotton or downy hair, of the height of two cubits.
The leaves are like those of St. James Wort, or Ragwort; and at the top
of the stalk grow small knops, from which come flowers of a pale yellow
colour; which are no sooner opened and spread abroad, but they change
into down like that of the Thistle, even the same hour of his flowering,
and is carried away with the wind: the root is small and tender.


Fig. 458. The Other Cotton Groundsel (3)

3. There is another with leaves more jagged, and finelier cut than the
last mentioned, soft also and downy; the flowers are fewer, less and
paler than in the ordinary, but turn speedily into down like as the
former.

The Place.

These herbs are very common throughout England, and do grow almost
everywhere.

The Time.

They flourish almost every month of the year.

The Names.

1. Groundsel is called in Latin, Senecio, because it waxeth old quickly:
by a bastard name Herbutum: in Germany, Creuz-wurtz: in Low Dutch, Cruys
cruyt, and Cruysken cruyt: in Spanish, Yerva cana: in Italian,
Cardoncello, Speliciosa: in English, Groundsel.

2. Cotton Groundsel seemeth to be all one with Theophrastus his Aphace;
he maketh mention of Aphace in his seventh book, which is not only a kind
of pulse, but an herb also, unto which this kind of Groundsel is very
like. For as Theophrastus saith, The herb Aphace is one of the pot-herbs
and kinds of Succory: adding further, That it flowereth in haste, but yet
soon is old, and turneth into down; and such a one is this kind of
Groundsel. But Theophrastus saith further, That it flowereth all the
winter long, and so long as the spring lasteth, as myself have often seen
this Groundsel do.

The Temperature.

Groundsel hath mixed faculties; it cooleth, and withal digesteth, as
Paulus Ægineta writeth.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Groundsel boiled in wine or water, and drunk, healeth
the pain and ache of the stomach that proceedeth of choler.

B. The leaves and flowers stamped with a little hog's grease ceaseth the
burning heat of the stones and fundament. By adding to a little saffron
or salt it helpeth the Struma or King's evil.

C. The leaves stamped and drained into milk and drunk, helpeth the red
gums and frets in children.

D. Dioscorides saith, That with the fine powder of Frankincense it
healeth wounds in the sinews. The like operation hath the down of the
flowers mixed with vinegar.

E. Boiled in ale with a little honey and vinegar, it provoketh vomit,
especially if you add thereto a few roots of Asarabacca.


CHAP. 28. Of Saint James his Wort, or Ragwort


Fig. 459. Kinds of St. James's Wort, Ragwort and Ragweeds (1-4)

The Kinds.

The herb called Saint James his Wort is not without cause thought to be a
kind of Groundsel: of which there be sundry sorts; some of the pasture,
and one of the sea; some sweet-smelling and some of a loathsome savour.
All which kinds I will set down.

The Description.

1. Saint James his Wort or Ragwort is very well known everywhere, and
bringeth forth at the first broad leaves, gashed round about like to the
leaves of common Wormwood, but broader, thicker, not whitish or soft, of
a deep green colour, with a stalk which riseth up above a cubit high,
chamfered, blackish, and somewhat red withal. The arms or wings are set
with lesser leaves like those of Groundsel or of wild Rocket. The flowers
at the top be of a yellow colour like Marigolds, as well the middle
button as the small flowers that stand in a pale round about, which turn
into down as doth Groundsel. The root is thready.

2. This hath stalks some cubit high, crested, and set with long whitish
leaves; the lower leaves are the shorter; but the upper leaves the
longer, yet the narrower: at the top of the stalk grow some four or five
flowers as in an umbel, which are of a dark red colour before they open
themselves; but opened, of a bright golden colour, and those are ingirt
by fifteen or more littler leaves, which are of a flame colour above, and
red underneath. The flowers fly away in down, and the seed is blackish,
and like that of the former. The roots are made of many strings like
those of the precedent.

3. This broad-Leaved Ragweed hath stiff crested stalks, which are set
with broad wrinkled sharp pointed leaves, of a green colour: the bottom
leaves are the larger and rounder, the top leaves the less, and more
divided. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, in shape and colour
like those of the common Ragweed, but much bigger: they also turn into
down as the former.

4. Sea Ragwort groweth to the height of two cubits: the stalks be not
reddish as the other, but contrariwise ash-coloured, grey and hoary: the
leaves be greater and broader than the other: the flowers grow at the
top, of a pale yellow colour, covered on the cup or husk of the flower,
as also the leaves, with a certain soft white down or frieze: the flowers
vanish into down, and fly away with the wind.
The Place.

1. Land Ragwort groweth everywhere in untiled pastures and fields, which
are somewhat moist especially, and near unto the borders of fields.

2, 3. These grow upon the Austrian and Helvetian Alps.

4. The fourth kind of Ragwort groweth near the seaside in sundry places:
I have seen it in the fields by Margate, by Queake's house, and by
Birchington in the Isle of Thanet: likewise it groweth near the King's
ferry in the Isle of Sheppey, in the way leading to Sherland house, where
Sir Edward Hobby dwelleth: and likewise at Queensborough Castle in the
same isle; and in other places. Thus saith our author, but I have been at
the former and latter of these places to find out plants, yet could I not
see this plant. It grows in the garden of Mr. Ralph Tuggy, but I fear
hardly wild in this kingdom.

The Time.

They flower in July and August, at which time they are carried away with
the down.

The Names.

1. The first is called in Latin, Herba S. Iacobi, or S. Iacobi flos, and
Iacobæa: in High Dutch, Sant Jacobs Blumen: in Low Dutch, Sant Jacobs
Cruyt: in French, Fleur de S. Iacques: in English, St. James his Wort:
the country people do call it Stagger-wort, and Staner-wort, and also
Ragwort, and Ragweed. In Holderness in Yorkshire they call it Seggrum.

2. The second is Iacobæa pannonica 2. of Clusius.

3. The third is his Iacobæa latifolia. Gesner calls it Coniza montana.

4. The fourth is named Cineraria, or Ash-coloured St. James Wort: some
call it Erigeron marinum, or Sea Groundsel: of some, Artemesia marina.
And by Prosper Alpinus, Artemesia alba.

The Temperature.

S. James's wort is hot and dry in the second degree, and also cleansing,
by reason of the bitterness which it hath.

The Virtues.

A. It is commended by the later physicians to be good for green wounds,
and old filthy ulcers which are not scoured, mundified, and made clean,
it also healeth them, with the juice hereof tempered with honey and May
butter, and boiled together to the form of an unguent or salve.

B. It is much commended, and not without cause, to help old aches and
pains in the arms, hips, and legs, boiled in hog's grease to the form of
an ointment.

C. Moreover, the decoction hereof gargarised is much set by as a remedy
against swellings and impostumations of the throat, which it wasteth away
and throughly healeth.

D. The leaves stamped very small, and boiled with some hog's grease unto
the consumption of the juice, adding thereto in the end of the boiling a
little Mastic and Olibanum, and then strained, taketh away the old ache
in the huckle-bones called sciatica.

E. The Egyptians (saith Prosper Alpinus) use the Sea Ragwort for many
things: for they commend the decoction made with the leaves thereof
against the stone in the kidneys and bladder, as also to help the old
obstructions of the inward parts, but principally thoseof the womb; as
also the coldness, strangulation, barrenness, inflation thereof, and it
also brings down the intercepted courses: wherefore women troubled with
the mother are much eased by baths made of the leaves and flowers hereof.


CHAP. 29. Of Garden Succory.



Fig. 460. Garden Succory (2) 

Fig. 461. Garden Endive (3)
The Kinds.

There be sundry sorts of plants comprehended under the title of
Cichoracea, that is to say, Chichory, Endive, Dandelion, &c. differing
not so much in operation and working, as in shape and form, which hath
caused many to deem them divers, who have distinguished them under the
titles aforesaid: of every which kind there be divers sorts, the which
shall be divided in their several chapters, wherein the differences shall
be expressed.

The Description.

1. Garden Succory is of two sorts, one with broad leaves, and the other
with narrow, deeply cut and gashed on both sides. The first hath broad
leaves somewhat hairy, not much unlike to Endive, but narrower; amongst
which do rise up stalks, whereon are placed the like leaves, but smaller.
The stalk divideth itself toward the top into many branches, whereon do
grow little blue flowers consisting of many small leaves, after which
followeth white seed. The root is tough, long, and white of colour,
continuing many years; from the which as from every part of the plant
doth issue forth bitter and milky juice. The whole plant is of a bitter
taste likewise.

2. The second kind of Succory is like unto the former, but greater in
every point. That which causeth the difference is, that this beareth
flowers white of colour tending to blueness; the others blue, as I have
said.

3. Garden Endive bringeth forth long leaves, broad, smooth, more green
than white, like almost to those of lettuce, something nicked in the
edges. The stalk groweth up among the leaves, being round and hollow,
divided into branches; out of which being broken or cut there issueth a
juice like milk, somewhat bitter; the flowers upon the branches consist
of many leaves, in colour commonly blue, seldom white. The root is long,
white; with strings growing thereat, which withereth after the seed is
ripe.

4. Curled Endive hath leaves not unlike to those of the curled or Cabbage
Lettuce, but much greater; among which rise up strong and thick stalks
set with the like leaves, but lesser, and not so notably curled or
crisped. The flowers grow at the top, blue of colour. The root perisheth,
as doth the whole plant, when it hath brought forth his ripe seed.


Fig. 462. Thorny Succory (5)

5. To these may fitly be added the thorny or prickly Succory of Candy,
being of this kindred, and there used in defect of the true Succory, in
stead thereof. The root is pretty long, white, with few fibres hanging
thereat; the stalk is hard, woody, and divaricated into many branches,
which commonly end in two or three pricks like horns: The leaves are
bitter, long, narrow, and sharp pointed, and lie spread upon the ground,
and are a little sinuated, or cut about the edges. The flowers, which
usually grow upon little footstalks at the divisions of the branches, are
much like those of the ordinary Succory, yet much less, consisting of
five blue leaves, with yellow chives in the middle. The seed is like
those of the common Succory. It flowers in July and August.

The Place and Time

This Succory, and these Endives are only grown in gardens.

Endive being sown in the spring quickly cometh up to flower, which
seedeth in harvest, and afterward dieth. But being sown in July it
remaineth till winter, at which time it is taken up by the roots, and
laid in the sun or air for the space of two hours; then will the leaves
be tough, and easily endure to be wrapped upon an heap, and buried in the
earth with the roots upward, where no earth can get within it (which if
it did, would cause rottenness) the which so covered may be taken up at
times convenient, and used in salads all the winter, as in London and
other places is to be seen; and then it is called white Endive, whereof
Pliny seemeth not to be ignorant, speaking to the same purpose in his
20th book and 8th chapter.

The Names.

1. Pliny nameth the Succory Hedypnois: and the bitterer Dioscorides
calleth Pichris: in Latin, Intybum sylvestre, Intybum agreste, Intybum
erraticum, and Cichorium: in shops it is called Cichorea, which name is
not only allowed of the later physicians, but also of the poet Horace in
the 31st Ode of his first book.

Me pascunt olivæ,
Me chicorea, levesque malvæ
["I browse on olives,
and chicory, and simple mallows"]

With us, saith Pliny in his 20th book, 8th chapter, they have called
Intybum erraticum, or wild Endive, Ambugia (others read Ambubeia) and
some there be that name it Rostrum porcinum: and others, as Guilielmus
Placentinus, and Petrus Crescentius, term it Sponsa solis: the Germans
call it Wegwarten, which is as much to say, as the keeper of the ways:
the Italians, Cichorea: the Spaniards, Almerones: the Englishmen, Chicory
and Succory: the Bohemians, Czakanka.

3. Endive is named in Latin, Intybum sativum: of some, Endivia: of
Avicenna and Serapio, Taraxacon: of the Italians, Scariola, which name
remaineth in most shops; also Seriola, as though they should fitly call
it Seris, but not so well Serriola, with a double r: for Serriola is
Lactuca sylvestris, or wild lettuce: it is called in Spanish, Serraya
Envide: in English, Endive, and Scariole: and when it hath been in the
earth buried as aforesaid, then it is called white Endive.

5. This was first set forth by Clusius under this name, Chondrillæe genus
elegans cæruleo flore: since, by Pona and Bauhin, by the title we give
you, to wit, Cichorium spinosum. Honorius Bellus writes that in Candy
where as it naturally grows, thcy vulgarly term it Hydriæ spina, the
Pitcher Thorn; because people fetch all their water in stone pots or
Pitchers, which they top with this plant, to keep mice and other such
things from creeping into them: and it grows so round, that it seems by
nature to be provided for that purpose.

The Nature.

Endive and Succory are cold and dry in the second degree, and withal
somewhat binding: and becaus they be something bitter, they do also
cleanse and open.

Garden Endive is colder, and not so dry or cleansing, by reason of these
qualities they are thought to be excellent medicines for a hot liver, as
Galen hath written in his 8th book of the Compositions of Medicines
according to the places affected.

The Virtues.

A. These herbs when they be green have virtue to stop the hot burning of
the liver, to help the stopping of the gall, yellow jaundice, lack of
sleep, stopping of urine, and hot burning fevers.

B. A syrup thereof and sugar is very good for the diseases aforesaid.

C. The distilled water is good in potions, cooling and purging drinks.

D. The distilled water of Endive, Plantain, and Roses, profiteth against
excoriations in the conduit of the yard to be injected with a syringe,
whether hurt came by uncleanness or by small stones and gravel issuing
forth with the urine; as often hath been seen.

E. These herbs eaten in salads or otherwise, especially white Endive,
doth comfort the weak and feeble stomach, and cooleth and refresheth the
stomach overmuch heated.

F. The leaves of Succory bruised are good against inflammation of the
eyes, being outwardly applied to the grieved place.


CHAP. 30. Of Wild Succory.



Fig. 463. Wild Succory (1) 

Fig. 464. Yellow Succory (2)
The Kinds.

In like manner as there be sundry sorts of Succories and Endives, so is
there wild kinds of either of them.

The Description.

1. Wild Succory hath long leaves, somewhat snipped about the edges like
the leaves of Sow-Thistle, with a stalk growing to the height of two
cubits, which is divided towards the top into many branches. The flowers
grow at the top, blue of colour: the root is tough, and woody, with many
strings fastened thereto.

2. Yellow Succory hath long and large leaves, deeply cut about the edges
like those of the Hawkweed. The stalk is branched into sundry arms,
wheron do grow yellow flowers very double, resembling the flowers of
Dandelion, or Piss-a-bed; the which being withered, it flieth away in
down with every blast of wind.


Fig. 465. Wild Endive (3)

3. Wild Endive hath long smooth leaves: slightly snipped about the edges.
The stalk is brittle and full of milky juice, as is all the rest of the
plant: the flowers grow at the top, of a blue or sky colour: the root is
tough and thready.

4. Meadow Endive, or Endive with broad leaves, hath a thick, tough, and
woody root with many strings fastened thereto, from which rise up many
broad leaves spread upon the ground like those of garden Endive, but
lesser, and somewhat rougher, among which rise up many stalks immediately
from the root; every of them are decided into sundry branches, whereupon
do grow many flowers like those of the former, but smaller.

The Place.

These plants do grow wild in sundry places in England, upon wild and
untilled barren grounds, especially in chalky and stony places.

The Time.

They flower from the midst to the end of August.

The Names.

The first of there is Seris picris of Lobel, or Cichorium sylvestre: or
Intybus erratica of Tabernamontaus.

Yellow Succory is not without cause thought to be Hyosiris, or (as some
copies have it) Hyosciris, of which Pliny in his 20th book and 8th
chapter writeth; Hyosiris (saith he) is like to Endive, but lesser and
rougher: it is called of Lobel, Hedypnois: the rest of the names set
forth in their several titles shall be sufficient for this time.

The Temperature.

They agree in temperature with the garden Succory, or Endive.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of these wild herbs are boiled in pottage or broths, for
sick, and feeble persons that have hot, weak, and feeble stomachs, to
strengthen the same.

B. They are judged to have the same virtues with those of the garden, if
not of more force in working.


CHAP. 31. Of Gum Succory.

 

Fig. 466. Blue Gum Succory (1) 

Fig. 467. Robinus' Gum Succory (2) 
The Description.

1. Gum Succory with blue flowers hath a thick and tough root, with some
strings annexed thereto, full of a milky juice, as is all the rest of the
plant, the flowers excepted. The leaves are great and long, in shape like
to those of garden Succory, but deeplier cut or jagged, somewhat after
the manner of wild Rocket: among which rise tender stalks very easy to be
broken, branched toward the top in two or sometimes three branches,
bearing very pleasant flowers of an azure colour or deep blue; which
being past, the seed flieth away in down with the wind.

2. Gum Succory with broad leaves, which I have named Robinus' Gum Succory
(for that he was the first that made any mention of a second kind, which
he sent me as a great dainty, as indeed I confess it) in roots is like
the former: the leaves be greater, not unlike to those of Endive, but cut
more deeply even to the middle rib: the stalks grow to the height of two
foot: the flowers likewise are of an azure colour, but sprinkled over as
it were with silver sand; which addeth unto the flower great grace and
beauty.


Fig, 468. Yellow Gum Succory (3) 

Fig. 469. Spanish Gum Succory (4) 
	3. Yellow Gum Succory hath long leaves like in form and division of
the cut leaves to those of wild Succory, but lesser, covered all over
with a hoary down. The stalk is two foot high, white and downy also,
divided into sundry branches, whereupon do grow some flowers like those
of Succory, but in colour yellow, which are turned into down that is
carried away with the wind. The root is long, and of a mean thickness,
from which, as from all the rest of the plant, doth issue forth a milky
juice, which being dried is of a yellowish red, sharp, or biting the
tongue. There is found upon the branches hereof a gum, as Dioscorides
saith, which is used at this day in physic in the Isle Lemnos, as
Bellonius witnssseth.

4. Spanish Gum Succory hath many leaves spread upon the ground, in shape
like those of Groundsel, but much more divided, and not so thick nor fat:
amongst which rise up branched stalks set with leaves like those of Stœbe
salamantica minor, or Silver-Weed, whereof this is a kind. The flowers
grow at the top, of an overworn purple colour, which seldom show
themselves abroad blown: The seed is like that of Carthamus in shape, but
black and shining.


Fig. 470. Kinds of Gum and Swine's Succory (5-8)

5. Rushy Gum Succory hath a tough and hard root, with a few short threads
fastened thereto; from the which rise up a few jagged leaves like those
of Succory, but much more divided: The stalk groweth up to the height of
two foot, tough and limber like unto rushes, whereon are set many narrow
leaves. The flowers be yellow, single and small; which being faded do fly
away with the wind: the whole plant having milky juice like unto the
other of his kind.

There is another sort of this plant to be found in some places of this
kingdom, and it is mentioned by Bauhin under the name of Chondrilla
viscosa humilis.

6. Sea Gum Succory hath many knobby or tuberous roots full of juice, of a
whitish purple colour, with long strings fastened to them; from which
immediately rise up a few small thin leaves fashioned like those of
Succory, narrower below, and somewhat larger towards their ends; among
which spring up small tender stalks, naked, smooth, hollow, round, of
some foot high, or thereabout: each of these stalks have one flower, in
shape like that of the Dandelion, but lesser. The whole plant is whitish
or hoary, as are many of the sea plants.

7. Swine's Succory hath white small and tender roots, from the which rise
many indented leaves like those of Dandelion, but much less, spread or
laid flat upon the ground; from the midst whereof rise up small soft and
tender stalks, bearing at the top double yellow flowers like those of
Dandelion or Piss-a-bed, but smaller: the seed with the downy tuft flieth
away with the wind.

8. The Male Swine's Succory hath a long and slender root, with some few
threads or strings fastened thereto; from which spring up small tender
leaves about the bigness of those of Daisies, spread upon the ground, cut 
or snipped about the edges confusedly, of an overworn colour, full of a
milky juice: among which rise up divers small tender naked stalks,
bearing at the top of every stalk one flower and no more, of a faint
yellow colour, and something double: which being ripe, do turn into down
that is carried away with the wind: the seed likewise cleaveth unto the
said down, and is also carried away with the wind. The whole plant
perisheth when it hath perfected his seed, and recovereth itself again by
the falling thereof.


Fig. 471. Wart-Succory (9)

9. I think it expedient in this place to deliver unto you the history of
the Cichorium verrucarium, or Zacintha of Matthiolus. This Wart-Succory
(for so I will call it) hath leaves almost like Endive, green, with
pretty deep gashes on their sides; the stalks are much crested, and at
the top divided into many branches; between which, and at their sides
grow many short stalks with yellow flowers like those of Succory, but
that these turn not into down, but into cornered and hard heads, most
commonly divided into eight cells or parts, wherein the seed is
contained.

The Place.

These plants are found only in gardens in this country; the seventh &
eighth excepted, which peradventure may be found to grow in untilled
places, upon ditches, banks and the borders of fields, or the like.

The Time.

They do flower from May to the end of August.

The Names.

Gum Succory hath been called of the Latins Condrilla, and Chondrilla:
Diosciorides and Pliny call it Cichorion, and Seris, by reason of some
likeness they have with Succory, especially the two first, which have
blue flowers as those of the Succories. Lobel maketh Cichorea verrucaria
to be Zacintha of Matthiolus.

The Names in particular.

1. This is called Chondrilla cærulea belgarum, of Lobel: Apate, of
Dalechampius.

2. Conrilla 2 of Matthiolus: Chondrilla latifolia cærulea, of
Tabernamonontus.

3. Chondrilla prior dioscoridis, of Clusius and Lobel.

4. Chondrilla rara purpurea, &c. of Lobel: Chondrilla hispanica
narbonensis, of Tabernamontanus: Seneciocarduus apulus, of Columna.

5. Chondrilla prima dioscoridis, of Columna and Bauhin: Viminea viscosa,
of Lobel and Clusius.

6. Chondrilla altera dioscoridis, of Columna: Lobel calls it, Chondrilla
pusilla marina lutea bulbosa.

7. Hypochæris porcellia, of Tabernamontanus.

8. Hieracium minimum 9 of Clusius: Hyoseris latifolia, of
Tabernamontanus. The two last should have been put among the Hieracia.

9. Cichorium verrucarium, and Zacinthus of Matthiolus and Clusius.

The Nature and Virtues.

These kinds of gum Succory are like in temperature to the common Succory,
but drier.

A. The root and leaves tempered with honey, and made into trochisks, or
little flat cakes, with nitre or saltpeter added to them, cleanse away
the morphew, sun-burnings, and all spots of the face.

B. The gum which is gathered from the branches, whereof it took his name,
layeth down the hairs of the eyebrows and such like places: and in some
places it is used for mastic, as Bellonius observes.

C. The gum powdered with myrrh, and put into a linen cloth, and a pessary
made thereof like a finger, and put up, bringeth down the terms in young
wenches and such like.

D. The seeds of Zacintha beat to powder, and given in the decreasing of
the Moon to the quantity of a spoonful, taketh away warts, and such like
excrescences, in what part of the body soever they be; the which medicine
a certain chirurgeon of Padua did much use, whereby he gained great sums
of money, as reporteth that ancient physician Ioachimus Camerarius of
Nuremberg a famous city in Germany. And Matthiolus affirms that he hath
known some helped of warts, by once eating the leaves hereof in a salad.


CHAP. 32. Of Dandelion.



Fig. 472. Dandelion (1) 

Fig. 473. Knotty-rooted Dandelion (3)
The Description.

1. The herb which is commonly called Dandelion doth send forth from the
root long leaves deeply cut and gashed in the edges like those of wild
Succory, but smoother: upon every stalk standeth a flower greater than
that of Succory, but double, and thick set together, of colour yellow,
and sweet in smell, which is turned into a round downy blowball, that is
carried away with the wind. The root is long, slender, and full of milky
juice when any part of it is broken, as is the Endive or Succory, but
bitterer in taste than Succory.

There are divers varieties of this plant, consisting in the largeness, 
smallness, deepeness, or shallowness of the divisions of the leaf, as
also in the smoothness and roughness thereof.

2. There is also another kind of Succory which maybe referred hereunto,
whose leaves are long, cut like those of broad leafed Succory: the stalks
are not unlike, being divided into branches as those of Dandelion, but
lesser, which also vanisheth into down when the seed is ripe, having a
long and white root.

3. There is another Dens Leonis, or Dandelion, which hath many knotty,
and tuberous roots like those of the Asphodel; the leaves are not so
deeply cut in as those of the common Dandelion, but larger, and somewhat
more hairy: the flowers are also larger, and of a paler yellow, which fly
away in such down as the ordinary.

The Place.

They are found often in meadows near unto water ditches, as also in
gardens and highways much trodden.

The Time.

They flower most times in the year, especially if the winter be not
extreme cold.

The Names.

These plants belong to the Succory which Theophrastus, & Pliny call
Aphaca, or Aphace Leonardus: Fuchsius thinkth that Dandelion is Hedypnois
plinii, of which he writeth in his 20th book, and eighth chapter,
affirming it to be a wild kind of Broad-Leaved Succory, and that
Dandelion is Taraxacon: but Taraxacon, as Avicenna teacheth in his 692nd
chapter, is garden Endive, as Serapio mentioneth in his 143rd chapter;
who citing Paulus for a witness concerning the faculties, setteth down
these words which Paulus writeth of Endive and Succory. Divers of the
later physicians do also call it Dens Leonis, or Dandelion: it is called
in High Dutch, Kolkraut: in Low Dutch, Papen Cruit: in French, Pissenlit
or couronne de prestre, or Dent de Lion: in English, Dandelion: and of
divers, Piss-a-bed. The first is also called of some, and in shops
Taraxacon, Caput monachi, Rostrum porcinum, and Urinaria. The other is
Dens leonis monspieliensium of Lobel, and Cichoreum constantinopolitanum,
of Matthiolus.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Dandelion is like in temperature to Succory, that is to say, wild
Endive. It is cold, but it drieth more, and doth withal cleanse, and open
by reason of the bitterness which it hath joined with it: and therefore
it is good for those things for which Succory is. Boiled, it strengthens
the weak stomach, and eaten raw it stops the belly, and helps the
dysentery, especially being boiled with lentils; the juice drunk is good
against the involuntary effusion of seed; boiled in vinegar, it is good
against the pain that troubles some in making of water. A decoction made
of the whole plant helps the yellow jaundice.


CHAP. 33. Of Sow-Thistle.



Fig. 474. Prickly Sow-Thistle (1) 

Fig. 475. The More Prickly Sow-Thistle (2)
The Kinds.

There be two chief kinds of Sow-Thistles; one tenderer and softer, the
other more pricking and wilder: but of these there be sundry sorts more
found by the diligence of the later writers; all which shall be
comprehended in this chapter, and every one be distinguished with a
several description.

The Description.

1. The Prickly Sow-Thistle hath long broad leaves cut very little in, but
full of small prickles round about the edges something hard and sharp,
with a rough and hollow stalk: the flowers stand on the tops of the
branches, consi sting of many small leaves, single, and yellow of colour;
and when the seed is ripe it turneth into down, and is carried away with
the wind. The whole plant is full of a white milky juice.

2. There is another kind of this, whose leaves are sometimes pretty deep
cut in like as those of the ordinary Sow-Thistle; but the stalks are
commonly higher than those of the last described, and the leaves more
rough and prickly; but in other respects not differing from the rest of
this kind. It is also sometimes to be found with the leaves less divided.



Fig. 476. Hare's Lettuce (3) 

Fig. 477. Broad-Leaved Sow-Thistle (4) 
	3. The stalk of Hare's Lettuce, or Smooth Thistle is oftentimes a
cubit high, edged and hollow, of a pale colour, and sometimes reddish:
the leaves be green, broad, set round about with deep cuts or gashes,
smooth, and without prickles. The flowers stand at the top of the
branches, yellow of colour, which are carried away with the wind when the
seed is ripe. This is sometimes found with whitish, and with snow-white
flowers, but yet seldom.

4. Broad-Leaved Sow-Thistle hath a long thick and milky root, as is all
the rest of the plant, with many strings or fibres; from the which cometh
forth a hollow stalk branched or divided into sundry sections. The leaves
be great, smooth, sharp pointed, and green of colour. The flowers of this
are for the most part yellow like as the former.



Fig. 478. Wall Sow-Thistle (5) 

Fig. 479. Narrow-Leaved Sow-Thistle (6) 
	5. Wall Sow-Thistle hath a fibrous woody root, from which rises up
a round stalk not crested: the leaves are much like to those of the other
Sow-Thistles, broad at the setting on, then narrower, and after much
broader, and sharp pointed, so that the end of the leaf much resembles
the shape of an ivy leaf; these leaves are very tender, and of somewhat a
whitish colour on the underside: the top of the stalk is divided into
many small branches, which bear little yellow flowers that fly away in
down.

6. This hath longish narrow leaves soft and whitish, unequally divided
about the edges. The stalks grow some foot high, having few branches, and
those set with few leaves, broad at their setting on, and ending in a
sharp point: the flowers are pretty large like to the great Hawkweed, and
fly away in down: the root is long, white, and lasting. It flowers most
part of summer; and in Tuscany, where it plentifully grows, it is much
eaten in salads, with oil and vinegar, it having a sweetish and somewhat
astringent taste.


Fig. 480. Kinds of Sow-Thistle (7-10)

7. This Blue-Flowered Sow-Thistle is the greatest of all the rest of the
kinds, somewhat resembling the last described in leaves; but those of
this are somewhat rough or hairy on the underside: the flowers are in
shape like those of the ordinary Sow-Thistle, but of a fair blue colour;
which fading, fly away in down that carries with it a small ash-coloured
seed. The whole plant yieldeth milk as all the rest do.

8. Tree Sow-Thistle hath a very great thick and hard root set with a few
hairy threads; from which ariseth a strong and great stalk of a woody
substance, set with long leaves not unlike to Langue-de-bœuf, but more
deeply cut in about the edges, and not so rough: upon which do grow fair
double yellow flowers, which turn into down, and are carried away with
the wind. The whole plant is possessed with such a milky juice as are the
tender and herby Sow-Thistles; which certainly showeth it to be a kind
thereof: otherwise it might be referred to the Hawkweeds, whereunto in
face and show it is like. This hath a running root, and the heads and
tops of the stalks are very rough and hairy.

9. This other Tree Sow-Thistle grows to a man's height or more, having a
firm stalk, smooth, without any prickles, and set with many leaves
encompassing the stalk at their setting on, and afterwards cut in with
four, or sometimes with two gashes only: the upper leaves are not divided
at all: the colour of these leaves is green on the upper side, and
greyish underneath; the top of the stalk is hairy, and divided into many
branches, which bear the flowers in an equal height, as it were in an
umbel: the flowers are not great, considering the largeness o the plant,
but usually as big as those of the common Sow-Thistle, and yellow, having
a hairy head or cap: the seed is crested, longish, and ash-coloured, and
flies away with the down: the root is thick, whitish, having many fibres,
putting out new shoots, and spreading every year. Bauhin maketh this all
one with the other, according to Clusius his description: but in my
opinion there is some difference between them, which chiefly consists, in
that the former hath larger and fewer flowers; the plant also not growing
to so great a height.

10. This plant hath long knotty creeping roots, from whence ariseth a
round slender stalk some two foot high, set at first with little leaves,
which grow bigger and bigger as they come nearer the middle of the stalk,
being pretty broad at their setting on; then somewhat narrower, and so
broader again, and sharp pointed, being of the colour of the Wall (or
Ivy-Leaved) Sow-Thistle. The top is divided into many small branches,
which end in small scaly heads like those of the wild Lettuce, containing
flowers consisting of four purple leaves, turned back and snipped at
their ends; there are also some threads in the middle of the flower,
which turning into down, carry away with them the seed, which is smaall,
and of an ash-colour. Bauhin makes a bigger, and a lesser of these,
distinguishing between that of Clusius (whose figure I here give you) and
that of Columna; yet Fabius Columna himself could find no difference, but
that Clusius his plant had five leaves in the flower, and his but four:
which indeed Clusius in his description affirms; yet his figure (as you
may see) expresses but four: adding, That the root is not well expressed;
which notwithstanding Clusius delcribes according to Columna's
expression.

The Place

The first four grow wild in pastures, meadows, woods, and marshes near
the sea, and among pot-herbs.

The fifth grows opon walls, and in woody mountainous places.

The Tree Sow-Thistle grows amongst corn in watery places.

The fixth, seventh and tenth are strangers in England.

The Time.

They flower in June, July, August, and sometimes later.

The Names.

Sow-Thistle is called in Latin, Sonchus: of divers, Cicerbita,
Lactucella, and Lacterones, Apuleius calleth it Lactuca leporina, or
Hare's-thistle: of some, Brassica leporina, or Hare's Colewort. The
English names are sufficiently touched in their several titles: In Dutch
it is called Hasen Latouwe: the French, Palays de lievre.

The Names in Particular.

1 This is Sonchus asper maior of Cordus: Sonchus tenerior aculeis
asperior of Lobel: Sonchus 3. asperior of Dodonæus.

2. This is Sonchus asper, of Matthiolus, Fuchsius, and others.

3. This, Matthiolus, Dodonæus, Lobel, and others call Sonchus lævis:
Tragus calls it Intybus erratica tertia.

4. This Tabernamontanus only gives, under the title as you have it here.

5. Matthiolus styles this, Sonchus lævis alter: Cæsalpinus calls it
Lactuca murorum and Tabernamontanus Sonchus sylvaticus quartus: Lobel,
Sonchus alter folio sinuato hederaceo.

6. Lobel calls this, Sonchus lævis matthioli: it is Terracrepulus of
Cæsalpinus, and Crepis of Dalechampius.

7. Clusius and Camerarius give us this under the title of Sonchus
cœruleus.

8. Only Tabernamontanus hath this figure, under the title our author
gives it: Bauhin puts it amongst the Hieracia, calling it Hieracium
arborescens palustre.

9. This Bauhin also makes an Hieracium, and would persuade us that
Clusius his description belongs to the last mentioned, and the figure to
this: to which opinion I cannot content. Clusius giveth it under the name
of Sonchus 3. lævis altissimus.

10. This Clusius gives under the name of Sonchus lævior pannonicus 4.
flore purp. Tabernamontanus calls it Libanotis Theophrasti sterilis:
Columna hath it by the name of Sonchus montanus purpureus: Cordus,
Gesner, Thalius, and Bauhin refer it to the Lactucæ sylvestres: the last
of them terming it Lactuca montana purpuro-cœrulea.

The Temperature

The Sow-Thistles, as Galen writeth, are of a mixed temperature; for they
consist of a watery and earthy substance, cold, and likewise binding.

The Virtues.

A. Whilst they are yet young and tender they are eaten as other pot-herbs
are; but whether they be eaten, or outwardly applied in manner of a
poultice, they do evidently cool: therefore they be good for all
inflammations or hot swellings, if they be laid thereon.

B. Sow-Thistle given in broth taketh away the gnawings of the stomach
proceeding of an hot cause and increase milk in the breasts of nurses,
causing the children whom they nurse to have a good colour: and of the
same virtue is the broth if it be drunken.

C. The juice of these herbs doth cool and temper the heat of the
fundament and privy parts.


CHAP. 34. Of Hawkweed.



Fig. 481. Great Hawkweed (1) 

Fig. 482. Small Hare's Hawkweed, or Yellow Devil's-Bit (2)
The Kinds.

Hawkweed is also a kind of Succory; of which Dioscerides maketh two
sorts, and the later writers more: the which shall be described in this
chapter following, where they shall be distinguished as well with several
titles as sundry descriptions.

The Description.

1. The Great Hawkweed hath large and long leaves spread upon the ground,
in shape like those of the Sow-Thistle: the stalk groweth to the height
of two cubits, branched into sundry arms or divisions, hollow within as
the young Kex, reddish of colour; whereupon do grow yellow flowers thick
and double, which turn into down that flieth away with the wind when the
seed is ripe. The root is thick, tough and thready.

2. The small Hawkweed, which of most writers hath been taken for Yellow
Devil's-bit, hath long leaves deeply cut about the edges, with some sharp
roughness thereon like unto Sow-Thistle. The stalks and flowers are like
the former: the root is compact of many small strings, with a small knob,
or as it were the stump of an old root in the middle of those strings,
cut or bitten off; whereupon it took his name Devil's-Bit.



Fig. 483. Black Hawkweed (3) 

Fig.484. Succory Hawkweed (4) 
	3. Black Hawkweed hath very many long jagged leaves, not much
unlike to those of Buck's-Horn, spread flat and far abroad upon the
ground, which the picture cannot express as is requisite, in so little
room: among which rise up many stalks slender and weak, the flowers
growing at the top yellow and very double: it hath also a thready root.

4. Succory Hawkweed hath many long and large leaves spread upon the
ground, deeply cut on both sides almost to the middle rib; from which
rise up small stalks and flowers like those of the less Dandelion, but
lesser. The root consisteth of many small thready strings.


Fig. 485. Kinds of Hawkweed (5-8)

5. Endive Hawkweed hath many broad leaves, indented about the edges very
like unto Garden Endive, but narrower; among which rise up stalks a foot
or more high, slender, hairy, and brittle: the flowers are yellow, and
grow at the top double, and thick set in a scaly husk like the Knapweed
or Iacea, having great thick and thready roots. This hath a stalk
sometimes more, and otherwhiles less rough, with the leaves somtimes more
cut in, more long and narrow, and again otherwhiles more short and broad.

6. Long-rooted Hawkweed hath many broad leaves spread upon the ground,
slightly & confusedly indented about the edges, with somewhat a bluntish
point; among which leaves spring up strong and tough stalks a foot and
half high, set on the top with fair double yellow flowers much like unto
a Piss-a-bed. The root is very long, white and tough.

7. Sharp Hawkweed hath leaves like those of Langue-de-Bœuf or Ox-Tongue,
but much narrower, sharp about the edges, and rough in the middle: the
stalks be long and slender, set with the like leaves, but lesser: the
flowers grow at the top, double and yellow: the root is tough & thready.

8. Crooked or Falked Hawkweed hath leaves like unto the garden Succory,
yet much smaller, and divided, slightly indented on both sides, with
tender, weak, and crooked stalks; whereupon do grow flowers like those of
Lampsana, of a black, or pale yellow colour, and the roots small and
thready. The seeds are long, and falcated, or crooked, so that they
somewhat resemble the foot or claws of bird, and from these seeds the
plant hath this epithet, falcatum, or crooked in manner of a scythe or
sickle.



Fig. 486. The other Crooked Hawkweed (9) 

Fig. 487. Broad-Leaved Mountain Hawkweed (10) 


9. This in leaves is not much unlike the last described, but that they
are somewhat broader, and less cut in, having little or no bitterness nor
milkiness, the stalks are some foot high commonly bending, or falling
upon the ground; the flowers are small and yellow, and to grow out of the
midst of the seed, whenas indeed they grow at the top of them, the rest
being but an empty husk which is falcated like that of the last
described. This figure we give you was taken before the flowers were
blown, so that by that means the falcated or crooked seed vessels are not
expressed in this, but you may see their manner of growing by the former.

10. The broad-Leaved mountain Hawkweed hath broad, long, smooth leaves,
deeply indented toward the stalk, relembling the leaves of the greatest
Sow-thistle. The stalk is hollow, and spongeous, full of a milky juice,
as is the rest of the plant, as also all the other of his kind; the
flowers grow at the top of the stalks, double and yellow.


Fig. 488. Narrow-Leaved or Lesser Mountain Hawkweed (11)

11. The Narrow-Leaved Mountain Hawkweed hath leaves like those of the
last described, but narrower. The stalks be fat, hollow, and full of
milk: the flowers grow at the top double, and yellow of colour. The root
is small and thready.

There is a small mountain Hawkweed having leaves like unto the former,
but more deeply cut about the edges, and sharper pointed, the stalks are
tender and weak, the flowers be double and yellow like those of
Pilosella, or great Mouse-Ear; the root is small and thready.
The Place.

These kinds of herbs do grow in untoiled places near unto the borders of
corn fields, in meadows, highways, woods, mountains, and hilly places,
and near to the brinks of ditches.

The two falcated Hawkweeds grow only in some few gardens.

The Time.

They flower for the most part all the summer long, some sooner, and
others later.

The Names in General.

These plants are all contained under the name of Hieracium: divers name
it in Latin, Accipitrina, which is termed in French, cichoree jaulne: in
English, Hawkweed. These herbs took their name from a Hawk, which is
called in Latin Accipiter, for they are reported to clear their sight by
conveying the juice hereof into their eyes. Gaza calleth it Porcellia for
it is numbered among the Succories, they are called also Lampuca.

Yellow Hawkweed is called of some Morsus diaboli, or yellow Devil's bit,
for that the root doth very well resemble the bitten or cropped root of
the common Devil's bit, being like Scabious.

The Names in Particular.

1. Matthiolus, Fuchsius, Dodonæus, and others call this Hieracium maius.

2, 3. These are varieties of the same plant, the first of them being
called by Fuchsius, Dodonæus, and Matthiolus, Hieracium minus, Lobel
calls it, Hieracium minus praæmorsa radice. That sort of this with more
cut leaves is by Tabernamontanus called, Hieracium nigrum.

4. Lobel calls this Hieracium foliis & facie chondrilla; Bauhin makes
this to differ from that which our author gave in this 4. place out of
Tabernamontanus for he terms this Hieracium chondrilla folio hirsutum,
and the other, Hieracium chondrilla folio glabrum; the one rough-leaved,
the other smooth; yet that which grows frequently with us, and is very
well represented by this figure, hath smooth leaves, as he also observed
it to have in Italy and about Montpellier in France.

5. This is Hieracium alterum grandius, and Hieracium montanum
angustifolium primum of Tabernamontanus.

6. Lobel calls this from the length of the root (though sometimes it be
not so long) Hieracium longius radicatum; as also Tabernamontanus
Hieracium macrorhizon, it is thought to be the Apargia of Theophrastes,
by Dalechampius in the Hist. Lugd. pag. 562, but the figure there that
bears the title is of Hieracium minus.

7. Tabernamontanus first gave this under the name of Hieracium intybaceum
asperum. Bauhin refers it to the wild yellow Succories, and calls it
Cichoreum montanum angustifolium hirsute asperum.

8. This Lobel calls Hieracium narbonense falcata siliqua.

9. He calls this Hieracium facie hedypnois: and Cæsalpinus terms this
Rhagadiolus; and the last mentioned, Rhagadiolus alter.

10. This by Tabernamontanus is called Hieracium montanum maius
latifolium.

11. Tabernamontanus also styles this Hieracium montanum latifolium minus.

The Nature.

The kinds of Hawkweed are cold and dry, and somewhat binding.

The Virtues.

A. They are in virtue and operation like to Sonchus or Sow-thistle, and
being used after the same manner, be as good to all purposes that it doth
serve unto.

B. They be good for the eyesight, if the juice of them be dropped into
the eyes, especially that which is called Devil's-Bit, which is thought
to be the best, and of greatest force.

C. Therefore as Dioscorides writeth, it is good for an hot stomach, and
for inflammations if it be laid on them.

D. The herb and root being stamped and applied, is a remedy for those
that be stung of the scorpion; which effect not only the greater
Hawkweeds, but the lesser ones also do perform.


CHAP. 35. Of Clusius' Hawkweed.



Fig. 489. Clusius' First Hawkweed (1) 

Fig. 490. Clusius' 5th Hawkweed (2)
The Kinds.

There be likewise other sorts of Hawkweeds, which Carolus Clusius hath
set forth in his Pannonic Observations, the which likewise require a
particular chapter, for that they do differ in form very notably.

The Description.

1. The first of Clusius his Hawkweeds have great broad leaves spread upon
the ground, somewhat hairy about the edges, oftentimes a little jagged,
also soft as is the leaf of Mullein, or Hagtaper, and sometimes dashed
here and there with some black spots, in shape like the garden Endive,
full of a milky juice: among which riseth up a thick hollow stalk of a
cubit high, dividing itself at the top into two or three branches,
whereupon do grow sweet smelling flowers not unlike to those of yellow
Succory, set or placed in a black hoary and woolly cup or husk, of a pale
bleak yellow colour, which turneth into a downy blowball that is carried
away with the wind: the root entereth deeply into the ground, of the
bigness of a finger, full of milk, and covered with a thick black bark.

2. The second sort of great Hawkweed according to my computation, and the
5th of Clusius, hath leaves like the former, that is to say soft, and
hoary, and as it were covered with a kind of white woolliness or
hairiness, bitter in taste, of an inch broad. The stalk is a foot high,
at the top whereof doth grow one yellow flower like that of the great
Hawkweed, which is caried away with the wind when the seed is ripe. The
root is black and full of milky juice, and hath certain white strings
annexed thereto.



Fig. 491. Clusius' 6th Hawkweed (3) 

Fig. 492. Clusius' 7th Hawkweed (4) 
	3. This kind of Hawkweed hath black roots a finger thick, full of
milky juice, deeply thrust into the ground, with four small fibres
belonging thereto from which come up many long leaves half an inch or
more broad, covered with a soft down or hairiness, of an overworn russet
colour: and amongst the leaves come up naked and hard stalks, whereupon
do grow yellow flowers set in a woolly cup or chalice, which is turned
into down, and carried away with his seed by the wind.

4. The fourth Hawkweed hath a thick root above a finger long, blackish,
creeping upon the top of the ground, and putting out some fibres, and it
is divided into some heads, each whereof at the top of the earth putteth
out some six or seven longish leaves some half an inch broad, and
somewhat hoary, hairy, and soft as are the others precedent, and these
leaves are snipped about the edges, but the deepest gashes are neareft
the stalks, where they are cut in even to the middle rib, which is strong
and large. The stalk is smooth, naked, and somewhat high; the flowers be
yellow and double as the other.



Fig. 493. Small Candy Hawkweed (5) 

Fig. 494. Dandelion Hawkweed (6) 
	5. The same author hath also set forth another Hieracium, under the
name of Hieracium parvum creticum, which he thus describes: This is an
elegant little plant spreading some six, or more leaves upon the top of
the ground, being narrower at that part whereas they adhere to the root,
and broader at the other end, and cut about the edges, having the middle
rib of a purple colour; amongst these rise up two or three little stalks
about a foot high, without knot until you come almost to the top, whereas
they are divided into two little branches, at which place grows forth
leaves much divided; the flowers grow at the top of a sufficient bigness,
considering the magnitude of the plant, and they consist of many little
leaves lying one upon another, on the upper side wholly white, and on the
underside of a flesh colour. The root is single, longish, growing small
towards the end, and putting forth stringy fibres on the sides. Thus much
Clusius, who received this figure and description from his friend Jaques
Plateau of Tournai. I conjecture this to be the same plant that Bauhin
hath somewhat more accurately figured and described in his Prod. pag. 68,
under the title of Chondrilla purpurascens fœtida: which plant being an
annual, I have seen growing some years since with Mr. Tuggy at
Westminster; and the last summer with an honest and skilful apothecary
one Mr. Nicholas Swayton of Feversham in Kent: but I must confess I did
not compare it with Clusius; yet now I am of opinion, that both these
figures and descriptions are of one and the same plant. It flowers in
July and August, at the later end of which month the seeds also come to
ripeness.

6. This other (not described by Clusius, but by Lobel) hath long rough
leaves cut in and toothed like to Dandelion, with naked hairy stalks,
bearing at their tops fair large and very double yellow flowers, which
fading fly away in down. It grows in some meadows.

The Place.

These kinds of Hawkweeds, according to the report of Clusius, do grow in
Hungary and Austria, and in the grassy dry hills, and herby and barren
Alpish mountains, and such-like places: notwithstanding if my memory fail
me not I have seen them growing in sundry places in England; which I
mean, God willing, better to observe hereafter, as opportunity shall
serve me.

The Time.

He saith they flower from May to August, at what time the seed is ripe.

The Names.

The author himself hath not said more than here is set down as touching
the names, so that it shall suffice what hath now been said, referring
the handling thereof to a further confideration.

The Nature and Virtues.

I find not any thing at all set down either of their nature or virtues,
and therefore I forbear to say any thing else of them, as a thing not
necessary to write of their faculties upon my own conceit and
imagination.


CHAP. 36. Of French or Golden Lungwort.



Fig. 495. Broad-Leaved French or Golden Lungwort (1) 

Fig. 496. Narrow-Leaved French or Golden Lungwort (2)
The Description.

1. This which I here give you in the first place, as also the other two,
are of the kinds of Hawkweed, or Hieracium; wherefore I thought it most
fit to treat of them in this place. This first hath a pretty large yet
fibrous and stringy root; from the which arise many longish leaves,
hairy, soft, and unequally divided, and commonly cut in the deepest
nearest the stalk; they are of a dark green colour, and they are
sometimes broader and shorter, and otherwhiles narrower and longer
(whence Tabernamontanus makes three sorts of this, yet are they nothing
but varieties of this same plant.) Amongst these leaves grow up one or
two naked stalks, commonly having no more than one leaf apiece, and that
about the middle of the stalk; these stalks are also hairy, and about a
cubit high, divided at their tops into sundry branches, which bear double
yellow flowers of an indifferent bigness, which fading and turning into
down, are together with the seed carried away with the wind. This whole
plant is milky like as the other Hawk-weeds.

2. This plant (though confounded by some with the former) is much
different from the last described; for the root is small and fibrous; the
leaves also are small, of the bigness, and somewhat of the shape (though
otherwise indented) of Daisy leaves, whitish and hoary; the stalk is not
above an handful high, crested, hoary, and set with many longish narrow
leaves; and at the top on short footstalks it bears four or five flowers
of a bright yellow colour and pretty large, considering the smallness of
the plant. The flowers, like as others of this kind, fly away in down,
and carry the seeds with them.


Fig. 497. Golden Mouse-Ear, or Grim the Collier (3)

3. This plant (which some also have confounded with the first described)
hath a root at the top, of a reddish or brownish colour, but whitish
within the earth, & on the lower side sending forth whitish fibres: it
bringeth forth in good and fruitful grounds leaves about a foot long, and
two or three inches broad, of a dark green colour, and hairy, little or
nothing at all cut in about the edges; amongst these leaves riseth up a
stalk some cubit high, round, hollow, and naked, but that it sometimes
hath a leaf or two toward the bottom, and towards the top it puts forth a
branch or two. The flowers grow at the top as it were in an umbel, and
are of the bigness of the ordinary Mouse-Ear, and of an orange colour.The
seeds are round, & blackish, and are carried away with the down by the
wind. The stalks and cups of the flowers are all set thick with a
blackish down or hairiness as it were the dust of coals; whence the
women, who keep in it gardens for novelty sake, have named it Grim the
Collier.

The Time.

All these flower in June, July, and August, about the later part of which
month they ripen their seed.

The Place.

1. I received some plants of this from John Goodyer, who first found it
May 27, 1631, in flower; and the 3rd of the following May, not yet
flowering, in a copse in Godalming in Surrey, adjoining to the orchard of
the inn whose sign is the Antelope.

2. This I had from my kind friend Mr. William Coote, who wrote to me,
That he found them growing on a hill in the Lady Bridget Kingsmill's
grounds, in an old Roman camp, close by the Decumane port, on the quarter
that regards the west-south-west, upon the skirts of the hill.

3. This is a stranger, and only to be found in some few gardens.

The Names.

1. This was first set forth by Tragus, under the name of Auricula muris
maior: and by Tabernamontanus (who gave three figures expressing the
several varieties thereof) by the name of Pulmonaria galli, sive aurea:
Dalechampius hath it under the name of Corchorus.

2. This was by Lobel (who first set it forth) confounded with the former,
as you may see by the title over the figure in his Observations, pag.
317, yet his figure doth much differ from that of Tragus, who neither in
his figure nor description allows so much as one leaf upon the stalks;
and Tabernamontanus allows but one, which it seldom wants. Now this by
Lobel's figure hath many narrow leaves; and by the description, Advers.
pag. 253, it is no more than an handful, or handful and half high: which
very well agrees with the plant we here give you, and by no means with 
the former, whose naked stalks are at least a cubit high. So it is
manifest that this plant I have described is different from the former,
and is that which Pena and Lobel gave us under the title of Pulmonaria
gallorum flore hieracii. Bauhin also confounds this with the former.

3. Basil Besler in his Hortus Eystettensis hath well expressed this plant
under the title of Hieracium latifolium peregrinum phlomoides: Bauhin
calls it Hieracium hortense floribus atropurpurascentibus and saith that
some call it Piliosella maior: and I judge it to be the Hieracium
germanicum of Fabius Columna. This also seems rather to be the herb Costa
of Camerarius, than the first described; and I dare almost be bold to
affirm it the same: for he saith that it hath fat leaves lying flat upon
the ground, and as much as he could discern by the figure, agreed with
the Hieracium latifolium of Clusius: to which indeed in the leaves it is
very like, as you may see by the figure which is in the first place in
the foregoing chapter, which very well resembles this plant, if it had
more and smaller flowers.

The Temper and Virtues.

I judge these to be temperate in quality, and endued with a light
astriction.

A. The decoction or the distilled water of this herb taken inwardly, or
outwardly applied, conduce much to the mundifying and healing of green
wounds; for some boil the herb in wine, and so give it to the wounded
patient; and also apply it outwardly.

B. It also is good against the internal inflammations and hot distempers
of the heart, stomach, and liver.

C. The juice of this herb is with good success dropped into the ears when
they are troubled with any pricking or shooting pains or noise.

D. Lastly, the water hath the same quality as that of Succory. Tragus.

E. 2: Pena and Lobel affirm this to be commended against whitlows, and in
the diseases of the lungs.

F. 3: This (if it be the Costa of Camerarius) is of singular use in the
pthisis, that is, the ulceration or consumption of the lungs: whereupon
in Meissen they give the conserve, syrup, and powder thereof for the same
purpose: and they also use it in broths and otherwise. Camerarius.


CHAP. 37. Of Lettuce.



Fig. 498. Garden Lettuce (1) 

Fig. 499. Curled Lettuce (2)
The Kinds.

There be according to the opinion of the ancients, of Lettuce two sorts;
the one wild, or of the field; the other tame, or of the garden: but
time, with the industry of later writers have found out others both wild
and tame, as also artificial, which I purpose to lay down.

The Description.

1. Garden Lettuce hath a long broad leaf, smooth, and of a light green
colour: the stalk is round, thick set with leaves full of milky juice,
bushed or branched at the top: whereupon do grow yellowish flowers, which
turn into down that is carried away with the wind. The seed sticketh fast
unto the cottony down, and flieth away likewise, white of colour, and
somewhat long: the root hath hanging on it many long tough strings, which
being cut or broken, do yield forth in like manner as doth the stalk and
leaves, a juice like to milk. And this is the true description of the
natural Lettuce, and not of the artificial; for by manuring,
transplanting, and having a regard to the moon and other circumstances,
the leaves of the artificial Lettuce are oftentimes transformed into
another shape: for either they are curled, or else so drawn together, as
they seem to be like a Cabbage or headed Colewort, and the leaves which
be within and in the midst are something white, tending to a very light
yellow.

2. The curled Lettuce hath great and large leaves deeply cut or gashed on
both the sides, not plain or smooth as the former, but intricately curled
and cut into many sections.The flowers are small, of a bleak colour, the
which do turn into down, and is carried away with the wind.The seed is
like the former, saving that it changeth sometime into blackness, with a
root like unto the former.

3. This small sort of curled Lettuce hath many leaves hacked and torn in
pieces very confusedly, and withal curled in such an admirable sort, that
every great leaf seemeth to be made of many small leaves set upon one
middle rib, resembling a fan of curled feathers used among gentlewomen:
the flowers, roots, and seeds agree with the former.

4. The Savoy Lettuce hath very large leaves spread upon the ground, at
the first coming up broad, cut or gashed about the edges, crisping or
curling lightly this or that way, not unlike to the leaves of Garden
Endive, with stalks, flowers and seeds like the former, as well in shape,
as yielding that milky juice wherewith they do all abound.



Fig. 500. Cabbage Lettuce (5) 

Fig. 501. Lombard Lettuce (6) 
	5. Cabbage Lettuce hath many plain and smooth leaves at his first
growing up, which for the most part lie flat still upon the ground: the
next that do appear are those leaves in the midst, which turn themselves
together, embracing each other so closely, that it is formed into that
globe or round head, whereof the simplest is not ignorant. The seed
hereof is black, contrary to all the rest; which may be as it were a rule
whereby ye may know the seed of Cabbage Lettuce from the other sorts.

6. The Lombard Lettuce hath many great leaves spread upon the ground like
unto those of the garden Endive, but lesser. The stalks rise up to the
height of three foot: the flowers be yellowish, which turn into down and
fly away with the wind: the seed is white as snow.

The Place.

Lettuce delighteth to grow, as Palladius saith, in a manured, fat, moist,
and dunged ground: it must be sown in fair weather in places where there
is plenty of water, as Columella saith, and prospereth best if it be sown
very thin.

The Time.

It is certain, saith Palladius, that Lettuce may well be sown at any time
or the year, but especially at every first spring, and so soon as winter
is done, till summer be well nigh spent.

The Names.

Garden Lettuce is called in Latin, Lactuca sativa: some judge it to be
Lactuca, à Lacteo succo, called of the milky juice which issueth forth of
the wounded stalks and roots: the Germans name it Lattich: the low Duch,
Latouwe: the Spaniards, Lechuga, and Alface: the English, Lettuce: and
the French, Laictue. When the leaves of this kind are curled or crumpled,
it is named of Pliny, Lactuca crispa: and of Columella, Lactuca
Ceciliana: in English, curled or crumpled Lettuce.

The Cabbage Lettuce is commonly called Lactuca capitata, and Lactuca
sessilis: Pliny nameth it Lactuca Laconica: Columella, Lactuca bætica:
Petrus Crescentius, lactuca Romana: in English, Cabbage Lettuce, and
Loved Lettuce.

There is another sort with reddish leaves, called of Columella, Lactuca
cypria: in English, Red Lettuce.

The Temperature.

Lettuce is a cold and moist pot-herb, yet not in the extreme degree of
cold or moisture, but altogether moderately; for otherwise it were not to
be eaten.

The Virtues.

A. Lettuce cooleth the heat of the stomach, called the heart-burning; and
helpeth it when it is troubled with choler: it quencheth thirst, causeth
sleep, maketh plenty of milk in nurses, who through heat and dryness grow
barren and dry of milk: for it breedeth milk by tempering the driness and
heat. But in bodies that be naturally cold, it doth not engender milk at
all, but is rather an hindrance thereunto.

B. Lettuce maketh a pleasant salad, being eaten raw with vinegar, oil,
and a little salt: but if it be boiled it is sooner digested, and
nourisheth more.

C. It is served in these days, and in these countries in the beginning of
supper, and eaten first before any other meat: which also Martial
testifieth to be done in his time, marvelling why some did use it for a
service at the end of supper, in these verses.

Claudere quæ cenas Lactucæ solebat avorum,
Dic mihi, cur nostras incohat illa dapes?
Tell me why Lettuce, which our grandsires last did eat,
Is now of late become, to be the first of meat?
[Martial, Epigrams book XIII. Ep.14]

D. Notwithstanding it may now and then be eaten at both those times to
the health of the body: for being taken before meat it doth many times
stir up appetite: and eaten after supper it keepeth away drunkenness
which cometh by the wine; and that is by reason that it stayeth the
vapors from rising up into the head.

E. The juice which is made in the veins by Lettuce is moist and cold, yet
not ill, nor much in quantity: Galen affirmeth that it doth neither bind
the belly nor loose it, for it hath in it no harshness nor styptic
quality by which the belly is stayed, neither is there in it any sharp or
biting faculty, which scoureth and provoketh to the stool.

F. But howsoever Galen writeth this, and howsoever the same wanteth these
qualities, yet it is found by experience, that it maketh the body
soluble, especially if it be boiled; for by moistening of the belly it
maketh it the more slippery: which Martial very well knew, writing in his
11th book of Epigrams in this manner:

Prima tibi dabitur; ventri Lactuca movendo
Utilis.
First you will be given letuce useful for moving the bowels.
[Martial, Epigrams book XI. Ep. 52]

G. Lettuce being outwardly applied mitigateth all inflammations; it is
good for burnings and scaldings, if it be laid thereon with salt before
the blisters do appear, as Pliny writeth.

H. The juice of Lettuce cooleth and quencheth the natural seed if it be
too much used, but procureth sleep.


CHAP. 38. Of Wild Lettuce.



Fig. 502. Greater Wild Lettuce (1) 

Fig. 502. Divided-Leaved Wild Lettuce (2)
The Description.

There are three sorts of wild Lettuce growing wild here with us in
England, yet I know not any that have mentioned more than two; yet I
think all three of them have been written of, though two of them be
confounded together and made but one (a thing often happening in the
history of plants) and unless I had seen three distinct ones, I should
myself have been of the same opinion.

1. The first and rarest of these hath long and broad leaves, not cut in,
but only snipped about the edges, and those leaves are they that are on
the lower part of the stalk almost to the middle thereof: then come
leaves from thence to the top, which are deeply divided with large
gashes: the stalk if it grow in good grounds exceeds the height of a man
(for I have seen it grow in a garden to the height of eight or nine
foot), it is large, round, and smooth, and towards the top divided into
many branches which bear yellow flowers somewhat like to the garden
Lettuce, after which also succeed blackish seeds like to other plants of
this kind. The whole plant is full of a clammy milky juice, which hath a
very strong and grievous smell of opium.

2. This hath broad leaves only cut about the edges, but not altogether so
large as those of the last described: the stalk, which commonly is two
cubits or better high, is also smooth, and divided into many branches,
bearing such flowers and seeds as the last described; and this also hath
a milky juice of the same smell as the last described, from which it
differs only in the magnitude, and that this hath all the leaves whole,
and not some whole and some divided, as the former.

3. This in stalks, flowers and seeds is like to the last described, but
the leaves are much different, for they are all deeply gashed or cut in
like as the leaves of Succory, or Dandelion. This also is full of a milky
juice, but hath not altogether so strong a scent of opium as the two
former, though it partake much thereof; the stalk of this is sometimes a
little prickly, and so also is the middle rib upon the backside of the
leaf. All these three have woody roots which die every year, and so they
come up again of the scattered seed.

The Place.

The first of these was found in Hampshire by Mr.Goodyer and the seeds
hereof sent to Mr. Parkinson, in whose garden I saw it growing some two
years ago. The other grow plentifully beween London and St. Pancras
Church, about the ditches and highway side.

The Time.

They come up in the spring, and sometimes sooner, and ripen their seed in
July and August.

The Names.

1. I take the first of there to be the Lactuca Sylvestris of Dioscorides
and the ancients, and that which the authors of the Adversaria gave us
under the title of Lactuca agrestis scariolæ hortensis folio, Lactuca
flore, opii odore vehementi, soporifero & viroso.["Country lettuce with
lives like garden endive, flowers like lettuce, smelling strongly of
opium and soporific"]

2 This is the Endivia of Tragus, pag. 268, and the Thesion of
Dalechampius, pag. 564. Bauhin confounds this with the former.

3. This is the Lactuca sylvestris prior, of Tragus: the Lactuca
sylvestris of Matthiolus, Fuchsius, Dodonæus, and others: it is the Seris
domestica of Lobel.

The Temperature.

These certainly, especially the two first, are cold, and that in the
later end of the third or beginning of the fourth degree (if opium be in
the fourth.)

The Virtues.

A. Some (saith Dioscorides) mix the milky juice hereof with Opium; (for
his Meconium is our opium) in the making thereof.

B. He also saith, that the juice hereof drunk in oxycrate in the quantity
of 2 obuli, (which make some one scruple) purgeth waterish humours by
stool; it also cleanseth the little ulcer in the eye called argemon in
Greek; as also the mystines or darkness of sight.

C. Also beaten and applied with woman's milk it is good agains burns and
scalds.

D. Lastly, it procures sleep, assuages pain, moves the courses in women,
and is drunk against the stingings of scorpions, and bitings of spiders.

E. The seed taken in drink, like as the Garden Lettuce, hindreth
generation of seed and venereous imaginations.


CHAP. 39. Of Lamb's Lettuce, or Corn Salad.



Fig. 504. Lamb's Lettuce (1) 

Fig. 505. Corn Salad (2)
The Description.

1. The plant which is commonly called Olus album, or the white pot-herb
(which of some hath been set out for a kind of Valerian, but unproperly,
for that it doth very notably reserable the Lettuce, as well in form, as
in meat to be eaten, which property is not to be found in Valerian, and
therefore by reason and authority I place it as a kind of Lettuce) hath
many slender weak stalks trailing upon the ground, with certain edges a
foot high when it grows in most fertile ground; otherwise a hand or two
high, with sundry joints or knees: out of every one whereof grow a couple
of leaves narrow and long, not unlike to Lettuce at the first coming up,
as well in tenderness as taste in eating; and on the top of the stalks
stand upon a broad tuft as it were certain white flowers that be
marvellous little, which can scarcely be known to be flowers, saving that
they grow many together like a tuft or umbel: it hath instead of roots a
few slender threads like unto hairs.

2. The other kind of Lettuce, which Dodonæus in his last edition setteth
forth under the name of Album olus: the Low Country men call it Witmoes,
and use it for their meat called wermose; with us, loblolly. This plant
hath small long leaves a finger broad, of a pale green colour; among
which shooteth up a small cornered and slender stem half a foot high,
jointed with two or three joints or knees, out of which proceed two
leaves longer than the first, bearing at the top of the branches tufts of
very small white flowers closely compact together, with a root like the
former.

Both these are of one plant, differing in the bigness and broadness of
the leaf and the whole plant besides.

The Place.

These herbs grow wild in the corn fields, and since it hath grown in use
among the French and Dutch strangers in England, it hath been sown in
gardens as a salad herb.

The Time.

They are found green almost all winter and summer.

The Names.

The Dutch-men do call it Wytmoes; that is to say, Album olus ["White
vegetable"]: of some it is called Ueltcrop: the French term it Salade de
Chanoine: it may be called in English, The White Pot-herb, but commonly,
Corn Salad.

The Temperature and Virtues.

This herb is cold and something moist, and not unlike in faculty and
temperature to the garden Lettuce; in stead whereof, in winter and in the
first months of the spring it serves for a salad herb, and is with
pleasure eaten with vinegar, salt and oil, as other salads be, among
which it is none of the worst.


CHAP. 40. Of Coleworts.


Fig. 506. Kinds of Colewort (1-4)

The Kinds.

Dioscorides maketh two kinds of Coleworts; the tame and the wild: but
Theophrastus makes more kinds hereof; the ruffed or curled Cole, the
smooth Cole, and the wild Cole. Cato imitating Theophrastus, setteth down
also three Coleworts: the first he describeth to be smooth, great, broad-
leaved, with a big stalk; the second ruffed; the third with little
stalks, tender, and very much biting. The same distinction also Pliny
maketh, in his twentieth book; and ninth chapter; where he saith, That
the most ancient Romans have divided it into three kinds; the first
roughed, the second smooth, and the third which is properly called
Colewort. And in his nineteenth book he hath also added to these, other
more kinds; that is to say, Tritianum, Cumanum, Pompeianum, Brutianum,
Sabellium, and Lacuturrium.

The herbarists of our time have likewise observed many sorts, differing
either colour or else in form; other headed with the leaves drawn
together; most of them white, some of a deep green, some smooth-leaved,
and others curled or ruffed; differing likewise in their stalks, as shall
be expressed in their several descriptions.

The Description

1. The Garden Colewort hath many great broad leaves of a deep black green
colour, mixed with ribs and lines of reddish and white colours: the stalk
groweth out of the midst from among the leaves, branched with sundry arms
bearing at the top little yellow flowers: and after they be past, there
do succeed long cods full of round seed like those of the Turnip, but
smaller, with a woody root having many strings or threads fastened
thereto.

2. There is another lesser sort than the former, with many deep cuts on
both sides even to the midst of the rib, and very much curled and roughed
in the edges; in other things it differeth not.

3. The red kind of Colewort is likewise a Colewort of the garden, and
differeth from the common in the colour of his leaves, which tend unto
redness; otherwise very like.

4. There is also found a certain kind hereof with the leaves wrapped
together into a round head or globe, whose head is white of colour,
especially toward winter when it is ripe. The root is hard, and the
stalks of a woody substance. This is the great ordinary Cabbage known
everywhere, and as commonly eaten all over this kingdom.



Fig. 507. Red Cabbage Cole (5) 

Fig. 508. Open Cabbage Cole (6) 
	5. There is another sort of Cabbage or loafed Colewort which hath
his leaves wrapped together into a round head or globe, yet lesser than
that of the white Cabbage, and the colour of the leaves of a lighter red
than those of the former.

6. The open loafed Colewort hath a very great hard or woody stalk,
whereupon do grow very large leaves of a white green colour, and set with
thick white ribs, and gathereth the rest of the leaves closely together,
which be lesser than those next the ground; yet when it cometh to the
shutting up or closing together, it rather dilateth itself abroad, than
closeth all together.

7. Double Colewort hath many great and large leaves, whereupon do grow
here and there other small jagged leaves, as it were made of ragged
shreds and jags set upon the smooth leaf, which giveth show of a plume or
fan of feathers. In stalk, root, and every other part besides it doth
agree with the Garden Colewort.

8. The double crisp or curled Colewort agreeth with the last before
described in every respect, only it differeth in the leaves, which are so
intricately curled, and so thick set over with other small cut leaves,
that it is hard to see any part of the leaf itself, except ye take and
put aside some of those jags and ragged leaves with your hand.



Fig. 509. Cauliflower (9) 

Fig. 510. Swollen Colewort (10) 
	9. Cauliflower, or after some Cauliflower, hath many large leaves
slightly indented about the edges, of a whitish green colour, narrower
and sharper pointed than Cabbage: in the midst of which leaves riseth up
a great white head of hard flowers closely thrust together, with a root
full of strings; in other parts like unto the Coleworts.

10. The swollen Colewort of all other is the strangest, which I received
from a worshipful merchant of London Master Nicholas Lete, who brought
the seed thereof out of France; who is greatly in love with rare and fair
flowers & plants, for which he doth carefully send into Syria, having a
servant there at Aleppo, and in many other countries, for the which
myself and likewise the whole land are much bound unto him.This goodly
Colewort hath many leaves of a bluish green, or of the colour of Woad,
bunched or swollen up about the edges as it were a piece of leather wet
and broiled on a gridiron, in such strange sort that I cannot with words
describe it to the full. The flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a
bleak yellow colour.The root is thick and strong like to the other kinds
of Coleworts.


Fig. 511. Kinds of Colewort (11-15)

11. Savoy Cole is also numbered among the headed Coleworts or Cabbages.
The leaves are great and large very like to those of the great Cabbage,
which turn themselves upwards as though they would embrace one another to
make a loafed Cabbage, but when they come to the shutting up they stand
at a stay, and rather show themselves wider open, than shut any nearer
together; in other respects it is like unto the Cabbage.

12. The curled Savoy Cole in every respect is like the precedent, saving
that the leaves hereof do somewhat curl or crisp about the middle of the
plant: which plant if it be opened in the spring time, as sometimes it
is, it sendeth forth branched stalks, with many small white flowers at
the top, which being past there follow long cods and seeds like the
common or first kind described.

13. This kind of Colewort hath very large leaves deeply jagged even to
the middle rib, in face resembling great and rank parsley. It hath a
great and thick stalk of three cubits high, whereupon do grow flowers,
cods, and seed like the other Coleworts.

14. The small cut Colewort hath very large leaves, wonderfully cut,
hacked and hewn even to the middle rib, resembling a kind of curled
parsley, that shall be described in his place, (which is not common nor
hath not been known nor described until this time) very well agreeing
with the last before mentioned, but differeth in the curious cutting and
jagging of the leaves: in stalk flowers and seed not unlike.

15. Sea Colewort hath large and broad leaves, very thick and curled, and
so brittle that they cannot be handled without breaking, of an overworn
green colour, tending to greyness: among which rise up stalks two cubits
high, bearing small pale flowers at the top; which being past there
follow round knobs wherein is contained one round seed and no more, black
of colour, of the bigness of a tare and a vetch: and therefore Pena and
Lobel called it Brassica marina monospermos.


Fig. 517. Wild Colewort (16)

16. The Wild Colewort hath long broad leaves not unlike to the tame
Colewort, but lesser, as is all the rest of the plant and is of his own
nature wild and therefore not sought after as a meat, but is sown and
husbanded up on ditch banks and such like places for the seeds' sake, by
which oftentimes great gain is gotten.

The Place.

The greatest sort of Coleworts do grow in gardens, and do love a soil
which is fat and thoroughly dunged and well manured: they do best prosper
when they be removed, and every of them grow in our English gardens,
except the wild; which groweth in fields and new digged ditch banks.

The sea Colewort groweth naturally upon the beach and brims of the sea,
where there is no earth to be seen, but sand and rolling pebble stones,
which those that dwell near the sea do call beach: I found it growing
between Whitstable and the Isle of Thanet near the brink of the sea, and
in many places near to Colchester and elsewhere by the seaside.

The Time.

Petrus Crescentius saith that the Colewort may be sown and removed at any
time of the year; whose opinion I altogether mislike. It is sown in the
spring, as March, April, and oftentimes in May, and sometimes in August,
but the special time is about the beginning of September.

The Colewort, saith Columella, must be removed when it attaineth to six
leaves, after it is come up from seed; the which must be done, in April
or May, especially those that were sown in autumn; which afterwards
flourish in the winter months, at what time, they are fittest for meat.

But the Savoy Cole, and the Cauliflower, must be sown in April, in a bed
of hot horse-dung, and covered with straw or such like, to keep it from
the cold, and frosty mornings; and when it hath gotten six leaves after
this sort, then shall you remove him as aforesaid, otherwise if you tarry
for temperate weather before you sow, the year will be spent, before it
come to ripeness.

The Names.

The Apothecaries and the common herbarists do call it Cardis, of the
goodness of the stalk: in the German tongue it is called Koole kraut: in
French, des Choux: in English, Coleworts.

Cauliflower is called in Latin Brassica cypria, and cauliflora: in
Italian, Cauliflore: it seemeth to agree with Brassica pompeiana of
Pliny, whereof he writeth in his 19th book, and 8th chapter.

The Temperature.

All the Coleworts have a drying and binding faculty, with a certain
nitrous or salt quality, whereby they mightily cleanse, either in the
juice, or in the broth. The whole substance or body of the Colewort is of
a binding and drying faculty, because it leaveth in the decoction this
salt quality; which lieth in the juice and watery part thereof: the water
wherein it is first boiled, draweth to itself all the quality; for which
cause the decoction thereof looseth the belly, as doth also the juice of
it, if it be drunk: but if the first broth in which it was boiled be cast
away, then doth the Colewort dry and bind the belly. But it yieldeth to
the body small nourishment, and doth not engender good, but a gross and
melancholic blood. The white Cabbage is best next unto the Cauliflower;
yet Cato doth chiefly commend the Russet Cole: but he knew neither the
white ones, nor the Cauliflower; for if he had, his censure had been
otherwise.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides teacheth, that the Colewort being eaten is good for them
that have dim eyes, and that are troubled with the shaking palsy.

B. The same author affirmeth, that if it be boiled and eaten with
vinegar, it is a remedy for those that be troubled with the spleen.

C. It is reported, that the raw Colewort being eaten before meat, doth
preserve a man from drunkenness: the reason is yielded, for that there is
a natural enmity between it and the vine, which is such, as if it grow
near unto it, forthwith the vine perisheth and withereth away; yea, if
wine be poured unto it while it is in boiling, it will not be any more
boiled, and the colour thereof quite altered, as Cassius and Dionysius
Uticensis do write in their books of tillage: yet doth not Athenæus
ascribe that virtue of driving away drunkenness to the leaves, but to the
seeds of Colewort.

D. Moreover, the leaves of Coleworts are good against all inflammations,
and hot swellings; being stamped with barley and meal, and laid upon them
with salt: and also to break carbuncles.

E. The juice of Coleworts, as Dioscorides writeth, being taken with
Fleur-de-Lys and nitre, doth make the belly soluble, and being drunk with
wine, it is a remedy against the bitings of venomous beasts.

F. The same being applied with the powder of Fenugreek, taketh away the
pain of the gout, and also cureth old and foul ulcers.

G. Being conveyed into the nostrils, it purgeth the head: being put up
with barley meal it bringeth down the flowers.

H. Pliny writeth, that the juice mixed with wine, and dropped into the
ears, is a remedy against deafness.

I. The seed, as Galen saith, driveth forth worms, taketh away freckles of
the face, sun-burning, and what thing soever that need to be gently
scoured or cleansed away.

K. They say that the broth wherein the herb hath been sodden is
marvellous good for the sinews and joints, and likewise for cankers in
the eyes, called in Greek Carcinomata, which cannot be healed by any
other means, if they be washed therewith.


CHAP. 41. Of Rape-Cole


Fig. 513. Round Rape-Cole (1)

The Description.

1. The first kind of Rape-Cole hath one single long root, garnished with
many thready strings: from which riseth up a great thick stalk, bigger
than a great Cucumber or great Turnip: at the top whereof shooteth forth
great broad leaves, like unto those of Cabbage Cole. The flowers grow at
the top on slender stalks, compact of four small yellow flowers: which
being past the seed followeth enclosed in litle long cods, like the seed
of Mustard.

2. The second hath a long fibrous root like unto the precedent; the
tuberous stalk is very great and long, thrusting forth in some few places
here and there, small footstalks, whereupon do grow smooth leaves,
slightly indented about the edges: on the top of the long Turnip stalk
grow lean stalks and flowers like the former. This second differs from
the former only in the length of the swolllen stalk, whence they call it
Caulorapum longum, or Long Rape Cole.

The Place.

They grow in Italy, Spain, and some places of Germany, from whence I have
received seeds for my garden, as also from an honest and curious friend
of mine called Master Goodman, at the Minories near London.

The Time.

They flower and flourish when the other Coleworts do, whereof no doubt
they are kinds, and must be carefully set and sown, as Musk Melons and
Cucumbers are.

The Names.

They are called in Latin, Caulorapum, and Rapocaulis, bearing for their
stalks, as it were Rapes and Turnips, participating of two plants, the
Colewort and Turnip; whereof they took their names.

The Temperature and Virtues.

There is nothing set down of the faculties of these plants, but are
accounted for dainty meat, contending with the Cabbage Cole in goodness
and pleasant taste.


CHAP. 42. Of Beets.



Fig. 514. White Beets (1) 

Fig. 515. Red Beets (2)
The Description.

1. The common white Beet hath great broad leaves, smooth, and plain: from
which rise thick crested or chamfered stalks: the flowers grow along the
stalks clustering together, in shape like little stars which being past,
there succeed round and uneven prickly seed. The root is thick, hard, and
great.

2. There is another sort like in shape and proportion to the former,
saving that the leaves of this be streaked with red here and there
confusedly, which setteth forth the difference.


Fig. 516. Red Roman Beet (3)


There is likewise another sort hereof, that was brought unto me from
beyond the seas, by that courteous merchant Master Lete, before
remembered, the which hath leaves very great, and red in colour, as is
all the rest of the plant, as well root, as stalk, and flowers, full of a
perfect purple juice tending to redness: the middle rib of which leaves
are for the most part very broad and thick, like the middle part of the
Cabbage leaf, which is equal in goodness with the leaves of Cabbage being
boiled. It grew with me 1596, to the height of viii cubits, and did bring
forth his rough and uneven seed very plentifully: with which plant nature
doth seem to play and sport hereself: for the seeds taken from that
plant, which was altogether of one colour, and sown, doth bring forth
plants of many and variable colours, as the worshipful gentleman Master
John Norden can very well testify, unto whom I gave some of the seeds
aforesaid, which in his garden brought forth many other of beautiful 
colours.

The Place.

The Beet is sown in gardens: it loveth to grow in a moist and fertile
ground. The ordinary white Beet grows wild upon the sea-coast of Thanet
and divers other places by the sea, for this is not a different kind as
some would have it.

The Time.

 The fittest time to sow it is in the spring: it flourisheth and is green
all summer long, and likewise in winter, and bringeth forth his seed the
next year following.

The Names.

The Latins have named it Beta: the Germans, Maugolt: the Spaniards,
Aselgas: the French, de la Porée, des Iotes, and Bects. Theophrastus
saith, that the White Beet is surnamed Sicula, or of Sicily: hereof
cometh the name Sicla by which the barbarians, and some apothecaries did
call the Beet; the which word we in England do use, taken for the same.

The Nature.

The White Beets are in moisture and heat temperate, but the other kinds
are dry, and all of them abstersive: so that the White Beet is a cold and
moist pot-herb, which hath joined with it a certain salt and nitrous
quality, by reason whereof it cleanseth and draweth phlegm out of the
nostrils.

The Virtues.

A. Being eaten when it is boiled, it quickly descendeth, looseth the
belly, and provoketh to the stool, especially being taken with the broth
wherein it is sodden: it nourisheth little or nothing, and is not so
wholesome as Lettuce.

B. The juice conveyed up into the nostrils doth gently draw forth phlegm,
and purgeth the head.

C. The great and beautiful Beet last described may be used in winter for
a salad herb, with vinegar, oil, and salt, and is not only pleasant to
the taste, but also delightful to the eye.

D. The greater red Beet or Roman Beet, boiled and eaten with oil, vinegar
and pepper, is a most excellent and delicate salad: but what might be
made of the red and beautiful root (which is to be preferred before the
leaves as well in beauty as in goodnes) I refer unto the curious and
cunning cook, who no doubt when he hath had the view thereof, and is
assured that it is both good and wholesome, will make thereof many and
divers dishes, both fair and good.


CHAP. 43. Of Blites.



Fig. 517. Great White Blite (1) 

Fig. 518. Great Red Blite (2)
The Description.

1. The Great White Blite groweth three or four foot high, with grayish or
white round stalks: the leaves are plain and smooth, almost like to those
of the white Orach, but not so soft nor mealy: the flowers grow thrust
together like those of Orach: after that cometh the seed enclosed in
little round flat husky skins.

2. There is likewise another sort of Blites very smooth and flexible like
the former, saving that the leaves are reddish, mixed with a dark green
colour, as is the stalk and also the rest of the plant.



Fig. 519. Small White Blite (3) 

Fig. 520. Small Red Blite (4) 
	3. There is likewise found a third sort very like unto the other,
saving that the stalks, branches, leaves, and the plant is altogether of
a green colour. But this grows upright, and creeps not at all.

4. There is likewise another in our gardens very like the former, saving
that the whole plant traileth upon the ground: the stalks, branches, and
leaves are reddish: the seed is small, and clustering together, green of
colour, and like unto those of Ruellius his Coronopus, or Buck's-Horn.

The Place.

The Blites grow in gardens for the most part, although there be found of
them wild many times.

The Time.

They flourish all the summer long, and grow very green in winter
likewise.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Blitum: in English, Blite, and Blites: in French,
Blites, or Blitres.

The Nature.

The Blite (saith Galen in his sixth book Of the Faculties of Simple
Medicines) is a pot-herb which serveth for meat; being of a cold moist
temperature, and that chiefly in the second degree. It yieldeth to the
body small nourishment, as in his second book Of the Faculties of
Nourishments he plainly shows; for it is one of the pot-herbs that be
unsavoury or without taste; whose substance is waterish.

The Virtues.

A. The Blite doth nourish little, and yet is fit to make the belly
soluble, though not vehemently, seeing it hath no nitrous or sharp
quality whereby the belly should be provoked. I have heard many old wives
say to their servants, Gather no Blites to put into my pottage, for they
are not good for the eye-sight: whence they had those words I know not,
it may be of some Doctor that never went to school, for that I can find
no such thing upon record, either among the old or later writers.


CHAP. 44. Of Flower-Gentle.


Fig. 521. Kinds of Flower-Gentle (1-4)

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Flower-Gentle, differing in many points very
notably; as in greatness and smallness; some purple, and others of a
scarlet colour; and one above the rest wherewith Nature hath seemed to
delight herself, especially in the leaves, which in variable colours do
strive with the Parrot's feathers for beauty.

The Description.

1. Purple Flower-Gentle riseth up with a stalk a cubit high, and sometime
higher, streaked or chamfered alongst the same, often reddish toward the
root, and very smooth: which divideth itself toward the top into small
branches, about which stand long leaves, broad, sharp pointed, soft,
slippery, of a green colour, and sometimes tending to a reddish: instead
of flowers, come up ears or spoky tufts, very brave to look upon, but
without smell; of a shining light purple, with a gloss like velvet, but
far passing it: which when they are bruised, do yield a juice almost of
the same colour, and being gathered, do keep their beauty a long time
after; insomuch that being set in water, it will revive again as at the
time of his gathering, and it remaineth so, many years, whereupon
likewise it hath taken its name. The seed standeth in the ripe ears, of
colour black, and much glittering: the root is short, and full of
strings.

2. The second sort of Flower-Gentle hath leaves like unto the former: the
stalk is upright with a few small slender leaves upon it: among which do
grow small clusters of scaly flowers, of an overworn scarlet colour. The
seed is like the former.

3. It far exceedeth my skill to describe the beauty and excellency of
this rare plant called Floramor; and I think the pencil of the most
curious painter will be at a stay, when he shall come to set him down in
his lively colours: but to colour it after my best manner this I say:
Floramor hath a thick knobby root, whereupon do grow many thready
strings: from which riseth a thick stalk, but tender and soft, which
beginneth to divide himself into sundry branches at the ground and so
upward, whereupon do grow many leaves, wherein doth consist his beauty:
for in few words, every leaf doth resemble in colours the most fair and
beautiful feather of a Parrot, especially those feathers that are mixed
with most sundry colours, as a stripe of red, and a line of yellow, a
dash of white, and a rib of green colour, which I canot with words set
forth, such are the sundry mixtures of colours that nature hath bestowed
in her greatest jollity upon this flower. The flowers do grow between the
footstalks of those leaves and the body of the stalk or trunk, base, and
of no moment in respect of the leaves, being as it were little chaffy
husks of an overworn tawny colour: the seed is black, and shining like
burnished horn.

So saith our author; but I have not seen this thus variegated as he
mentions, but the leaves are commonly of three colours; the lower part or
that next to the stalk is green; the middle red, and the end yellow; or
else the end red, the middle yellow, and the bottom green.

4. This plant hath a great many of threads and strings, of which his
roots do consist. From which do rise up very thick fat stalks, crested
and streaked, exceeding smooth, and of a shining red colour, which begin
at the ground to divide themselves into branches whereupon do grow many
great and large leaves of a dark green colour tending to redness, in show
like those of the red Beet, streaked and dashed here and there with red,
mixed with green. The flowers grow alongst the stalks, from the midst
thereof even to the top, in shape like Panicum, that is, a great number
of chaffy confused ears thrust hard together, of a deep purple colour. I
can compare the shape thereof to nothing so fitly as to the velvet head
of a stag, compact of such soft matter as is the same: wherein is the
seed, in colour white, round, and bored through the middle.


Fig. 522. Velvet Flower-Gentle (5)

5. This in stalks and leaves is much like the purple Flower-Gentle, but
the heads are larger, bended round, and laced, or as it were woven one
with another looking very beautifully like to crimson velvet: this is
seldom to be found with us; but for the beauty's sake is kept in the
gardens of Italy, whereas the women esteemed it not only for the
comeliness and beauteous aspect, but also for the efficacy thereof
against the bloody issues, and sanious ulcers of the womb and kidneys, as
the authors of the Adversaria affirm.

The Place and Time.

These pleasant flowers are sown in gardens, especially for their great
beauty.

They flower in August, and continue flourishing till the frost overtake
them, at what time they perish. But the Floramor would be sown in a bed
of hot horse-dung, with some earth strewed thereon in the end of March,
and ordered, as we do musk Melons, and the like.

The Names.

This plant is called in Greek Amaranthos, because it doth not wither and
wax old: in Latin, Amaranthus purpureus: in Duch, Samatbluomen: in
Italian, Flor velluto: in French, Passe velours: in English Flower-
Gentle, purple Velvet Flower, Floramor; and of some Flower Velour.

The Temperature, and Virtues.

Most attribute to Flower-Gentle a binding faculty, with a cold and dry
temperature.

A. It is reported they stop all kinds of bleeding which is not manifest
by any apparent quality in them, except peradventure by the colour only
that the red ears have: for some are of opinion, that all red things
stanch bleeding in any part of the body: because some things, as Bole
armeniac, Sanguis draconis, Terra Sigillata, and such like of red colour
do stop blood: But Galen, lib. 2 & 4, de Simp. Facult. plainly showeth,
that there can be no certainty gathered from the colours, touching the
virtues of simple and compound medicines: wherefore they are ill
persuaded, that think the Flower-Gentle to stanch bleeding, to stop the
lask or bloody flux, because of the colour only, if they had no other
reason to induce them thereto.


CHAP. 45. Of Orach.


Fig. 523. Kinds of Orach (1-4)

The Description.

1. The Garden White Orach hath an high and upright stalk, with broad
sharp pointed leaves like those of Blite, yet smoother and softer. The
flowers are small and yellow, growing in clusters: the seed round, and
like a leaf covered with a thin skin, or film, and groweth in clusters.
The root is woody and fibrous: the leaves and stalks at the first are of
a glittering grey colour, and sprinkled as it were with a meal or flour.

2. This differs from the former, only in that it is of an overworn purple
colour.

3. This hath a white and slender root and it is somewhat like, yet less
then the Blite, with narrow leaves somewhat resembling Basil: it hath
abundance of small flowers, which are succeeded by a numerous sort of
seeds, which are black and shining.

4. There is a wild kind growing near the sea, which hath pretty broad
leaves, cut deeply about the edges, sharp pointed, and covered over with
a certain mealiness, so that the whole plant as well leaves, as stalks
and flowers, look of an hoary or grey colour. The stalks lie spread, on
the shore or beach, whereas it usually grows.


Fig. 524. Kind of Wild Orach (5-8)

5. The Common Wild Orach hath leaves unequally sinuated, or cut in
somewhat after the manner of an oaken leaf, and commonly of an overworn
grayish colour: the flowers and seeds are much like those of the garden,
but much less.

6. This is like the last described, but the leaves are lesser and not so
much divided, the seeds grow also in the same manner as those of the
precedent.

7. This also in the face and manner of growing is like those already
described, but the leaves are long and narrow, sometimes a little
notched: and from the shape of the leaf Lobel called it Atriplex
sylvestris polygoni, aut helxines folio.

8. This elegant Orach hath a single and small root, putting forth a few
fibres, the stalks are some foot high, divided into many branches, and
lying along upon the ground; and upon these grow leaves at certain spaces
whitish and unequally divided, somewhat after the manner of the wild
Orach; about the stalk or setting on of the leaves grow as it were little
berries, somewhat like a little mulberry, and when these come to
ripeness, they are of an elegant red colour, and make a fine show. The
seed is small, round and ash coloured.

The Place.

The Garden Oraches grow in most gardens. The wild Oraches grow near
pathways and ditch sides; but most commonly about dunghills and such fat
places. Sea Orach I have found at Queenborough, as also at Margate in the
Isle of Thanet: and most places about the seaside. The eighth groweth
only in some choice gardens, I have seen it divers times with Mr.
Parkinson.

TheTime.

They flower and seed from June to the end of August.

The Names.

Garden Orach is called in Latin, Atriplex, and Aureum olus: in Dutch,
Weld; in French, Arrouches ou bonnes dames: in English, Orach and Orage:
in the Bohemian tongue, Leboda: Pliny hath made some difference between
Atriplex and Chrysolachanum, as though they differed one from another;
for of Atriplex he writeth in his twentieth book; and of Chrysolachanum
in his twenty-eighth book, and eighth chapter: where he writeth thus,
Chrysolachanum, saith he, groweth in Pinetum ["Pine woods"] like Lettuce:
it healeth cut sinews if it be forthwith applied.

3 This wild Orach hath been called of Lobel, Polyspermum Cassani Bassi,
or Allseed.

The Temperature.

Orach, saith Galen, is of temperature moist in the second degree, and
cold in the first.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, That the garden Orach is both moist and cold, and
that it is eaten boiled as other salad herbs are, and that it softeneth
and looseth the belly.

B. It consumeth away the swellings of the throat, whether it be laid on
raw or sodden.

C. The seed being drunk with mead or honeyed water, is a remedy against
the yellow jaundice. Galen thinketh, that for that cause it hath a
cleansing quality, and may open the stoppings of the liver.


CHAP. 46. Of Stinking Orach.


Fig. 525. Stinking Orach

The Description.

Stinking Orach grows flat upon the ground and is a base and low plant
with many weak and feeble branches, whereupon do grow small leaves of a
grayish colour, sprinkled over with a certain kind of dusty mealiness, in
shape like the leaves of Basil: amongst which leaves here and there
confusedly be the seeds dispersed, as it were nothing but dust or ashes:
The whole plant is of a most loathsome savour or smell; upon which plant
if any should chance to rest and sleep, he might very well report to his
friends, that he had reposed himself among the chief of Scoggin's heirs.

The Place.

It groweth upon dunghills, and in the most filthy places that may be
found, as also about the common pissing places of great princes' and
noblemen's houses. Sometime it is found in places near brick kilns and
old walls, which doth somewhat alter his smell, which is like toasted
cheese: but that which groweth in his natural place smells like stinking
salt-fish, whereof it took his name.

The Time

It is an herb for a year, which Garosmus springeth up, and when the seed
is ripe it perisheth, and recovereth itself again of his own seed; so
that if it be gotten into a ground, it cannot be destroyed.

The Names

Stinking Orach is called of Cordus, Garosmus, because it smelleth like
stinking fish: it is likewise called Tragium germanicum, and Atriplex
fœtidagarum olens, by Pena and Lobel: for it smelleth more stinking than
the rammish male goat: whereupon some by a figure have called it
Vulvaria: and it may be called in English, stinking Mother-Wort.

The Nature and Virtues.

There hath been little or nothing set down by the ancients, either of his
nature or virtues, notwithstanding it hath been thought profitable, by
reason of his stinking smell for such as are troubled with the mother:
for as Hypocrates saith, when the mother doth stifle or strangle, such
things are to be applied unto the nose as have a rank and stinking smell.


CHAP. 47. Of Goose-Foot.



Fig. 526. Goose-Foot (1) 

Fig. 527. The Other Goose-Foot (2)
The Description.

1. Goose-Foot is a common herb, and thought to be a kind of Orach: it
riseth up with a stalk a cubit high or higher, somewhat chamfered and
branched the leaves be broad, smooth, sharp pointed, shining, having
certain deep cuts about the edges, and resembling the foot of a goose:
the flowers be small, something red: the seed standeth in clusters upon
the top of the branches, being very like the seed of wild Orach, and the
root is divided into sundry strings.

2. This differs from the last described, in that the leaves are sharper
cut, and more divided, the seed somewhat smaller, and the colour of the
whole plant is a deeper or darker green.

The Place.

It grows plentifully in obscure places near old walls and highways, and
in desert places.
The Time.

It flourisheth when the Orach doth, whereof this is a wild kind.

The Names.

The later herbarists have called it Pes anserinus, and Chenopodium, of
the likeness the leaves have to the foot of a goose: in English, Goose-
Foot and wild Orach.

The Temperature.

This herb is cold and moist, and that no lesser than Orach, but as it
appeareth more cold.

The virtues.

It is reported that it killeth swine if they do eat thereof: it is not
used in physic, and much less as a salad herb.


CHAP. 48. Of English Mercury.


Fig. 528. English Mercury, or Good Henry

The Description.

Good Henry called Tota Bona, so named of the later herbarists, is
accounted of them to be one of the Docks, but not properly. This bringeth
forth very many thick stalks, set with leaves two foot high; on the
branches whereof towards the top stand green flowers in clusters, thick
thrust together. The seed is flat like that of the Orach, whereof this is
a kind. The leaves be fastened to long footstalks; broad behind, and
sharp pointed, fashioned like the leaves of Aron, or Wake-Robin, white or
grayish of colour, and as it were covered over with a fine meal: in
handling it is fat and oleous, with a very thick root, and parted into
many divisions, of a yellow colour within, like the sharp pointed Dock.

The Place

It is commonly found in untiled places, and among rubbish near common
ways, old walls, and by hedges in fields.

The Time.

It flowereth in June and July especially.

The Names.

It is called of some Pes Anserinus, and Tota bona: in English, All-Good,
and Good Henry: in Cambridgshire it is called Good King Harry: the
Germans call it Guter Heinrick, of a certain good quality it hath, as
they also name a certain pernicious herb, Malus Henricus, or Bad Henry.
It is taken for a kind of Mercury, but unproperly, for that it hath no
participation with Mercury either in form or quality, except ye will call
every herb Mercury which hath power to loose the belly.

The Temperature;

Bonus Henricus, or Good Henry is moderately hot and dry, cleansing and
scouring withal.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves boiled with other pot-herbs and eaten, maketh the body
soluble.

B. The same bruised and laid upon green wounds, or foul and old ulcers,
doth scour, mundify and heal them.


CHAP. 49. Of Spinach.


Fig. 529. Spinach (1)

The Description.

1. Spinach is a kind of Blite, after some; notwithstanding I rather take
it for a kind of Orach. It bringeth forth soft and tender leaves of a
dark green colour, full of juice, sharp pointed, and in the largest part
or nether end square; parted oftentimes with a deep gash on either side
next to the stem or footstalk: the stalk is round, a foot high, hollow
within: on the tops of the branches stand flowers in clusters, in whose
places doth grow a prickly seed. The root consisteth of many small
threads.

2. There is another sort found in our gardens like unto the former in
goodness, as also in shape, having that the leaves are not so great, nor
so deepely gashed or indented: and the seed hath no prickles at all, for
which cause it is called Round Spinach.

The Place.

It is sown in gardens without any great labour or industry, and forsaketh
not any ground being but indifferent fertile.

The Time.

It may be sown almost at any time of the year, but being sown in the
spring it quickly groweth up, and cometh to perfection within two months:
but that which is sown in the fall of the year groweth not so soon to
perfection; yet continueth all the winter and seedeth presently upon the
first spring.

The Names.

It is called in these days Spinachia: of some, Spinacheum olus: of
others, Hispanicum olus: Fuchsius nameth it Spinachia: the Arabians and
Serapio call it Hispane: the Germans, Spinet: in English, Spinage and
Spinach: in French, Espinas.

The Nature.

Spinach is evidently cold and moist almost in the second degree, but
rather moist. It is one of the pot-herbs whole substance is watery, and
almost without taste, and therefore quickly descendeth and looseth the
belly.

The Virtues.

A. It is eaten boiled, but it yieldeth little or no nourishment at all:
it is something windy, and easily causeth a desire to vomit: it is used
in salads when it is young and tender.

B. This herb of all other pot-herbs and salad herbs maketh the greatest
diversity of meats and salads.


CHAP. 50. Of Pellitory of the Wall.


Fig. 530. Pellitory of the Wall

The Description.

Pellitory of the Wall hath round tender stalks somewhat brown or reddish
of colour and somewhat shining: the leaves be rough like to the leaves of
Mercury, nothing snipped about the edges. The flowers be small, growing
close to the stems: the seed is black and very small, covered with a
rough husk which hangeth fast upon garments: the root is somewhat
reddish.

The Place.

It groweth near to old walls in the moist corners of churches and stone
buildings, among rubbish and such like places.

The Time.

It cometh up in May: it seedeth in July and August: the root only 
continueth and is to be found in winter.

The Names.

It is commonly called Parietaria, or by a corrupt word Paritaria, because
it groweth near to walls and for the same cause it is named of divers
muralis: also Muralium of Pliny and Celsus. There is also another Helxine
surnamed Cissampelos: some call it perdicium, of partridges which
somtimes feed hereon: some, urceolaris, and vitraria, because it serveth
to scour glasses, pipkins, and such like: it is called in High Dutch,
Tagundnacht: in Spanish Yerva del muro: in English, Pellitory of the
Wall: in French, Parietaire.

The Temperature.

Pellitory of the Wall (as Galen saith) hath force to scour, and is
something cold and moist.

The Virtues.

A. Pellitory of the Wall boiled, and the decoction of it drunken, helpeth
such as are vexed with an old cough, the gravel and stone, and is good
against the difficulty of making water, and stopping of the same, not
only inwardly, but also outwardly applied upon the region of the bladder,
in manner of a fomentation or warm bathing, with sponges or double
clouts, or such like.

B. Dioscorides saith, That the juice tempered with ceruse or white lead
maketh a good ointment against Saint Anthony's fire and the shingles: and
mixed with the cerot of Alcanna, or with the male goat's tallow, it
helpeth the gout in the feet: which Pliny also affirmeth, Lib. 22. cap.
17.

C. It is applied (saith he) to pains of the feet with goat's suet and wax
of Cyprus; where instead of wax of Cyprus there must be put the cerot of
Alcanna.

D. Dioscorides addeth, That the juice hereof is a remedy for old coughs,
and taketh away hot swellings of the almonds in the throat, if it be used
in a gargarism, or otherwise applied: it mitigateth also the pains of the
ears, being poured in with oil of roses mixed therewith.

E. It is affirmed, That if three ounces of the juice be drunk it
provoketh urine out of hand.

F. The leaves tempered with oil of sweet almonds in manner of a poultice,
and laid to the pained parts, is a remedy for them that be troubled with
the stone, and that can hardly make water.


CHAP. 51. Of French Mercury.



Fig. 531. Male Mercury

Fig. 532. Female Mercury
The Kinds.

 There be two kinds of Mercury reckoned for good, and yet both sometimes
wild; besides two wild never found in gardens, unless they be brought
thither.

The Description.

1. The male garden Mercury hath tender stalks full of joints and
branches, whereupon do grow green leaves like Pellitory of the Wall, but
snipped about the edges: amongst which come forth two hairy bullets
round, and joined together like those of Goose-Grass or Cleavers, each
containing in itself one small round seed: the root is tender, and full
of white hairy strings.

2. The female is like unto the former in leaves, stalks, and manner of
growing, differing but in the flowers and seed: for this kind hath a
greater quantity of flowers and seed growing together like little
clusters of grapes, of a yellowish colour. The seed for the most part is
lost before it can be gathered.

The Place.

French Mercury is grown in kitchen gardens among pot-herbs; in vineyards,
and in moist shadowy places: I found it under the dropping of the
Bishop's house at Rochester; from whence I brought a plant or two into my
garden, since which time I cannot rid my garden from it.

The Time.

They flower and flourish all the summer long.

The Names.

It is called in Greek, Mercury his herb; whereupon the Latins call it
Mercurialis: it is called in Italian, Mercorella: in English, French
Mercury: in French, Mercuriale, Vignoble, and Foirelle, quia fluidam
laxamue alvum reddit, Gallobelgæ enim foize & foizeus, ventris fluorem
vocant. ["Which makes the bowels relaxed and fluid, for which reason the
French Belgians call it foize and foiseus, that is, flow-belly."]

The Temperature.

Mercury is hot and dry, yet not above the second degree: it hath a
cleansing faculty, and (as Galen writeth) a digesting quality also.

The Virtues.

A. It is used in our age in clysters, and thought very good to cleanse
and scour away the excrements and other filth contained in the guts. It
serveth to purge the belly, being eaten or otherwise taken, voiding out
of the belly not only the excrements, but also phlegm and choler.
Dioscorides reporteth, that the decoction hereof purgeth waterish
humours.

B. The leaves stamped with butter, and applied to the fundament,
provoketh to the stool; and the herb bruised and made up in manner of a
pessary, cleanseth the mother, and helpeth conception.

C. Costæus in his book Of the nature of plants saith, that the juice of
Mercury, Hollyhocks, & Purslane mixed together, and the hands bathed
therein, defendeth them from burning, if they be thrust into boiling
lead.


CHAP. 52. Of Wild Mercury.



Fig. 533. Dog's Mercury (1) 

Fig. 534. Male Children's Mercury (2)
The Description

1. Dog's Mercury is somewhat like unto the garden Mercury, saving the
leaves hereof are greater, and the stalk not so tender, and yet very
brittle, growing to the height of a cubit, without any branches at all,
with small yellow flowers. The seed is like the female Mercury. It is
also found like the male Mercury, as you see them both expressed in the
figure; and so there is both male & female of this Mercury also.

2. Male Children's Mercury hath three or four stalks, or more: the leaves
be somewhat long, not much unlike the leaves of the Olive tree, covered
over with a soft down or wool grey of colour; and the seed also like
those of Spurge, growing two together, being first of an ash-colour, but
after turn to a blue.


Fig. 535. Female Children's Mercury (3)

3. This is much in shape like to the last described, but the stalks are
weaker, and have more leaves upon them; the flowers also are small and
mossy, and they grow upon long stalks, whereas the seeds of the other are
fastened to very short ones: the seed is contained in round little heads,
being sometimes two, otherwhiles three or more in a cluster.

The Place.

They grow in woods and copses, in the borders of fields, and among bushes
and hedges. But the two last described are not in England, for anything
that I know.

The Dog's Mercury I have found in many places about Greenhithe,
Swanscombe village, Gravesend, and Southfleet in Kent; in Hampsted wood,
and all the villages thereabout, four miles from London.

The Time.

These flourish all the summer long, until the extreme frost do pull them
down.

The Names.

Dogs Mercury is called in Latin, Canina, and Brassica Canina, and
Mercurialis sylvestris: in English, Dog's Cole, and Dog's Mercury.

Children's Mercury is called Phyllon thelygonon, and Phyllon
arrhenogonon.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These wild kinds of Mercury are not used in physic notwithstanding it is
thought they agree as well in nature as quality with the other kinds of
Mercury.

A. It is reported by the ancients, that the male Phyllon conduces to the
generation of boys, and the female to girls.

B. At Salamanca they give and much commend the decoction of either of
these against the bitings of a mad dog.

C. The Moors at Granada use them frequently in women's diseases.


CHAP. 53. Of Turnsole.



Fig. 536. Great Turnsole (1) 

Fig. 537. Small Turnsole (2)
The Kinds.

There be four sorts of Turnsole, differing one from another in many
notable points, as in greatness and smallness, in colour of flowers, in
form and shape.

The description.

1. The Great Turnsole hath great straight stalks covered with a white
hairy cotton, especially about the top; the leaves are soft and hairy in
handling, in shape like the leaves of Basil: the flowers grow at the top
of the branches, in colour white, thick together in rows upon one side of
the stalk, which stalk doth bend or turn backward like the tail of a
scorpion: the root is small and hard.

2. The Small Turnsole hath many little and weak branches trailing upon
the ground, whereupon do grow small leaves, like those of the lesser
Basil. The flowers do grow without any certain order, amongst the leaves
and tender branches, grey of colour, with a little spot of yellow in the
midst, the which turn into crooked tails like those of the precedent, but
not altogether so much.


Fig. 538. Hairy Turnsole (3)

3. Hairy Turnsole hath many feeble and weak branches trailing upon the
ground, set with small leaves, lesser than the great Turnsole, of which
it is a kind, having the seed in small chaffy husks, which do turn back
like the tail of a scorpion, just after the manner of the first
described.


Fig. 539. Widow-Wail Turnsole (4)


4. This kind of Turnsole hath leaves very like to those of the great
Turnsole, but of a blacker green colour: the flowers be yellow, and
unprofitable; for they are not succeeded by the fruit, but after them
cometh out the fruit hanging upon small footstalks three square, and in
every corner there is a small seed like to those of the Tythimales; the
root is small and thready.
The Place.

Turnsole, as Dioscorides saith, doth grow in fenny grounds and near unto
pools and lakes. They are strangers in England as yet: It doth grow about
Montpellier in Languedoc, where it is had in great use to stain and dye
clouts withal, wherewith through Europe meat is coloured.

The Time.

They flourish especially in the summer solstice, or about the time when
the sun entereth into Cancer.

The Names.

The Grecians call it Heliotropium: the Latins keep these names,
Heliotropium magnum, and scorpiurum: of Raellius, Herba cancri: it is
named Heliotropium, not because it is turned about at the daily motion of
the sun, but by reason it flowereth in the summer solstice, at which time
the sun being farthest gone from the equinoctial circle, returneth to the
same: and scorpiurum of the twiggy tops, that bow backward like a
scorpion's tail: of the Italians, Tornesole bobo; in French, Tournsol:
some think it to be Herba Clytiæ, into which the poets feign Clytia to be
metamorphosed whence one hath these verses:

Herba velut Clytiæ semper petit obvia solem,
Sic pia mens Christum, quo prece spectet, habet.
["As Clytia's herb always seeks the sun,
So the pious mind always seeks Christ in prayer."]

The Nature.

Turnsole, as Paulus Æginata writeth, is hot and dry, and of a binding
faculty.

The Virtues.

A. A good handful of great Turnsole boiled in wine, and drunk, doth
gently purge the body of hot choleric humours and tough clammy or slimy
phlegm.

B. The same boiled in wine and drunk is good against the stings of
scorpions, or other venomous beasts, and is very good to be applied
outwardly upon the grief or wound.

C. The seed stamped and laid upon warts and such like excrescences, or
superfluous out-growings, causeth them to fall away.

D. The small Turnsole and his seed boiled with Hyssop, Cresses and
saltpetre, and drunk, driveth forth flat and round worms.

E. With the small Turnsole they in France do dye linen rags and clouts
into a perfect purple colour, wherewith cooks and confectioners colour
jellies, wines, meats, and sundry confectures: which clouts in shops be
called Turnsole, after the name of the herb.


CHAP. 54. Of Of Scorpion Grass.


Fig. 540. Kinds of Scorpion Grass (1-4)

The Description

1. Scorpion grass hath many smooth, plain, even leaves, of a dark green
colour; stalks small, feeble and weak, trailing upon the ground, and
occupying a great circuit in respect of the plant. The flowers grow upon
long and slender footstalks, of colour yellow, in shape like to the
flowers of Broom; after which succeed long, crooked, rough cods, in shape
and colour like unto a caterpillar; wherein is contained yellowish seed
like unto a kidney in form. The root is small and tender: the whole plant
perisheth when the seed is ripe.

2. There is another Scorpion grass, found among (or rather resembling)
peas and tares, and thereupon called Scorpioides leguminosa, which hath
small and tender roots like small threads: branches many, weak and
tender, trailing upon the ground, if there be nothing to take hold upon
with his clasping and crooked seed vessels; otherwise it rampeth upon
whatsoever is near unto it. The leaves be few and small: the flowers very
little and yellow of colour: the seed followeth, little and blackish,
contained in little cods, like unto the tail of a scorpion.

3. There is another sort almost in every shallow gravelly running stream,
having leaves like to Becabunga or Brooklime. The flowers grow at the top
of tender fat green stalks, blue of colour, and sometimes with a spot of
yellow among the blue; the whole branch of flowers do turn themselves
likewise round like the scorpion's tail.

There is also another growing in watery places, with leaves like unto
Anagallis aquatica, or Water Chickweed, having like slender stalks and
branches as the former, and the flowers not unlike, saving that the
flowers of this are of a light blue or watchet colour, somewhat bigger,
and laid more open, whereby the yellow spot is better seen.

4. There is likewise another sort growing upon most dry gravelly and
barren ditch banks, with leaves like those of Mouse-Ear: this is called
Myosotis scorpioides. It hath rough and hairy leaves, of an overworn
russet colour: the flowers do grow upon weak, feeble, and rough branches,
as is all the rest of the plant. They likewise grow for the most part 
upon one side of the stalk, blue of colour, with a like little spot of
yellow as the others, turning themselves back again like the tail of a
Scorpion.

There is another of the land called Myosotis scorpioides repens, like the
former but the flowers are thicker thrust together, and do not grow all
upon one side as the other, and part of the flowers are blue, and part
purple, confusedly mixed together.

The Place.

1, 2. These Scorpion grasses grow not wild in England, notwithstanding I
have received seed of the first from beyond the seas, and have dispersed
them through England, which are esteemed of gentlewomen for the beauty
and strangeness of the crooked cods resembling caterpillars.

The others do grow in waters and streams, as also on dry and barren
banks.

The Time.

The first flowereth from May to the end of August: the others I have
found all the summer long.

The Names.

1. Fabius Columna judges this to be the Clymenon of Dioscorides: others
call it Scorpiodes, and Scorpiodes bupleurifolio.

2. This is the Scorpiodes of Matthiolus, Dodonæeus, Lobel, and others:
Guillandinus, Cæsalpinus, and Bauhin judge it to be the Telephium of
Dioscorides.

3. This and the next want no names, for almost every writer hath given
them several ones: Brunfelsius, called it Cynoglossa minor: Tragus,
Tabernamontanus, and our author have it under the name of Euphrasia
cærulea: Dodonæeus calls it Scorpioides fœmina: Lonicerus, Leontopodium;
Cæsalpinus, Heliotropum minus in palustribus: Cordus and Thalius, Echium
palustre.

4. This is Auricula muris minor tertia, Euphrasia quarta, and Pilosella
sylvestris of Tragus: Scorpioides mas of Dodonæeus; Alsine myosotis and
Myosotis hirsuta repens of Lobel; Heliotropium minus alterum of
Cæsalpinus: Echium minimum of Columna; and Echium palustre alterum of
Thalius.

The Nature and Virtues.

There is not any thing remembered of the temperature: yet Dioscorides
saith, that the leaves of Scorpion grass applied to the place, is a
present remedy against the stinging of Scorpions: and likewise boiled in
wine and drunk, prevaileth against the said bitings, as also of adders,
snakes, and such venomous beasts: being made in an unguent with oil, wax,
and a little gum Elemni, is profitable against such hurts as require a
healing medicine.


CHAP. 55. Of Nightshade.



Fig. 541. Garden Nightshade (1) 

Fig. 542. Sleepy Nightshade (2)
The Kinds.

There be divers Nightshades, whereof some are of the garden; and some
that love the fields, and yet every of them found wild: whereof some
cause sleepiness even unto death: others cause sleepiness, and yet
physical: and others very profitable unto the health of man, as shall be
declared in their several virtues.

The Description.

1. Garden Nightshade hath round stalks a foot high, and full of branches,
whereon are set leaves of a blackish colour, soft and full of juice, in
shape like to leaves of Basil, but much greater: among which do grow
small white flowers with yellow pointels in the middle; which being past,
there succeed round berries, green at the first, and black when they be
ripe, like those of Ivy: the root is white, and full of hairy strings.

2. The root of this is long, pretty thick and hard, being covered with a
brownish skin; from this root grow up many small stalks of the height of
a cubit and better, somewhat thick withal: the leaves that grow alongst
the stalk are like those of the Quince tree, thick, white, soft and
downy. The flowers grow about the stalk at the setting on of the leaf,
somewhat long and of a pale colour, divided into four parts, which are
sueceeded by seeds contained in hairy or woolly receptacles: which when
they come to ripeness are red, or of a reddish saffron colour.

The Place.

1. This Nightshade cometh up in many places, and not only in gardens, of
which notwithstanding it hath taken his surname, and in which it is often
found growing with other herbs; but also near common highways, the
borders of fields, by old walls and ruinous places.

2. This grows not with us, but in hotter countries; Clusius found it
growing among rubbish at Malaga in Spain.

The Time.

1. It flowereth in summer, and oftentimes till autumn be well spent; and
then the fruit cometh to ripeness.

2. This Clusius found in flower and with the seed ripe in February; for
it liveth many years in hot countries, but in cold it is but an annual.

The Names.

It is called of the Latins, Solanum, and Solanum hortense: in shops,
Solatrum: of some, Morella, Uva vulpina, and Uva vulpis: in Spanish
likewise, Morella, Yerba Mora: Marcellus an old physic writer, and divers
others of his time called it Strumum: Pliny in his 27th book chap. 8
showeth that it is called Cucubalus: both these words are likewise extant
in Apuleius among the confused names of Nightshade, who comprehending all
the kinds of Nightshade together in one chapter, being so many, hath
strangely & absurdly confounded their names. In English it is called
Garden Nightshade, Morel and Petty Morel: in French, Morelle,
Gallobelgis: seu Ardent: quia medetur igni sacre. ["By the French
Belgians also called Ardent: which cures erysipelas"]

The Temperature.

Nightshade (as Galen saith in his book Of the Faculties of Simple
Medicines) is used for those infirmities that have need of cooling and
binding; for these two qualities it hath in the second degree: which
thing also he affirmeth in his book Of the Faculties of Nourishments,
where he saith that there is no pot-herb which we use to eat that hath so
great astriction or binding as Nightshade hath and therefore physicians
do worthily use it, and that seldom as a nourishment, but always as a
medicine.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth, that Nightshade is good against St. Anthony's
fire, the shingles, pain of the head, the heart burning or heat of the
stomach, and other like accidents proceeding of sharp and biting
humours.Notwithstanding that it hath these virtues, yet it is not always
good that it should be applied unto those infirmities, for that many
times there happeneth more dangers by applying of these remedies, than of
the disease itself: for as Hippocrates writeth in the 6th book of his
Aphorisms, the 25th particular, that it is not good, that St. Anthony's
fire should be driven from the outward parts to the inward. And likewise
in his Prognostics he saith, that it is necessary that St.Anthony's fire
should break forth, and that it is death to have it driven in; which is
to be understood not only of St. Anthony's fire, but also of other like
burstings out procured by nature. For by using of these kinds of cooling
and repelling medicines, the bad, corrupt sharp humours are driven back
inwardly to the chief and principal parts, which cannot be done without
great danger and hazard of life. And therefore we must not unadvisedly,
lightly, or rashly minister such kind of medicines upon the coming out of
Saint Anthony's fire, the shingles, or such hot pimples and blemishes of
the skin.

B. The juice of the green leaves of Garden Nightshade mixed with Barley
meal, is very profitably applied unto Saint Anthony's fire, and to all
hot inflammations.

C. The juice mixed with oil of roses, ceruse, and litharge of gold, and
applied, is more proper and effectual to the purposes before set down.

D. Neither the juice hereof, nor any other part is usually given
inwardly, yet it may without any danger.

E. The leaves stamped are profitably put into the ointment of Poplar
buds, called unguentum popleon, and it is good in all other ointments
made for the same purpose.

F. 2. The bark of the root of Sleepy Nightshade, taken in the weight of 1
dram hath a somniferous quality; yet is it milder then opium, and the
fruit thereof vehemently provokes urine. But (as Pliny saith) the
remedies hereof are not of such esteem that we should long insist upon
them, especially seeing we are furnished with such store of medicines
less harmful, yet serving for the same purpose.


CHAP. 56. Of Deadly Nightshade.


Fig. 543. Dwale, or Deadly Nightshade

The Description.

Dwale or deadly Nightshade hath round blackish stalks six foot high,
whereupon do grow great broad leaves of a dark green colour; among which
do grow small hollow flowers bell-fashion, of an overworn purple colour;
in the place whereof come forth great round berries of the bigness of the
black cherry, green at the first, but when they be ripe of the colour of
black jet or burnished horn, soft and full of purple juice: among which
juice lie the seeds like the berries of Ivy: the root is very great,
thick, and long lasting.

The Place.

It groweth in untoiled places near unto high ways and the sea marshes,
and such like places.

It groweth very plentifully in Holland in Lincolnshire, and in the Isle
of Ely at a place called Walsoken, near unto Wisbech.

I found it growing without the gate of Highgate near unto a pound or
pinfold on the left hand.

The Time.

This flourisheth all the summer and spring, beareth his seed and flower
in July and August.

The Names.

It is called of the Latins, Solanum somniferum, or Sleeping Nightshade;
and Solanum læthale, or deadly Nightshade; and Solanum maniacum, Raging
Nightshade: of some, Apollinaris minor ulticana, and Herba opsago: in
English, Dwale, or sleeping Nightshade: the Venetians and Italians call
it Belladona: the Germans, Dollwurtz: the Low Dutch, Dulle besien; in
French, Morelle mortelle: it cometh very near unto Theophrastus his
Mandragoras, (which differeth from Dioscorides his Mandragoras.)

The Nature.

It is cold even in the fourth degree.

The Virtues.

A. This kind of Nightshade causeth sleep, troubleth the mind, bringeth
madness if a few of the berries be inwardly taken, but if more be given
they also kill and bring present death. Theophrastus in his 6th book doth
likewise write of Mandrake in this manner; Mandrake causeth sleep, and if
also much of it be taken it bringeth death.

B. The green leaves of deadly Nightshade may with great advice be used in
such cases as Petty Morel: but if you will follow my counsel, deal not
with the same in any case, and banish it from your gardens and the use of
it also, being a plant so furious and deadly: for it bringeth such as
have eaten thereof into a dead sleep wherein many have died, as hath been
often seen and proved by experience both in England and elsewhere. But to
give you an example hereof it shall not be amiss: It came to pass that
three boys of Wisbech in the Isle of Ely did eat of the pleasant &
beautiful fruits hereof, two whereof died in less than eight hours after
that they had eaten of them. The third child had a quantity of honey and
water mixed together given him to drink, causing him to vomit often: God
blessed this means and the child recovered. Banish therefore these
pernicious plants out of your gardens, and all places near to your
houses, where children or women with child do resort, which do oftentimes
long and lust after things most vile and filthy; and much more after a
berry of a bright shining black colour, and of such great beauty, as it
were able to allure any such to eat thereof.

C. The leaves hereof laid unto the temples cause sleep, especially if
they be imbibed or moistened in wine vinegar.It easeth the intolerable
pains of the headache proceeding of heat in furious agues, causing rest
being applied as aforefaid.


CHAP. 57. Of Winter Cherry.



Fig. 544. Red Winter Cherry (1) 

Fig. 545. Black Winter Cherry (2)
The Description

1. The Red Winter Cherry bringeth forth stalks a cubit long, round,
slender, smooth, and somewhat reddish, reeling this way and that way by
reason of his weakness, not able to stand upright without a supporter:
whereupon do grow leaves not unlike to those of common Nightshade, but
greater; among which leaves come forth white flowers, consisting of five
small leaves: in the middle of which leaves standeth out a berry, green
at the first, and red when it is ripe, in colour of our common Cherry and
of the same bigness, enclosed in a thin husk or little bladder, it is of
a pale reddish colour, in which berry is contained many small flat seeds
of a pale colour. The roots be long, not unlike to the roots of Couch-
Grass; ramping and creeping within the upper crust of the earth far
abroad, whereby it increaseth greatly.

2. The Black Winter Cherry hath weak and slender stalks somewhat crested,
and like unto the tendrils of the vine, casting itself all about, and
taketh hold of such things as are next unto it: whereupon are set jagged
leaves deeply indented or cut about the edges almost to the middle rib.
The flowers be very small and white standing upon long footstalks or
stems. The skinny bladders succeed the flowers, parted into three cells
or chambers, every of the which containeth one seed and no more, of the
bigness of a small pea, and black of colour, having a mark of white
colour upon each berry, in proportion of an heart. The root is very small
and thready.

The Place.

1. The Red Winter Cherry groweth upon old broken walls, about the borders
of fields, and in moist shadowy places, and in most gardens, where some
cherish it for the beauty of the berries, and others for the great and
worthy virtues thereof.

2. The Black Winter Cherry is brought out of Spain and Italy, or other
hot regions, from whence I have had of those black seeds marked with the
shape of a man's heart, white, as aforesaid: and have planted them in my
garden where they have borne flowers, but have perished before the fruit
could grow to maturity, by reason of those unseasonable years 1594, 95,
96.

The Time.

The Red Winter Cherry beareth his flowers and fruit in August.

The black beareth them at the same time, where it doth naturally grow.

The Names.

1. The Red Winter Cherry is called in Latin, Vesicaria, and Solanum
vesicarium: in shops, Alkekengi: Pliny in his 21st book nameth it
Halicacabus, and Vesicaria, of the little bladders: or as the same author
writeth, because it is good for the bladder and the stone: it is called
in Spanish, Vexiga de porro: in French, Alquequenges, Bagenauldes, and
Cerises d'outre mer: in English, red Nightshade, Winter Cherries, and
Alkakengie.

2. The Black Winter Cherry is called Halacacabum peregrinum, Vesicaria
peregrina, or strange Winter Cherry: of Pena and Lobel it is called Cor
indium, Cor indicum: of others, Pisum cordatum: in English, the Indian
Heart, or Heart Peas: some have taken it to be Dorycnion, but they are
greatly deceived, being in truth not any of the Nightshades; it rather
seemeth to agree with the grain named of Serapio, Abrong, or Abrugi, of
which he writeth in his 153rd chapter in there words: It is a little
grain spotted with black and white, round, and like the grain Maize, with
which notes this doth agree.

The Temperature.

The Red Winter Cherry is thought to be cold and dry and of subtle parts.

The leaves differ not from the temperature of the garden Nightsbade, as
Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. The fruit bruised and put to infuse or steep in white wine two or
three hours, and after boiled two or three bubblings, straining it, and
putting to the decoction a little sugar and cinnamon, and drunk,
prevaileth very mightily against the stopping of urine, the stone and
gravel, the difficulty and sharpness of making water, and such like
diseases: if the grief be old, the greater quantity must be taken; if new
and not great, the less: it scoureth away the yellow jaundice also, as
some write.


CHAP. 58. Of the Marvel of Peru



Fig. 546. Marvel of Peru with Yellowish Flowers (1) 

Fig. 547. Marvel of Peru with White Flowers (2)
The Description.

This admirable plant called the Marvel of Peru, or the Marvel of the
World, springeth forth of the ground like unto Basil in leaves; amongst
which it sendeth out a stalk two cubits and a half high, of the thickness
of a finger; full of juice, very firm, and of a yellowish green colour,
knotted or kneed with joints somewhat bunching forth, of purplish colour,
as in the female Balsamina: which stalk divideth itself into sundry
branches or boughs, and those also knotty like the stalk. His branches
are decked with leaves growing by couples at the joints like the leaves
of wild Peascods, green, fleshy, and full of joints; which being rubbed
do yield the like unpleasant smell as wild Peascods do, and are in taste
also very unsavory, yet in the latter end they leave a taste and sharp
smack of Tobacco. The stalks towards the top are garnished with long
hollow single flowers, folded, as it were, into five parts before they be
opened; but being fully blown do resemble the flowers of Tobacco, not
ending into sharp corners, but blunt and round as the flowers of
Bindweed, and larger than the flowers of Tobacco, glittering oftentimes
with a fine purple or crimson colour; many times of an horse-flesh;
sometime yellow; sometime pale, and sometime resembling an old red or
yellow colour; sometime whitish, and most commonly two colours occupying
half the flower, or intercoursing the whole flower with streaks and
orderly streams, now yellow, now purple, divided through the whole;
having sometime great, sometime little spots of a purple colour,
sprinkled and scattered in a most variable order, and brave mixture. The
ground or field of the whole flower is either pale, red, yellow, or
white, containing in the middle of the hollowness a prick or pointel set
round about with six small strings or chives. The flowers are very sweet
and pleasant resembling the Narcissus or white Daffodil, and are very
suddenly fading; for at night they are flowered wide open, and so
continue until eight of the clock the next morning: at which time they
begin to close or shut up (after the manner of the Bindweed) especially
if the weather be very hot: but if the air be more temperate they remain
open the whole day, and are closed only at night, and so perish, one
flower lasting but only one day, like the true Ephemerum or Hemerocallis.
This marvellous variety doth not without cause bring admiration to all
that observe it. For if the flowers be gathered and reserved in several
papers, and compared with those flowers that will spring and flourish the
next day, you than easily perceive that one is not like another in
colour, though you should compare one hundred which flower one day, and
another hundred which you gathered the next day; and so from day to day
during the time of their flowering. The cups and husks which contain and
embrace the flowers are divided into five pointed sections, which are
green, and, as it were, consisting of skins, wherein is contained one
seed and no more, covered with a blackish skin, having a blunt point
whereon the flower groweth; but on the end next the cup or husk it is
adorned with a little five-cornered crown. The seed is as big as a
peppercorn, which of itself falleth with any light motion. Within this
seed is contained a white kernel, which being bruised, resolveth into a
very white pulp like starch. The root is thick and like unto a great
radish, outwardly black, and within white, sharp in taste, wherewith is
mingled a superficial sweetness. It bringeth new flowers from July unto
October in infinite number, yea even until the frosts do cause the whole
plant to perish: notwithstanding it may be reserved in pots, and set in
chambers and cellars that are warm, and so defended from the injury of
our cold climate; provided always that there be not any water cast upon
the pot, or set forth to take any moisture in the air until March
following; at which time it must be taken forth of the pot and replanted
in the garden. By this means I have preserved many (though to small
purpose) because I have sown seeds that have borne flowers in as ample
manner and in as good time as those reserved plants.

Of this wonderful herb there be other sorts, but not so amiable or so
full of variety, and for the most part their flowers are all of one
colour. But I have since by practise found out another way to keep the
roots for the year following with very little difficulty, which never
faileth. At the first frost I dig up the roots and put up or rather hide
the roots in a butter firkin, or such like vessel, filled with the sand
of a river, the which I suffer still to stand in some corner of a house
where it never receiveth moisture until April or the midst of March, if
the weather be warm; at which time I take it from the sand and plant it
in the garden, where it doth flourish exceeding well and increaseth by
roots; which that doth not which was either sown of seed the same year,
nor those plants that were preserved after the other manner.

The Place.

The seed of this strange plant was brought first into Spain, from Peru,
whereof it took his name Mirabula peruana, or peruviana: and since
dispersed into all the parts of Europe: the which myself have planted
many years, and have in some temperate years received both flowers and
ripe seed.

The Time.

It is sown in the midst of April, and bringeth forth his variable flowers
in September, and perisheth with the first frost, except it be kept as
aforefaid.

The Names.

It is called in Peru of those, Indians there, Hachal. Of others after
their name Hachal indi: of the high and Low Dutch, Solanum odoriferum: of
some, Iasminum mexicanum: and of Carolus Clulius, Admirabilia peruviana:
in English rather the Marvel of the World, than of Peru alone.

The Nature and Virtues.

We have not as yet any instructions from the people of India concerning
the nature or virtues of this plant: the which is esteemed as yet rather
for his rareness, beauty, and sweetness of his flowers, than for any
virtues known; but it is a pleasant plant to deck the gardens of the
curious. Howbeit Jacobus Antonius Cortusus of Padua hath by experience
found out, that two drams of the root thereof taken inwardly doth very
notably purge waterish humours.


CHAP. 59. Of Mad Apple.


Fig. 548. Mad Apple

The Description.

Mad Apple hath a round stalk of two foot high, divided into sundry
branches, set with broad leaves somewhat indented about the edges, not
unlike the leaves of white Henbane, of a dark brown-green colour,
somewhat rough. Among the which come the flowers of a white colour, and
sometimes changing into purple, made of six parts, wide open like a star
with certain yellow chives or thrums in the middle; which being past the
fruit cometh in place, set in a cornered cup or husk after the manner of
the great Nightshade, great and somewhat long, of the bigness of a swan's
egg, and sometimes much greater, of a white colour, sometimes yellow, and
often brown, wherein is contained small flat seed of a yellow colour. The
root is thick, with many threads fastened thereto.

The Place.

This plant groweth in Egypt almost everywhere in sandy fields even of
itself, bringing forth fruit of the bigness of a great Cucumber, as
Petrus Bellonius reporteth in the second book of his Singular
Observations.

We had the same in our London gardens, where it hath borne flowers; but
the winter approaching before the time of ripening, it perished:
notwithstanding it came to bear fruit of the bigness of a goose egg one
extraordinary temperate year, as I did see in the garden of a worshipful
merchant Mr Harvie in Lime Street, but never to the full ripeness.

The Time

This herb must be sown in April in a bed of hot horse dung, as Musk-
Melons are, and flowereth in August.

The Names.

Petrus Bellonius hath judged s it to be Malinathalla theophrasti. In the
Dukedom of Milan it is called Melongena and of some, Melanzana: in Latin,
Mala insana: and in English, Mad Apples: in the German tongue,
Dollopffell: in Spanish, Verangenes.

The Nature.

The herb is cold almost in the fourth degree.

The use and danger.

A. The people of Toledo do eat them with great devotion being boiled with
fat flesh, putting thereto some scraped cheese, which they do keep in
vinegar, honey, or salt pickle all winter to procure lust.

B. Petrus Bellonius, and Hermolaus Barbarus, report that in Egypt and
Barbary they use to eat the fruit of Mala insana boiled or rosted under
ashes, with oil, vinegar, & pepper, as people use to eat mushroms. But I
rather wish English men to content themselves with the meat and sauce of
our own country, than with fruit and sauce eaten with such peril; for
doubtless these apples have a mischievous quality, the use whereof is
utterly to be forsaken. And as we see and know many have eaten and do eat
Mushroms more for wantonness than for need: for there are two kinds
thereof venomous and deadly, which being in the handling of an unskilful
cook, may procure untimely death. Therefore it is better to esteem this
plant and have him in the garden for your pleasure and the rareness
thereof than for any virtue or good qualities yet known.


CHAP. 60. Of Apple of Love

Fig 549. Apple of Love

The Description.

The Apple of Love bringeth forth very long round stalks or branches, fat
and full of juice, trailing upon the ground, not able to sustain himself
upright by reason of the tenderness of the stalks, and also the great
weight of the leaves and fruit wherewith it is surcharged. The leaves are
great and deeply cut or jagged about the edges, not unlike to the leaves
of Agrimony, but greater, and of a whiter green colour: among which come
forth yellow flowers growing upon short stems or footstalks, clustering
together in bunches: which being fallen, there do come in place fair and
goodly apples, chamfered, uneven, and bunched out in many places; of a
bright shining red colour, and the bigness of a goose egg or a large
pippin. The pulp or meat is very full of moisture, soft, reddish, and of
the substance of a wheat plum. The seed is small, flat and rough: the
root small and thready: the whole plant is of a rank and stinking savour.

There hath happened unto my hands another sort, agreeing very notably
with the former, as well in leaves and stalks as also in flowers and
roots, only the fruit hereof was yellow of colour, wherein consisted the
difference.

The Place.

Apples of Love grow in Spain, Italy, and such hot countries, from whence
myself have received seeds for my garden, where they do increase and
prosper.

The Time.

It is sown in the beginning of April in a bed of hot horse dung, after
the manner of musk Melons and such like cold fruits.

The Names.

The Apple of Love is called in Latin Pomium aureum, Poma amoris, and
Lycopersicum: of some, Glaucium: in English, Apples of Love, and Golden
Apples: in French, Pommes d'amours. Howbeit there be other golden apples
whereof the poets do fable, growing in the gardens of the daughters of
Hesperus, which a dragon was appointed to keep, who, as they fable, was
killed by Hercules.

The Temperature.

The Golden Apple, with the whole herb itself is cold, yet not fully so
cold as Mandrake, after the opinion of Dodenæus. But in my judgement it
is very cold, yea perhaps in the highest degree of coldness: my reason
is, because I have in the hottest time of summer cut away the superfluous
branches from the mother root, and cast them away carelessly in the
alleys of my garden, the which (notwithstanding the extreme heat of the
Sun, the hardness of the trodden alleys, and at that time when no rain at
all did fall) have growne as fresh where I cast them, as before I did cut
them off; which argueth the great coldness contained therein. True it is,
that it doth argue also a great moisture wherewith the plant is
possessed, but as I have said, not without great cold, which I leave to
every man's censure.

The Virtues.

A. In Spain and those hot regions they use to eat the apples prepared and
boiled with pepper, salt, and oil: but they yield very little nourishment
to the body, and the same nought and corrupt.

B. Likewise they do eat the apples with oil, vinegar and pepper mixed
together for sauce to their meat, even as we in these cold countries do
mustard.


CHAP. 61. Of the Æthiopian Apple.


Fig. 550. Æthiopian Apple

The Description.

The Apple of Æthiopia hath large leaves of a whitish green colour, deeply
indented about the edges, almost to the middle rib; the which middle rib
is armed with a few sharp prickles. The flowers be white, consisting of
six small leaves, with a certain yellow pointel in the midst. The fruit
is round, and bunched with uneven lobes or banks lesser than the golden
Apple, of colour red, and of a firm and solid substance; wherein are
contained small flat seeds. The root is small and thready.

The Place.

The seeds of this plant have been brought unto us out of Spain, and also
sent into France and Flanders: but to what perfection it hath come unto
in those parts I am ignorant, but mine perished at the first approch of
winter. His first original was from Æthiopia, whereof it took his name.

The Time.

This plant must be sown as Musk-Melons, and at the same time. They flower
in July, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

In English we have thought good to call it the Æthiopian Apple, for the
reason before alleged: in Latin, Mala æthiopica: of some it hath been
thought to be Malinathalla. This is the Solanum pomiferum of Lobel and
others.

The Nature.

The temperature agreeth with the Apple of Love.

The Virtues.

These Apples are not used in physic that I can read of, only they are
used for a sauce and service unto rich men's tables to be eaten, being
first boiled in the broth of fat flesh with pepper and salt, and have a
less hurtful juice than either Mad Apples or Golden Apples.


CHAP. 62. Of Thorn-Apples.



Fig. 551. Apple of Peru (1) 

Fig. 552. Thorn-Apple of Peru (2)
The Desciription.

1. The stalks of Thorn-Apples are oftentimes above a cubit and a half
high, seldom higher, an inch thick, upright and straight, having very few
branches, sometimes none at all, but one upright stem; whereupon do grow
leaves smooth and even, little or nothing indented about the edges,
longer and broader than the leaves of Nightshade, or of the Mad Apple.
The flowers come forth of long toothed cups, great, white of the form of
a bell, or like the flowers of the great Withwind that rampeth in hedges;
but altogether greater and wider at the mouth, sharp cornered at the
brims, with certain white chives or threads in the midst, of a stong
pontic savour, offending the head when it is smelled unto: in the place
of the flower cometh up round fruit full of short and blunt prickles, of
the bigness of a green Walnut when it is at the biggest, in which are the
seeds of the bigness of tares or of Mandrakes, and of the same form. The
herb itself is of a strong savour, and doth stuff the head and causeth
drowsiness. The root is small and thready.

2. There is another kind hereof altogether greater than the former, whose
seeds I received of the right honorable the Lord Edward Zouch: which he
brought from Constantinople, and of his liberality did bestow them upon
me, as also many other rare & strange seeds; and it is that Thorn-apple
that I have dispersed through this land, whereof at this present I have
great use in surgery, as well in burnings and scalding, as also in
virulent and malign ulcers, apostumes, and such like. The which plant
hath a very great stalk in fertile ground, bigger than a man's arm,
smooth, and green of colour, which a little above the ground divideth
itself into sundry branches or arms, in manner of an hedge tree;
whereupon are placed many great leaves cut and indented deeply about the
edges, with many uneven sharp corners: among these leaves come white
round flowers made of one piece in manner of a bell, shutting itself up
close toward night, as do the flowers of the great Bindweed, whereunto it
is very like, of a sweet smell, but so strong, that it offends the
senses. The fruit followeth round, sometimes of the fashion of an egg,
set about on every part with most sharp prickles; wherein is contained
very much seed of the bigness of tares, and of the same fashion. The root
is thick, made of great and small strings: the whole plant is sown,
beareth his fruit, and perisheth the same year. There are are some
varieties of this plant, in the colour and doubleness of the flowers.

The Place.

1. This plant is rare and strange as yet in England: I received seeds
thereof from John Robin of Paris, an excellent herbarist; which did grow
and bore flowers, but perished before the fruit came to ripeness.

2. The Thorn-Apple was brought in seed from Constantinople by the right
honourable the Lord Edward Zouch, and given unto me, and beareth fruit
and ripe seed.

The Time.

The first is to be sown in a bed of horse-dung, as we do cucumbers and
Musk-melons. The other may be sown in March or April, as other seeds are.

The Names.

The first of these Thorn-Apples may be called in Latin, Stramonia, and
Pomum, or Malum spinosum: of some, Corona regia, and Melospinum. The
Italians name it, Paracoculi: it seemeth to Valerius Cordus to be
Hyoscyamus peruvianus, or Henbane of Peru: Cardanus doubteth whether it
should be inserted among the Nightshades as a kind thereof: of Matthiolus
and others it is thought to be Nux methel: Serapio, cap. 375, saith, That
Nux methel is like unto Nux vomica; the seed whereof is like that of
Mandrake: the husk is rough or full of prickles; the taste pleasing and
strong: the quality thereof is cold in the fourth degree. Which
description agreeth herewith, except in the form or shape it should have
with Nux vomica: Anguillaria suspecteth it to be Hippomanes which
Theocritas mentioneth, wherewith in his second Eclogue he showeth that
horses are made mad: for Crateuas, whom Theocritus his scholiast doth
cite, writeth, That the plant of Hippomanes hath a fruit full of
prickles, as hath the fruit of wild Cucumbers. In English it may be
called Thorn-Apple, or the Apple of Peru.

The words of Theocritus, Idyll. 2. are, in English:

Hippomanes 'mongst the Arcadians' springs, by which even all
The colts and agile mares in mountains mad do fall.

Now in the Greek Scholia amongst the Expositions there is this: Crateuas
saith, That the plant hath a fruit like the wild Cucumber, but blacker;
the leaves are like a poppy, but thorny or prickly. Thus I expound these
words of the Greek scholiast, being pag. 51 of the edition set forth by
Dan. Heinsius, Ann. Dom. 1603. Julius Scaliger blames Theocritus, because
he calls Hippomanes phytos, a plant: but Heinsius, as you may see in his
notes upon Theocritus, pag. 120, probably judges, that the word phytos in
this place signifies nothing but a thing growing. Such as are curious may
have recourse to the places quoted, where they may find it more largely
handled than is fit for me in this place to insist upon. There is no
plant at this day known, in mine opinion, whereto Crateuas his
description may be more fitly referred, than to the Papaver spinosum, or
Ficus infernalis, which we shall hereafter describe.

The Nature.

The whole plant is cold in the fourth degree, and of a drowsy and numbing
quality, not inferior to Mandrake.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of Thorn-Apples boiled with hog's grease to the form of an
unguent or salve, cureth all inflammations whatsoever, all manner of
burnings or scaldings, as well of fire, water, boiling lead, gunpowder,
as that which comes by lightning, and that in very short time, as myself
have found by my daily practise, to my great credit and profit. The first
experience came from Colchester, where Mistress Lobel a merchant's wife
there being most grievously burned with lightning, and nor finding ease
or cure in any other thing, by this found help when all hope was past, by
the report of Mr. William Ramme, public notary of the said town, was
perfectly cured.

B. The leaves stamped small, and boiled with olive oil until the herbs be
as it were burnt, then strained and set to the fire again with some wax,
rosin, and a little Turpentine, and made into a salve, doth most speedily
cure old ulcers, new and fresh wounds, ulcers upon the glandulous part of
the yard, and other sores of hard curation.


CHAP. 63. Of Bitter-sweet, or Woody Nightshade.


Fig. 553. Bitter-sweet

The Description.

Bitter-sweet bringeth forth woody stalks as doth the Vine, parted into
many slender creeping branches, by which it climbeth and taketh hold of
hedges and shrubs next unto it. The bark of the oldest stalks are rough
and whitish, of the colour of ashes, with the outward rind of a bright
green colour, but the younger branches are green as are the leaves: the
wood brittle, having in it a spongy pith; it is clad with long leaves,
smooth, sharp pointed, lesser than those of the Bindweed. At the lower
part of the same leaves doth grow on either side one small or lesser leaf
like unto two ears. The flowers be small, and somewhat clustered
together, consisting of five little leaves apiece, of a perfect blue
colour, with a certain prick or yellow pointel in the middle: which being
past, there do come in place fair berries, more long than round, at the
first green, but very red when they be ripe; of a sweet taste at the
first, but after very unpleasant, of a strong savour, growing together in
clusters like burnished coral. The root is of a mean bigness, and full of
strings.

I have found another sort which bringeth forth most pleasant white
flowers with yellow pointels in the middle, in other respects agreeing
with the former.

The Place.

Bitter-sweet doth grow in moist places about ditches, rivers, and hedges,
almost everywhere.

The other sort with the white flowers I found in a ditch side against the
right honorable the Earl of Sussex his garden wall at his house in
Bermondsey Street by London, as you go from the court which is full of
trees, unto a farmhouse near thereunto.

The Time.

The leaves come forth in the spring, the flowers in July, the berries are
ripe in August.

The Names.

The later herbarists have named this plant Dulcamara, Amarodulcis, and
Amaradulcis: they call it also Solanum lignosum, and siliquastrum: Pliny
calleth it Melortum: Theophrastus, Vitis sylvestris: in English we call
it Bitter-sweet, and Woody Nightshade. But every author must for his
credit say something, although to small purpose; for Vitis sylvestris is
that which we call Our Lady's Seal, which is no kind of Nightshade: for
Tamus and Vitis sylvestris are both one; as likewise Solanum lignosum or
fruticosum; and also Solanum rubrum: whereas indeed it is no such plant,
nor any of the Nightshades, although I have followed others in placing it
here. Therefore those that use to mix the berries thereof in compositions
of divers cooling ointments, instead of the berries of Nightshade have
committed the greater error; for the fruit of this is not cold at all,
but hot, as forthwith shall be showed. Dioscorides saith it is Cyclaminus
altera; describing it by the description of those with white flowers
aforefaid, whereunto it doth very well agree. Dioscorides describeth his
Muscoso flore with a mossy flower, that is, such an one as consists of
small chives or threads, which can by no means be agreeable to the flower
of this plant.

The Temperature.

The leaves and fruit of Bitter-sweet are in temperature hot and dry,
cleansing and wasting away.

The virtues.

A. The decoction of the leaves is reported to remove the stoppings of the
liver and gall; and to be drunk with good success against the yellow
jaundice.

B. The juice is good for those that have fallen from high places, and
have been thereby bruised, or dry beaten: for it is thought to dissolve
blood congealed or cluttered anywhere in the entrails, and to heal the
hurt places.

C. Hieronymus Tragus teacheth to make a decoction of wine with the wood
finely sliced and cut into small pieces; which he reporteth to purge
gently both by urine and siege those that have the dropsy or jaundice.

D. Dioscorides doth ascribe unto Cyclaminus altera, or Bitter-sweet with
white flowers as I conceive it, the like faculties.

E. The fruit (saith he) being drunk in the weight of one dram, with three
ounces of white wine, for forty days together helpeth the spleen.

F. It is drunk against difficulty of breathing: it throughly cleanseth
women that are newly brought abed.



CHAP. 64. Of Enchanter's Nightshade.


Fig. 554. Enchanter's or Bindweed Nightshade

The Description.

Enchanter's or Bindweed Nightshade hath leaves like to Petty-Morel, sharp
at the point like unto Spinach: the stalk is straight and upright, very
brittle, two foot high: the flowers are white tending to carnation, with
certain small brown chives in the midst: the seed is contained in small
round bullets, rough and very hairy. The roots are tough, and many in
number, thrusting themselves deep into the ground, and dispersing far
abroad; whereby it doth greatly increase, insomuch that when it hath once
taken fast rooting, it can hardly with great labour be rooted out or
destroyed.

The Place

It groweth in obscure and dark places, about dung-hills, and in untoiled
grounds, by pathways and such like.

The Time.

It flourisheth from June to the end of September.

The Names.

It is called of Lobel, Circæa lutetiana: in English, Enchanter's
Nightshade, or Bindweed Nightshade.

The Nature and Virtues.

There is no use of this herb either in physic or surgery that I can read
of; which hath happened by the corruption of time and the error of some
who have taken Mandragoras for Circæa; in which error they have still
persisted unto this day, attributing unto Circæa the virtues of
Mandragora; by which means there hath not any thing been laid of the true
Circæa, by reason, as I have said, that Mandragora hath been called
Circæa: but doubtless it hath the virtue of Garden Nightshade, and may
serve in stead thereof without error.


CHAP. 65. Of Mandrake.


Fig. 555. Mandrake

The Description.

The male Mandrake hath great broad long smooth leaves of a dark green
colour, flat spread upon the ground: among which come up the flowers of a
pale whitish colour, standing every one upon a single small and weak
footstalk of a whitish green colour: in their places grow round apples of
a yellowish colour, smooth, soft, and glittering, of a strong smell; in
which are contained flat and smooth seeds in fashion of a little kidney,
like those of the Thorn-Apple. The root is long, thick, whitish, divided
many times into two or three parts resembling the legs of a man, with
other parts of his body adjoining thereto, as the privy part, as it hath
been reported; whereas in truth it is no otherwise than in the roots of
carrots, parsnips, and such like, forked or divided into two or more
parts, which Nature taketh no account of. There hath been many ridiculous
tales brought up of this plant, whether of old wives, or some runnagate
surgeons or physic-mongers I know not, (a title bad enough for them) but
sure some one or more that sought to make themselves famous and skilful
above others, were the first broachers of that error I speak of. They add
further, That it is never or very seldom to be found growing naturally
but under a gallows, where the matter that hath fallen from the dead body
hath given it the shape of a man; and the matter of a woman, the
substance of a female plant, with many other such doltish dreams. They
fable further and affirm, That he who would take up a plant thereof must
tie a dog thereunto to pull it up, which will give a great shriek at the
digging up; otherwise if a man should do it, he should surely die in
short space after. Besides many fables of loving matters, too full of
scurrility to set forth in print, which I forbear to speak of. All which
dreams and old wives' tales you shall from henceforth cast out of your
books and memory; knowing this, that they are all and every part of them
false and most untrue: for I myself and my servants also have digged up,
planted, and replanted very many, and yet never could either perceive
shape of man or woman, but sometimes one straight root, sometimes two,
and often six or seven branches coming from the main great root, even as
nature list to bestow upon it, as to other plants. But the idle drones
that have little or nothing to do but eat and drink, have bestowed some
of their time in carving the roots of Bryony, forming them to the shape
of men & women: which falsifying practice hath confirmed the error
amongst the simple and unlearned people, who have taken them upon their
report to be the true Mandrakes.

The female Mandrake is like unto the male, saving that the leaves hereof
be of a more swart or dark green colour; and the fruit is long like a
pear, and the other is round like an apple.

The Place.

Mandrake groweth in hot regions, in woods and mountains, as in mount
Garganus in Apulia, and such like places; we have them only planted in
gardens, and are not elsewhere to be found in England.

The Time.

They spring up with their leaves in March, and flower in the end of
April: the fruit is ripe in August.

The Names.

Mandrake is called of the Grecians Mandragoras, and Circæa, of Circe the
witch, who by art could procure love: for it hath been thought that the
root hereof serveth to win love: of some, Anthropomorphos, and Morion:
some of the Latins have called it, Terræ malum, and Terrestre malum, and
Canina malus: Shops, and also other Nations do receive the Greek name.
Dioscorides saith, That the male is called of divers Morion and 
describeth also another Mandrake by the name of Morion, which as much as
can be gathered by the description, is like the male, but less in all
parts: in English we call it Mandrake, Mandrage, and Mandragon.

The Temperature.

Mandrake hath a predominate cold faculty, as Galen saith, that is to say
cold in the third degree: but the root is cold in the fourth degree.

The virtues.

A. Dioscorides doth particularly set down many faculties hereof; of which
notwithstanding there be none proper unto it, saving those that depend
upon the drowsy and sleeping power thereof: which quality consisteth more
in root than in any other part.

B. The apples are milder, and are reported that they may be eaten, being
boiled with pepper and other hot spices.

C. Galen saith that the apples are something cold and moist, and that the
bark of the root is of greatest strength, and doth not only cool, but
also dry.

D. The juice of the leaves is very profitably put into the ointment
called Populeon, and all cooling ointments.

E. The juice drawn forth of the roots dried, and taken in small quantity,
purgeth the belly exceedingly from phlegm and melancholic humours.

F. It is good to be put into medicines and collyria that do mitigate the
pain of the eyes, and put under a pessary it draweth forth the dead child
and secondine.

G. The green leaves stamped with barrow's grease and barley meal, cool
all hot swellings and inflammations; and they have virtue to consume
apostumes and hot ulcers, being bruised and applied thereon.

H. A suppository made with the same juice, and put into the fundament
causeth sleep.

I. The wine wherein the root hath been boiled or infused provoketh sleep
and assuageth pain.

K. The smell of the apples, moveth to sleep likewise, but the juice
worketh more effectually if you take it in small quantity.

L. Great and strange effects are supposed to be in the Mandrakes, to
cause women to be fruitful and bear children, if they shall but carry the
same near unto their bodies. Some do from hence ground it, for that
Rachel desired to have her sisters' Mandrakes (as the text is translated)
but if we look well into the circumstances which there we shall find, we
may rather deem otherwise. Young Reuben brought home amiable and sweet
smelling flowers (for so signifieth the Hebrew word, which is used
Cantic. 7: 13 in the same sense:) and the lad brought them home, rather
for their beauty and smell, than for their virtue. Now in the flowers of
Mandrake there is no such delectable or amiable smell as was in these
amiable flowers which Reuben brought home. Besides, we read not that
Rachel conceived hereupon, for Leah Jacob's wife had four children before
God granted that blessing of fruitfulness unto Rachel. And last of all
(which is my chiefest reason) Jacob was angry with Rachel when she said,
Give me children else I die: and demanded of her, whether he were in the
stead of God or no, who had withheld from her the fruit of her body. And
we know that the Prophet David saith, children and the fruit of the womb
are the inheritance, that cometh from the Lord, Psalm. 127.

M. Serapio, Avicenna, and Paulus Ægineta do write, that the seed and
fruit of Mandragoras taken in drink, do cleanse the matrix or mother, and
Dioscorides wrote the same long before them.

He that would know more hereof, may read that chapter of Doctor Turner
his book; concerning this matter, where he hath written largely and
learnedly of this simple.


CHAP. 66. Of Henbane.



Fig. 556. Black Henbane (1) 

Fig. 557. White Henbane (2)
The Description.

1. The common Black Henbane hath great and soft stalks: leaves very
broad, soft, and woolly, somewhat jagged, especially those that grow near 
unto the ground, and those that grow upon the stalk, narrower, smaller,
and sharper. The flowers are bell fashion, of a faint yellowish white and
brown within towards the bottom; when the flowers are gone, there cometh
hard knobby husks, like small cups or boxes, wherein are small brown
seeds.

2. The White Henbane is not much unlike to the black, saving that his
leaves are smaller, whiter and more woolly, and the flowers also whiter.
The cods are like the other, but without pricks; it dieth in winter, and
must likewise be sown again the next year.



Fig. 558. Lesser White Henbane (3) 

Fig. 559. White Henbane of Candy (4) 
	3. This other White Henbane is much like the last described, but
that it is lesser: the leaves smaller and rounder, hanging upon pretty
long stalks, the flowers and seed vessels are like those of the last
mentioned.

4. This is softer and tenderer than the last described, the leaves also
hang upon long footstalks and are covered over with a soft downiness: and
they are somewhat broader, yet thinner and more sinuated than those of
the white, and somewhat resemble the form of a vine leaf, being snipped
about the edges; the stalks are also covered with a white down. The
flowers are of a gold yellow with a velvet coloured circle in their
middles: the root is sufficiently rhick and large: Clusius had the figure
and description of this from his friend Jacques Plateau, who had the
plant growing of seed received from Candy.


Fig. 560. Henbane with a Reddish Flower (5)

5. The stalk of this grows some cubit high, being pretty stiff, about the
thickness of one's little finger, and covered over with a soft and white
down: the leaves grow dispersed upon the stalk, not much unlike those of 
the common kind, but lesser and more divided, and white (while they are
young) covered with a slender and long downiness: the top of the stalk is
divided into certain branches that bend or hang down their heads, which
alternately amongst narrower, lesser and undivided leaves carry cups like
as the common one, ending in five pretty stiff points, in which are
contained flowers at first somewhat like the common kind, but afterwards,
as they grow bigger, they change into an elegant red purplish colour,
with deep coloured veins: neither is the ring or middle part purple as in
the common kind, but whitish, having a purplish pointel, and five threads
in the middle: the seeds and seed vessels are like those of the common
kind. Clusius received the seed hereof from Paludanus returning from his
travels into Syria and Egypt, wherefore he calls it Hyoscyamus Ægyptius,
Egyptian Henbane.

The Place.

Black Henbane grows almost everywhere by highways, in the borders of
fields, about dung-hills and untoiled places; the white Henbane is not
found but in the gardens of those that love physical plants: the which
groweth in my garden, and doth sow itself from year to year.

The Time.

They spring out of the ground in May, bring forth their flowers in
August, and the seed is ripe in October.

The Names.

Henbane is called of the Latins, Apollinaris, and Faba suilla: the
Arabians, as Pliny saith, Altercum: of some, Faba iovis, or Jupiter's
bean: of Pythagoras, Zoroastes, and Apuleius Insana, Alterculam,
Symphoniaca, and Calicularis: of the Tuscans, Fabulonia, and Faba lupina:
of Matthæus Sylvaticus, Dens Caballinus, Milimandrum, Cassilago: of
Iacobus de Manliis, Herba pinnula: in shops it is called Insquiamus, and
Hyoscyamus: in English, Henbane: in Italian, Hyosquiamo: in Spanish,
Velenno: in High Dutch, Bilsen kraut: in French, Hannebane, Endormie: the
other is called Hyoscyamus albus, or white Henbane.

The Temperature.

These kinds of Henbane are cold in the fourth degree.

The Virtues.

A. Henbane causeth drowsiness, and mitigateth all kind of pain: it is
good against hot and sharp distillations of the eyes and other parts: it
stayeth bleeding and the disease in women: it is applied to inflammations
of the stones and other secret parts.

B. The leaves stamped with the ointment Populeon, made of poplar buds,
assuageth the pain of the gout, and the swellings of the stones, and the
tumors of women's breasts, and are good to be put into the same ointment,
but in small quantity.

C. To wash the feet in the decoction of Henbane causeth sleep; or given
in a clyster it doth the same; and also the often smelling to the
flowers.

D. The leaves, seed, and juice taken inwardly causeth an unquiet sleep
like unto the sleep of drunkenness, which continueth long, and is deadly
to the party.

E. The seed of White Henbane is good against the cough, the falling of
watery humours into the eyes or breast; against the inordinate flux of
women's issues, and all other issues of blood, taken in the weight of ten
grains, with water wherein honey hath been sodden.

F. The root boiled with vinegar, and the same holden hot in the mouth,
easeth the pain of the teeth. The seed is used by mountebank tooth-
drawers which run about the country, for to cause worms come forth of
men's teeth, by burning it in a chafing-dish with coals, the party
holding his mouth over the fume thereof: but some crafty companions to
gain money convey small lute strings into the water, persuading the
patient that those small creeping beasts came out of his mouth or other
parts which he intended to ease.


CHAP. 67. Of Yellow Henbane, or English Tobacco.


Fig. 561. Yellow Henbane

The Description.

Yellow Henbane groweth to the height of two cubits: the stalk is thick,
fat, and green of colour, full of a spongeous pith; and is divided into
sundry branches set with smooth and even leaves, thick, and full of
juice. The flowers grow at the tops of the branches, orderly placed, of a
pale yellow colour, something lesser than those of the Black Henbane. The
cups wherein the flowers do stand are like, but lesser, tenderer, and
without sharp points, wherein is set the husk or cod somewhat round, full
of very small seed like the seed of Marjoram. The root is small and
thready.
The Place.

Yellow Henbane is sown in gardens, where it doth prosper exceedingly,
insomuch that it cannot be destroyed where it hath once sown itself, and
it is dispersed into the most parts of England.

The Time.

It flowereth in the summer months, and oftentimes till autumn be far
spent, in which time the seed cometh to perfection.

The Names.

Yellow Henbane is called Hyoscyamus luteus: of some, Petum, and Petun: of
others, Nicotiana, of Nicot a Frenchman that brought the seeds from the
Indies, as also the seeds of the true Tobacco, whereof this hath been
taken for a kind; insomuch that Lobel hath called it Dubius Hyoscyamus,
or doubtful Henbane, as a plant participating of Henbane and Tobacco: and
it is used of divers instead of Tobacco, and called by the same name, for
that it hath been brought from Trinidad, a place so called in the Indies,
as also from Virginia and Norembega, for Tobacco, which doubtless taken
in smoke worketh the same kind of drunkenness that the right Tobacco
doth. Some use to call this Nicotian, in English, being a name taken from
the Latin.

The Nature.

This kind of Henbane is thought of some to be cold and moist, but after
Lobel it rather heateth than cools at all, because the biting taste, as
also that rosinniness or gumminess it is possessed of; which is evidently
perceived both in handling and chewing it in the mouth.

The Virtues.

A. This herb availeth against all apostumes, tumours, inveterate ulcers,
botches, and such like, being made into an unguent or salve as followeth:
Take of the green leaves three pounds and an half, stamp them very small
in a stone mortar; of olive oil one quart; set them to boil in a brass
pan or such like, upon a gentle fire, continually stirring it until the
herbs seem black, and will not boil or bubble any more: then shall you
have an excellent green oil; which being drained from the faeces or
dross, put the clean and drained oil to the fire again; adding thereto of
wax half a pound, of rosin four ounces, and of good Turpentine two
ounces: melt them all together, and keep it in pots for your use, to cure
inveterate ulcers, apostumes, burnings, green wounds, and all cuts and
hurts in the head; wherewith I have gotten both crowns and credit.

B.  It is used of some instead of Tobacco, but to small purpose or
profit, although it do stupefy and dull the senses, and cause that kind
of giddiness that Tobacco doth, and likewise spitting; which any other
herb of hot temperature will do, as Rosemary, Thyme, Winter Savory, Sweet
Marjoram, and such like: any of the which I like better to be taken in
smoke than this kind of doubtful Henbane.


CHAP. 68. Of Tobacco, or Henbane of Peru.



Fig. 562. Tobacco of Peru (1) 

Fig. 563. Tobacco of Trinidad (2)
The Kinds.

There be two sorts or kinds of Tobacco; one greater, the other lesser:
the greater was brought into Europe out of the provinces of America,
which we call the West Indies; the other from Trinidad, an island near
unto the continent of the same Indies. Some have added a third sort and
others make the yellow Henbane a kind thereof.

The Description.

1. Tobacco, or Henbane of Peru hath very great stalks of the bigness of a
child's arm; growing in fertile and well dunged ground of seven or eight
foot high, dividing itself into sundry branches of great length; whereon
are placed in most comely order very fair long leaves, broad, smooth, and
sharp pointed, soft, and of a light green colour; so fastened about the
stalk, that they seem to embrace and compass it about. The flowers grow
at the top of the stalks, in shape like a Bell-Flower somewhat long and
cornered, hollow within, of a light carnation colour, tending to
whiteness toward the brims. The seed is contained in long sharp pointed
cods or seed-vessels like unto the seed of yellow Henbane, but somewhat
smaller and browner of colour. The root is great, thick, and of a woody
substance, with some thready strings annexed thereunto.

2. Trinidad Tobacco hath a thick tough and fibrous root, from which
immediately rise up long broad leaves and smooth, of a greenish colour,
lesser than those of Peru: among which riseth up a stalk dividing itself
at the ground into divers branches, whereon are set confusedly the like
leaves, but lesser; at the top of the stalks stand up long necked hollow
flowers of a pale purple tending to a blush colour: after which succeed
the cods or seed-vessels, including many small seeds like unto the seed
of Marjoram. The whole plant perisheth at the first approach of winter.


Fig. 564. Dwarf Tobacco (3)

3. This third is an herb some span or better long, not in face unlike the
precedent, neither defective in the hot and burning taste. The flowers
are much less than those of the Yellow Henbane, & of a greenish yellow.
The leaves are small, and narrower those of Sage of Jerusalem. The root
is small and fibrous.

The Place.

These were first brought into Europe out of America, which is called the
West Indies, in which is the province or country of Peru; but being now
planted in the gardens of Europe it prospereth very well, and cometh from
seed in one year to bear both flowers and seed. The which I take to be
better for the constitution of our bodies than that which is brought from
India; and that growing in the Indies better for the people of the same
country: notwithstanding it is not so thought, nor received of our
tobacconists; for according to the English proverb, Far fetched and dear
bought is best for ladies.

The Time.

Tobacco must be grown in the most fruitful ground that may be found,
carelessly cast abroad in the sowing, without raking it into the ground
or any such pain or industry taken as is requisite in the sowing of other
seeds, as myself have found by proof, who have experimented every way to
cause it quickly to grow: for I have committed some to the earth in the
end of March, some in April, and some in the beginning of May, because I
durst not hazard all my seed at one time, lest some unkindly blast should
happen after the sowing, which might be a great enemy thereunto.

The Names.

The people of America call it Petun: some, as Lobel and Pena, have given
it these Latin names, Sacra herba, Sancta herba, and Sanasancta indorum:
and other, as Dodonæus, call it Hyoscyamus peruvianus, or Henbane of
Peru: Nicolaus Monardus names it Tabacum. That it is Hyoscyami species,
or a kind of Henbane, not only the form being like to yellow Henbane, but
the quality also doth declare; for it bringeth drowsiness, troubleth the
senses, and maketh a man as it were drunk by taking of the fume only; as
Andrew Thevet testifieth, (and common experience showeth): of some it is
called Nicotiana: the which I refer to the yellow Henbane, for
distinction's sake.
The Temperature.

It is hot and dry, and that in the second degree, as Monardis thinketh,
and is withal of power to discuss or resolve, and to cleanse away filthy
humours, having also a small astriction, and a stupefying or benumbing
quality, and it purgeth by the stool: and Monardis writeth that it hath a
certain power to resist poison. And to prove it to be of an hot
temperature, the biting quality of the leaves doth show, which is easily
perceived by taste: also the green leaves laid upon ulcers in sinewy
parts may serve for a proof of heat in this plant; because they do draw
out filth and corrupted matter, which a cold simple would never do. The
leaves likewise being chewed draw forth phlegm and water, as doth also
the fume taken when the leaves are dried: which things declare that this
is not a little hot; for what things soever, that being chewed or held in
the mouth bring forth phlegm and water, the same be all accounted hot as
the root of Pellitory of Spain, of Saxifrage, and other things of like
power. Moreover, the benumbing quality hereof is not hard to be
perceived, for upon the taking of the fume at the mouth there followeth
an infirmity like unto drunkenness, and many times sleep; as after the
taking of opium: which also showeth in the taste a biting quality, and
therefore is not without heat; which when it is chewed and inwardly
taken, it doth forthwith show, causing a certain heat in the chest, and
yet withal troubling the wits, as Petrus Bellonius in his third book Of
Singularities doth declare; where also he showeth, that the Turks
oftentimes do use opium, and take one dram and a half thereof at one
time; without any other hurt following, saving that they are thereupon
(as it were) taken with a certain light drunkenness. So also this Tobacco
being in taste biting, and in temperature hot, hath notwithstanding a
benumbing quality. Hereupon it seemeth to follow, that not only this
Henbane of Peru, but also the juice of poppy otherwise called opium,
consisteth of divers parts; some biting and hot and others extreme cold,
that is to say, stupefying or benumbing: if so be that this benumbing
quality proceed of extreme cold (as Galen and all the old physicians do
hold opinion) then should this be cold; but if the benumbing faculty doth
not depend of an extreme cold quality, but proceedeth of the essence of
the substance, then Tobacco is not cold and benumbing, but hot and
benumbing, and the latter not so much by reason of his temperature as
through the property of his substance; no otherwise than a purging
medicine, which hath his force not from the temperature, but from the
essence of the whole substance.

The Virtues.

A. Nicolaus Monardis saith, that the leaves hereof are a remedy for the
pain in the head called the megrim or migraine that hath been of long
continuance; and also for a cold stomach; especially in children; and
that it is good against the pains in the kidneys.

B. It is a present remedy for the fits of the mother: it mitigateth the
pain of the gout if it be roasted in hot embers and applied to the
grieved part.

C. It is likewise a remedy for the tooth-ache, if the teeth and gums be
rubbed with a linen cloth dipped in the juice; and afterward a round ball
of the leaves laid unto the place.

D. The juice boiled with sugar in form of a syrup and inwardly taken,
driveth forth worms of the belly; if withal a leaf be laid to the navel.

E. The same doth likewise scour and cleanse old and rotten ulcers, and
bringeth them to perfect digestion as the same author affrmeth.

F. In the Low Countries it is used against scabs and filthiness of the
skin, and for the cure of wounds: but some hold opinion that it is to be
used but only to hot and strong bodies: for they say that the use is not
safe in weak and old folks: and for this cause, as it seemeth, the women
in America (as Thevet sayeth) abstaine from the herb Petun or Tobacco,
and do in no wise use it.

G. The weight of four ounces of the juice hereof drunk purgeth both
upwards and downwards, and procureth after, a long and sound sleep, as we
have learned of a friend by obfervation, affirming that a strong
countryman of a middle age, having a dropsy, took of it, and being
wakened out of his sleep, called for meat and drink, and after that
became perfectly whole.

H. Moreover the same man reported, that he had cured many countrymen of
agues with the distilled water of the leaves drunk a little while before
the fit.

I. Likewise there is an oil to be taken out of the leaves that healeth
merry-galls, kibed heels and such like.

K. It is good against poison, and taketh away the malignity thereof, if
the juice be given to drink or the wounds made by venomous beasts be
washed therewith.

L. The dry leaves are used to be taken in a pipe set on fire and sucked
into the stomach, and thrust forth again at the nostrils against the
pains of the head, rheums, aches in any part of the body whereof soever
the original proceed, whether from France, Italy, Spain, Indies, or from
our familiar and best known diseases: those leaves do palliate or ease
for a time, but never perform any cure absolutely: for although they
empty the body of humours, yet the cause of the grief cannot be so taken
away. But some have learned this principle, that repletion requireth
evacuation; that is, fullness craveth emptiness, and by evacuation assure
themselves of health: But this doth not take away so much with it this
day, but the next bringeth with it more: as for example, a well doth
never yield such store of water as when it is most drawn and emptied.
Myself speak by proof, who have cured of that infectious disease a great
many; divers of which had covered or kept under the sickness by the help
of Tobacco as they thought, yet in the end have been constrained to have
unto such an hard knot, a crabbed wedge, or else had utterly perished.

M. Some use to drink it (as it is termed) for wantonness or rather
custom, and cannot forbear it, no not in the midst of their dinner, which
kind of taking is unwholesome and very dangerous: although to take it
seldom and that physically is to be tolerated and may do some good; but I
commend the syrup above this fume or smoky medicine.

N. It is taken of some physically in a pipe for that purpose once in a
day at the most, and that in the morning fasting against pains in the
head, stomach, and grief in the breast and lungs; against catarrhs and
rheums, and such as have gotten cold and hoarseness.

O. Some have reported that it little prevaileth against an hot disease,
and that it profiteth an hot complexion nothing at all: but experience
hath not showed it to be injurious unto either.

P. They that have seen the proof hereof have credibly reported, that when
the Moors and Indians have fainted either for want of food or rest, this
hath been a present remedy unto them to supply the one, and to help them
to the other.

Q. The priests and enchanters of the hot countries do take the fume
thereof until they be drunk; that after they have lain for dead three or
four hours, they may tell the people what wonders, visions, or illusions
they have seen, and so give them a prophetical direction or foretelling
(if we may trust the Devil) of the success of their business.

R. The juice or distilled water of the first kind is very good against
catarrhs, the dizziness of the head, and rheums that fall down the eyes,
against the pain called the megrim, if either you apply it unto the
temples, or take one or two green leaves, or a dry leaf moistened in
wine, and dried cunningly upon the embers and laid thereto.

S. It cleareth the sight and taketh away the webs and spots thereof,
being anointed with the juice blood warm.

T. The oil or juice dropped into the ears is good against deafness; a
cloth dipped in the same and laid upon the face, taketh away the lentils,
redness, and spots thereof.

V. Many notable medicines are made hereof against the old and inveterate
cough, against asthmatical or pectoral griefs, which if I should set down
at large, would require a peculiar volume.

X. It is also given to such as are accustomed to swoon, and are troubled
with the colic and windiness, against the dropsy, the worms in children,
the piles and the sciatica.

Y. It is used in outward medicines either the herb boiled with oil, wax,
rosin and turpentine, as before is set down in Yellow Henbane, or the
extraction thereof with salt, oil, balsam, the distilled water and such
like, against tumours, apostumes, old ulcers of hard curation, botches,
scabs, stinging with nettles, carbuncles, poisoned arrows, and wounds
made with guns or any other weapon.

Z. It is excellent good in burnings and scaldings with fire, water, oil,
lightning, or such like, boiled with hog's grease in form of an ointment,
which I have often proved, and found most true, adding a little of the
juice of Thorn-apple leaves, spreading it upon a cloth and so applying
it.

A. I do make hereof an excellent balsam to cure deep wounds and
punctures, made by some narrow sharp pointed weapon. Which balsam doth
bring up the flesh from the bottom very speedily, and also heal simple
cuts in the flesh according to the first intention, that is, to glue or
solder the lips of the wound together, not procuring matter or corruption
unto it, as is commonly seen in the healing of wounds. The receipt is
this: Take oil of roses, oil of St. John's Wort, of either one pint, the
leaves of Tobacco stamped small in a stone mortar two pounds, boil them
together to the consumption of the juice, strain it and put it to the
fire again adding thereto of Venice turpentine two ounces, of olibanum
and mastic of either half an ounce, in most fine and subtle powder, the
which you may at all times make an unguent or salve by putting thereto
wax and rosin to give unto it a stiff body, which worketh exceeding well
in malign and virulent ulcers, as in wounds and punctures. I send this
jewel unto you women of all sorts, especially to such as cure and help
the poor and impotent of your country without reward. But unto the
beggarly rabble of witches, charmers, and such like cozeners, that regard
more to get money, than to help for charity, I with these few medicines
far from their understanding, and from those deceivers whom I wish to be
ignorant herein. But courteous gentlewomen, I may not for the malice that
I do bear unto such, hide any thing from you of such importance: and
therefore take one more that followeth, wherewith I have done very many
and good cures, although of small cost, but regard it not the less for
that cause.

B. Take the leaves of Tobacco two pound, hog's grease one pound, stamp
the herb small in a stone mortar, putting thereto a small cupful of red
or claret wine, stir them well together; cover the mortar from filth and
so let it rest until morning; then put it to the fire and let it boil
gently, continually stirring it until the consumption of the wine; strain
it, and set it to the fire again; putting thereto the juice of the herb
one pound, of Venice turpentine four ounces; boil them together to the
consumption of the juice, then add thereto of the roots of Aristolochia
or Birthwort in most fine powder two ounces, sufficient wax to give it a
body, the which keep for thy wounded poor neighbour, as also the old and
filthy ulcers of the legs and other parts of such as have need of help.


CHAP. 69. Of Tree Nightshade.


Fig. 565. Tree Nightshade

The Description.

This rare and pleasant plant, called Tree Nightshade, is taken of some to
be a kind of Guinea Pepper, but not rightly; of others for a kind of
Nightshade, whose judgement and censure I gladly admit; for that it doth
more fitly answer it both in the form and nature. It groweth up like unto
a small shrub or woody hedge bush, two or three cubits high, covered with
a greenish bark set with many small twiggy branches, and garnished with
many long leaves very green, like unto those of the Peach tree. The
flowers are white, with a certain yellow prick or pointel in the middle,
like unto the flowers of garden Nightshade. After which succeed small
round berries very red of colour, and of the same substance with winter
Cherries, wherein are contained little flat yellow seeds. The root is
compact of many small hairy yellow strings.

The Place.

It groweth not wild in these cold regions, but we have them in our
gardens, rather for pleasure than profit, or any good quality as yet
known.

The Time.

It is kept in pots and tubs with earth and such like in houses during the
extremity of winter, because it cannot endure the coldness of our coldd
climate; and is set abroad into the Garden in March or April: it
flowereth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

Tree Nightshade is called in Latin Solanam arborescens: of some,
Strychnodendron: and some judge it to be Amomum of Pliny: it is
Pseudocapsicum of Dodonæus.

The Nature and Virtues.

We have not as yet any thing set down as touching the temperature or
virtues of this plant, but it is referred of form to the kinds of Guinea
Pepper, but without any reason at all; for Guinea Pepper though it bring
forth fruit very like in shape unto this plant, yet in taste more unlike,
for that Capsicum or Guinea Pepper is more sharp in taste than our common
pepper, and the other hath no taste of biting at all, but is like unto
the berries of Garden Nightshade in taste, although they differ in
colour: which hath moved some to call this plant Red Nightshade, of the
colour of the berries: and Tree Nightshade, of the woody substance which
doth continue and grow from year to year and Guinea Pepper dieth at the
first approch of winter.


CHAP. 70. Of Balsam Apple, or Apple of Jerusalem.



Fig. 566. Male Balsam Apple (1) 

Fig. 577. Female Balsam Apple (2)
The Description.

1. The Male Balsam Apple hath long, small, and tender branches set with
leaves like those of the vine; and the like small clasping tendrils
wherewith it catcheth hold of such things as do grow near unto it, not
able by reason of his weakness to stand upright without some pole or
other thing to support it. The flowers consist of five small leaves of a
mean bigness, and are of a faint yellow colour: which being past, there
do come in place long apples, something sharp toward the point almost
like an egg, rough all over as it were with small harmless prickles, red
both within and without when they be ripe, and cleave in sunder of
themselves; in the apple lieth great broad flat seeds, like those of
Pompion or Citrull, but something black when they be withered. The root
is thready, and disperseth itself far abroad in the ground.

2. The Female Balsam Apple doth not a little differ from the former: it
bringeth forth stalks not running or climbing like the other, but a most
thick and fat trunk or stock full of juice, in substance like the stalks
of Purslane, of a reddish colour and somewhat shining. The leaves be long
and narrow, in shape like those of Willow or the Peach tree, somewhat
toothed or notched about the edges: among which grow the flowers of an
incarnate colour tending to blueness, having a small spur or tail annexed
thereto as hath the Lark's Heel, of a fair light crimson colour: in their
places come up the fruit or apples rough and hairy, but lesser than those
of the former, yellow when they be ripe, which likewise cleave asunder of
themselves and cast abroad their seeds much like unto Lentils, saith mine
author. But those which I have from year to year in my garden bring forth
seed like the Cauliflower or Mustard seed; whether they be of two kinds,
or the climate do alter the shape, it resteth disputable.

The Place.

These plants do prosper best in hot regions: they are strangers in
England, and do with great labour and industry grow in these cold
countries.

The Time.

They must be sown in the beginning of April in a bed of hot horse dung,
even as Musk Melons, Cucumbers, and such like cold fruits are; and
replanted abroad from the said bed into the most hot and fertile place of
the garden at such time as they have gotten three leaves apiece.

The Names.

Diversly hath this plant been named; some calling it by one name, and
some by another, every one as it seemed good to his fancy. Baptista
Sardus calleth it Balsamina Cucumerina: others, Viticella, and Charantia,
as also Pomum hierosolymitanum, or Apples of Jerusalem: in English,
Balsam Apple or Balm Apple: in Italian, Caranza: in the German tongue,
Balsam opffel: in French, Merveille: some of the Latins have called it
Pomum mirabile, or Marvellous Apples. It is thought to be named
Balsamina, because the oil wherein the ripe apples be steeped or infused,
is taken to be profitable for many things, as is Opobalsamum, or the
liquor of the plant Balsamum.

The female Balsam Apple is likewise called Balsamina, and oftentimes in
the neuter gender Balsaminum. Gesner chooseth rather to name it Balsamina
amygdaloides: Valerius Cordus, Balsammella: others, Balsamina fœmina: in
English, the Female Balsam apples.

The Nature.

The fruit or apples hereof, as also the leaves, do notably dry, having
withal a certain moderate coldness very near to a mean temperature, that
is after some hot, in the first, and dry in the second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves are reported to heal green wounds if they be bruised and
laid thereon; and taken with wine they are said to be a remedy for the
colic; and an effectual medicine for burstings and convulsions or cramps.

B. The leaves of the male Balsamina dried in the shadow, and beaten into
powder and given in wine unto those that are mortally wounded in the
body, doth cure them inwardly, and helpeth also the colic.

C. The oil which is drawn forth of the fruit doth cure all green and
fresh wounds as the true natural Balsam: it helpeth the cramps and
convulsions, and the shrinking of sinews, being anointed therewith.

D. It profiteth women that are in great extremity of childbirth in taking
away the pain of the matrix, causing easy deliverance being applied to
the place, and anointed upon their bellies, or cast into the matrix with
a syringe, and easeth the dolour of the inward parts.

E. It cureth the hæmorrhoids and all other pains of the fundament, being
thereto applied with lint of old clouts.

F. The leaves drunken in wine, heal ruptures.

G. I find little or nothing written of the property or virtues of the
female kind, but that it is thought to draw near unto the first in
temperament and virtue.

H. Olive oil in which the fruit (the seed taken forth) is either set in
the sun, as we do when we make oil of roses, or boiled in a double glass
set in hot water, or else buried in hot horse dung, taketh away
inflammations that are in wounds. It doth also easily and in short time
consolidate or glue them together, and perfectly cure them.

I. It cureth the ulcers of the dugs or paps, the head of the yard or
matrix, as also the inflammation thereof being injected or conveyed into
the place with a syringe or mother pessary.

K. This apple is with good success applied unto wounds, pricks and hurts
of the sinews. It hath great force to cure scaldings and burnings: it
taketh away scars and blemishes, if in the mean time the powder of the
leaves be taken for certain days together.

L. It is reported that such as be barren are made fruitful herewith, if
the woman first be bathed in a fit and convenient bath for the purpose, &
the parts about the share and matrix anointed herewith, and the woman
presently have the company of her husband.


CHAP. 71. Of Guinea or Indian Pepper.


Fig. 568. Kinds of Guinea Pepper (1-3)

The Description.

1. The first of these plants hath square stalks a foot high or somewhat
more, set with many thick and fat leaves, not unlike to those of Garden
Nightshade, but narrower and sharper pointed, of a dark green colour. The
flowers grow alongst the stalks, out of the wings of the leaves, of a
white colour, having for the most part five small leaves blazing out like
a star, with a green button in the middle. After them grow the cods,
green at the first, and when they be ripe of a brave colour glittering
like red coral; in which is contained little flat seeds, of a light
yellow colour, of a hot biting taste like common pepper, as is also the
cod itself: which is long, and as big as a finger, and sharp pointed.

2. The difference that is between this and the last described is small,
for it consists in nothing but that the cods are pretty large and round,
after the fashion of cherries, and not so long as those of the former.

3. The third kind of Guinea Pepper is like unto the precedent in leaves,
flowers, and stalks. The cods hereof are small, round, and red, very like
to the berries of Dulcamara or Woody Nightshade, both in bigness, colour,
and substance, wherein consisteth the difference: notwithstanding the
seed and cods are very sharp and biting, as those of the first kind.


Fig. 569. Varieties of the Cods of Guinea Pepper

There are many other varieties of Guinea Pepper, which chiefly consist in
the shape and colour of the cods: wherefore I thought good (and that
chiefly because it is a plant that will hardly brook our climate) only to
present you with the figures of their several shapes, whereof the cods of
some stand or grow upright, and other some hang down: such as desire
further information of this plant, may be abundantly satisfied in Clusius
his Curæposter. from pag. 95 to pag. 108, where they shall find these
treated of large in a treatise written in Italian by Gregory de Regio, a
Capuchin friar, and sent to Clusius, who translating it into Latin, left
it to be set forth with other his observations, which was performed 2
years after his death, to wit Anno Domini 1611. The figures we here give
are the same which are in that tractate.

The Names.

These plants are brought from foreign countries, as Guinea, India, and
those parts, into Spain and Italy: from whence we have received seed for
our English gardens, where they come to fruit-bearing: but the cod doth
not come to that bright red colour which naturally it is possessed with,
which hath happened by reason of these unkindly years that are past: but
we expect better, when God shall send us a hot and temperate year.

The Time.

The seeds hereof must be sown in a bed of hot horse-dung, as Musk Melons
are, and removed into a pot when they have gotten three or four leaves,
that it may the more conveniently be carried from place to place to
receive the heat of the sun: and are toward autumn to be carried into
some house, to avoid the injury of the cold nights of that time of the
year, when it is to bear his fruit.

The Names.

Actuarius calleth it in Latin, Capsicum: and it is thought to be that
which Avicenna nameth Zinziber caninum, or Dog's Ginger: and Pliny,
Siliquastrum, which is more like in taste to pepper than is Panax, and it
is therefore called Piperitis, as he hath written in his 19th book, 12th
chap. Panax (saith he) hath the taste of pepper and Siliquastrum for
which cause it is called Piperitis. The later herbarists do oftentimes
call it Piper indianum, or Indicum, sometimes Piper Calicuthium, or Piper
hispanicum: in English it is called Guinea Pepper, and Indian Pepper: in
the German tongue, Indianischer Pfeffer: in Low Dutch, Bresilie Peper: in
French, Poivre d'Inde, very well known in the shops at Billingsgate by
the name of Guinea Pepper, where it is usually to be bought.

The Temperature.

Guinea Pepper is extreme hot and dry even in the fourth degree: that is
to say, far hotter and drier then Avicenna showeth Dog's Ginger to be.

The Virtues.

A. Guinea Pepper hath the taste of pepper, but not the power or virtue,
notwithstanding in Spain and sundry parts of the Indies they do use to
dress their meat therewith, as we do with Calicut pepper: but (saith my
author) it hath in it a malicious quality, whereby it is an enemy to the
liver and other of the entrails. Avicenna writeth that it killeth dogs.

B. It is said to dye or colour like Saffron; and being received in such
sort as Saffron is usually taken, it warmeth the stomach, and helpeth
greatly the digestion of meats.

C. It dissolveth the swellings about the throat called the King's evil,
as kernels and cold swellings; and taketh away spots and lentils from the
face, being applied thereto with honey.


CHAP. 72. Of Horned Poppy.


Fig. 570. Kinds of Horned Poppy (1-4)

The Description.

1. The yellow horned Poppy hath whitish leaves very much cut or jagged,
somewhat like the leaves of Garden Poppy, but rougher and more hairy. The
stalks be long, round, and brittle. The flowers be large and yellow,
consisting of four leaves; which being past, there come long husks or
cods, crooked like an horn or cornet, wherein is contained small black
seed. The root is great, thick, scaly, and rough, continuing long.

2. The second kind of horned Poppy is much slenderer and lesser than the
precedent, and hath leaves with like deep cuts as Rocket hath, and
something hairy. The stalks be very slender, brittle, and branched into
divers arms or wings, the flowers small, made of four little leaves, of a
red colour with a small streak of black toward the bottom, after which
cometh the seed, enclosed in slender, long, crooked cods full of blackish
seed. The root is small and single, and dieth every year.

3. This is much like the last described, and according ro Clusius, rather
a variety than difference. It is distinguished from the last mentioned by
the smoothness of the leaves, and the colour of the flowers, which are of
a pale yellowish red, both which accidents Clusius affirms happen to the
former, towards the latter end of summer.

4. There is another sort of horned Poppy altogether lesser than the last
described, having tenderer leaves, cut into fine little parcels: the
flower is likewise lesser, of a blue purple colour like the double
Violets.

The Place.

The yellow horned Poppy groweth upon the sands and banks of the sea: I
have found it growing near unto Rye in Kent, in the Isles of Sheppey and
Thanet, at Lee in Essex, at Harwich, at Whitstable, and many other places
alongst the English coast.

The second groweth not wild in England. Angelus Palea, and Bartholomæus
ab Urbe-veterum, who have commented upon Mesue, write that they found
this red horned Poppy in the kingdoms of Aragon and Castile in Spain, and
the fields near unto common paths. They do grow in my Garden very
plentifully.

The Time.

They flower from May to the end of August.

The Names.

Most Writers have taken horned Poppy, especially that with red flowers to
be Glaucium: neither is this their opinion altogether unprobable; for as
Dioscorides saith, Glaucium hath leaves like those of horned Poppy, but
fatter, low, or lying on the ground, of a strong smell and of a bitter
taste; the juice also is much like in colour to Saffron. Now Lobel and
Pena witness, that this horned Poppy hath the same kind of juice, as
myself likewise can testify. Dioscorides saith that Glaucium groweth
about Hierapolis, a city in Syria; but what hindereth that it should not
be found also somewhere else? These things show it hath a great affinity
with Glaucium, if it be not the true and legitimate Glaucium of
Disocorides. Howbeit the first is the Mecon ceratites, or Papaver
corniculatum of the ancients, by the common consent of all late writers:
in English, Sea Poppy and Horned Poppy: in Dutch, Geelheul and Horne
Heule: in the German tongue Gelbomag: in French, Pavot Cornu: in Spanish,
Dormidera marina.

The Nature.

Horned Poppies are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The root of horned Poppy boiled in water unto the consumption of the
one half, and drunk, provoketh urine, and openeth the stopping of the
liver.

B. The seed taken in the quantity of a spoonful looseth the belly gently.

C. The juice mixed with meal and honey, mundifieth old rotten and filthy
ulcers.

D. The leaves and flowers put into unguents or salves appropriate for
green wounds, digest them: that is, bring them to white matter, with
perfect quitter or sanies.


CHAP. 73. Of Garden Poppies.


Fig. 571. Kinds of Garden Poppy (1-4)

The Description.

1. The leaves of White Poppy are long, broad, smooth, longer than the
leaves of Lettuce, whiter, and cut in the edges: the stem or stalk is
straight and brittle, oftentimes a yard and a half high: on the top
whereof grow white flowers, in which at the very beginning appeareth a
small head, accompanied with a number of threads or chives, which being
full grown is round, and yet something long withal, and hath a cover or
coronet upon the top; it is with many films or thin skins divided into
coffers or several partitions, in which is contained abundance of small
round and whitish seed. The root groweth deep, and is of no estimation
nor continuance.

2. Like unto this is the Black Garden Poppy, saving that the flowers are
not so white and shining, but usually red, or at least spotted or
streaked with some lines of purple. The leaves are greater, more jagged,
and sharper pointed. The seed is likewise blacker, which maketh the
difference.

3. There is also another Garden Poppy whose leaves are much more
sinuated, or crested, and the flower also is all jagged or finely cut
about the edges, and of this sort there is also both black and white. The
flowers of the black are red, and the seed black; and the other hath both
the flowers and seed white.

4. There are divers varieties of double Poppies of both these kinds, and
their colours are commonly either white, red, dark purple, scarlet, or
mixed of some of these. They differ from the former only in the
doubleness of their flowers.


Fig. 572. Wild Poppy (5)

5. There is also another kind of Poppy, which oft times is found wild;
the stalks, leaves, flowers, and heads are like, but less than those of
the precedent: the flowers are of an overworn bluish purple colour; after
which follow heads short and round, which under their cover or coronet
have little holes by which the seed may fall out; contrary to the heads
of the former, which are close and open not of themselves. There is also
a double one of this kind.

The Place.

These kind of Poppies are sown in gardens, & do afterward come of the
fallings of their seed.

The Time.

They flower most commonly in June. The seed is perfected in July and
August.

The Names.

Poppy is called of the Latins, Papaver: the shops keep the Latin name; it
is called in High Dutch, Magsamen: in Low Dutch, Huel and Mancop: in
English, Poppy & Cheesebowls: in French, Pavot, and Oliette, by the
Walloons.

The Garden Poppy which hath black seeds, is named of Pliny and of the
Latins, Papaver nigrum, whereof there be many variable colours, and of
great beauty, although of evil smell, whereupon our gentlewomen do call
it Joan Silver Pin.

The Temperature.

All the Poppies are cold, as Galen testifieth in his book Of the
Faculties of Simple Medicines.

The Virtues.

A. This seed, as Galen saith in his book Of The Faculties of
Nourishments, is good to season bread with; but the white is better than
the black. He also addeth, that the same is cold and causeth sleep, and
yieldeth no commendable nourishment to the body; it is often used in
comfits, served at the table with other junketting dishes.

B. The oil which is pressed out of it is pleasant and delightful to be
eaten, and is taken with bread or any other ways in meat, without any
sense of cooling.

C. A greater force is in the knobs or heads, which do specially prevail
to move sleep, and to stay and repress distillations or rheums, and come
near in force to opium, but more gentle. Opium, or the condensed juice of
Poppy heads is strongest of all: Meconium (which is the juice of the
heads and leaves) is weaker. Both of them any ways taken either inwardly,
or outwardly applied to the head, provoke sleep. Opium somewhat too
plentifully taken doth also bring death, as Pliny truely writeth.

D. It mitigateth all kind of pains: but it leaveth behind it oftentimes a
mischief worse than the disease itself, and that hard to be cured, as a
dead palsy and such like.

E. The use of it, as Galen in his 11th book of medicines according to the
places affected, saith, is so offensive to the firm and solid parts of
the body, as that they had need afterwards to be restored.

F. So also collyries or eye medicines made with opium have been hurtful
to many; insomuch that they have weakened the eyes and dulled the sight
of those that have used it: whatsoever is compounded of opium to mitigate
the extreme pains of the ears bringeth hardness of hearing. Wherefore all
those medicines and compounds are to be shunned that are to be made of
opium, and are not to be used but in extreme necessity; and that it is,
when no other mitigator or assuager of pain doth any thing prevail, as
Galen in his third book Of Medicines, according to the places affected,
doth evidently declare.

G. The leaves of poppy boiled in water with a little sugar and drunk,
causeth sleep: or if it be boiled without sugar, and the head, feet, and
temples bathed therewith, it doth effect the same.

H. The heads of Poppy boiled in water with sugar to a syrup causeth
sleep, and is good against rheums and catarrhs that distill & fall down
from the brain into the lungs, & easeth the cough.

I. The green knops of Poppy stamped with barley meal, and a little
barrow's grease, helpeth St. Anthony's fire, called Ignis sacer.

K. The leaves, knops and seed stamped with vinegar, woman's milk, and
saffron, cureth an Erysipelas, (another kind of St. Anthony's fire,) and
easeth the gout mightily, and put in the fundament as a clyster causeth
sleep.

L. The seed of black Poppy drunk in wine stoppeth the flux of the belly,
and the overmuch flowing of women's sickness.

M. A caudle made of the seeds of white poppy, or made into almond milk,
and so given, causeth sleep.

N. It is manifest that this wild Poppy (which I have described in the
fifth place) is that of which the composition Diacodium is to be made; as
Galen hath at large treated in his seventh book Of Medicines, according
to the places affected. Crito also, and after him Themison and Democritus
do appoint the wild Poppy, to be in the same composition; and even that
same Democritus addeth, that it should be that which is not sown: and
such an one is this, which groweth without sowing. Dodonæus.


CHAP. 74. Of Corn-Rose, or Wild Poppy.



Fig. 573. Red Poppy, or Corn-Rose (1) 

Fig. 574. Prickly Poppy (4)
The Description.

1. The stalks of red Poppy be black, tender, and brittle, somewhat hairy:
the leaves are cut round about with deep gashes like those of Succory or
wild Rocket: the flowers grow forth at the tops of the stalks, being of a
beautiful and gallant red colour, with blackish threads compassing about
the middle part of the head: which being fully grown, is lesser than that
of the Garden Poppy: the seed is small and black.

2. There is also a kind hereof in all points agreeing with the former,
saving that the flowers of this are very double and beautiful, and
therein only consists the difference

3. There is a small kind of red Poppy growing commonly wild together with
the first described, which is lesser in all parts, and the flowers are of
a fainter or overworn red, inclining somewhat to orange.

4. Besides these there is another rare plant, which all men, and that
very fitly, have referred to the kinds of Poppy. This hath a slender long
and fibrous root, from which arises a stalk some cubit high, divided into
sundry branches, round, crested, prickly, and full of a white pith. The
leaves are divided after the maner of horned poppy, smooth, with white
veins & prickly edges: the flower is yellow; and consists of four or five
leaves; after which succeeds a longish head, being either four, five, or
six-cornered, having many yellow threads encompassing it: the head while
it it is tender is reddish at the top, but being ripe it is black, and it
is set with many and stiff pricks. The seed is round, black, and pointed,
being six times as big as that of the ordinary Poppy.

The Place.

They grow in arable grounds, among wheat, spelt, rye, barley, oats, and
other grain, and in the borders of fields. The double red, and prickly
Poppy are not to be found in this kingdom, unless in the gardens of some
prime herbarists.

The Time.

The fields are garnished and overspread with these wild poppies in June
and August.

The Names.

1. Wild Poppy is called in Latin, Papaver erraticum: Gaza according to
the Greek nameth it Papaver fluidum: as also Lobel, who calls it Pap.
rhœas, because the flower thereof soon falleth away. Which name rhœas may
for the same cause be common, not only to these, but also to the others,
if it be so called of the speedy falling of the flowers: but if it be
surnamed rhœas of the falling away of the seed (as it appeareth) then
shall it be proper to that which is described in the fifth place in the
foregoing chapter, out of whose heads the seed easily and quickly falls;
as it doth also out of this, yet less manifestly. They name it in French
Cocquelicot, Consanons, Pavot sauvage: in Dutch, Collen bloemen, Coren
rosen: in High Dutch, Klapper rossen: in English, Red Poppy, and Corn-
rose.

4. Some have called this Ficus infernalis, from the Italian name Figo del
inferno. But Clusius and Bauhin have termed it Papaver spinosum: and the
latter of them would have it (and that not without good reason) to be
Glaucium of Dioscorides, lib. 3, cap 100. And I also probably conjecture
it to be the Hippomanes of Crateaus, mentioned by the Greek Scholiast of
Theocritus, as I have formerly briefly declared, Chap. 62.

The Nature.

The faculty of the wild poppies is like to that of the other poppies;
that is to say cold and causing sleep.

The Virtues.

A. Most men being led rather by false experiments than reason, commend
the flowers against the pleurisy, giving to drink as soon as the pain
cometh, either the distilled water, or syrup made by often infusing the
leaves. And yet many times it happeneth that the pain ceaseth by that
means, though hardly sometimes, by reason that the spittle cometh up
hardly, and with more difficulty, especially in those that are weak, and
have not a strong constitution of body. Baptista Sardus might be counted
the author of this error; who hath written, That most men have given the
flowers of this poppy against the pain of the sides, and that it is good
against the spitting of blood.


CHAP. 75. Of Bastard Wild Poppy.



Fig. 575. Bastard Wild Poppy (1) 

Fig. 576. Long-codded Wild Poppy (2)
The Description.

1. The first of these bastard wild Poppies hath slender weak stems a foot
high, rough and hairy, set with leaves not unlike to those of Rocket,
made of many small leaves deeply cut or jagged about the edges. The
flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a red colour, with some small
blackness toward the bottom. The seed is small, contained in little round
knobs. The root is small and thready.

2. The second is like the first, saving that the cods hereof be long, and
the other more round, wherein the difference doth consist.

The Place.

These plants do grow in the corn fields in Somersetshire, and by the
hedges and highways, as ye travel from London to Bath. Lobel found it
growing in the next field unto a village in Kent called Southfleet,
myself being in his company, of purpose to discover some strange plants
not hitherto written of.

Mr. Robert Lorkin and I found both these growing in Chelsea fields, as
also in those belonging to Hammersmith: but the shorter headed one is a
flower of a more elegant colour, and not so plentiful as the other.

The Time.

They flower in the beginning of August, and their seed is ripe at the end
thereof.

The Names.

The bastard wild Poppy is called in Latin, Argemone, Argemonia,
Concordia, Concordialis, and Herba liburnica: of some, Pergalium, Arsela,
and Sacrocolla Herba: in English, Wind-rose, and Bastard Wild Poppy.

The Temperature.

They are hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves stamped, and the juice dropped into the eyes easeth the
inflammation thereof; and cureth the disease of the eye called Argema,
whereof it took his name: which disease when it happeneth on the black of
the eye it appears white, and contrariwise when it is in the white then
it appeareth black of colour.

B. The leaves stamped and bound unto the eyes or face that are black or
blue by means of some blow or stripe, doth perfectly take it away. The
dry herb steeped in warm water worketh the like effect.

C. The leaves and roots stamped, and the juice given in drink, helpeth
the wringings or gripings of the belly. The dry herb infused in warm
water doth the same effectually.

D. The herb stamped, cureth any wound, ulcer, canker, or fistula, being
made up into an unguent or salve, with oil, wax, and a little turpentine.

E. The juice taken in the weight of two drams, with wine, mightily
expelleth poison or venom.

F. The juice taketh away warts if they be rubbed therewith; and being
taken in meat it helps the milt or spleen if it be wasted.


CHAP. 76. Of Wind-Flowers.



Fig. 577. Purple Wind-Flower (1) 

Fig. 578. Double Scarlet Wind-Flower (2)
The Kinds.

The stock or kindred of the Anemones or Wind-Flowers, especially in their
varieties of colours, are without number, or at the least not
sufficiently known unto any one that hath written of plants. For Dodonæus
hath set forth five sorts; Lobel eight; Tabernamontanus ten: myself have
in my garden twelve different sorts: and yet I do hear of divers more
differing very notably from any of these; which I have briefly touched,
though not figured, every new year bringing with it new and strange
kinds; and every country his peculiar plants of this sort, which are sent
unto us from far countries, in hope to receive from us such as our
country yieldeth.

The Description.

1. The first kind of Anemone or Wind-Flower hath small leaves very much
snipped or jagged almost like unto Camomile, or Adonis flower: among
which riseth up a stalk bare or naked almost unto the top; at which place
is set two or three leaves like the other: and at the top of the stalk
cometh forth a fair and beautiful flower compact of seven leaves, and
sometimes eight, of a violet colour tending to purple. It is impossible
to describe the colour in his full perfection, considering the variable
mixtures. The root is tuberous or knobby, and very brittle.

2. The second kind of Anemone hath leaves like to the precedent, insomuch
that it is hard to distinguish the one from the other but by the flowers
only: for those of this plant are of a most bright and fair scarlet
colour, and as double as the Marigold; and the other not so. The root is
knobby and very brittle, as is the former.


Fig. 579. Kinds of Wind-Flower (3-5)

3. The great Anemone hath double flowers, usually called the Anemone of
Chalcedon (which is a city in Bithynia) and great broad leaves deeply cut
in the edges, not unlike to those of the field Crow-Foot, of an overworn
green colour: amongst which riseth up a naked bare stalk almost unto the
top, where there stand two or three leaves in shape like the others, but
lesser; sometimes changed into reddish stripes, confusedly mixed here and
there in the said leaves. On the top of the stalk standeth a most gallant
flower very double, of a perfect red colour, the which is sometimes
striped amongst the red with a little line or two of yellow in the
middle; from which middle cometh forth many blackish thrums. The seed is
not to be found that I could ever observe, but is carried away with the
wind. The root is thick and knobby.

4. The fourth agreeth with the first kind of Anemone, in roots, leaves,
stalks, and shape of flowers, differing in that, that this plant bringeth
forth fair single red flowers, and the other of a violet colour, as
aforesaid.

5. The fifth sort of Anemone hath many small jagged leaves like those of
Coriander, proceeding from a knobby root resembling the root of
Bulbocastanum or Earth Chestnut. The stalk rises up amongst the leaves of
two hands high, bearing at the top a single flower, consisting of a pale
or border of little purple leaves, sometimes red, and often of a white
colour set about a blackish pointel, thrummed over with many small
blackish hairs.



Fig. 580.Broad-Leaved Wind-Flower (6) 

Fig. 581. Double Yellow Wind-Flower. (7) 
	6. The sixth hath very broad leaves in respect of all the rest of
the Anemones, not unlike to those of the common Mallow, but green on the
upper part, and tending to redness underneath, like the leaves of Sow-
Bread. The stalk is like that of the last described, on the top whereof
grows a fair yellow star-flower, with a head ingirt with yellow thrums.
The root (saith my author) is a finger long, thick and knobby.

7. There is also another whose lower leaves resemble those of the last
described, yet those which grow next above them are more divided or cut
in: amongst these leaves riseth up a stalk some foot high the top whereof
is adorned with a flower consisting of two ranks of leaves, whereof those
on the outside are larger, rounder pointed, and sometimes snipped in a
little; the rest are narrower and sharper pointed: the colour of these
leaves is yellow, deeper on the inside, and on the outside there are some
small purple veins running alongst these leaves of the flower. The root
is some two inches long, the thickness of one's little finger, with some
tuberous knobs hanging thereat.


Fig. 582. Kinds of Wind-Flower (8-11)

8. The eighth hath many large leaves deeply cut or jagged, in shape like
those of the Stork's-Bill or Pink-Needle; among which riseth up a naked
stalk, set about toward the top with the like leaves, but smaller and
more finely cut, bearing at the top of the stalk a single flower
consisting of many small blue leaves, which do change sometimes into
purple, and oftentimes into white, set about a blackish pointel, with
some small threads like unto a pale or border. The root is thick and
knobby.

9. The ninth sort of Anemone hath leaves like unto the garden Crow-Foot:
the stalk riseth up from amongst the leaves, of a foot high, bearing at
the top fair white flowers made of five small leaves on the middle
whereof are many little yellow chives or threads. The root is made of
many slender threads or strings, contrary to all the rest of the Wind-
Flowers.

10. The tenth sort of Anemone hath many leaves like unto the common
meadow Trefoil; slightly snipped about the edges like a saw: on the top
of the slender stalks standeth a single white flower tending to purple,
consisting of eight small leaves, resembling in shape the flowers of
common field Crow-Foot. The root is knobby, with certain strings fastened
thereto.

11. The eleventh kind of Anemone hath many jagged leaves cut even to the
middle rib, resembling the leaves of Geranium columbinum, or Dove's-Foot.
The leaves that do embrace the tender weak stalks are flat and slightly
cut: the flowers grow at the top of the stalks, of a bright shining
purple colour, set about a blackish pointel, with small thrums or chives
like a pale. The root is knobby, thick, and very brittle, as are most of
those of the Anemones.

The Place.

All the sorts of Anemones are strangers, and not found growing wild in
England; notwithstanding all and every sort of them do grow in my garden
very plentifully.

The Time.

They do flower from the beginning of January to the end of April, at what
time the flowers do fade, and the seed flieth away with the wind, if
there be any seed at all; the which I could never as yet observe.

The Names.

Anemone, or Wind-Flower is so called for the flower doth never open
itself but when the wind doth blow, as Pliny writeth: whereupon also it
is named of divers Herba venti: in English, Wind-Flower.

Those with double flowers are called in the Turkey tongue Giul, and Giul
catamer: and those with jagged leaves and double flowers are called Lalé
benzede, and Gallipoli lalé. they do call those with small jagged leaves
and single flowers Binizate & binizade, and Binizante.

The Temperature.

All the kinds of Anemones are sharp, biting the tongue; and of a binding
quality.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves stamped, and the juice sniffed up into the nose purgeth the
head mightily.

B. The root champed or chewed procureth spitting, and causeth water and
phlegm to run forth out of the mouth, as Pellitory of Spain doth.

C. It profiteth in collyries for the eyes, to cease the inflammation
thereof.

D. The juice mundifieth and cleanseth malign, virulent, and corrosive
ulcers.

E. The leaves and stalks boiled and eaten of nurses cause them to have
much milk: it provoketh the terms, and easeth the leprosy, being bathed
therewith.


CHAP. 77. Of divers other Anemones, or Wind-Flowers.



Fig. 583. Broad-Leaved Scarlet Anemone (1) 

Fig. 584. Large-flowerd Scarlet Anemone (2)
The Kinds.

These flowers which are in such esteem for their beauty may well be
divided into two sorts, that is, the Latifolia, or broad-leaved, and the
Tenuifolia, or narrow-leaved: now of each of these sorts there are
infinite varieties, which consist in the singleness and doubleness of the
flowers, and in their diversity of colours; which would ask a large
discourse to handle exactly. Wherefore I only intend (besides those set
down by our author) to give you the figures of some few others, with
their description, briefly taken out of the works of the learned and
diligent herbarist Carolus Clusius; where such as desire further
discourse upon this subject may be abundantly satisfied: and such as do
not understand Latin may find as large satisfaction in the late work of
Mr. John Parkinson; whereas they not only have their history at large,
but also learn the way to raise them of seed, which hath been a thing not
long known (except to some few;) and thence hath risen this great variety
of these flowers, wherewith some gardens so much abound.

The Description.

1. The root of this is like to that of the great double red Anemone
described in the third place of the precedent chapter; and the leaves
also are like, but lesser and deeper coloured. The stalk grows some foot
high, slender and green, at the top whereof groweth a single flower,
consisting of eight leaves of a bright shining scarlet colour on the
inside, with a paler coloured ring encompassing a hairy head set about
with purple thrums: the outside of the flower is hairy or downy. This is
Anem. latifol. simpl. Flo. 16 of Clusius.

2. This in shape of roots & leaves is like the former, but the leaves are
blacker, and more shining on their upper sides: the stalk also is like to
others of this kind, and at the top carrieth a large flower consisting of
eight broad leaves, being on the inside of a bright scarlet colour,
without any circle; and the thrums that ingirt the hairy head are of a
sanguine colour. This head (as in others of this kindred) grows larger
after the falling of the flower, and at length turns into a downy
substance, wherein a smooth black seed is enclosed like as in other
Anemones; which sown as soon as it is ripe usually comes up before
winter. This is Anem. latifol. simpl. Flo. 17 of Clusius.


Fig. 585. Other Kinds of Wind-Flowers (3-6)

3. This differs not from the former but in flowers, which are of an
orange-tawny colour, like that of Corn-Rose, or Red Poppy; and the
bottoms of the leaves of the flowers are of a paler colour, which make a
ring or circle about the hairy head. This is the eighteenth of Clusius.

Besides these varieties here mentioned, there are many others, which in
the colour of the leaves of the flower, or the nails which make a circle
at the bottom thereof, do differ each from other.

Now let us come to the narrow-leaved ones, which also differ little but
in colour of their flowers.

4. The root of this is knotty and tuberous like those of other Anemones,
and the leaves are much divided and cut in like to those of the first
described in the former chapter: the stalk (which hath three or four
leaves ingirting it, as in all other Anemones) at the top sustaineth a
fair sanguine flower consisting of six large leaves with great white
nails. The seeds are contained in downy heads like as those of the
former. This is Anem. tenuifol. simpl. Flo. 6 of Clusius.

5. This differs from the former in the flower, which consists of six
leaves made somewhat rounder than those of the precedent: their colour is
between a scarlet and sanguine. And there is a variety hereof also of a
brick colour. This is the eighth of Clusius.

6. This differs from the rest, in that the flower is composed of some
fourteen or more leaves, and these of a light purple, or flesh-colour.
This is the ninth of Clusius.


Fig. 586. Other Kinds of Wind-Flowers (7-10)

7. The flower of this is large, consisting of six leaves, being at the
first of a whitish green, and then tending to a flesh colour, with their
nails green on the outside, and white within, and the threads in the
middle of a flesh colour. There is a lesser of this kind, with the flower
of a flesh colour, and white on the outside, and wholly white within,
with the nails greenish. These are the tenth and eleventh of Clusius.

8. This flower also consists of six leaves of a flesh colour, with
whitish edges on the outside; the inside is whitish, with flesh coloured
veins running to the midst thereof.

Besides these single kinds there are divers double both of the broad and
narrow-leaved Anemones, whereof I will only describe and figure two, and
refer you to the forementioned authors for the rest, which differ from
these only in colour.

9. This broad-leaved double Anemone hath roots, stalks, and leaves like
those of the single ones of this kind, and at the top of the stalk there
stands a fair large flower composed of two or three ranks of leaves,
small and long, being of a kind of scarlet or orange-tawny colour; the
bottoms of these leaves make a whitish circle, which gives a great beauty
to the flower, and the downy head is ingirt with sanguine threads tipped
with blue. This is the Pavo maior 1 of Clusius.

10. This in shape of roots, leaves, and stalks resembles the formerly
described narrow-leaved Anemones, but the flower is much different from
them; for it consists first of divers broad leaves, which encompass a
great number of smaller narrow leaves, which together make a very fair
and beautiful flower: the outer leaves hereof are red, and the inner
leaves of a purple velvet colour.

Of this kind there are divers varieties, as the double white, crimson,
blush, purple, blue, carnation, rose-coloured, &c.

The Place and Time.

These are only to be found in gardens, and bring forth their flowers in
the spring.

Their Names.

I judge it no ways pertinent to set down more of the names than is 
already delivered in their several titles and descriptions.

Their Temper and Virtues.

A. These are of a hot and biting faculty, and not (that I know of) at
this day used in medicines, unless in some one or two ointments: yet they
were of more use amongst the Greek physicians, who much commend the juice
of them for taking away the scars and scales which grow on the eyes.

B. Trallianus also saith, That the flowers beaten in oil, and so
anointed, cause hair to grow where it is deficient.

The virtues set down in the former chapter do also belong to these here
treated of, as these here delivered are also proper to them.


CHAP. 78. Of Wild Anemones, or Wind-Flowers.


Fig. 587. Kinds of Wild Anemone (1-4)

The Kinds.

Like as there be many and divers sorts of the garden Anemones, so are
there of the wild kinds also, which do vary especially in their flowers.

The description.

1. The first of these wild Anemones hath jagged leaves deeply cut or
indented, which do grow upon the middle part of a weak and tender stalk:
at the top whereof doth stand a pretty yellow flower made of six small
leaves, and in the middle of the flower there is a little blackish
pointel, and certain slender chives or threads. The root is small,
somewhat knotty and very brittle.

2. The second hath jagged leaves, not unlike to water Crowsoot or
mountain Crowfoot. The flower groweth at the top of the stalk not unlike
to the precedent in shape, saving that this is of a milk white colour,
the root is like the other.

There is also of this single kind two other varieties, the one with a
purple flower, which we may therefore call Anemone nemorum purpurea, the
Wild Purple Wind-Flower. And the other with a scarlet (or rather a blush)
coloured flower, which we may term Anemone nemorum coccinia, The Wild
Scarlet Wind-Flower. These two differ not in other respects from the
White Wind-Flower.

3. There is in some choice gardens one of this kind with white flowers
very double, as is that of the Scarlet Anemone, and I had one of them
given me by a worshipful Merchant of London, called Mr. John
Franqueville, my very good friend.

4. This in roots and stalks is like the last described Wood Anemones, or
Wind-Flowers. But this and the last mentioned double one have leaves on
two places of their stalks; whereas the single ones have them but in one,
and that is about the middle of the stalks. The flower of this double one
consists of some forty or more little leaves, whereof the outermost are
the biggest; the bottoms or nails of these leaves are of a deep purple,
but the other parts of a lighter blush colour.

The Place.

All these wild single Anemones grow in most woods and copses through
England, except that with the yellow flower, which as yet I have not
seen: notwithstanding I have one of the greater kinds which beareth
yellow flowers, whose figure is not expressed nor yet described, for that
it doth very notably resemble those with single flowers, but is of small
moment, either in beauty of the flower, or otherwise. The double ones
grow only in some few gardens.

The Time.

They flower from the midst of February unto the end of April, or the
midst of May.

The Names.

1. The first of there by most Writers is referred to the Ranunculi, or
Crowfeet; and Lobel calls it fitly Ranunculus nemorosus luteus: only
Dodonæus, Cæsalpinus, and our author have made it an Anemone.

2. This with the varieties also, by Tragus, Fuchsius, Cordus, Gesner,
Lobel, and others, is made a Ranunculus: yet Dodonæus, Cæsalpinus, and
our author have referred it to the Anemones. Clusius thinks this to be
Anemone, Anemonia of Theophrastus.

3. Clusius calls this Anemone limonia, or Ranunculus sylvarum flo. pleno
albo.

4. And he styles this Anem. limonia, or Ranunculus syl. flore pleno
purpurascente.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The faculties and temperature of these plants are referred to the garden
sorts of Anemones.


CHAP. 79. Of Bastard Anemones, or Pasque-flowers.



Fig. 588. Purple Pasque-Flower (1) 

Fig. 589. Red Pasque-Flower (2)
The Description.

1. The first of these Pasque flowers hath many small leaves finely cut or
jagged, like those of Carrots: among which rise up naked stalks, rough
and hairy; whereupon do grow beautiful flowers bell fashion, of a bright
delayed purple colour: in the bottom whereof groweth a tuft of yellow
thrums, and in the middle of the thrums it thrusteth forth a small purple
pointel: when the whole flower is past there succeedeth an head or knop
compact of many grey hairy locks, and in the solid parts of the knops
lieth the seed flat and hoary, every seed having his own small hair
hanging at it. The root is thick and knobby, of a finger long, running
right down, and therefore not like unto those of the Anemone, which it
doth in all other parts very notably resemble, and whereof no doubt this
is a kind.

2. There is no difference at all in the leaves, roots, or seeds, between
this red Pasque-Flower and the precedent, nor in any other point, but in
the colour of the flowers; for whereas the other are of a purple colour,
these are of a bright red, which setteth forth the difference.



Fig. 590. White Pasque-Flower (3) 

Fig. 591. Lesser Purple Pasque-Flower (4) 
	3. The White Pasque-Flower hath many fine jagged leaves, closely
couched or thrust together, which resemble an holy-water sprinkle,
agreeing with the others in roots, seeds and shape of flowers, saving
that these are of a white colour, wherein chiefly consisteth the
difference.

4. This also in shape of roots and leaves little differs from the
precedent, but the flowers are lesser, of a darker purple colour, and
seldom open or show themselves so much abroad as the other of the first
described, to which in all other respects it is very like.

5. There is also another kind with leaves less divided, but in other
parts like those already described, saving that the flower is of a yellow
colour something inclining to a red.

The Place.

Ruellius writeth, that the Pasque-Flower groweth in France in untoiled
places: in Germany they grow in rough and stony places, and oftentimes on
rocks.

Those with purple flowers do grow very plentifully in the pasture or
close belonging to the parsonage house of a small village six miles from
Cambridge, called Hildersham: the parson's name that lived at the
impression hereof was Mr. Fuller, a very kind and loving man, and willing
to show unto any man the said close, who desired the same.

The Time.

They flower for the most part about Easter, which hath moved me to name
it Pasque-Flower, or Easter flower: and often they do flower again in
September. The yellow kind flowers in May.

The Names.

Pasque-Flower is called commonly in Latin Pulsatilla: and of some, Apium
risus, & Herba venti. Dalechampius would have it to be Anemone limonia &
Samolus of Pliny: in French, Coquelourdes: in Dutch, Kneckenschell: in
English, Pasque-Flower, or Passe-Flower, and after the Latin name
Pulsatill, or Flaw-flower: in Cambridgeshire where they grow, they are
named Coventry Bells.

The Temperature.

Pasque-Flower doth extremely bite, and exulcerateth and eateth into the
skin if it be stamped and applied to any part of the body; whereupon it
hath been taken of same to be a kind of Crowfoot, and not without reason,
for that it is not inferior to the Crowfoots: and therefore it is hot and
dry.

The Virtues.

There is nothing extant in writing among authors of any peculiar virtue,
but they serve only for the adorning of gardens and garlands, being
flowers of great beauty.


CHAP. 80. Of Adonis Flower.


Fig. 592. Adonis Flower (1)

The Description.

1. The first hath very many slender weak stalks, trailing or leaning to
the ground, set on every part with fine jagged leaves very deeply cut
like those of Camomile, or rather those of May-weed: upon which stalks do
grow small red flowers, in shape like the field Crowfoot, with a blackish
green pointel in the middle, which being grown to maturity turneth into a
small greenish bunch of seeds, in shape like a little bunch of grapes.
The root is small and thready.

2. The second differeth not from the precedent in any one point, but in
the colour of the flowers, which are of a perfect yellow colour, wherein
consistcth the difference.

The Place.

The red flower of Adonis groweth wild in the West parts of England among
their corn, even as May-weed doth in other parts, and is likewise an
enemy to corn as May-weed is: from thence I brought the seed, and have
sown it in my garden for the beauty of the flowers' sake. That with the
yellow flower is a stranger in England.

The Time

They flower in the summer months, May, June, and July, and sometimes
later.

The Names.

Adonis Flower is called in Latin Flos adonis, and adonidis: of the Dutch
men, Feldroszlin: in English we may call it Red Maythes, by which name it
is called of them that dwell where it groweth naturally, and generally
Red Camomile: in Greek, Eranthemum: our London women do call it Rose-a-
ruby.

The Temperature.

There hath not been any that hath written of the temperature hereof;
notwithstanding, so far as the taste thereof showeth, it is something
hot, but not much.

The Virtues.

A. The seed of Adonis flower is thought to be good against the stone:
amongst the ancients it was not known to have any other faculty: albeit
experience hath of late taught us, that the seed stamped, and the powder
given in wine, ale, or beer to drink, doth wonderfully and with great
effect help the colic.


CHAP. 81. Of Docks.



Fig. 593. Sharp Pointed Dock (1) 

Fig. 594. Small Sharp Dock (2)
The Kinds.

Dioscorides setteth forth four kinds of Docks; wild or sharp pointed
Dock; Garden Dock; round leafed Dock; and the sour Dock called Sorrel:
besides these the later herbarists have added certain other Docks also,
which I purpose to make mention of.

The Description.

1. That which among the Latins signifieth to soften, ease, or purge the
belly, the same signification hath Lapateon, among the Grecians: whereof
Lapathuem and Alapaza (as some do read) took their names for herbs which
are used in pottage and medicine, very well known to have the power of
cleansing: of these there be many kinds and differences, great store
everywhere growing, among whom is that which is now called Sharp Pointed
Dock, or Sharp Leafed Dock. It groweth in most meadows and by running
streams, having long narrow leaves sharp and hard pointed: among the
which cometh up round hollow stalks of a brown colour, having joints like
knees, garnished with such like leaves but smaller: at the end whereof
grow many flowers of a pale colour, one above another; and after them
cometh a brownish three square seed, lapped in brown chaffy husks like
Patience. The root is great, long; and yellow within.

2. The second kind of Sharp Pointed Dock is like the first, but much
smaller, and doth bear his seed in roundels about his branches in chaffy
husks, like Sorrel, not so much in use as the former, called also Sharp
Pointed Dock.


Fig. 595. The Roundish-Leaved Wild Dock (3)

3. This in roots, stalks, and seeds is like to the precedent; but the
leaves are shorter, and rounder than those of the first described, &
therein consists the chief difference betwixt this & it.

The Place.

These kinds of Docks do grow, as is before said, in meadows and by
rivers' sides.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

They are called in Latin Lapathum acutum, Rumex, Lapatium, & Lapathium:
of some, Oxylapathum: in English, Dock, and Sharp Pointed Dock, the
greater and the lesser: in High Dutch, Wengelwurtz, Streijffwurtz: in
Italian, Rombice: in Spanish, Romaza, Paradilla: in Low Dutch, Patich
(which word is derived of Lapathum) and also Peerdick: in French,
Pareille.

The third is Lapathum folio retuso, or minus acuto of Lobel, and
Hippolapathum sylvest. of Tabernamontanus.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. These herbs are of a mixture between cold and heat, and almost dry in
the third degree, especially the seed which is very astringent.

B. The powder of any of the kinds of Docks drunk in wine, stoppeth the
lask and bloody flux, and easeth the pains of the stomach.

C. The roots boiled till they be very soft, and stamped with barrow's
grease, and made into an ointment helpeth the itch and all scurvy scabs
and manginess. And for the same purpose it shall be necessary to boil
them in water as aforesaid, and the party to be bathed and rubbed
therewith.


CHAP. 82. Of Water Docks.


Fig. 596. Kinds of Water-Dock and similar plants (1-4)

The Description.

1. The Great Water Dock hath very long and great leaves, stiff, and hard,
not unlike to the Garden Patience, but much longer. The stalk riseth up
to a great height, oftentimes to the height of five foot or more. The
flower groweth at the top of the stalk in spoky tufts, brown of colour.
The seed is contained in chaffy husks, three square, of a shining pale
colour. The root is very great, thick, brown without, and yellowish
within.

2. The Small water Dock hath short narrow leaves, set upon a stiff stalk.
The flowers grow from the middle of the stalk upward in spoky roundels,
set in spaces by certain distances round about the stalk, as are the
flowers of Horehound: which Dock is of all the kinds most common and of
less use, and taketh no pleasure or delight in any one soil or dwelling-
place, but is found almost everywhere, as well upon the land as in watery
places, but especially in gardens among good and wholesome pot-herbs,
being there better known than welcome or desired: wherefore I intend not
to spend further time about his description.

3. The Garden Patience hath very strong stalks, furrowed or chamfered, of
eight or nine foot high when it groweth in fertile ground, set about with
great large leaves like to those of the Water Dock, having alongst the
stalks toward the top flowers of a light purple colour declining to
browneness. The seed is three square, contained in thin chaffy husks,
like those of the common Dock. The root is very great, brown without, and
yellow within, in colour and taste like the true Rhubarb.

4. Bastard Rhubarb hath great broad round leaves, in shape like those of
the great Burdock. The stalk and seeds are to like unto the precedent,
that the one cannot be known from the other, saving that the seeds of 
this are somewhat lesser. The root is exceeding great and thick, very
like unto the Rha of Barbary, as well in proportion as in colour and
taste; and purgeth after the same manner, but must be taken in greater
quantity, as witnesseth that famous learned physician now living, Mr.
Doctor Bright, and others, who have experimented the same.


Fig. 597. Bloodwort (5)

5. This fifth kind of Dock is best known unto all, of the stock or
kindred of Docks; it hath long thin leaves, sometimes red in every part
thereof, and often striped here and there with lines and streaks of a
dark red colour; among which rise up stiff brittle stalks of the same
colour: on the top whereof come forth such flowers and seed as the common
wild dock hath. The root is likewise red, or of a bloody colour.

The Place.

They do grow for the most part in ditches and water-courses, very common
through England. The two last save one do grow in gardens; myself and
others in London and elswhere have them growing for our use in physic and
chirurgery. The last is sown for a pot-herb in most gardens

The Time.

Most of the docks do rise up in the spring of the year, and their seed is
ripe in June and August.

The Names.

The dock is called in Latin, Rumex, and Lapathum; yet Pliny in his 19th
book, 12th chapter, seemeth to attribute the name of Rumex only to the
garden dock.

The Monk's Rhubarb is called in Latin Rumex sativus, and Patientia, or
Patience, which word is borrowed of the French, who call this herb
Patience: after whom the Dutch men name this pot herb also Patiente: of
some Rhabarbarum Monachorum, or Monk's Rhubarb because as it should seem
some monk or other have used the root hereof instead of Rhubarb.

Bloodwort, or bloody Patience, is called in Latin Lapathum sanguineum: of
some, Sanguis draconis, of the bloody colour wherewith the whole plant is
possessed, and is of pot-herbs the chief or principal, having the
property of the bastard Rhubarb; but of less force in his purging
quality.

The Temperature

Generally all the Docks are cold, some little and moderately, and some
more: they do all of them dry, but not all after one manner:
notwithstanding some are of opinion that they are dry almost in the third
degree.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of the Garden Dock or Patience may be eaten, and are
somewhat cold, but more moist, and have withal a certain clamminess; by
reason whereof they easily and quickly pass through the belly when they
be eaten and Dioscorides writeth, that all the Docks beeing boiled do
mollify the belly: which thing also Horace hath noted in his second book
of Sermons, the fourth Satire, writing thus.


- Si dura morabitur alvus
Mugilus, & viles pellent obstantia conchæ
Et lapathi brevis herba.
"If the bowels are sluggish
Mussels and common shellfish and the short herb dock
Will clear the problem."
Horace, Sermons, Book 2.4, l. 27-29 tr. A. S. Kline

B. He calleth it a short herb, being gathered before the stalk be grown
up; at which time it is fittest to be eaten.

C. And being sodden, it is not so pleasant to be eaten as either Beets or
Spinach: it engendereth moist blood of a mean thickness, and which
nourisheth little.

D. The leaves of the sharp pointed Docks are cold and dry: but the seed
of Patience, and the water Dock do cool, with a certain thinness of
substance.

E. The decoction of the roots of Monk's Rhubarb is drunk against the
bloody flux, the lask, the wambling of the stomach which cometh of
choler: and also against the stinging of serpents, as Dioscorides
writeth.

F. It is also good against the spitting of blood, being taken with Acacia
(or his succedaneum, the dried juice of sloes) as Pliny writeth.

G. Monk's Rhubarb or Patience is an excellent wholesome pot-herb; for
being put into the pottage in some reasonable quantity, it doth loosen
the belly, helpeth the jaundice, the tympany and such like diseases,
proceeding of cold causes.

H. If you take the roots of Monk's Rhubarb, and red Madder, of each half
a pound; Senna four ounces; Anise seed and Liquorice of each two ounces;
Scabious and Agrimony, of each one handful; slice the roots of the
Rhubarb, bruise the Anise seed and Liquorice, break the herbs with your
hands, and put them into a stone pot called a stean, with four gallons of
stong ale to steep or infuse the space of three days; and then drink this
liquor as your ordinary drink for three weeks together at the least,
though the longer you take it, so much the better; providing in a
readiness another stean so prepared that you may have one under another,
being always careful to keep a good diet: it cureth the dropsy, the
yellow jaundice, all manner of itch, scabs, breaking out, and manginess
of the whole body: it purifieth the blood from all corruption; prevaileth
against the green sickness very greatly, and all oppilations or
stoppings, maketh young wenches to look fair and cherry-like, and
bringeth down their terms, the stopping whereof hath caused the same.

I. The seed of bastard Rhubarb is of a manifest astringent nature,
insomuch that it cureth the bloody flux, mixed with the seed of Sorrel,
and given to drink in red wine.

K. There have not been any other faculties attributed to this plant
either of the ancient or later writers, but generally of all it hath been
referred to the other Docks or Monk's Rhubarb, of which number I assure
myself this is the best, and doth approch nearest unto the true Rhubarb.
Many reasons induce me so to think and say, first this hath the shape and
proportion of Rhubarb, the same colour, both within and without, without
any difference. They agree as well in taste as smell: it coloureth the
spittle of a yellow colour when it is chewed, as Rhubarb doth; and lastly
it purgeth the belly after the same gentle manner that the right Rhubarb
doth, only herein it differeth, that this must be given in three times
the quantity of the other. Other distinctions and differences with the
temperature and every other circumstance, I leave to the learned
physicians of our London college (who are very well able to search this
matter) as a thing far above my reach, being no graduate, but a country
scholar, as the whole framing of this History doth well declare: but I
hope my good meaning will be well taken, considering I do my best; not
doubting but some of greater learning will perfect that which I have
begun according to my small skill, especially the ice being broken unto
him, and the wood rough hewed to his hands. Notwithstanding I think it
good to say thus much more in mine own defence, that although there be
many wants and defects in me, that were requisite to perform such a work;
yet may my long experience by chance happen upon same one thing or other
that may do the learned good: considering what a notable experiment I
learned of one John Bennet a chirurgeon of Maidstone in Kent, a man as
slenderly learned as myself, which he practised upon a butcher's boy of
the same town, as himself reported unto me; his practice was this: Being
desired to cure the foresaid lad of an ague, which did grieviously vex
him, he promised him a medicine, & for want of one for the present (for a
shift as himself confessed unto me) he took out of his garden three or
four leaves of this plant of Rhubarb, which myself had among other
simples given him, which he stamped & strained with a draught of ale, and
gave it the lad in the morning to drink: it wrought extremely downward
and upward within one hour after, and never ceased until night. In the
end the strength of the boy overcame the force of the physic, it gave
over working, and the lad lost his ague; since which time (as he saith)
he hath cured with the same medicine many of the like malady, having ever
great regard unto the quantity, which was the cause of the violent
working in the first cure. By reason of which accident, that thing hath
been revealed unto posterity, which heretofore was nor so much as dreamed
of. Whose blunt attempt may set an edge upon some sharper wit, and
greater judgement in the faculties of plants, to seek farther into their
nature than any of the ancients have done: and none fitter than the
learned physicians of the College of London; where are many singularly
well learned and experienced in natural things.

L. The roots sliced and boiled in the water of Carduus Benedictus to the
consumption of the third part, adding thereto a little honey, of the
which decoction eight or ten spoonfuls drunk before the fit, cureth the
ague in two or three times so taking it at the most: unto robustous or
strong bodies twelve spoonfuls may be given. This experiment was
practised by a worshipful gentlewoman mistress Anne Wylbraham, upon
divers of her poor neighbours with good suecess.


CHAP. 83. Of Rhubarb.


Fig. 598. Kinds of Rhubarb (1-3)

It hath happened in this as in many other foreign medicines or simples,
which though they be of great and frequent use, as Hermodactyls, Musk,
Turpeth, &c. yet have we no certain knowledge of the very place which
produces them nor of their exact manner of growing, which hath given
occasion to divers to think diversly, and some have been so bold as to
counterfeit figures out of their own fancies, as Matthiolus: so that this
saying of Pliny is found to be very true, Nulla medicinæ pars magna
incerta, quam quæ ab alio quam nostro orbe petitur.["There is no medicine
whose nature is more uncertain, than that which is brought from a
different part of the world."] But we will endeavour to show you more
certainty of this here treated of than was known until of very late
years.

The Description.

1. This kind of Rhubarb hath very great leaves, somewhat snipped or
indented about the edges like the teeth of a saw, not unlike the leaves
of Enula campana, called by the vulgar sort Elecampane, but greater:
among which riseth up a straight stalk of two cubits high, bearing at the
top a scaly head like those of Knapweed, or Iacea maior: in the middle of
which knap or head thrusteth forth a fair flower consisting of many
purple threads like those of the Artichoke; which being past, there
followeth a great quantity of down, wherein is wrapped long seed like
unto the great Centaury, which the whole plant doth very well resemble.
The root is long and thick, blackish without, and of a pale colour
within: which being chewed maketh the spittle very yellow, as doth the
Rhubarb of Barbary.

2. This other bastard Rha, which is also of Lobel's description, hath a
root like that of the last described: but the leaves are narrower almost
like those of the common Dock, but hoary on the other side: the stalk
grows up straight, and beareth such heads and flowers as the precedent.

3. I have thought to present you with a perfect figure and description of
the true Rha Ponticum of the ancients, which was first of late discovered
by the learned Prosper Alpinus, who writ a peculiar tract thereof, and it
is also again figured and described in his work de Plantis Exoticis. Our
countryman Mr John Parkinson hath also set forth very well both the
figure and description hereof, in his Paradisus terrestris. This plant
hath many large roots diversly spreading in the ground, of a yellow
colour, from which grow up many very great leaves like those of the
Butterbur, but of a fresh green colour, with great and manifest veins
dispersed over them. The stalk also is large and crested, sending forth
sundry branches bearing many small white flowers, which are succeeded by
seeds three square and brownish, like as those of other Docks. Dr. Lister
one of his Majesy's physicians was the first that enriched this kingdom
with this elegant and useful plant, by sending the seeds thereof to Mr.
Parkinson. Prosper Alpinus proves this to be the true Rha of the
ancients, described by Dioscorides, Lib. 3. Cap 2., yet neither he nor
any other (that I know of) have observed a fault, which I more than
probably suspect to be in the text of Dioporides in that place, which is
in the word melana which I judge should be melie that is, yellow, and not
black, as Ruellius and others have translated it: now melinos is a word
frequently used by Dioscorides, as may appear by the chapters of
Hieracium magnum, parvum, Conyra, Peucedanum, Ranunculus, and divers
others, and I suspect the like fault may be found in some other places of
the same author. But I will no further insist upon this, seeing the thing
itself in all other respects, as also in yellowness shows itself to be
that described by Dioscorides, and that my conjecture musf therefore be
true. And besides, the root wherto he compares it is Rubescens, [turning
red] or rather ex flavo rubescens [turning from yellow to red], as any
versed in reading Dioscorides may easily gather by divers places in him.
Now I here omit his words, because they are in the next description
allcgcd by our author, as also the description of our ordinarily used
Rhubarb, for that it is sufficiently described under the following title
of the choice thereof. Mr. Parkinson is of opinion that this is the true
Rhubarb used in shops, only less heavy, bitter, and strong in working, by
reason of the diversity of our climate from that whereas the dried
Rhubarb brought us usually grows. This his opinion is very probable, and
if you compare the roots together, you may easily be induced to be of the
same belief.


Fig. 599. Dried Rhubarb of Pontus (4)

4. The Pontic Rhubarb is lesser and slenderer than that of Barbary.
Touching Pontic Rhubarb Dioscorides writeth thus: Rha that divers call
Rheon, which groweth in those places that are beyond Bosphorus from
whence it is brought, hath yellow roots like to the great Centaury, but
lesser and redder, and without smell (Dodonæus thinks it should be well
smelling) spongy, and something light. That is the best which is not
worm-eaten, and tasted is somewhat viscid with a light astriction, and
chewed becomes of a yellow or Saffron colour.

The Place.

It is brought out of the Country of Sina (commonly called China) which is
toward the East in the upper part of India, and that India which is
without the river Ganges: and not at all Ex Scenitarum provincia, [from
the province of the Syrians] (as many do unadvisedly think) which is in
Arabia the Happy, and far from China: it groweth on the sides of the
river Rha now called Volga, as Amianus Marcellus saith, which river
springeth out of the Hyperborean mountains, and running through Muscovia,
falleth into the Caspian or Hircan sea.

The Rha of the ancients grows naturally, as Alpinus saith, upon the hill
Rhodope in Thrace, now called Romania. It grows also as I have been
informed upon some mountains in Hungary. It is also to be found growing
in some of our choice gardens.

The choice of Rhubarb.

The best Rhubarb is that which is brought from China fresh and new, of a
light putplish red, with certain veins and branches, of an uncertain
variety of colour, commonly whitish: but when it is old the colour
becometh ill-favoured by turning yellowish or pale, but more, if it be
worm eaten: being chewed in the mouth it is somewhat gluey and clammy,
and of a saffron colour, which being rubbed upon paper or some white 
thing showeth the colour more plainly: the substance thereof is neither
hard or closely compacted, nor yet heavy; but something light, and as it
were in a middle between hard and loose and something spongy: it hath
also a pleasing smell. The second in goodness is that which cometh from
Barbary. The last and worst from Bosphorus and Pontus.

The Names.

It is commonly called in Latin Rha Barbarum, or Rha Barbaricum: of
divers, Rheu Barbarum: the Moors and Arabians do more truly name it Raued 
seni, a Sinensi provincia; from whence it is brought into Persia and
Arabia and afterwards into Europe: and likewise from Tangut, through the
land of Cataia into the land of the Persians, whereof the Sophy is the
ruler, and from thence into Ægypt, and afterwards into Europe. It is
called of the Arabians and the people of China, and the parts adjacent,
Rauend Cini, Raued Seni, and Raued Sceni: in shops, Rhabarbarum: in
English, Rhubarb, and Rewbarbe.

The Temperature.

Rhubarb is of a mixed substance, temperature and faculties: some of the
parts thereof are earthy, binding and drying: others thin, aereous, hot,
and purging.

The Virtues.

A. Rhubarb is commended by Dioscorides against windiness, weakness of the
stomach, and all griefs thereof, convulsions, diseases of the spleen,
liver, and kidneys, gripings and inward gnawings of the guts, infirmities
of the bladder and chest, swelling about the heart, diseases of the
matrix, pain in the huckle bones, spitting of blood, shortness of breath,
yexing, or the hiccup, the bloody flux, the lask proceeding of raw
humours, fits in agues, and against the bitings of venomous beasts.

B. Moreover he saith, that it taketh away black and blue spots and
tetters or ringworms, if it be mixed with vinegar, and the place anointed
therewith.

C. Galen affirms it to be good for burstings, cramps, and convulsions,
and for those that are short winded, and that spit blood.

D. But touching the purging faculty neither Dioscorides nor Galen hath
written anything, because it was not used in those days to purge with.
Galen held opinion, that the thin aereous parts do make the binding
quality of more force; not because it doth resist the cold and earthy
substance, but by reason that it carrieth the same, and maketh it deeply
to pierce, and thereby to work the greater effect; the dry and thin
essence containing in itself a purging force and quality to open
obstructions, but helped and made more facile by the subtle and aereous
parts. Paulus Ægineta seemeth to be the first that made trial of the
purging faculty of Rhubarb; for in his first book, Chap. 43, he maketh
mention thereof, where he reckoneth up turpentine among those medicines
which make the bodies of such as are in health soluble: But when we
purpose, saith he, to make the turpentine more strong, we add unto it a
little rhubarb. The Arabians that followed him brought it to a further
use in physic, as chiefly purging downward choler, and oftentimes phlegm.

E. The purgation which is made with Rhubarb is profitable and fit for all
such as be troubled with choler, and for those that are sick of sharp and
tertian fevers, or have the yellow jaundice, or bad livers.

F. It is a good medicine against the pleurisy, inflammation of the lungs,
the squinancy or squincy, madness, frenzy, inflammation of the kidneys,
bladder, and all the inward parts, and especially against St. Anthony's
fire, as well outwardly as inwardly taken.

G. Rhubarb is undoubtedly an especial good medicine for the liver and
infirmities of the gall; for besides that it purgeth forth choleric and
naughty humours, it removeth stoppings out of the conduits.

H. It also mightily strengtheneth the entrails themselves: insomuch as
Rhubarb is justly termed of divers the life of the liver; for Galen in
his eleventh book of the method or manner of curing, affirmeth that such
kind of medicines are most fit and profitable for the liver, as have
joined with a purging and opening quality an astringent or binding power.
The quantity that is to be given is from one dram to two; and the
infusion from one and a half to three.

I. It is given or steeped, and that in hot diseases, with the infusion or
distilled water of Succory, Endive, or some other of the like nature; and
likewise in whey; and if there be no heat it may be given in wine.

K. It is also oftentimes given being dried at the fire, but so, that the
least or no part thereof at all be burned; and being so used it is a
remedy for the bloody flux, and for all kinds of lasks: for it both
purgeth away naughty and corrupt humours, and likewise withal stoppeth
the belly.

L. The same being dried after the same manner doth also stay the overmuch
flowing of the monthly sickness, and stoppeth blood in any part of the
body, especially that which cometh through the bladder; but it should be
given in a little quantity, and mixed with some other binding thing.

M. Mesue saith, That Rhubarb is an harmless medicine, and good at all
times, and for all ages, and likewise for children and women with child.

My friend Mr. Sampson Johnson Fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford
assures me, That the physicians of Vienna in Austria use scarce any other
at this day than the Rhubarb of the ancients, which grows in Hungary not
far from thence: and they prefer it before the dried Rhubarb brought out
of Persia and the East Indies, because it hath not so strong a binding
faculty as it, neither doth it heat so much; only it must be used in
somewhat a larger quantity.


CHAP. 84. Of Sorrel.



Fig. 600. Sorrel (1) 

Fig. 601. Knobbed Sorrel (2)
The Kinds.

There be divers kinds of Sorrel, differing in many points, some of the
garden, others wild; some great, and some lesser.

The Description.

1. Though Dioscorides hath not expressed the Oxalides by that name, yet
none ought to doubt but that they were taken and accounted as the fourth
kind of Lapathum. For though some like it not well that the seed should
be said to be Drimus; yet that is to be understood according to the
common phrase, when acrid things are confounded with those which be sharp
and sour; else we might accuse him of such ignorance as is not amongst
the simplest women. Moreover, the word oxys in Greek doth not only
signify the leaf, but the savour and tartness, which by a figure drawn
from the sharpness of knives' edges is therefore called sharp: for oxys
xymes signifieth a sharp or sour juice which pierceth the tongue like a
sharp knife: whereupon also Lapathum may be called Oxalis, as it is
indeed. The leaves of this are thinner, tenderer, and more unctuous than
those of Lapatium acutum, broader next to the stem, horned and crested
like Spinach and Atriplex. The stalk is much streaked, reddish, and full
of juice: the root is yellow and fibrous; the seed sharp, cornered and
shining, growing in chaffy husks like the other Docks.

2. The second kind of Oxalis or Sorrel hath large leaves like Patience,
confusedly growing together upon a great tall stalk, at the top whereof
grow tufts of a chaffy substance. The root is tuberous, much like the
Peony, or rather Filipendula, fastened to the lower part of the stem with
small long strings and laces.



Fig. 602. Sheep's Sorrel (3) 

Fig. 603. Round-Leaved or French Sorrel (4) 
	3. The third kind of Sorrel groweth very small, branching hither
and thither, taking hold (by new shoots) of the ground where it groweth,
whereby it disperseth itself far abroad. The leaves are little and thin,
having two small leaves like ears fastened thereto, in show like the herb
Sagittaria: the seed in taste is like the other of his kind.

4. The fourth kind of Sorrel hath leaves somewhat round and cornered, of 
a whiter colour than the ordinary, and having two short ears annexed unto
the same. The seed and root in taste is like the other Sorrels.

5. This kind of curled Sorrel is a stranger in England, and hath very
long leaves, in shape like the garden Sorrel, but curled and crumpled
about the edges as is the curled Colewort. The stalk riseth up among the
leaves, set here and there with the like leaves, but lesser. The flowers,
seeds, and roots are like the common Sorrel or sour Dock.


Fig. 604. Small Sorrel (6)

6. The small Sorrel that groweth upon dry barren sandy ditch-banks, hath
small grassy leaves somewhat forked or crossed over like the cross-hilt
of a rapier. The stalks rise up amongst the leaves, small, weak, and
tender, of the same sour taste that the leaves are of. The flower, seed,
and root is like the other Sorrels, but altogether lesser.

7. The smallest sort of Sorrel is like unto the precedent, saving that
the lowest leaves that lie upon the ground be somewhat round, and without
the little ears that the other hath, which setteth forth the difference.

8. There is also kept in some gardens a very large sorrel, having leaves
thick, whitish, as large as an ordinary Dock, yet shaped like Sorrel, and
of the same acid taste. The stalks and seed are like those of the
ordinary, yet whiter coloured.

The Place.

The common Sorrel groweth for the most part in moist meadows and gardens.
The second by water's sides, but not in this kingdom that I know of. The
fourth also is a garden plant with us, as also the fifth: but the third
and last grow upon gravelly and sandy barren ground and ditch banks.

The Time.

They flourish at that time when as the other kinds of Docks do flower.

The Names.

1. Garden Sorrel is called in Latin Acidum lapathum, or Acidus rumex,
sour Dock: and in shops commonly Acetosa: in the German Tongue,
Sawrampffer: in Low Dutch, Surckele, and Surinck: the Spaniards,
Azederas, Agrelles, and Azedas: in French, ozeille, and Surelle,
Aigrette: in English, Garden Sorrel.

2. The second is called of the later herbarists Tuberosa acetosa, and
Tuberosum lapathum: in English Bunched or Knobbed Sorrel.

3. The third is called in English Sheep's Sorrel: in Dutch, Schap Suckel.

4. The fourth, Roman Sorrel, or round-Leaved Sorrel.

5. The fifth, Curled Sorrel.

6, 7. The sixth and seventh, Barren Sorrel, or Dwarf Sheep's Sorrel.

8. The eighth is called Oxalis, or Acerosa maxima latifolia, Great broad-
Leaved Sorrel.

The Nature.

The Sorrels are moderately cold and dry.

The Virtues.

A. Sorrel doth undoutedly cool and mightily dry; but because it is sour
it likewise cutteth tough humours.

B. The juice hereof in summertime is a profitable sauce in many meats,
and pleasant to the taste: it cooleth an hot stomach, moveth appetite to
meat, tempereth the heat of the liver, and openeth the stoppings thereof.

C. The leaves are with good success added to decoctions which are used in
agues.

D. The leaves of Sorrel taken in good quantity, stamped and strained into
some ale, and a posset made thereof, cooleth the sick body, quencheth the
thirst, and allayeth the heat of such as are troubled with a pestilent
fever, hot ague, or any great inflammation within.

E. The leaves sodden and eaten in manner of a spinach tart, or eaten as
meat, softeneth and looseneth the belly, and doth attemper and cool the
blood exceedingly.

F. The seed of Sorrel drunk in gross red wine stoppeth the lask and
bloody flux.


CHAP. 85. Of Bistort or Snake-Weed.



Fig. 605. Snake-Weed (1) 

Fig. 606. Small Snake-Weed (2)
The Description.

1. The great Bistort hath long leaves much like Patience, but smaller,
and more wrinkled or crumpled, on the upper side of a dark green, and
underneath of a bluish green colour, much like Woad. The stalk is long,
smooth, and tender, having at the top a spiked knap or ear, set full of
small whitish flowers declining to carnation. The root is all in a lump,
without fashion; within of a reddish colour like unto flesh, in taste
like the kernel of an acorn.

2. The small Bistort hath leaves about three inches long, and of the
breadth of a man's nail; the upper side is of a green colour, and
underneath of an overworn greenish colour: amongst the which riseth up a
stalk of the height of a span, full of joints or knees, bearing at the
top such flowers as the great Bistort beareth; which being fallen, the
seeds appear of the bigness of a tare, reddish of colour, every seed
having one small green leaf fastened thereunto, with many such leaves
thrust in among the whole bunch of flowers and seed. The root is tuberous
like the other, but smaller, and not so much crooked.

3. Broad-Leaved Snake-weed hath many large uneven leaves, smooth and very
green, among which rise up small brittle stalks of two hands high,
bearing at the top a fair spike of flowers like unto the Great Bistort.
The root is knobby or bunched, crookedly turned or writhed this way and
that way, whereof it took his name Bistorta. It differs from the first
only in that the root is somewhat more twined in, and the leaves broader
and more crumpled.

The Place.

1. The great Bistort groweth in moist and watery places, and in the dark
shadowy woods, and is very common in most gardens.

2. The small Bistort groweth in great abundance in Westmorland, at
Crosby, Ravenswaith, at the head of a park belonging to one Mr.
Pickering: from whence it hath been dispersed into many gardens; as also
sent unto me from thence for my garden.

The Time.

They flower in May, and the seed is ripe in June.

The Names.

Bistorta is called in English Snake-Weed: in some places, Oysterloit: in
Cheshire, Passions, and Snake-Weed, and there used for an excellent pot-
herb. It is called Bistorta of his writhed roots, and also Colubrina,
Serpentaria, Brittanica; Dracontion, Pliny; Dracunculus, Dodonæus; and
Limonium; Gesner.

The Nature.

Bistort doth cool and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of Bistort put into the nose prevaileth much against the
disease called polyps, against the biting of serpents or any venomous
beast, being drunk in wine or the water of Angelica.

B. The root boiled in wine and drunk, stoppeth the lask and bloody flux;
it stayeth also the overmuch flowing of women's monthly sicknesses.

C. The root taken as aforesaid stayeth vomiting, and healeth the
inflammation and soreness of the mouth and throat: it likewise fasteneth
loose teeth, being holden in the mouth for a certain space, and at sundry
times.


CHAP. 86. Of Scurvy-Grass, or Spoonwort.



Fig. 607. Round-Leaved Scurvy-Grass (1) 

Fig.608. Common Scurvy-Grass (2)
The Description.

1. Round-Leaved Scurvy-Grass is a low or base herb: it bringeth forth
leaves upon small stems or footstalks of a mean length, coming
immediately from the root, very many in number, of a shining green
colour, somewhat broad, thick, hollow like a little spoon, but of no
great depth, uneven, or cornered about the edges: among which leaves
spring up small stalks of a span high, whereon do grow many little white
flowers: after which cometh the seed, small and reddish, contained in
little round pouches or seed-vessels: the roots be small, white, and
thready. The whole plant is of a hot and spicy taste.

2. The common Scurvy-Grass or Spoonwort hath leaves somewhat like a
spoon, hollow in the middle, but altogether unlike the former: the leaves
hereof are bluntly toothed about the edges, sharp pointed, and somewhat
long: the stalks rise up among the leaves, of the length of half a foot;
whereon do grow white flowers with some yellowness in the middle: which
being past, there succeed small seed-vessels like unto a pouch, not
unlike to those of Shepherd's Purse; green at the first, next yellowish,
and lastly when they be ripe, of a brown colour, or like a filbert nut.
The root is small and tender, compact of a number of thready strings very
thick thrust together in manner of a little turf.

The Place.

1. The first groweth by the seaside at Hull, at Bolton, and Lynne, and in
many other places of Lincolnshire near unto the sea, as in Whapload and
Holbeck Marshes in Holland in the same county. It hath been found of late
growing many miles from the seaside, upon a great hill in Lancashire
called Ingleborough hill; which may seem strange unto those that do not
know that it will be content with any soil, place, or clime whatsoever:
for proof whereof, myself have sown the seeds of it in my garden, and
given them unto others, with whom they flower, flourish, and bring forth
their seed, as naturally as by the seaside; and likewise retain the same
hot spicy taste: which proveth that they refuse no culture, contrary to
many other sea-plants.

2. The second, which is our common Scurvy-Grass, groweth in divers places
upon the brims of the famous river Thames, as at Woolwich, Erith,
Greenhithe, Gravesend, as well on the Essex shore as the Kentish; at
Portsmouth, Bristol, and many other places along the Western coast: but
toward the North I have not heard that any of this kind hath grown.

The Names.

We are not ignorant that in low Germany, this hath seemed to some of the
best learned to be the true Britannica, and namely to those next the
ocean in Friesland and Holland. The Germans call it Leffelkraut: that is,
Cochlearia or Spoonwort, by reason of the compassed roundness and
hollowness of the leaves, like a spoon; and have thought it to be Pliny's
Britannica, because they find it in the same place growing, and endued
with the same qualities. Which excellent plant Cæsar's soldiers (when
they removed their camps beyond the Rhine) found to prevail (as the
Frisians had taught it them) against that plague and hurtful disease of
the teeth, gums, and sinews, called the scurvy, being a deprivation of
all good blood and moisture, in the whole body, called scorbutum; in
English, the scurvy, and skyrby, a disease happening at the sea among
fishermen, and fresh-water soldiers, and such as delight to sit still
without labour and exercise of their bodies; and especially above the
rest of the causes, when they make not clean their biscuit bread from the
flour or mealiness that is upon the same, which doth spoil many. But sith
this agrees not with Pliny's description, and that there be many other
water plants as Nasturtium, Sium, Cardamine, and such others, like in
taste and not unlike in proportion and virtues, which are remedies
against the diseases aforesaid, there can be no certain argument drawn
therefrom to prove it to be Britannica. For the leaves at their first
coming forth are somewhat long like Pyrola or Adder's Tongue, soon after
somewhat thicker, and hollow like a navel, after the manner of Sundew,
but in greatness like Soldanella, in the compass somewhat cornered, in
fashion somewhat like a spoon: the flowers white, and in shape like the
Cuckoo-Flowers: the seed reddish, like the seed of Thlaspi, which is not
to be seen in Britannica which is rather holden to be Bistort or garden
Patience, than Scurvy-Grass. In English it is called Spoonwort, Scruby-
Grass, and Scurvy-Grass.

The Temperature.

Scurvy-Grass is evidently hot and dry, very like in taste and quality to
the garden Cresses, of an aromatic or spicy taste.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of Spoonwort given to drink in ale or beer, is a singular
medicine against the corrupt and rotten ulcers, and stench of the mouth:
it perfectly cureth the disease called of Hippocrates, Volvulus
Hematites: of Pliny, Stomacace: of Marcellus, Oscedo: and of the later
writers, Scorbutum: of the Hollanders and Frisians; Scuerbuyck: in
English, the Scurvy: either giving the juice in drink as aforesaid, or
putting six great handfuls to steep, with long pepper, grains, anise-
seed, and liquorice, of each one ounce, the spices being brayed, and the
herbs bruised with your hands, and so put into a pot, such as is before
mentioned in the chapter of Bastard Rhubarb, and used in like manner; or
boiled in milk or wine and drunk for certain days together it worketh the
like effect.

B. The juice drunk once in a day fasting in any liquor, ale, beer, or
wine, doth cause the foresaid medicine more speedily to work his effect
in curing this filthy, loathsome, heavy, and dull disease, which is very
troublesome, and of long continuance. The gums are loosed, swollen, and
exulcerate; the mouth grievously stinking; the thighs and legs are withal
very often full of blue spots, not much unlike those that come of
bruises: the face and the rest of the body is oftentimes of a pale
colour: and the feet are swollen, as in a dropsy.

C. There is a disease (saith Olaus Magnus in his history of the Northern
regions) haunting the camps, which vex them that are besieged and pinned
up: and it seemeth to come by eating of salt meats, which is increased
and cherished with the cold vapors of the stone walls. The Germans call
this disease (as we have said) scorbuck, the symptom or passion which
happeneth to the mouth, is called of Pliny stomacace: and that which
belongeth to the thighs schelotorby: Marcellus an old writer nameth the
infirmities of the mouth oscedo: which disease cometh of a gross cold and
tough blood, such as melancholy juice is, not by adustion, but of such a
blood as is the feculent or drossy part thereof: which is gathered in the
body by ill diet, slothfulness to work, laziness (as we term it), much
sleep and rest on ship-board, and not looking to make clean the biscuit
from the mealiness, and unclean keeping their bodies, which are the
causes of this disease called the scurvy or scyrby; which disease doth
not only touch the outward parts, but the inward also: for the liver
oftentimes, but most commonly the spleen, is filled with this kind of
thick, cold and tough juice, and is swollen by reason that the substance
thereof is slack, spongy and porous, very apt to receive such kind of
thick and cold humours. Which thing also Hippocrates hath written of in
the second book of his Prorrhetics: their gums (saith he) are infected,
and their mouths stink that have great spleens or milts: and whosoever
have great milts and use not to bleed, can hardly be cured of this
malady, especially of the ulcers in the legs, and black spots. The same
is affirmed by Paulus Ægineta in his third book, 49th chapter, where you
may easily see the difference between this disease and the black
jaundice; which many times are so confounded together, that the
distinction or difference is hard to be known, but by the expert
chirurgeon: who oftentimes serving in the ships, as well her Majesty's as
merchants, are greatly pestered with the curing thereof: it shall be
requisite to carry with them the herb dried: the water distilled, and the
juice put into a bottle with a narrow mouth, full almost to the neck, and
the rest filled up with olive oil, to keep it from putrefaction: the
which preparations discreetly used, will stand them in great stead for
the disease aforesaid.

D. The herb stamped and laid upon spots and blemishes of the face, will
take them away within six hours, but the place must be washed after with
water wherein bran hath been sodden.


CHAP. 87. Of Twayblade, or Herb Bifoil.



Fig. 609. Twayblade (1) 

Fig. 610. Bulbous Twayblade (3)
The Description.

1. Herb Bifoil hath many small fibres or thready strings, fastened unto a
small knot or root, from which riseth up a slender stem or stalk, tender,
fat, and full of juice; in the middle whereof are placed in comely order
two broad leaves, ribbed and chamfered, in shape like the leaves of
Plantain: upon the top of the stalk groweth a slender greenish spike made
of many small flowers, each little flower resembling a gnat, or little
gosling newly hatched, very like those of the third sort of Serapia's
Stones.

2. Ophris trifolia, or Trefoil Twayblade, hath roots, tender stalks, and
a bush of flowers like the precedent; but differeth in that, that this
plant hath three leaves which do clip or embrace the stalk about; and the
other hath but two, and never more, wherein especially consisteth the
difference: although in truth I think it a degenerate kind, and hath
gotten a third leaf per accidens, as doth sometimes chance unto the
Adder's Tongue, as shall be declared in the chapter that followeth.

3. This kind of Twayblade, first described in the last edition of
Dodonæus, hath leaves, flowers, and stalks like to the ordinary; but at
the bottom of the stalk above the fibrous roots it hath a bulb greenish
within, and covered with two or three skins: it grows in moist and wet
low places of Holland.

The Place.

The first groweth in moist meadows, fenny grounds, and shadowy places. I
have found it in many places, as at Southfleet in Kent, in a wood of
Master Sidley's by Longfield Downs, in a wood by London called Hampstead
Wood, in the fields by Highgate, in the woods by Ovenden near to Clare in
Essex, and in the woods by Dunmow in Essex. The second sort is seldom
seen.
The Time.

They flower in May and June.

The Names.

It is called of the later herbarists, Bifolium, and Ophris.

The Nature and Virtues.
 	A. There are reported of the herbarists of our time to be good for
green wounds, burstings, and ruptures; whereof I have in my unguents and
balsams for green wounds had great experience and good success.


CHAP. 88. Of Adder's-Tongue.



Fig. 611. Adder's-Tongue (1) 

Fig. 612. Mis-shapen Adder's-Tongue
The Description.

1. Ophioglosson, or Lingua serpentis (called in English Adder's-Tongue;
of some, Adder's-Grass, though unproperly) riseth forth of the ground,
having one leaf and no more, fat or oleous in substance, of a finger
long, and very like the young and tender leaves of Marigolds: from the
bottom of which leaf springeth out a small and tender stalk one finger
and a half long, on the end whereof doth grow a long small tongue not
unlike the tongue of a serpent, whereof it took the name.

2. I have seen another like the former in root, stalk, and leaf; and
differeth, in that this plant hath two, and sometimes more crooked
tongues, yet of the same fashion, which if my judgment fail not chanceth
per accidens, even as we see children born with two thumbs upon one hand;
which moveth me so to think, for that in gathering twenty bushels of the
leaves a man can hardly find one of this fashion.

The place.

Adder's-Tongue groweth in moist meadows throughout most parts of England;
as in a Meadow near the preaching spittle adjoining to London; in the
Mantels by London, in the meadows by Colebrook, in the fields in Waltham
Forest, and many other places.

The Time.

They are to be found in April and May; but in June they are quite
vanished and gone.

The Names.

Ophioglossum is called in shops Lingua serpentis, Linguae, and
Lingualace: it is also called Lancea Christi, Enephyllon, and Lingua
vulneraria: in English, Adder's-Tongue, or Serpent's-Tongue: in Dutch,
Natertonguen: of the Germans, Nater zungelin

The nature.

Adders-tongue is dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Adder's-Tongue stamped in a stone mortar, and boiled in
olive oil unto the consumption of the juice, and until the herbs be dry
and parched, and then strained, will yield a most excellent green oil, or
rather a balsam for green wounds, comparable unto oil of St. John's Wort,
if it do not far surpass it by many degrees: whose beauty is such, that
very many Artists have thought the same to be mixed with verdigris.


CHAP. 89. Of One-Berry, or Herb True-Love, and Moonwort.



Fig. 613. One-Berry or Herb True-love or Herb Paris (1) 

Fig. 614. Small Moonwort (2) 
The Description.

1. Herb Paris riseth up with one small tender stalk two hands high; at
the very top whereof come forth four leaves directly set one against
another in manner of a Burgundian cross or true-love knot: for which
cause among the ancients it hath been called Herb True-Love. In the
middle of the said leaf comes forth a star-like flower of an herby or
grassy colour; out of the midst whereof there ariseth up a blackish brown
berry: the root is long and tender, creeping under the earth, and
dispersing itself hither and thither.

2. The Small Lunary or Moonwort springeth forth of the ground with one
leaf like Adder's-Tongue, jagged or cut on both sides into five or six
deep cuts or notches, not much unlike the leaves of Scolopendria, or
Ceterach, of a green colour; whereupon doth grow a small naked stem of a
finger long, bearing at the top many little seeds clustering together;
which being gathered and laid in a platter or such like thing for the
space of three weeks, there will fall from the same a fine dust or meal
of a whitish colour, which is the seed if it bring forth any. The root is
slender, and compact of many small thready strings.

In England (saith Camerarius) there grows a certain kind of Lunaria,
which hath many leaves and sometimes also sundry branches; which
therefore I have caused to be delineated, that other herbarists might
also take notice hereof. Thus much Camerarus Epit. Mat. p. 644, where he
gives an elegant figure of a variety having more leaves and branches than
the ordinary, otherwise not differing from it.


Fig. 615. Small Branched Moonwort (3)

3. Besides this variety there is another kind set forth by Clusius; whose
figure and description I think good here to set down. This hath a root
consisting of many fibres somewhat thicker than those of the common kind:
from which arise one or two winged leaves, that is, many leaves set to
one stalk; and these are like the leaves of the other Lunaria, but that
they are longer, thicker, and more divided, and of a yellowish green
colour. Amongst these leaves there comes up a stalk fat and juicy,
bearing a greater tuft of flowers or seeds (for I know not whether to
call them) than the ordinary, but otherwise very like thereto. It groweth
in the mountains of Silesia, and in same places of Austria.

The Place.

1. Herba Paris groweth plentifully in all these places following; that is
to say, in Chalkney wood near to Wakes Colne, seven miles from Colchester
in Essex, and in the wood by Robin Hood's Well, near to Nottingham; in
the parsonage orchard at Radwinter in Essex, near to Saffron Walden; in
Blackburn at a place called Merton in Lancashire; in the moor by
Canterbury called the Clapper; in Dingley wood, six miles from Preston in
Aunderness; in Backing park by Braintree in Essex; at Hesset in
Lancashire, and in Cotting Wood in the North of England; as that
excellent painful and diligent physician Mr. Doctor Turner of late memory
doth record in his Herbal.

2. Lunaria or small Moonwort groweth upon dry and barren mountains and
heaths. I have found it growing in these places following; that is to
say, about Bath in Somersetshire in many places, especially at a place
called Carey, two miles from Bruton, in the next close unto the
churchyard; on Cock's Heath between Lowse and Linton, three miles from
Maidstone in Kent: it groweth also in the ruins of an old brick-kiln by
Colchester, in the ground of Mr. George Sayer, called Mile's End: it
groweth likewise upon the side of Blackheath, near unto the stile that
leadeth unto Eltham house, about an hundred paces from the stile: also in
Lancashire near unto a Wood called Fairest, by Latham: moreover, in
Nottinghamshire by the West wood at Gringley, and at Weston in the Ley
field by the west side of the town; and in the Bishop's field at York,
near unto Wakefield, in the close where Sir George Savill his house
standeth, called the Heath Hall, by the relation of a learned doctor in
Physic called Mr. John Mershe of Cambridge, and many other places.

The. Time.

1. Herba Paris flowereth in April, and the berry is ripe in the end of
May.

2. Lunaria or small Moon-wort is to be seen in the month of May.

The Names.

1. One-Berry is also called Herb True-love, and Herb Paris: in Latin;
Herba paris, and Solanum tetraphyllum by Gesner and Lobel.

2. Lunaria minor is called in English Small Lunary, and Moonwort.

The Nature.

Herb Paris is exceeding cold; whereby it represses the rage and force of
poison. Lunaria minor is cold and dry of temperature.

The Virtues.

A. The berries of Herb Paris given by the space of twenty days are
excellent good against poison, or the powder of the herb drunk in like
manner half a spoonful at a time in the morning fasting.

B. The same is ministered with great success unto such as are become
peevish, or without understanding, being ministered as is aforesaid,
every morning by the space of twenty days, as Baptista Sardus, and
Matthiolus have recorded. Since which time there hath been further
experience made thereof against poison, and put in practice in the city
of Paris, in Louvain, and at the baths in Helvetia, by the right
excellent herbarists Matthias de Lobel, and Petria Pena, who having often
read, that it was one of the Aconites, called Pardalianches, and so by
consequence of a poisoning quality, they gave it unto dogs and lambs, who
received no hurt by the same: wherefore they further prosecuted the
experience thereof, and gave unto two dogs fast bound or coupled
together, a dram of arsenic, and one dram of mercury sublimate mixed with
flesh (in the the Adversaria it is but of each half a dram, and there pg.
105 you may find this history more largely set down.) which the dogs
would not willingly eat, and therefore they had it crammed down their
throats: unto one of these dogs they gave this antidote following in a
little red wine, whereby he recovered his former health again within a
few hours: but the other dog which had none of the medicine, died
incontinently.

This is the receipt.

? Utriusque Angelica (innuit) domesticam, & sylvestrem, Vicetoxici,
Valerianæ domestica, Polipodii querni, radicum Altheæ & Urticæ ana dramæ
iiij, Corticis Mezerei Germanici, dramæ ii, granorum herbæ Paridis, N.
24, foliorium eiusdem cumtoto, Num. 6. Ex maceratis in aceto radicibus, &
ficcatis fit omnium pulvis. ["He says: Take Angelica, either domestic or
wild, Vicetoxicus, Garden Valerian, Oak Polypody, Marsh Mallow and Nettle
roots, each 4 drams; German Mezereon bark, 2 drams; 24 Herb Paris seeds;
6 leaves of the same. Steep the roots in vinegar, evaporate it, and mix
with all the other ingredients made into a powder"]

C. The people in Germany do use the leaves of Herb Paris in green wounds,
for the which it is very good, as Joachimm Camerarius reporteth; who
likewise saith, that the powder of the roots given to drink, doth
speedily cease the gripings and pain of the Colic.

D. Small Moonwort is singular to heal green and fresh wounds: it stayeth
the bloody flux. It hath been used among the alchemists and witches to do
wonders withal, who say, that it will loose locks, and make them to fall
from the feet of horses that graze where it doth grow, and hath been
called of them Martagon, whereas in truth they are all but drowsy dreams
and illusions; but it is singular for wounds as aforesaid.


CHAP. 90. Of Wintergreen.


Fig. 616. Kinds of Wintergreen (1-4)

The Description.

1. Pyrola hath many tender and very green leaves, almost like the leaves
of Beet, but rather in my opinion like to the leaves of a Pear-tree,
whereof it took his name Pyrola, for that it is Pyriformis. Among these
leaves cometh up a stalk garnished with pretty white flowers, of a very
pleasant sweet smell, like Lillium convallium, or the Lily of the Valley.
The root is small and thready, creeping far abroad under the ground.

2. This differs from the last described in the slenderness of the stalks,
and smallness of the leaves and flowers: for the leaves of this are not
so thick and substantial, but very thin, sharp pointed, and very finely
snipped about the edges, black, and resembling a Pear-tree leaf. The
flowers are like those of the former, yet smaller and more in number: to
which succeed five-cornered seed vessels with a long pointel as in the
precedent: the root also creeps no less than that of the former, and here
and there puts up new stalks under the moss. It grows upon the Austrian
and Styrian Alps, and flowers in June and July.

3. This is an elegant plant, and sometimes becomes shrubby, for the new
and short branches growing up each year, do remain firm and green for
some years, and grow straight up, until at length borne down by their own
weight they fall down and hide themselves in the moss. It hath commonly
at each place where new branches grow forth, two, three, or four thick
very green and shining leaves, almost in form and magnitude like to the
leaves of Laureola, yet snipped about the edges, of a very drying taste,
and then bitterish. From among these leaves at the spring of the year new
branches shoot up, having small leaves like scales upon them, and at
their tops grow flowers like to those of the first described, yet
somewhat larger, of a whitish purple colour; which fading, are succeeded
by five-cornered seed vessels containing a very small seed; the roots are
long & creeping. It grows a little from Vienna in Austria in the woods of
Enzersdorf, and in divers places of Bohemia and Silesia.

4. This from creeping roots sends up short stalks, set at certain spaces
with small, round, and thin leaves, also snipped about the edges, amongst
which upon a naked stem grows a flower of a pretty bigness consisting of
five white sharpish pointed leaves with ten threads, and a long pointel
in the midst. The seed is contained in such heads as the former, and it
is very small. This grows in the shadowy places of the Alps of Sneberge,
Hochbergerin, Duerrenstein, towards the roots of these great mountains.
Clusius.


Fig. 617. One-blade (5)

5. Monophyllon, or Unifolium, hath a leaf not much unlike the greatest
leaf of Ivy, with many ribs or sinews like the Plantain leaf; which
single leaf doth always spring forth of the earth alone, but when the
stalk riseth up, it bringeth upon his sides two leaves, in fashion like
the former; at the top of which slender stalk come forth fine small
flowers like Pyrola; which being faded, there succeed small red berries.
The roots is small, tender, and creeping far abroad under the upper face
of the earth.

The Place.

1. Pyrola groweth in Lonsdale, and Craven, in the North part of England,
especially in a close called Crag-close.

5. Monophyllon groweth in Lancashire in Dingley wood, six miles from
Preston in Aunderness and in Harwood, near to Blackburn likewise.

The Time.

1 Pyrola flowereth in June and July, and groweth winter and summer.

5. Monophyllon flowereth in May, and the fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

1. Pyrola is called in English Winter-Green: it hath been called Limonium
of divers, but untruly.

5. Monophyllon, according to the etymology of the word, is called in
Latin Unifolium: in English, One-blade, or One-leaf.

The Nature.

1. Pyrola is cold in the second degree, and dry in the third.

5. Monphyllon is hot and dry of complexion.

The virtues.

A. Pyrola is a most singular wound-herb, either given inwardly, or
applied outwardly; the leaves whereof stamped and strained, and the juice
made into an unguent, or healing salve, with wax, oil, and turpentine,
doth cure wounds, ulcers, and fistulas, that are mundified from the
callous & tough matter, which keepeth the same from healing.

B. The decoction hereof made with wine, is commended to close up and heal
wounds of the entrails, and inward parts: it is also good for ulcers of
the kidneys, especially made with water, and the roots of Comfrey added
thereto.

C. The leaves of Monophyllon, or Unifolium are of the same force in
wounds with Pyrola, especially in wounds among the nerves and sinews.
Moreover, it is esteemed of some late writers a most perfect medicine
against the pestilence, and all poisons, if a dram of the root be given
in vinegar mixed with wine or water, and the sick go to bed and sweat
upon it.


CHAP. 91. Of Lily in the valley, or May Lily.



Fig. 618. Lily of the Valley(1) 

Fig. 618. Red Lily of the Valley (2)
The Description.

1. Convally Lily, or Lily of the Valley, hath many leaves like the
smallest leaves of Water Plantain among which riseth up a naked stalk
half a foot high, garnished with many white flowers like little bells,
with blunt and turned edges, of a strong savour, yet pleasant enough;
which being past, there come small red berries, much like the berries of
Asparagus, wherein the seed is contained. The root is small and slender,
creeping far abroad in the ground.

2. The second kind of May Lilies, is like the former in every respect;
and herein varieth or differeth, in that this kind hath reddish flowers,
and is thought to have the sweeter smell.

The Place.

1. The first groweth on Hampstead Heath, four miles from London, in great
abundance: near to Lee in Essex, and upon Bushy Heath, thirteen miles
from London, and many other places.

2. That other kind with the red flower is a stranger in England: howbeit
I have the same growing in my garden.

The Time.

They flower in May, and their fruit is ripe in September.

The Names.

The Latins have named it Lilium Convallium: Gesner doth think it to be
Callionymum: in the German tongue, Meyen Blumen: the Low Dutch, Mayen
Bluemkens: in French, Muguet: yet there is likewise another herb which
they call Muguet, commonly named in English, Woodruff. It is called in
English Lily of the Valley, or the Convally Lily, and May Lilies, and in
some places Liriconfancy.

The Nature.

They are hot and dry of complexion.

The virtues.

A. The flowers of the Valley Lily distilled with wine, and drunk the
quantity of a spoonful, restoreth speech unto those that have the dumb
palsy and that are fallen into the apoplexy, and is good against the
gout, and comforteth the heart.

B. The water aforesaid doth strengthen the memory that is weakened and
diminished; it helpeth also the inflammation of the eyes, being dropped
thereinto.

C. The flowers of May Lilies put into a glass, and set in a hill of ants
close stopped for the space of a month and then taken out, therein you
shall find a liquor, that appeaseth the pain & grief of the gout, being
outwardly applied; which is commended to be most excellent.


CHAP. 92. Of Sea Lavender.



Fig. 620. Sea Lavender (1) 

Fig. 621. Rock Lavender (2)
The Description.

1. There hath been among writers from time to time, great contention
about this plant Limonium, no one author agreeing with another: for some
have called this herb Limonium, some another herb by this name; & some in
removing the rock, have mired themselves in the mud, as Matthiolus, who
described two kinds, but made no distinction of them, nor yet expressed
which was the true Limonium; but as a man herein ignorant, he speaks not
a word of them. Now then to leave controversies and cavilling, the true
Limonium is that which hath fair leaves, like the Lemon or Orange tree,
but of a dark green colour, somewhat fatter, and a little crumpled:
amongst which leaves riseth up an hard and brittle naked stalk of a foot
high, divided at the top into sundry other small branches, which grow for
the most part upon the one side, full of little bluish flowers, in show
like Lavender, with long red seed, and a thick root like unto the small
Dock.

2. There is a kind of Limonium like the first in each respect, but
lesser; which groweth upon rocks and chalky cliffs.



Fig. 622. Sea Lavender with Indented Leaf (3) 

Fig. 623. Hollow-Leaved Sea Lavender (4) 
	3. Besides these two here described, there is another elegant plant
by Clusius and others referred to this kindred: the description thereof
is thus; from a long slender root come forth long green leaves lying
spread upon the ground, being also deeply sinuated on both sides, and
somewhat roughish. Amongst these leaves grow up the stalks welted with
slender indented skin, and towards their tops they are divided into
sundry branches after the manner of the ordinary one, but these branches
are also winged, and at their tops they carry flowers some four or five
clustering together, consisting of one thin crisp or crumpled leaf of a
light blue colour (which continues long, if you gather them in their
perfect vigour, and so dry them) and in the midst of this blue comes up
little white flowers, consisting of five little round leaves with some
white threads in their middles. This plant was first observed by
Rawolfius at Joppa in Syria: but it grows also upon the coasts of
Barbary, and at Malaga and Cadiz in Spain: I have seen it growing with
many other rare plants, in the Garden of my kind friend Mr. John
Tradescant at South Lambeth.

4. Clusius in the end of his fourth Book Historiæ Plantarum, sets forth
this, and saith, he received this figure with one dried leaf of the plant
sent him from Paris from Claude Gonier an Apothecary of that city, who
received it (as you see it here expressed) from Lisbon. Now Clusius
describes the leaf that it was hard, and as if it had been a piece of
leather, open on the upper side, and distinguished with many large purple
veins on the inside, &c. for the rest of his description was only taken
from the figure (as he himself saith) which I hold impertinent to set
down, seeing I here give you the same figure, which by no means I could
omit, for the strangeness thereof, but hope that some or other that
travel into foreign parts may find this elegant plant, and know it by
this small  expression, and bring it home with them, that so we may come
to a perfecter knowledge thereof.

The Place

1. The first groweth in great plenty upon the walls of the fort against
Gravesend: but abundantly on the banks of the River below the same town,
as also below the Kings Store-house at Chatham: and fast by the King's
Ferry going into the Isle of Sheppey: in the salt marshes by Lee in
Essex: in the Marsh by Harwich, and many other places.

The small kind I could never find in any other place but upon the chalky
cliff going from the town of Margate down to the seaside, upon the left
hand.

The Time.

They flower in June and July.

The Names.

It shall be needless to trouble you with any other Latin name than is
expressed in their titles: the people near the seaside where it groweth
do call it Marsh Lavender, and Sea Lavender.

This cannot be the Limonium of Dioscorides, for the leaves are not longer
than a Beet, nor the stalk so tall as that of a Lily, but you shall find
more hereafter concerning this in the chapter of Water Plantain. I cannot
better refer this to any plant described by the ancients than to
Britannica described by Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 2.

The Nature.

The seed of Limonium is very astringent or binding.

The Virtues.

A. The seed beaten into powder, and drunk in wine, helpeth the colic,
strangury, and dysentery.

B. The seed taken as aforesaid, stayeth the overmuch flowing of women's
terms, and all other fluxes of blood.


CHAP. 93. Of Serapia's Turpeth, or Sea Starwort.



Fig. 624. Great Sea Starwort (1) 

Fig. 625. Small Sea Starwort (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Tripolium hath long and large leaves somewhat hollow
or furrowed, of a shining green colour declining to blueness, like the
leaves of Woad: among which riseth up a stalk of two cubits high, and
more, which toward the top is divided into many small branches garnished
with many flowers like Camomile, yellow in the middle, set about or
bordered with small blueish leaves, like a pale, as in the flowers of
Camomile, which grow into a whitish rough down, that flieth away with the
wind. The root is long and thready.

2. There is another kind of Tripolium, like the first, but much smaller,
wherein consisteth the difference.

The Place.

These herbs grow plentifully alongst the English coasts in many places,
as by the fort against Gravesend, in the Isle of Sheppey in sundry
places, in a marsh which is under the town walls of Harwich, in the marsh
by Lee in Essex, in a marsh which is between the Isle of Sheppey and
Sandwich, especially where it ebbeth and floweth: being brought into
gardens, it flourisheth a long time, but there it waxeth huge great, and
rank; and changeth the great roots into strings.

The Time.

These herbs do flower in May and June.

The Names.

It is reported by men of great fame and learning, that this plant was
called Tripolium, because it doth change the colour of his flowers thrice
in a day. This rumour we may believe, and it may be true, for that we see
and perceive things of as great and greater wonder to proceed out of the
earth. This herb I planted in my garden, whither (in his season) I did
repair to find out the truth hereof, but I could not espy any such
variableness herein; yet thus much I may say, that as the heat of the sun
doth change the colour of divers flowers, so it fell out with this, which
in the morning was very fair, but afterward of a pale or wan colour.
Which proveth that to be but a fable which Dioscorides saith is reported
by some, that in one day it changeth the colour of his flowers thrice:
that is to say, in the morning it is white, at noon purple, and in the
evening crimson. But it is not untrue, that there may be found three
colours of the flowers in one day, by reason that the flowers are not all
perfected together (as before I partly touched) but one after another by
little and little. And there may easily be observed three colours in
them, which is to be understood of them that are beginning to flower,
that are perfectly flowered, and those that are falling away. For they
that are blowing and be not wide open and perfect, are of a purplish
colour, and those that are perfect and wide open, of a whitish blue; and
such as have fallen away have a white down: which changing happeneth into
sundry other plants. This herb is called of Serapio, Turpeth: women that
dwell by the seaside, call it in English, blue Daisies, or blue Camomile;
and about Harwich it is called Hog's Beans, for that the swine do greatly
desire to feed thereon: as also for that the knobs about the roots do
somewhat resemble the Garden Bean. It may be fitly called Aster marinus,
or Amellus marinus: in English, Sea Starwort, Serapio's Turpeth: of some,
Blue Daisies. The Arabian Serapio, doth call Sea Starwort, Turpeth, and
after him, Avicennna: yet Actuarius the Grecian doth think that Turpeth
is the root of Alypum: Mesue judged it to be the root of an herb like
Fennel. The history of Turpeth of the shops shall be discoursed upon in
his proper place.

The Nature.

Tripolium is hot in the third degree, as Galen saith.

The virtues.

A. The root of Tripolium taken in wine by the quantity of two drams,
driveth forth by siege waterish and gross humours, for which cause it is
often given to them that have the dropsy.

B. It is an excellent herb against poison, and comparable with Pyrola, if
not of greater efficacy in healing of wounds either outward or inward.


CHAP. 94. Of Turpeth of Antioch.


Fig. 626. Turpeth of the shops

The Description.

Garcias a Portugal physician saith that Turpeth is a plant having a root
which is neither great nor long: the stalk is of two spans long,
sometimes much longer, a finger thick, which creepeth in the ground like
Ivy, and bringeth forth leaves like those of the Marsh Mallow. The
flowers be also like those of the Mallow, of a reddish white colour: the
lower part of the stalk only, which is next to the root and gummy, is
that which is profitable in medicine, and is the same that is used in
shops: they choose that for the best which is hollow, and round like a
reed, brittle, and with a smooth bark, as also that whereunto doth cleave
a congealed gum, which is said to be gummosum, or gummy, and somewhat
white. But, as Garcias saith, it is not always gummy of his own nature,
but the Indians because they see that our merchants note the best Turpeth
by the gumminess, are wont before they gather the same, either to writhe
or else lightly to bruise them, that the sap or liquor may issue out;
which root being once hardened they pick out from the rest to sell at a
greater price. It is likewise made white, as the said Author showeth,
being dried in the sun: for if it be dried in the shadow it waxeth black,
which notwithstanding may be as good as the white which is dried in the
sun.

The Place.

It groweth by the seaside, but yet not so near that the wash or water of
the sea may come to it, but near about, and that for two or three miles:
in untiled grounds, rather moist than dry. It is found in Cambay, Surat,
in the Isle Dion, Bazaim, and in places hard adjoining; also in Gujerat,
where it groweth plentifully, from whence great abundance of it is
brought into Persia, Arabia, Asia the less, and also into Portugal and
other parts of Europe: but that is preferred which groweth in Cambay.

The Names.

It is called of the Arabians, Persians, and Turks Turpeth: and in Gujerat
Barcaman: in the province Canara, in which is the city Goa, Tiguar:
likewise in Europe the learned call it diversely, according to their
several fancies, which hath bred sundry controversies, as it hath fallen
out as well in Hermodactyls, as in Turpeth; the use and possession of
which we cannot seem to want: but which plant is the true Turpeth, we
have great cause to doubt; some have thought our Tripolium marinum,
described in the former chapter, to be Turpeth: others have supposed it
to be one of the Tithymals, but which kind they know not: Guillandinus
saith, that the root of Tithymalus myrsinitis is the true Turpeth; which
caused Lobel and Pena to pluck up by the roots all the kinds of
Tithymals, and dry them very curiously; which when they had beheld, and
throughly tried, they found it nothing so. The Arabians and half Moors
that dwell in the East parts have given divers names unto this plant: and
as their words are divers, so have they divers significations; but this
name Turpeth they seem to interpret to be any milky root which doth
strongly purge phlegm, as this plant doth. So that as men have thought
good, pleasing themselves, they have made many and divers constructions
which have troubled many excellent learned men to know what root is the
true Turpeth. But briefly to set down my opinion, not varying from the
judgment of men which are of great experience; I think assuredly that the
root of Scammony of Antioch is the true and undoubted Turpeth, one reason
especially that moveth me so to think is, for that I have taken up the
roots of Scammony which grew in my garden. and compared them with the
roots of Turpeth, between which I found little or no difference at all.

Through all Spain (as Clusius in his notes upon Garcia, testifies) they
use the roots of Thapsia for Turpeth which also have been brought hither,
and I keep some of them by me, but they purge little or nothing at all
being dry, though it may be the green root or juice may have some purging
faculty.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. The Indian physicians use it to purge phlegm, to which if there be no
fever they add ginger, otherwise they give it without in the broth of a
chicken, and sometimes in fair water.

B. Mesue writeth, that Turpeth is hot in the third degree; and that it
voideth thick tough phlegm out of the stomach, chest, sinews, and out of
the furthermost parts of the body: but (as he saith) it is slow in
working, and troubleth and overturneth the stomach: and therefore ginger,
mastic, and other spices are to be mixed with it; also oil of sweet
almonds, or almonds themselves, or sugar, lest the body with the use
hereof should pine and fall away. Others temper it with dates, sweet
almonds, and certain other things, making thereof a composition (that the
apothecaries call an electuary) which is named diaphœnicon, common in
shops, and in continual use among expert physicians.

C. There is given at one time of this Turpeth one dram (more or less);
two at the most: but in the decoction, or in the infusion three or four.


CHAP. 95. Of Arrow-Head, or Water-Archer.
627. Great Arrow-Head (1) 628. Small Arrow-Head (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Water-Archer or Arrow-Head, hath large and long
leaves, in shape like the sign Sagittarius, or rather like a bearded
broad arrow head. Among which riseth up a fat and thick stalk, two or
three foot long, having at the top many pretty white flowers, declining
to a light carnation, compact of three small leaves: which being past,
there come after great rough knops or burrs wherein is the seed. The root
consisteth of many strings.

2. The second is like the first, and differeth in that this kind hath
smaller leaves and flowers, and greater burrs and roots.

3. The third kind of Arrow-Head hath leaves in shape like the broad
Arrow-Head, standing upon the ends of tender foot stalks a cubit long:
among which rise up long naked smooth stalks of a greenish colour from
the middle whereof to the top do grow flowers like to the precedent. The
root is small and thready.

The Place.

These herbs do grow in the watery ditches by Saint George his field near
unto London; in the Tower ditch at London; in the ditches near the wals
of Oxford; by Chelmsford in Essex, and many other places, as namely in
the ditch near the place of execution, called Saint Thomas' Waterings not
far from London.

The Time.

They flower in May and June.

The Names.

Sagittaria, may be called in English the Water-Archer, or Arrow-Head.
Some would have it the Phleum of Theophrastus; and it is the Pistana
magonis, and Sagitta of Pliny.

The Nature and Virtues.

I find not any thing extant in writing either concerning their virtues or
temperament, but doubtless they are cold and dry in quality, and are like
Plantain in faculty and temperament.


CHAP. 96. Of Water Plantain.



Fig. 629. Great Water Plantain (1) 

Fig. 630. Starry-Headed Small Water Plantain (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of water Plantain hath fair great large leaves like the
land Plaintain, but smoother, and full of ribs or sinews: among which
riseth up a tall stem four foot high, dividing itself into many slender
branches garnished with infinite small white flowers, which being past
there appear triangle husks or buttons wherein is the seed. The root is
as it were a great tuft of threads or thrums.

2. This plant in his roots and leaves is like the last described, as also
in the stalk, but much less in each of them, the stalk being about some
foot high; at the top whereof stand many pretty star-like skinny seed-
vessels, containing a yellowish seed.


Fig. 631. Dwarf Water Plantain (3)

3. The third kind hath long, little, and narrow leaves, much like the
Plantain called Ribwort: among which rise up small and feeble stalks
branched at the top, whereon are placed white flowers, consisting of
three slender leaves; which being fallen, there come to your view round
knobs, or rough burrs: the root is thready.

The Place.

1. This herb grows about the brinks of rivers, ponds and ditches almost
everywhere.

2, 3. These are more rare. I found the second a little beyond Ilford, in
the way to Romford, and Mr. Goodyer found it also growing upon Hounslow
Heath. I found the third in the company of Mr. William Broad, and Mr.
Leonard Buckner, in a ditch on this side Margate in the Isle of Thanet.

The Time.

They flower from June till August.

The Names.

The first kind is called Plantago aquatica, that is, Water Plantain. The
second Lobel calls Alisma pusillum angustifolia muricatum, and in the
Hist. Lugd. it is called Damasonium stellatum. The third is named
Plantago aquatica humilis, that is, the low water Plantain.

I think it fit here to restore this plant to his ancient dignity, that
is, his names and titles wherewith he was anciently dignified by
Dioscorides and Pliny. The former whereof calls it by sundry names, and
all very significant and proper, as Lemonion, Potamogeiton, Neuroides,
Lonchitis: thus many are Greek, and therefore ought not to be rejected,
as they have been by some without either reason or authority. For the
barbarous names we can say nothing; now it is said to be called Limonium,
because it grows in wet or overflown meadows: it is called Neuroides,
because the leaf is composed of divers strings or fibres running from the
one end thereof to the other, as in Plantain, which therefore by
Dioscorides is termed by the same reason Polyneuros: Also it may be as
fitly termed Lonchitis for the similitude which the leaf hath to the top
or head of a lance which lonche properly signifies, as that other plant
described by Dioscoroides lib. 3. cap. 161, for that the seed (a less
eminent part) resembles the same thing. And for Potamogeiton, which
signifies a neighbour to the river or water, I think it loves the water
as well, and is as near a neighbour to it as that which takes its name
from thence, and is described by Dioscorides, lib. 4. cap. 101. Now to
come to Pliny, lib. 20. cap. 8, he calls it, Beta sylvestris, Limonion,
and Neuroides: the two later names are out of Dioscorides, and I shall
show you where also you shall find the former in him. Thus much I think
might serve for the vindication of my assertion, for I dare boldly affirm
that no late writer can fit all these names to any other plant, and that
makes me more to wonder that all our late herbarists as Matthiolus,
Dodonæus, Fuchsius, Cæsalpinus, Dalechampius, but above all Pena and
Lobel, who Advers. pag. 126, call it to question, should not allow this
plant to be Limonium, especially seeing that Anguillara had before or in
their time asserted it so to be; but whether he gave any reasons or no
for his assertion, I cannot tell, because I could never by any means get
his Opinions, but only find by Bauhin his Pinax that such was his opinion
hereof. But to return from whence I digressed, I will give you
Dioscorides his description, and a brief explanation thereof; and so
desist; it is thus: It hath leaves like a Beet, thinner and larger, 10 or
more; a stalk slender, straight, and as tall as that of a Lily, and full
of seeds of an astringent taste. The leaves of this you see are larger
than those of a Beet, and thin, and as I formerly told you in the names,
nervous; which to be so may be plainly gathered by Diorcorides his words
in the description of White Hellebore, whose leaves he compares to the
leaves of Plantain and the wild Beet: now there is no wild Beet mentioned
by any of the ancients, but only this by Pliny in the place formerly
quoted, nor no leaf more fit to compare those of White Hellebore to, than
those of water Plantain, especially for the nerves and fibres that run
alongst the leaves; the stalk also of this is but slender considering the
height, and it grows straight, and as high as that of a Lily, with the
top plentifully stored with astringent seed; so that no one note is
wanting in this, not scarce any to be found in the other plants that many
have of late set forth for Limonium.

The Nature.

Water Plantain is cold and dry of temperature.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of water Plantain, as some authors report, are good to be
laid upon the legs of such as are troubled with the dropsy, and hath the
same property that the land Plantain hath.

B. Dioscorides and Galen commend the seed hereof given in wine, against
fluxes, dysenteries, the spitting of blood, and overmuch flowing of
women's terms.

C. Pliny saith, the leaves are good against burns.


CHAP. 97. Of Land Plantain.



Fig. 632. Broad-Leaved Plantain (1) 

Fig. 633. Hoary Plantain (2)
The Description.

1. As the Greeks have called some kinds of herbs Serpent's tongue, Dog's
tongue and Ox tongue; so have they termed a kind of Plantain Arnoglosson,
which is as you should say Lamb's tongue, very well known unto all, by
reason of the great commodity and plenty thereof growing everywhere; and
therefore it is needless to spend time about them. The greatness and
fashion of the leaves hath been the cause of the varieties and
diversities of their names.

2. The second is like the first kind, and differeth in that, that this
kind of Plantain hath greater, but shorter spikes or knaps: and the
leaves are of an hoary or overworn green colour; the stalks are likewise
hoary and hairy.

3. The small Plantain hath many tender leaves ribbed like unto the great
Plantain, and is very like in each respect unto it, saving that it is
altogether lesser.



Fig. 634. Spiked Rose Plantain (4) 

Fig. 635. Strange Rose Plantain (5) 
	4. The spiked Rose Plantain hath very few leaves, narrower than the
leaves of the second kind of Plantain, sharper at the ends, and further
growing one from another. It beareth a very double flower upon a short
stem like a rose, of a greenish colour tending to yellowness. The seed
groweth upon a spiky tuft above the highest part of the plant;
notwithstanding it is but very low in respect of the other Plantains
above mentioned.

5. The fifth kind of Plantain hath been a stranger in England and
elsewhere, until the impression hereof. The cause why I say so is, the
want of consideration of the beauty which is in this plant, wherein it
excelleth all the other. Moreover, because that it hath not been written
of or recorded before this present time, though plants, of lesser moment
have been very curiously set forth. This plant hath leaves like unto them
of the former, and more orderly spread upon the ground like a Rose: among
which rise up many small stalks like the other Plantains, having at the
top of every one a fine double Rose altogether unlike the former, of an
hoary or rusty green colour.

I take this to be the same with that which Clusius received from James
Garret the younger, from London; and therefore I give you the figure
thereof in this place, together with this addition to the history out of
Clusius: That some of the heads are like those of the former Rose
Plantain; other some are spike fashion, and some have a spike growing as
it were out of the midst of the Rose, and some heads are otherwise
shaped: also the whole plant is more hoary than the common Rose Plantain.


Fig. 636. Spoky-tufted Plantain (6)

6. This Plantain must not here be forgot, though it be somewhat hard to
be found: his leaves, roots, and stalks are like those of the ordinary,
but instead of a compact spike it hath one much divided after the manner
as you see it here expressed in the figure, and the colour thereof is
greenish.

The Place.

The greater Plantains do grow almost everywhere.

The lesser Plantain is found on the sea coasts and banks of great rivers
which are sometime washed with brackish water.

The Rose Plantains grow with us in gardens; and the sixth with spoky
tufts groweth in some places in the Isle of Thanet, where I first found
it, being in company with Mr. Thomas Hickes, Mr. Leonard Buckner, and
other London apothecaries, Anno 1632.

The Time.

They are to be seen from April unto September.

The Names.

Plantain is called in Latin Plantago, and in Greek, Arnoglossa, that is
to lay, Lamb's tongue: the apothecaries keep the Latin name: in Italian,
Piantagine, and Plantagine: in Spanish, Lhantem: the Germans, Megrich: in
Low Dutch, Wechbre: in English, Plantain, and Waybread: in French,
Plantain.

The Temperature.

Plantain (as Galen saith) is of a mixed temperature; for it hath in it a
certain watery coldness, with a little harshness, earthy, dry, and cold: 
therefore they are cold and dry in the second degree. To be brief, they
are dry without biting, and cold without benumbing. The root is of like
temperature, but drier, and not so cold. The seed is of subtle parts, and
of temperature less cold.

The Virtues.

A. Plantain is good for ulcers that are of hard curation, for fluxes,
issues, rheums, and rottenness, and for the bloody flux: it stayeth
bleeding, it heals up hollow sores and ulcers, as well old as new. Of all
the Plantains the greatest is the best, and excelleth the rest in faculty
and virtue.

B. The juice or decoction of Plantain drunken stoppeth the bloody flux
and all other fluxes of the belly, stoppeth the pissing of blood,
spitting of blood, and all other issues of blood in man or woman, and the
desire to vomit.

C. Plantain leaves stamped and made into a tansy, with the yolks of eggs,
stayeth the inordinate flux of the terms, although it have continued many
years.

D. The root of Plantain with the seed boiled in white wine and drunk,
openeth the conduits or passages of the liver and kidneys, cures the
jaundice, and ulcerations of the kidneys and bladder.

E. The juice dropped in the eyes doth cool the heat and inflammation
thereof. I find in ancient writers many good-morrows, which I think not
meet to bring into your memory again; as that three roots will cure one
grief, four another disease, six hanged about the neck are good for
another malady, &c. all which are but ridiculous toys.

F. The leaves are singular good to make a water to wash a sore throat or
mouth, or the privy parts of a man or woman.

G. The leaves of Plantain stamped and put into Olive oil, and set in the
hot sun for a month together, and after boiled in a kettle of seething
water (which we do call Balneum Mariæ) and then strained, prevaileth
against the pains in the ears, the yard, or matrix, (being dropped into
the ears, or cast with a syringe into the other parts before rehearsed)
or the pains of the fundament; proved by a learned gentleman Mr. William
Godowrus Sergeant Surgeon to the Queen's Majesty.


CHAP. 98. Of Ribwort.



Fig. 637. Ribwort (1) 

Fig. 638. Rose Ribwort (2)
The Description.

1. Ribwort or small Plantain hath many leaves flat spread upon the
ground, narrow, sharp pointed, and ribbed for the most part with five
nerves or sinews, and therefore it was called Quinque-nervia; in the
middle of which leaves riseth up a crested or ribbed stalk, bearing at
the top a dark or dusky knap, set with a few such white flowers as are
the flowers of wheat. The root and other parts are like the other
Plantains.

There is another less kind of this Ribwort, which differs not from the
first mentioned in any thing but the smallness thereof.

2. Rose Ribwort hath many broad and long leaves of a dark green colour,
sharp pointed, and ribbed with fine nerves or sinews like the common
Ribwort; amongst which rise up naked stalks furrowed, chamfered, or
crested with certain sharp edges: at the top whereof groweth a great and
large tuft of such leaves as those are that grow next the ground making
one entire tuft or umbel, in shape resembling the Rose (wherof I thought
good to give it his surname Rose) which is from his flower.

This also I think differs not from that of Clusius; wherefore I give his
figure in the place of that set forth by our author.

The Place.

Ribwort groweth almost everywhere in the borders of path-ways and fertile
fields.

Rose Ribwort is not very common in any place, notwithstanding it groweth
in my garden, and wild also in the North parts of England; and in a field
near London by a village called Hoxton, found by a learned merchant of
London Mr. James Cole, a lover of plants, and very skilful in the
knowledge of them.

The Time.

They flower and flourish when the other Plantains do.

The Names.

Ribwort is called in Latin, Plantago minor, Quinquenervia, and Lanceola,
or Lanceolata: in High Dutch, Spitziger wegrich: in French, Lanceole: in
Low Dutch, Hondts ribbe that is to say in Latin, Costa canina, or Dog's
rib: in English, Ribwort, and Ribwort Plantain.

The second I have thought meet to call Rose Ribwort in English, and
Quinquenervia Rosea in Latin.

The Temperature.

Ribwort is cold and dry in the second degree, as are the Plantains.

The Virtues.

The virtues are referred to the kinds of Plantains.


CHAP. 99. Of Sea Plantains.



Fig. 639. Flowering Sea Plantain (1) 

Fig. 640. Small Sea Plantain (2)
The Description.

1. Carolus Clusius that excellent herbarist hath referred these two sorts
of Holosteum unto the kinds of Sea Plantain. The first hath long leaves
like the common Ribwort, but narrower, covered with some hairiness or
woolliness: among which there riseth up a stalk, bearing at the top a
spike like the kinds of Plantain, beset with many small flowers of an
herby colour, declining to whiteness. The seed is like that of the
Plantain: the root is long and woody. This flowers in April or May.

2. The second is like the former, but smaller, and not so grey or hoary:
the flowers are like to Coronopus, or the lesser Ribwort. This flowers at
the same time as the former.



Fig. 641. Sea Plantain (3) 

Fig. 642. Candia Lion's Foot (4) 
	3. The third kind, which is the Sea Plantain, hath small and narrow
leaves like Bucks-Horn, but without any manifest incisure, cuttings or
notches upon the one side: among which riseth up a spiky stalk, like the
common kind, but smaller.

4. These two following plants are by Clusius and Bauhin referred to this
tribe; wherefore I think it fitting to place them here. The former of
them from a reddish, and as it were scaly root growing less by little and
little, and divided into fibres, sends forth many leaves, narrow, hoary,
an handful long, and having three nerves or ribs running alongst each of
them: amongst these come forth divers footstalks, covered with a soft
reddish down; and being some two or three inches long, having heads
somewhat thick and reddish: the flowers are whitish, with a blackish
middle, which makes it seem as if it were perforated or holed. Now when
the plant grows old, and withers, the stalks becoming more thick and
stiff, bend down their heads towards the root, so that in some sort they
resemble the foot of a lion.


Fig. 643. The other Candia Lion's Foot (5)

5. This Plant which is figured in the upper place (for I take the lower
to be an exacter figure of the last described) hath leaves like to the
small Sea Plantain, but tenderer, and standing upright; and amongst these
on little footstalks grow heads like those of Psyllium, but prettier, and
of a whitish red colour.

The Place.

1,2. The two first grow in most of the kingdoms of Spain. Carolus Clusius
writeth, that he never saw greater or whiter than near to Valencia a city
of Spain, by the highway. Since, they have been found at Bastable in the
Isle of Wight, and in the Isles of Guernsey and Jersey.

3. The third doth grow near unto the sea in all the places about England
where I have travelled, especially by the forts on both the sides of the
water at Gravesend; at Erith near London; at Lee in Essex; at Rye in
Kent; at Westchester, and at Bristol.

4,5. The fourth and fifth grow in Candia, from whence they have been sent
to Padua and divers other places.

The Names.

Holosteum is also called by Dodonæus, Plantago angustifolia albida, or
Plantago hispaniensis: in English, Spanish hairy small Plantain, or
flowering Sea Plantain.

The fourth is called by Clusius, Leontopodium creticum: by some it hath
been thought to be Catanance of Dioscorides: the which Honorius Bellus
will not allow of: Bauhin calls it Holosteum, sive leontopodium creticum.

The fifth is Leontopodivim creticum alterum of Clusius; the Habbures of
Camerarius; and the Holosteum creticum alterum of Bauhin.
The Temperature and Virtues.

Galen saith, That Holsteum is of a binding and drying faculty.

A. Galen, Dioscorides, and Pliny have proved it to be such an excellent
wound herb, that it presently closeth or shutteth up a wound, though it
be very great and large: and by the same authority I speak it, that if it
be put into a pot where many pieces of flesh are boiling, it will solder
them together.

These herbs have the same faculties and virtues that the other Plantains
have, and are thought to be the best of all the kinds.


CHAP. 100. Of Sea Buck-Horn Plantains.



Fig. 644. Sea Buck-Horn (1) 

Fig. 645. Small Sea Buck-Horn (2)
The Description.

1. The new writers following as it were by tradition those that have
written long agone, have been content to hear themselves speak and set
down certainties by uncertain speeches; which hath wrought such confusion
and corruption of writings, that so many writers, so many several
opinions; as may most evidently appear in these plants and in others: And
myself am content rather to suffer this scar to pass, than by correcting
the error, to renew the old wound. But for mine own opinion thus I think,
the plant which is reckoned for a kind of Coronopus is doubtless a kind
of Holosteum: my reason is, because it hath grassy leaves; or rather
leaves like Vetonica sylvestris or wild Pinks, a root like those of
Gariophyllata or Avens, and the spiky ear of Holosteum or Sea Plantain:
which are certain arguments that these writers have never seen the plant,
but only the picture thereof, and so have set down their opinions by
hearsay.

This plant likwise hath been altogether unknown unto the old writers. It
groweth most plentifully upon the cliffs and rocks and the tops of the
barren mountains of Auvergne in France, and in many places of Italy.

2. The second sort of wild Sea Plantain or Serpentina differeth not from
the former but only in quantity and slenderness of his stalks, and the
smallness of his leaves, which exceed not the height of two inches. It
groweth on the hills and rocks near the washings of the sea at Massilia
in great plenty almost everywhere among the Tragacanthum, having a most
thick and spreading cluster of leaves after the manner of Sedum minimum
saxeum montanum, somewhat like Pinaster, or the wild Pine, as well in
manner of growing, as stiffness, and great increase of his slender
branches. It hath the small seed of Plantain, or Serpentina vulgaris,
contained within his spiky ears. The root is somewhat long, woody, and
thick, in taste somewhat hot and aromatical.



Fig. 646. Small Buck-Horn Plantain (3) 

Fig. 647. Mouse-Tail (4).
	3. This small sea plant is likewise one of the kinds of Sea
Plantain, participating as well of Buck-Horn as of Holosteum, being as it
were a degenerate kind of Sea Plantain. It hath many grassy leaves very
like unto the herb Thrift, but much smaller; among which come forth
little tender footstalks, whereon do grow small spiky knops like those of
Sea Plantain. The root is tough and thready.

4. Mouse-Tail or Cauda muris resembleth the last kind of wild Coronous or
Sea Plantain, in small spiky knops, leaves, and stalks, that I know no
reason to the contrary, but that I may as well place this small herb
among the kinds of Coronopus or Buck-horn, as other writers have placed
kinds of Holosteum in the same section: and if that be pardonable in
them, I trust this may be tolerated in me, considering that without
controversy this little and base herb is a kind of Holosteum, having many
small short grassy leaves spread on the ground, an inch long or somewhat
more: among which do rise small tender naked stalks of two inches long,
bearing at the top a little blackish torch or spiky knop in shape like
that of the Plantains, resembling very notably the tail of a mouse,
whereof it took his name. The root is small and thready.

The Place.

The first and second of these plants are strangers in England
notwithstanding I have heard say that they grow upon the rocks in Scilly,
Guernsey, and the Isle of Man.

Mouse-Tail groweth upon a barren ditch bank near unto a gate leading into
a pasture on the right hand of the way, as ye go from London to a village
called Hampstead; in a field as you go from Edmonton (a village near
London) unto a house thereby called Pim's, by the foot-paths' sides; in
Woodford Row in Waltham Forest, and in the orchard belonging to Mr.
Francis Whetstone in Essex, and in other places.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in May and June.

The Names.

Matthiolus writeth, That the people of Gorizia do commonly call the two
former plants Serpentaria and Serpentina; but unproperly, for that there
be other plants which may better be called Serpentina than these two: we
may call them in English wild Sea Plantain, whereof doubtless they are
kinds.

Mouse-Tail is called in Latin Cauda muris, and Cauda murina: In Greek,
Myosuros. Myosuros is called of the French-men Queue de Souris: in
English, Blood-strange, and Mouse-Tail.
The Temperature.

Cordonopus is cold and dry much like unto the Plantain. Mouse-Tail is
cold and somthing drying, with a kind of astriction or binding quality.

The Virtues.

Their faculties in working are referred unto the Plantains and Hartshorn.


CHAP. 101. Of Buck-Horn Plantains, or Hartshorn



Fig. 648. Hartshorn or Buck's-Horn (1) 

Fig. 649. Swine's Cresses, or Ruellius' Buck's-Horn
The Description.

1. Buck's-horn or Hartshorn hath long narrow hoary leaves, cut on both
the sides with three or four short starts or knags, resembling the
branches of a hart's horn, spreading itself on the ground like a star:
from the middle whereof spring up small round naked hairy stalks at the
top whereof do grow little knops or spiky torches like those of the small
Plantains. The root is slender and thready.

2. Ruellius' Buck's-horn or Swine's Cresses hath many small and weak
straggling branches, trailing here and there upon the ground, set with
many small cut or jagged leaves, somewhat like the former, but smaller,
and nothing at all hairy as is the other. The flowers grow among the
leaves, in small rough clusters, of an herby greenish colour: which being
past, there come in place little flat pouches broad and rough, in which
the seed is contained. The root is white, thready, and in taste like the
garden Cresses.

The Place.

They grow in barren plains, and untilled places, and sandy grounds; as in
Tothill field near unto Westminster, at Waltham twelve miles from London,
and upon Blackheath also near London.

The Time.

They flower and flourish when the Plantains do, whereof these have been
taken to be kinds.

The Names.

Buck's-Horn is called in Latin Cornu cervinum, or Hart's-Horn: divers
name it Herba stella, or stellaria, although there be another herb so
called: in Low Dutch, Hertzhooren: in Spanish, Guiabella: in French,
Corne de Cerf: It is thought to be Dioscorides his Choronopous, which
doth signify Cornicis pedem, a Crow's foot. It is called also by certain
bastard names, as Harenarea, Sanguinaria and of many, Herb Ivy, or Herb
Eve.

The Temperature.

Buck's-Horn is like in temperature to the common Plantain, in that it
bindeth, cooleth, and drieth.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Buck's-Horn boiled in drink, and given morning and
evening for certain days together, helpeth most wonderfully those that
have sore eyes, watery or blasted, and most of the griefs that happen
unto the eyes; experimented by a learned physician of Colchester called
Master Duke; and the like by an excellent apothecary of the same town
called Mr. Buckstone.

B. The leaves and roots stamped with bay salt, and tied to the wrists of
the arms, take away fits of the ague: and it is reported to work the like
effect being hanged about the neck of the patient in a certain number; as
unto men nine plants, roots and all; and unto women and children seven.


CHAP. 102. Of Saracen's Confound.


Fig. 650. Saracen's Confound

The Description.

Saracen's Confound hath many long narrow leaves cut or slightly snipped
about the edges: among which rise up fair brown hollow stalks of the
height of four cubits, along which even from the bottom to the top it is
set with long and pretty large leaves like them of the Peach tree: at the
top of the stalks grow fair star-like yellow flowers, which turn into
down, and are carried away with the wind. The root is very fibrous or
thready.

The Place

Saracen's Confound groweth by a wood as ye ride from Great Dunmow in
Essex, unto a place called Clare in the said country; from whence I
brought some plants into my garden.

The true Solidago here described and figured was found Anno 1632, by my
kind Friends Mr. George Bowles. and Mr. William Coot, in Shropshire in
Wales, in a hedge in the way as one goeth from Dudson in the parish of
Cherbery to Guarthlow.

The Time.

It flowers in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.

Saracen's Confound is called in Latin Solidago saracenica, or Saracen's
Comfrey, and Consolida saracenica: in Dutch Heidinisch Mundtkraut: of
some, Herba fortis: in English, Saracen's Confound, or Saracen's
Woundwort

The Nature.

Saracen's Confound is dry in the third degree; with some manifest heat.

The Virtues

A. Saracen's Confound is not inferior to any of the wound-herbs
whatsoever, being inwardly ministered, or outwardly applied in ointments
or oils. With it I cured Master Cartwright a gentleman of Grey's Inn, who
was grievously wounded into the lungs, and that by God's permission in
short space.

B. The leaves boiled in water and drunk, doth restrain and stay the
wasting of the liver, taketh away the oppilation and stopping of the
same, and profiteth against the jaundice and fevers of long continuance.

C. The decoction of the leaves made in water is excellent against the
soreness of the throat, if it be therewith gargarised: it increaseth also
the virtue and force of lotion or washing waters, appropriate for privy
maims, sore mouths, and such like, if it be mixed therewith.


CHAP. 103. Of Golden-Rod.



Fig. 651. Golden-Rod (1) 

Fig. 652. Arnoldus Villanova's Golden-Rod (2)
The Description.

1. Golden-Rod hath long broad leaves somewhat hoary and sharp pointed;
among which rise up brown stalks two foot high, dividing themselves
toward the top into sundry branches, charged or laden with small yellow
flowers; which when they be ripe turn into down which is carried away
with the wind. The root is thready and brown of colour. Lobel makes this
with unsnipped leaves to be that of Arnoldus Villanova.

2. The second sort of Golden-Rod hath small thin leaves broader than
those of the first described, smooth, with some few cuts or nicks about
the edges, and sharp pointed, of a hot and harsh taste in the throat 
being chewed; which leaves are set upon a fair reddish stalk. It took his
name from the flowers which grow at the top of a gold yellow colour:
which flowers turn into down, which is carried away with the wind, as is
the former. The root is small, compact of many strings or threads.

The Place.

They both grow plentifully in Hampstead Wood, near unto the gate that
leadeth out of the wood unto a village called Kentish town, not far from
London; in a wood by Rayleigh in Essex, hard by a gentleman's house
called Mr. Leonard, dwelling upon Dawes Heath; in Southfleet and in
Swainescombe wood also, near unto Gravesend.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in the end of August.

The Names.

It is called in English Golden-Rod: in Latin, Virga aurea, because the
branches are like a Golden-Rod: in Dutch, Gulden Roede: in French, Verge
d'or.

The Temperature.

Golden-Rod is hot and dry in the second degree: it cleanseth with a
certain astriction or binding quality.

The Virtues.

A. Golden-Rod provoketh urine, wasteth away the stones in the kidneys,
and expelleth them, and withal bringeth down tough and raw phlegmatic
humours sticking in the urine vessels, which now and then do hinder the
coming away of the stones, and causeth the gravel or sand which is
brittle to be gathered together into one stone. And therefore Arnoldus
Villanova by good reason hath commended it against the stone and pain of
the kidneys.

B. It is of the number of those plants that serve for wound-drinks, and
is reported that it can fully perform all those things that Saracen's
Confound can; and in my practise shall be placed in the foremost rank.

C. Arnoldus writeth, That the distilled water drunk with wine for some
few days together, worketh the same effect, that is, for the stone and
gravel in the kidneys.

D. It is extolled above all other herbs for the stopping of blood in
sanguinolent ulcers and bleeding wounds; and hath in times past been had
in greater estimation and regard than in these days: for in my
remembrance I have known the dry herb which came from beyond the sea sold
in Buckler's Bury in London for half a crown an ounce. But since it was
found in Hampstead wood, even as it were at our town's end, no man will
give half a crown for an hundredweight of it: which plainly setteth forth
our inconstancy and sudden mutability, esteeming no longer of any thing,
how precious soever it be, than whilst it is strange and rare. This
verifieth our English proverb, Far fetched and dear bought is best for
ladies. Yet it may be more truly said of fantastical physicians, who when
they have found an approved medicine and perfect remedy near home against
any disease; yet not content therewith, they will seek for a new farther
off; and by that means many times hurt more than they help. Thus much I
have spoken to bring these new fangled fellows back again to esteem
better of this admirable plant than they have done, which no doubt hath
the same virtue now that then it had, although it grows so near our own
homes in never so great quantity.


CHAP. 103. Of Captain Andrea Doria his Woundwort.


Fig. 653. Andrea Doria's Woundwort (1)

The Description.

1. Herba doria. This plant hath long and large thick and fat leaves,
sharp pointed, of a blueish green like unto Woad, which being broken with
the hands hath a pretty spicy smell. Among these leaves riseth up a stalk
of the height of a tall man, divided at the top into many other branches,
whereupon grow small yellowish flowers, which turneth into down that
flieth away with the wind. The root is thick almost like Helleborus
albus.

Of which kind there is another like the former, but that the leaves are
rougher, somewhat bluntly indented at the edges and not so fat and gross.

2. Herba doria altera. This herb grows up with a green round brittle
stalk, very much chamfered, sinewed, or furrowed, about four or five foot
high, full of white pith like that of Elder, and sendeth forth small
branches: the leaves grow on the stalk out of order, & are smooth, sharp
pointed, in shape like those of Herba doria, but much shorter & narrower,
the broadest and longest seldom being above ten or eleven inches long,
and scarce two inches broad, and are more finely and smally nicked or
indented about the edges; their smell being nothing pleasant, but rather
when together with the stalk they are broken and rubbed yield forth a
smell having a small touch of the smell of Hemlock. Out of the bosoms of 
these leaves spring other smaller leaves or branches. The flowers are
many, and grow on small branches at the tops of the stalks like those of
Herba doria, but more like those of Iacobea, of a yellow colour, as well
the middle button, as the small leaves that stand round about, every
flower having commonly eight of those small leaves. Which being past the
button turneth into down and containeth very small long seeds which fly
away with the wind. The root is nothing else but an infinity of small
strings which most hurtfully spread in the ground, and by their infinite
increasing destroyeth and starveth other herbs that grow near it. Its
natural place of growing I know not, for I had it from Mr. John Coys, and
yet keep it growing in my garden. John Goodyer.

The Place.

These plants grow naturally about the borders or brinks of rivers near to
Narbonne in France, from whence they were brought into England, and are
contented to be made denizens in my garden, where they flourish to the
height aforesaid.

The Time.

They flowered in my garden about the twelfth of June.

The Nature.

The roots are sweet in smell, and hot in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Two drams of the roots of Herba doria boiled in wine and given to 
drink, draweth down waterish humours, and provoketh urine.

B. The same is with good success used in medicines that expel poison.

All these Plants mentioned in the three last chapters, to wit, Solidago,
Virga aurea and this Herba doria, are by Bauhin fitly comprehended under
the title of Virga aurea; because they are much alike in shape, and for
that they are all of the same faculty in medicine.


CHAP. 105. Of Felwort, or Baldmoney.



Fig. 654. Great Felwort (1) 

Fig. 655. Great purple Felwort (2)
The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Gentians or Felworts, whereof some be of our own
country; others more strange and brought further off: and also some not
before this time remembered, either of the ancient or later writers, as
shall be set forth in this present chapter.

The Description.

1. The first kind of Felwort hath great large leaves, not unlike to those
of Plantain, very well resembling the leaves of the White Hellebore:
among which riseth up a round hollow stalk as thick as a man's thumb,
full of joints or knees, with two leaves at each of them, and towards the
top every joint or knot is set round about with small yellow star-like
flowers, like a coronet or garland: at the bottom of the plant next the
ground the leaves do spread themselves abroad, embracing or clipping the
stalk in that place round about, set together by couples one opposite
against another. The seed is small, brown, flat, and smooth like the
seeds of the Stock Gillyflower. The root is a finger thick. The whole
plant is of a bitter taste.

2. This described by Clusius, hath leaves and stalks like the precedent;
these stalks are some cubit and half or two cubits high, and towards the
tops they are ingirt with two or three coronets of fair purple flowers,
which are not star-fashioned, like those of the former, but long and
hollow, divided as it were into some five or six parts or leaves, which
towards the bottom on the inside are spotted with deep purple spots:
these flowers are without smell, & have so many chives as they have jags,
and these chives compass the head, which is parted into two cells, and
contains store of a smooth, chaffy, reddish seed. The root is large,
yellow on the outside, and white within, very bitter, & it sends forth
every year new shoots. It grows in divers places of the Alps, it flowers
in August, and the seeds are ripe in September.



Fig. 656. Blue Flowered Felwort (3) 

Fig. 657. Crosswort Gentian (4) 
	3. Carolus Clusius also setteth forth another sort of a great
Gentian, rising forth of the ground with a stiff, firm or solid stalk,
set with leaves like unto Asclepias, by couples one opposite against
another, even from the bottom to the top in certain distances: from the
bosom of the leaves there shoot forth set upon slender footstalks certain
long hollow flowers like bells, the mouth whereof endeth in five sharp
corners. The whole flower changeth many times his colour according to the
soil and climate; now and then purple or blue, sometimes whitish, and
often of an ash colour. The root and seed is like the precedent.

4. Crosswort Gentian hath many ribbed leaves spread upon the ground, like
unto the leaves of Soapwort, but of a blacker green colour: among which
rise up weak jointed stalks trailing or leaning toward the ground. The
flowers grow at the top in bundles thick thrust together, like those of
Sweet Williams, of a light blue colour. The root is thick, and creepeth
in the ground far abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.


Fig. 658. Dr. Pennie's Spotted Gentian (5)

5. Carolus Clusius hath set forth in his Pannonic History a kind of
Gentian, which he received from Mr. Thomas Pennie of London, Doctor in
physic, of famous memory, and a second Dioscorides for his singular
knowledge in plants: which Tabernamontanus hath set forth in his Dutch
book for the seventh of Clusius, wherein he greatly deceived himself, and
hath with a false description wronged others.

This twelfth sort or kind of Gentian after Clusius, hath a round stiff
stalk, firm and solid, somewhat reddish at the bottom, jointed or kneed
like unto Crosswort Gentian. The leaves are broad, smooth, full of ribs
or sinews, set about the stalks by couples, one opposite against another.
The flowers grow upon small tender stalks, compact of five slender
blueish leaves, spotted very curiously with many black spots and little
lines; having in the middle five yellow chives. The seed is small like
sand: the root is little, garnished with a few strings of a yellowish
colour.

The Place.

Gentian groweth in shadowy woods, and the mountains of Italy, Slavonia,
Germany, France, and Burgundy; from whence Mr. Isaac de Laune a learned
physician sent me plants for the increase of my garden. Crosswort Gentian
groweth in a pasture at the West end of Little Rayne in Essex on the
North side of the way leading from Braintree to Much Dunmow; and in the
horseway by the same close.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in August, and the seed is ripe in September.

The Names.

Gentius King of Illyria was the first finder of this herb, and the first
that used it in medicine, for which cause it was called Gentian after his
own name: in Greek, Gentiane, which name also the apothecaries retain
unto this day, and call it Gentiana: it is named in English Felwort,
Gentian, Bitterwort, Baldmoyne, and Baldmoney.

1. This by most writers is called Gentiana, and Gentiana maior lutea.

2. Gesner calleth this Gentiana punicea; Clusius, Gentiana maior flore
purpureo.

3. This is Gentiana foliis hirundinariæ of Gesner: and Gentiana
asclepiadis folio of Clusius.

4. This, Cruciata, or Gentiana Cruciata, of Tragus, Fuschius, Dodonæus,
Gesner and others: it is the Gentiana minor of Matthiolus.

5. Clusius calls this Gentiana maior pallida punctis distincta.

The Temperature.

The root of Felwort is hot, as Dioscorides saith, cleansing or scouring:
divers copies have, that it is likewise binding, and of a bitter taste.

The Virtues.

A. It is excellent good, as Galen saith, when there is need of
attenuating, purging, cleansing, and removing of obstructions, which
quality it taketh of his extreme bitterness.

B. It is reported to be good for those that are troubled with cramps and
convulsions; for such as are burst, or have fallen from some high place:
for such as have evil livers and bad stomachs. It is put into
counterpoisons, as into the composition named Theriaca diatessaron: which
Aetius calleth mysterium, a mystery or hid secret.

C. This is of such force and virtue, saith Pliny, that it helpeth cattle
which are not only troubled with the cough, but are also broken winded.

D. The root of Gentian given in powder the quantity of a dram, with a
little pepper and Herb Grace mixed therewith, is profitable for them that
are bitten or stung with any manner of venomous beast or mad dog: or for
any that hath taken poison.

E. The decoction drunk is good against the stoppings of the liver, and
crudity of the stomach, helpeth digestion, dissolveth and scattereth
congealed blood, and is good against all cold diseases of the inward
parts.


CHAP. 106. Of English Felwort.


Fig. 659. English or Hollow Felwort

The Description.

Hollow-leafed Felwort or English Gentian hath many long tough roots,
dispersed hither and thither within the upper crust of the earth; from
which immediately riseth a fat thick stalk, jointed or kneed by certain
distances, set at every knot with one leaf, and sometimes more, keeping
no certain number: which leaves do at the first enclose the stalks round
about, being one whole and entire leaf without any incisure at all, as it
were a hollow trunk; which after it is grown to his fullness, breaketh in
one side or other, and becometh a flat ribbed leaf, like unto the great
Gentian or Plantain. The flowers come forth of the bosom of the upper
leaves, set upon tender footstalks, in shape like those of the small
Bindweed, or rather the flowers of Soapwort, of a whitish colour, washed
about the brims with a little light carnation. Then followeth the seed,
which as yet I have not observed.

The Place.

I found this strange kind of Gentian in a small grove of a wood called
the Spinney, near unto a small village in Northamptonshire called
Litchborough: elsewhere I have not heard of it.

The Time.

It springeth forth of the ground in April, and bringeth forth his flowers
and seed in the end of August.

The Names.

I have thought good to give unto this plant, in English, the name
Gentian, being doubtless a kind therof. The which hath not been set
forth, nor remembered by any that have written of plants until this time.
In Latin we may call it Gentiana concava, of the hollow leaves. It may be
called also Hollow-Leaved Felwort.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Of the faculties of this plant as yet I can say nothing, referring it
unto the other Gentians, until time shall disclose that which yet is
secret and unknown.

Bauhin received this plant with the figure thereof from Doctor Lister one
of his Majesty's physicians, and he refers it unto Saponaria, calling it
Saponaria concava anglica; and (as far as I can conjecture) hath a good
description thereof in his Prodrom. Pag. 103. Now both by our author and
Bauhin's description, I gather, that the roots in this figure is not
rightly expressed, for that it should be long, thick, and creeping, with
few fibres adhering thereunto; when as this figure expresseth an annual
woody root. But not having as yet seen the plant, I can affirm nothing of
certainty.


CHAP. 107. Of Bastard Felwort.



Fig. 660. Spring-Flowering Large Gentian (1) 

Fig. 661. Alpine Spring Gentian (2)
The Description

1. This elegant Gentianella hath a small yellowish creeping root, from
which arise many green smooth thick hard and sharp pointed leaves like
those of the Broad-Leaved Myrtle, yet larger, and having the veins
running alongst the leaves as in Plantain. Amongst the leaves come up
short stalks, bearing very large flowers one upon a stalk; and these
flowers are hollow like a Bell-Flower, and end in five sharp points with
two little ears between each division, and their colour is an exquisite
blue. After the flower is past there follows a sharp pointed longish
vessel, which opening itself into two equal parts, shows a small crested
dark coloured seed.

2. This second rises up with a single slender and purplish stalk, set at
certain spaces with six or eight little ribbed leaves, standing by
couples one against another. At the top stands a cup, out whereof comes
one long flower without smell, and as it were divided at the top into
five parts; and it is of so elegant a colour, that it seems to exceed
blueness itself; each of the folds or little leaves of the flower hath a
whitish line at the side, and other five as it were pointed leaves or
appendices set between them: and in the midst of the flower are certain
pale coloured chives: a longish sharp pointed vessel succeeds the flower,
which contains a small hard round seed. The root is small, yellowish and
creeping, putting up here and there stalks bearing flowers, and in other
places only leaves lying orderly spread upon the ground.


Fig. 662. Bastard or Dwarf Felwort (3)

3. Besides these two whose roots last long and increase every year, there
are divers other Dwarf or Bastard Gentians which are annual, and wholly
perish every year as soon as they have perfected their seed; and
therefore by Clusius they are fitly called Gentianæ fugaces. Of these I
have only observed two kinds (or rather varieties) in this Kingdom. which
I will here describe unto you. The first of these, which is the lesser, &
whose figure we here give you, is a proper plant some two or three inches
high, divided immediately from the root into three or four or more
branches, set at certain spaces with little longish leaves, being
broadest at the setting on, and so growing narrower or sharper pointed.
The tops of these stalks are beautified with long, hollow, and pretty
large flowers, considering the magnitude of the plant. and these flowers
are of a dark purplish colour, and at their tops divided into five parts.
The root is yellowish, small, and woody. The seed which is small and
round is contained in longish vessels. The stalks and leaves are commonly
of a dark green, or else of a brownish colour.

4. This from a root like, yet a little larger than the former, sends up a
pretty stiff round stalk of some span high; which at certain spaces is
set with such leaves as the last described, but larger: and out of the
bosoms of these leaves from the bottom to the top of the stalk come forth
little footstalks, which usually carry three flowers apiece; two set one
against another, and the third upon a stalk somewhat higher; and
sometimes there comes forth a single flower at the root of these
footstalks. The flowers in their shape, magnitude and colour, are like
those of the last mentioned, and also the seed and seed vessels. The
manner of growing of this is very well presented by the figure of the
third Gentian, formerly described in the chapter last save one
aforegoing.

The Place.

1, 2. These grow not wild in England that I know of, but the former is to
be found in most of our choice gardens. As with Mr. Parkinson, Master
Tradescant, and Master Tuggy, &c.

3, 4. These are found in divers places, as in the Chalk-dale at Dartford
in Kent, and according to our author (for I know he meant these) in
Waterdown Forest in Sussex, in the way that leadeth from Charlwoods
lodge, unto the house of the Lord of Abergavenny, called Eridge house by
a brook side there; especially upon a heath by Colbrook near London: on
the Plain of Salisbury, hard by the turning from the said plain, unto the
right Honourable the Lord of Pembroke's house at Wilton, and upon a
chalky bank in the high way between Saint Alban's and Gorhambury.

The Time.

1, 2. Thers two flower in April and May. The other from August unto the
end of October.

The Names

1. This is the Gentiana 4 of Traus. The Gentianella Alpina of Gesner.
Gentianella campanulæ flore and helvetica of Lobel; the Gentian 5 or
Gentianella maior verna of Clusius.

2. Gesner called this Calathiana verna: Lobel, Gentianella Alpina, and
Clusius, Gentiana 6 and Gentianella minor verna.

3. This is the Calathiana vera of Dalechampius: and the Gentiana fugax 5
or Gentiana 11 minima of Clusius.

4. I take this to be Clusius his Gentiana fugax 4. or Gentiana 10. We may
call this in English, Small Autumn Gentian.

Their Temperature and virtues.

These by their taste and form should be much like to the greater Gentians
in their operation and working, yet not altogether so effectual.


CHAP. 106. Of Calathian Violet, or Autumn Bell-Flower.


Fig. 663. Calathian Violet

The Description.

Among the number of the base Gentians there is a small plant, which is
late before it cometh up, having stalks a span high, and sometimes
higher, narrow leaves like unto Thyme, set by couples about the stalks by
certain distances: long hollow flowers growing at the top of the stalks
like a cup called a beaker, wide at the top, and narrower toward the
bottom, of a deep blue colour tending to purple, with certain white
threads or chives in the bottom: the flower at the mouth or brim is five-
cornered before it be opened, but when it is opened it appeareth with
five clefts or pleats. The whole plant is of a bitter taste, which
plainly showeth it to be a kind of wild Gentian. The root is small, and
perisheth when it hath perfected his seed, and recovereth itself by
falling of the same.

The Place.

This plant I never found but once, and that was on a wet marsh ground in
Lincolnshire, 2 or 3 miles on this side Caister, and as I remember, the
place is called Nettleton Moor.

The Time.

The gallant flowers hereof be in their bravery about the end of August,
and in September.

The Names.

This is thought to be Viola Calathiana of Ruellius, yet not that of
Pliny; and those that desire to know more of this may have recourse to
the twelfth chapter of the first book of the 2. Pempt. of Dodonæus his
Latin Herbal. It is called Viola autumnalis, or Autumn Violet, and
seemeth to be the same that Valerius Cordus doth call Pneumonanthe, which
he saith is named in the German tongue Lungen blumen, or Lung-flower: in
English, Autumn Bell-Flowers, Calathian Violets, and of some, Harvest-
Bells.

The Temperature.

This wild Felwort or Violet is in temperature hot, somewhat like in
faculty to Gentian, whereof it is a kind, but far weaker in operation.

The Virtues.

A. The latter physicians hold it to be effectual against pestilent
diseafes, and the bitings & stingings of venomous beasts.


CHAP. 109. Of Venus' Looking-Glass.



Fig. 664 Venus' Looking-Glass (1) 	
Fig. 665. Codded Corn Violet (2)

The Description.

1. Besides the former Bell-Flowers, there is likewise a certain other,
which is low and little; the stalks whereof are tender, two spans long,
divided into many branches most commonly lying upon the ground. The
leaves about the stalks are little, slightly nicked in the edges. The
flowers are small, of a bright purple colour tending to blueness, very
beautiful, with wide mouths like broad bells, having a white chive or
thread in the middle. The flowers in the daytime are wide open, and about
the setting of the sun are shut up and closed fast together, in five
corners, as they are before their first opening, and as the other Bell-
Flowers are. The roots be very slender, and perish when they have
perfected their seed.

2. There is another which from a small and woody root sendeth up a 
straight stalk, sometimes but two or three inches, yet otherwhiles a foot
high, whenas it lights into good ground. This stalk is crested and
hollow, having little longish leaves crumpled or sinuated about the edges
set thereon: and out of the bosoms of those leaves towards the top of the
stalk and sometimes lower, come little branches bearing little winged
cods, at the tops of which in the midst of five little green leaves stand
small purple flowers, of little or no beauty; which being past the cods
become much larger, and contain in them a small yellowish seed, and they
still retain at their tops the fine longish green leaves that encompassed
the flower. This plant is an annual like as the former.

The Place.

1. It groweth in ploughed fields among the corn, in a plentiful and
fruitful soil. I found it in a field among the corn by Greenhithe, as I
went from thence toward Dartford in Kent, and in many other places
thereabout, but not elsewhere: from whence I brought of the seeds for my
garden, where they come up of themselves from year to year by falling of
the seed. So saith our author, but I never found it growing in England, I
have seen only some branches of it brought from Leiden by my friend Mr
William Parker.

2. The other of my description I have divers times found growing among
the corn in Chelsea field, and also have had it brought me from other
places by Mr. George Bowles, & Mr. Leonard Buckner.

The Time.

It flowereth in June and July, and the seed is ripe in the end of August.

The Names.

1. It is called Campana arvensis, and of some Onobrychis, but unproperly,
of other Cariophyllos segetum, or Corn Gillyflower, or Corn Pink, and
Speculum veneris, or Lady's Glass. The Brabanters in their tongue call it
Vrouwen Spiegel. Tabernamontanus hath two figures thercof, the one under
the name of Viola arvensis, and the other by the title of Viola
pentagonia, because the flower hath five folds or corners.

2. This of my description is not mentioned by any author; wherefore I am
content to follow that name which is given to the former, and term it in
Latin Speculum veneris minus: and from the colour of the flower and
codded seed vessel, to call it in English, Codded Corn Violet.

The Temperature and Virtues.

We have not found any thing written either of his virtue or temperature,
of the ancient or late writers.


CHAP. 110 Of White Hellebore or Neeze-Wort.



Fig. 666. White Hellebore (1) 

Fig. 667. Early White Hellebore (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of White Hellebore hath leaves like unto great Gentian,
but much broader, and not unlike the leaves of the great Plantain, folded
into pleats like a garment pleated to be layed up in a chest; amongst
these leaves riseth up a stalk a cubit long, set towards the top full of
little star-like flowers, of an herby green colour tending to whiteness;
which being past there come small husks containing the seed. The root is
great and thick, with many small threads hanging thereat.

2. The second kind is very like the first, and differeth in that, that
this hath black reddish flowers, and cometh to flowering before the other
kind; and seldom in my garden cometh to seeding.

The Place.

The White Hellebore groweth on the Alps, and such like mountains where
Gentian doth grow. It was reported unto me by the bishop of Norwich, that
White Hellebore groweth in a wood of his own near to his house at
Norwich. Some say likewise that it doth grow upon the mountains of Wales.
I speak this upon report, yet I think not, but that it may be true.
Howbeit I dare assure you, that they grow in my garden at London, where
the first kind flowereth and seedeth very well.

The Time.

The first flowereth in June, and the second in May.

The Names.

Neeze-wort is called in Latin, Veratrum album, Helleborus albus, and
Sanguis herculeus. The Germans call it Weisz nieswurt; the Dutchmen,
Nieswortel: the Italians, Elleboro Bianco: the Spaniards, Verde gambre
blanco: the French, Ellebore blanche: and we of England call it White
Hellebore, Neeze-wort, Lingwort, and the root neezing powder.

The Temperature.

The root of White Hellebore, is hot and dry in the third degree.

The virtues.

A. The root of White Hellebore procureth vomit mightily, wherein
consisteth his chief virtue, and by that means voideth all superfluous
slime and naughty humours. It is good against the falling sickness,
frenzies, sciatica, dropsies, poison, and against all cold diseases that
be of hard curation, and will not yield to any gentle medicine.

B. This strong medicine made of White Hellebore, ought not to be given
inwardly unto delicate bodies without great correction, but it may more
safely be given unto country people which feed grossly, and have hard,
tough, and strong bodies.

C. The root of Hellebore cut in small pieces, such as may aptly and
conveniently be conveyed into the fistulas doth mundify them, and taketh
away the callous matter which hindereth curation, and afterward they may
be healed with some incarnative unguent, fit for the purpose. This
faculty by Dioscorides is attributed to the black Hellebore, and not to
this.

D. The powder drawn up into the nose causeth sneezing, and purgeth the
brain from gross and slimy humours.

E. The root given to drink in the weight of two pence, taketh away the
fits of agues, killeth mice and rats being made up with honey and flower
of wheat: Pliny addeth that it is a medicine against the lousy evil.


CHAP. 111. Of Wild White Hellebore.



Fig. 668. Wild White Hellebore (1) 

Fig. 669. Narrow-Leaved White Hellebore (2)
The Description.

1. Helleborine is like unto White Hellebore, and for that cause we have
given it the name of Helleborine. It hath a straight stalk of a foot
high, set from the bottom to the tuft of flowers, with fair leaves,
ribbed and chamfered like those of White Hellebore, but nothing near so
large, of a dark green colour. The flowers be orderly placed from the
middle to the top of the stalk, hollow within, and white of colour,
streaked here and there with a dash of purple, in shape like the flowers
of Satyrion. The seed is small like dust or motes in the sun. The root is
small, full of juice, and bitter in taste.

2. The second is like unto the first, but altogether greater, and the
flowers white, without any mixture at all, wherein consisteth the
difference.

3. The third kind of Helleborine, being the 6th after Clusius' account,
hath leaves like the first described, but smaller and narrower. The stalk
riseth up to the height of two spans; at the top whereof grow fair
shining purple coloured flowers, consisting of six little leaves, within
or among which lieth hid things like small helmets. The plant in
proportion is like the other of this kind. The root is small and creepeth
in the ground.

The Place.


They be found in dank and shadowy places; the first was found growing in
the woods by Digges Well pastures, half a mile from Welwen in
Hertfordshire: it groweth in a wood five miles from London, near unto a
bridge called Lockbridge: by Nottingham near Robin-Hood's well, where my
friend Mr. Steven Bredwell a learned physician found the same: in the
woods by Dunmow in Essex; by Southfleet in Kent, in a little grove of
juniper, and in a wood by Clare in Essex.

The Time.

They flower in May and June, and perfect their seed in August.

The Names.

The likeness that it hath with White Hellebore, doth show it may not
unproperly be named Helleborine, or wild White Hellebore, which is also
called of Dioscorides and Pliny Epipactis; but from whence that name came
it is not apparent.

The Temperature.

They are thought to be hot and dry of nature.
The virtues.

A. The faculties of these wild Hellebores are referred to the white
Neeze-Wort, whereof they are kinds.

B. It is reported that the decoction of wild Hellebore drunken, openeth
the stoppings of the liver, and heIpeth any imperfections of the same.


CHAP. 112. Of Our Lady's Slipper.



Fig. 670. Our Lady's Slipper (1) 

Fig. 671. The Other Lady's Slipper (2)
The Description.

1. Our Lady's Shoe or Slipper hath a thick knobbed root, with certain
marks or notes upon the same; such as the roots of Solomon's Seal have,
but much lesser, creeping within the upper crust of the earth: from which
riseth up a stiff and hairy stalk a foot high, set by certain spaces with
fair broad leaves, ribbed with the like sinews or nerves as those of the
Plantain. At the top of the stalk groweth one single flower; seldom two,
fashioned on the one side like an egg; on the other side it is open,
empty, and hollow, and of the form of a shoe or slipper, whereof it took
his name; of a yellow colour on the outside, and of a shining deep yellow
on the inside. The middle part is compassed about with four leaves of a
bright purple colour, often of a light red or obscure crimson, and
sometimes yellow as in the middle part, which in shape is like an egg, as
aforesaid.

2. This other differs not from the former, unless in the colour of the
flower; which in this hath the four long leaves white, and the hollow
leaf or slipper of a purple colour.



The Place.

Lady's Slipper groweth upon the mountains of Germany, Hungary, and
Poland. I have a plant thereof in my garden, which I received from Mr.
Garret, apothecary, my very good friend. It is also reported to grow in
the North parts of this kingdom; and I saw it in flower with Mr.
Tradescant the last summer.

The Time.

It flowereth about the midst of June.

The Names.

It is commonly called Calceolus d. mariæ, and marianus: of some,
Calceolus sacerdotis: of some, Alisma, but unproperly: in English, Our
Lady's Shoe or Slipper: in the German tongue, Pfaffen Schueth, Papen
scoeu: and of some, Damasonium nothum.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Touching the faculties of Our Lady's Shoe we have nothing to write, it
being not sufficiently known to the old writers, no nor to the new.


CHAP. 113. Of Soapwort.


Fig. 672. Soapwort

The Description.

The stalks of Soapwort are slippery, slender, round, jointed, a cubit
high or higher: the leaves are broad, set with veins very like broad-
Leaved Plantain, but yet lesser, standing out of every joint by couples
for the most part, and especially those that are the nearest the roots
bowing backwards. The flowers in the top of the stalks and about the
uppermost joints are many, well smelling, sometimes of a beautiful red
colour like a Rose; otherwhile of a light purple or white, which grow out
of long cups consisting of five leaves, in the middle of which are
certain little threads. The roots are thick, long, creeping aslope,
having certain strings hanging out of them like to the roots of Black
Hellebore: and if they have once taken good and sure rooting in any
ground it is impossible to destroy them.

There is kept in some of our gardens a variety of this, which differs
from it in that the flowers are double and somewhat larger: in other
respects it is altogether like the precedent.

The Place.

It is planted in gardens for the flowers' sake, to the decking up of
houses, for the which purpose it chiefly serveth. It groweth wild of
itself near to rivers and running brooks in sunny places.

The Time.

It flowereth in June and July.

The Names.

It is commonly called Saponaria, of the great scouring quality that the
leaves have: for they yield out of themselves a certain juice when they
are bruised, which scoureth almost as well as soap: although Ruellius
describe a certain other Soapwort. Of some it is called Alisma, or
Damasonium: of others, Saponaria gentiana, whereof doubtless it is a
kind: in English it is called Soapwort, and of some Bruisewort.

The Temperature and Virtues.

It is hot and dry, and not a little scouring withal.

A. Although our author and such as before him have written of plants were
ignorant of the faculty of this herb, yet hath the industry of some later
men found out the virtue thereof: and Septalius reports that it was one
Zapata a Spanish empiric. Since whose time it hath been written of by
Rudius, lib. 5. de Morbis occultus & venenatus cap. 18. And by Cæsar
Claudinus, de Ingressu ad infirmos, pag. 411  pag. 417. But principally
by Ludovicus Septalius, Animadvers. Med. lib. 7. num. 214, where treating
of decoctions in use against the French poxes, he mentions the singular
effect of this herb against that filthy disease. His words are these: I
must not in this place omit the use of another alexipharmical decoction,
being very effectual and useful for the poorer sort; namely that which is
made of Soapwort, an herb common and known to all. Moreover, I have
sometimes used it with happy success in the most contumacious disease:
but it is of somewhat an ungrateful taste, and therefore it must be
reserved for the poorer sort. The decoction is thus made:

Rx. Saponariæ virid. M. ii. infundantur per noctem in lib. viii aquæ mox
excoquantur ad cocturum Saponariæ: deinde libra una cum dimidia aquæ cum
herbaiam cocta excoletur cum expresione, quæ reservetur pro potione
matutina ad sudores proliciendos sumendo unciae vii aut viii quod vero
superest dulcoretur cum passuris aut saccaro pro potu cum cibis; æstate &
biliosis naturis addi poterit aut Sonchi, aut Cymbalariæ M. i. Valet &
pro muleribus ad menstrua alba absumenda cum M. ss. Cymbalariæ, & addito
tantaundem Philipendulæ.
["Rx. Take two handfuls of green Soapwort, steep overnight in eight pints
of water. Boil until one pint has boiled away, then pour it off, pressing
out all the juice from the soapwort leaves. Take every morning enough to
cause sweating – about seven or eight ounces – sweetened with sugar or
raisins and drunk with food. In summer and for bilious natures, you can
add a handful of Sow-Thistle or Wall Pennywort. For the drying up of
women's white menstruae, add half a handful of Wall Pennywort and the
same amount of Meadowsweet."]

Thus much Septalius, who saith that he had used it saepe ac saepius,
often and often again.

B. Some have commended it to be very good to be applied to green wounds,
to hinder inflammation, and speedily to heal them.


CHAP. 114. Of Arsesmart or Water-Pepper.



Fig. 673. Arsesmart (1) 

Fig. 674. Dead or Spotted Arsesmart (2)
The Description.

1. Arsesmart bringeth forth stalks a cubit high, round, smooth, jointed
or kneed, dividing themselves into sundry branches; whereon grow leaves
like those of the Peach or of the Sallow tree. The flowers grow in
clusters upon long stems, out of the bosom of the branches and leaves,
and likewise upon the stalks themselves, of a white colour tending to a
bright purple: after which cometh forth little seeds semewhat broad, of a
reddish yellow and sometimes blackish, of an hot and biting taste, as is
all the rest of the plant, and like unto whereof it took his name; yet
hath it no smell at all.

2. Dead Arsesmart is like unto the precedent in stalks, clustering
flowers, roots and seed, and differeth in that, that this plant hath
certain spots or marks upon the leaves, in fashion of a half moon, of a
dark blackish colour. The whole plant hath no sharp or biting taste, as
the other hath, but as it were a little sour smack upon the tongue. The
root is likewise full of strings or threads, creeping up and down in the
ground.



Fig. 675. Small Creeping Arsesmart (3) 

Fig. 676. Codded Arsesmart (4) 
	3. This in roots, leaves, and manner of growing is very like the
first describcd, but lesser by much in all these parts: the flowers also
are of a whitish, and sometimes of a purplish colour: it grows in barren
gravelly and wet places.

4. The stalks of this are some two foot high, tender, green, and
sometimes purplish, hollow, smooth, succulent and transparent, with large
and eminent joints, from whence proceed leaves like those of French
Mercury, a little bigger, and broader toward their stalks, and thereabout
also cut in with deeper notches: from the bosoms of each of these leaves
come forth long stalks hanging downwards, and divided into three or four
branches upon which hang flowers yellow, and much gaping, with crooked
spurs or heels, and spotted also with red or sanguine spots: after these
are past succeed the cods, which contain the seed, and they are commonly
two inches long, slender, knotted, and of a whitish green colour, crested
with greenish lines; and as soon as the seed begins to be ripe, they are
so impatient that they will by no means be touched, but presently the
seed will fly out of them into your face. And this is the cause that
Lobel and others have called this plant Noli me tangere ["Touch me not"].
As for the like reason some of late have imposed the same name upon the
Sium minimum of Alpinus, formerly described by me in the seventh place of
the eighteenth chapter of this book.

The Place and Time.

They grow very common almost everywhere in moist and waterish plashes,
and near unto the brims of rivers, ditches, and running brooks. They
flower from June to August.

The codded or impatient Arsesmart was first found to grow in this kingdom
by the industry of my good friend Mr. George Bowles, who found it at
these places: first in Shropshire, on the banks of the river Camlad at
Marrington in the parish of Chirbury, under a gentleman's house called
Mr. Lloyd; but especially at Wernddu in the parish of Churchstoke, half a
mile from the foresaid river, amongst great Alder trees in the highway.

The Names.

1. Arsesmart is called of the Latins, Hydropiper, or Piper aquaticum, or
aquatile, or Water Pepper: in High Dutch, Wasser Pfeffer: in Low Dutch,
Water Peper: in French, Curage, or Culrage: in Spanish, Pimenta aquatica:
in English, Water-Pepper, Culrage, and Arsesmart, according to the
operation and effect when it is used in the abstersion of that part.

2. Dead Arsemart is called Persicaria, or Peach-wort, of the likeness
that the leaves have with those of the Peach tree. It hath been called
Plumbago of the leaden coloured marks which are seen upon it: but Pliny
would have Plumbago not to be so called of the colour, but rather of the
effect, by reason that it helpeth the infirmity of the eyes called
plumbum. Yet there is another Plumbago which is rather thought to be that
of Pliny's description, as shall be showed in his proper place. In
English we may call it Peach-wort, and Dead Arsesmart, because it doth
not bite those places as the other doeth.

3. This is by Lobel set forth, and called Persicaria pusilla repens: of
Tabernamontanus, Persicaria pumila.

4. No plant I think hath found more variety of names than this: for
Tragus calls it Mercurialis sylvestris altera; and he also calls it
Esula: Leonicerus calls it Tithymalus sylvestris: Gesner, Camerarius, and
others, Noli me tangere: Dodonæus, Impatiens herba: Cæsalpinus, Catanance
altera: in the Hist. Lugd. (where it is some three times over) it is
called besides the names given it by others, Chrysæa: Lobel, Thalius, and
others call it Persicaria siliquosa: yet none of these well pleasing
Columna, he hath accurately described and figured it by the name of
Balsamita altera: and since him Bauhin hath named it Balsamina lutea: yet
both these and most of the other keep the title of Noli me tangere.

The Temperature.

1. Arsesmart is hot and dry, yet not so hot as Pepper, according to
Galen.

2. Dead Arsesmart is of temperature cold, and something dry.

The Virtues

A. The leaves and seed of Arsesmart do waste and consume all cold
swellings, diffuse and scatter congealed blood that cometh of bruisings
or stripes.

B. The same bruised and bound upon an impostume in the joints of the
fingers (called among the vulgar sort a felon or ancome) for the space of
an hour, taketh away the pain: but (saith the author) it must be first
buried under a stone before it be applied; which doth somewhat discredit
the medicine.

C. The leaves rubbed upon a tired jade's back, and a good handful or two
laid under the saddle, and the same set on again, wonderfully refresheth
the wearied horse, and causeth him to travel much the better.

D. It is reported that Dead Arsesmart is good against inflammations and
hot swellings, being applied in the beginning: and for green wounds, if
it be stamped and boiled with olive oil, wax, and turpentine.

E. The faculties of the fourth are not yet known. Lobel saith it hath a
venenate quality: and Tragus saith a vomitory: yet neither of them seems
to affirm any thing of certainty, but rather by hearsay.


CHAP. 115. Of Bell-Flowers.


Fig. 677. Coventry Bells

The Description.

1. Coventry Bells have broad leaves rough and hairy, not unlike to those
of the Garden Bugloss, of a swart green colour: among which do rise up
stiff hairy stalks the second year after the sowing of the seed: which
stalks divide themselves into sundry branches, whereupon grow many fair
and pleasant Bell-Flowers, long, hollow, and cut on the brim with five
slight gashes, ending in five corners toward night, when the flower
shutteth itself up, as do most of the Bell-Flowers: in the middle of the
flowers be three or four whitish chives, as also much downy hair, such as
is in the ears of a dog or such like beast. The whole flower is of a blue
purple colour: which being past, there succeed great square or cornered
seed-vessels, divided on the inside into divers cells or chambers,
wherein do lie scatteringly many small brown flat seeds. The root is long
and great like a Parsnip, garnished with many thready strings, which
perisheth when it hath perfected his seed, which is in the second year
after his sowing, and recovereth itself again by the falling of the seed.

2. The second agreeth with the first in each respect, as well in leaves,
stalks, or roots, and differeth in that, that this plant bringeth forth
milk-white flowers, and the other not so.

The Place and Time.

They grow in woods, mountains, and dark valleys, & under hedges among the
bushes, especially about Coventry, where they grow very plentifully
abroad in the fields, & are there called Coventry-bells; and of some
about London Canterbury-bells; but unproperly, for that there is another
kind of Bell-Flower growing in Kent about Canterbury, which may more
fitly be called Canterbury-bells, because they grow there more
plentifully than in any other country. These pleasant Bell-Flowers we
have in our London gardens especially for the beauty of their flower,
although they be kinds of Rampions, and the roots eaten as Rampions are.

They flower in June, July, and August; the seed waxeth ripe in the mean
time for these plants bring not forth their flowers all at once; but when
one flowereth another seedth.

The Names.

Coventry Bells are called in Latin Viola Mariana: in English, Mercury's
Violets, or Coventry Rapes; and of some, Mariets. It hath been taken to
be Medium, but unfitly: of some it is called Rapii sylvestre.

The Temperature and Virtues.

The root is cold and somewhat binding, and not used in physic, but only
for a salad root boiled and eaten with oil, vinegar, and pepper.


CHAP. 116. Of Throatwort, or Canterbury Bells.



Fig. 678. Blue Canterbury Bells (1) 

Fig. 679. Giant Throatwort (3)
The Description.

1. The first of the Canterbury Bells hath rough and hairy brittle stalks,
crested into a certain squareness, dividing themselves into divers
branches, whereupon do grow very rough sharp pointed leaves, cut about
the edges like the teeth of a saw; and so like the leaves of nettles,
that it is hard to know the one from the other, but by touching them. The
flowers are hollow, hairy within, and of a perfect blue colour, bell
fashion, not unlike to the Coventry Bells. The root is white, thick, and
long lasting. There is also in some gardens kept a variety hereof having
double flowers.

2. The White Canterbury bells are so like the precedent, that it is not
possible to distinguish them, but by the colour of the flowers; which of
this plant is a milk white colour, and of the other a blue, which setteth
forth the difference.

3. Giant Throatwort hath very large leaves of an overworn green colour,
hollowed in the middle like the Muscovites' spoon, and very rough,
slightly indented about the edges. The stalk is two cubits high, whereon
those leaves are set from the bottom to the top; from the bosom of each
leaf cometh forth one slender footstalk, whereon doth grow a fair and
large flower fashioned like a bell, of a whitish colour tending to
purple. The pointed corners of each flower turn themselves back like a
scroll, or the Dalmatian Cap; in the middle whereof cometh forth a sharp
style or clapper of a yellow colour. The root is thick, with certain
strings annexed thereto.



Fig. 680. Small Canterbury Bells (4) 

Fig. 681. Great Stone Throatwort (5) 
	4. The smaller kind of Throatwort hath stalks and leaves very like
unto the great Throatwort, but altogether lesser, and not so hairy: from
the bosom of which leaves shoot forth very beautiful flowers bell
fashion, of a bright purple colour, with a small pistil or clapper, in
the middle, and in other respects is like the precedent.

5. This from a woody and wrinkled root of a pale purple colour sends
forth many rough crested stalks of some cubit high, which are unorderly
set with leaves, long, rough, and snipped lightly about their edges,
being of a dark colour on the upper side, and of a whitish on their under
part. At the tops of the stalks grow the flowers, being many, and thick
thrust together, white of colour, and divided into five or seven parts,
each flower having yellowish threads, and a pointel in their middles. It
flowers in August, and was first set forth and described by Pona in his
description of Mount Baldus.

The Place

1, 2. The first described and sometimes the second grows very plentifully
in the low woods and hedgerows of Kent, about Canterbury, Sittingbourne,
Gravesend, Southfleet, and Greenhithe, especially under Cobham Park-pale
in the way leading from Southfleet to Rochester, at Eltham about the park
there not far from Greenwich; in most of the pastures about Watford and
Bushey, fifteen miles from London.

3. The third was kept by our author in his garden, as it is also at this
day preserved in the garden of Mr. Parkinson: yet in the year 1626 I
found it in great plenty growing wild upon the banks of the River Ouse in
Yorkshire, as I went from York to visit Selby the place whereas I was
born, being ten miles from thence.

4. The fourth groweth in the meadow next unto Ditton ferry as you go to
Windsor, upon the chalky hills about Greenhithe in Kent; and in a field
by the highway as you go from thence to Dartford; in Henningham park in
Essex, and in Sion meadow near to Brentford, eight miles from London.

5. The fifth grows on Mount Baldus in Italy.

The Time.

All the kinds of Bell-Flowers do flower and flourish from May until the
beginning of August, except the last, which is the plant that hath been
taken generally for the Calathian Violet, which flowereth in the later
end of September; notwithstanding the Calathian Violet or Autumn Violet
is of a most bright and pleasant blue or azure colour, as those are of
this kind, although this plant sometimes changeth his colour from blue to
whiteness by some one accident or other.

The Names.

1, 2. Throatwort is called in Latin Cervicaria; and Cervicaria maior: of
most, Uvularia: of Fuchsius, Campanula: in Dutch, Halfrupt: in English,
Canterbury Bells, Haskwort, Throatwort, or Uvula Wort, of the virtue it
hath against the pain and swelling thereof.

3. This is the Trachelium maius belgarum of Lobel, and the same that our
author formerly set forth by the name of Trachelium giganteum, so that I
have put them, as you may see, together in the title of the plant.

4. This is the Trachelium maius of Dodonæus, Lobel, and others: the
Cervicaria minor of Tabernamontanus; and Uvularia exigua of Tragus.

The Temperature.

These plants are cold and dry, as are most of the Bell-Flowers.

The Virtues.

A. The ancients for any thing that we know have not mentioned, and
therefore not set down anything concerning the virtues of these Bell-
Flowers: notwithstanding we have found in the later writers, as also of
our own experience, that they are excellent good against the inflammation
of the throat and uvula or almonds, and all manner of cankers and 
ulcerations in the mouth, if the mouth and throat be gargarized and
washed of the decoction of them: and they are of all other herbs the
chief and principal to be put into lotions or washing waters, to inject
into the privy parts of man or woman being boiled with honey in water,
with some white wine.


CHAP. 117. Of Peach-Bells and Steeple-Bells.



Fig. 682. Peach-Leaved Bell-Flower (1) 

Fig. 683. Steeple Bell-Flower (2)
The Description.

1. The Peach-Leaved Bell-Flower hath a great number of small and long
leaves, rising in a great bush out of the ground, like the leaves of the
Peach tree: among which riseth up a stalk two cubits high: alongst the
stalk grow many flowers like bells sometimes white, and for the most part
of a fair blue colour; but the bells are nothing so deep as they of the
other kinds; and these also are more dilated or spread abroad than any of
the rest. The seed is small like Rampions, and the root a tuft of laces
or small strings.

2. The second kind of Bell-Flower hath a great number of fair bluish or
watchet flowers, like the other last before mentioned, growing upon
goodly tall stems two cubits and a half high, which are garnished from
the top of the plant unto the ground with leaves like Beets, disorderly
placed. This whole plant is exceeding full of milk, insomuch as if you do
but break one leaf of the plant, many drops of a milky juice will fall
upon the ground. The root is very great, and full of milk also: likewise
the knops wherein the seed should be are empty and void of seed, so that
the whole plant is altogether barren, and must be increased with slipping
of his root.



Fig. 684. Round-Leaved Bell-Flower (3) 

Fig. 685. Yellow Bell-Flower (4) 
	3. The small Bell-Flower hath many round leaves very like those of
the common field Violet, spread upon the ground; among which rise up
small slender stems, disorderly set with many grassy narrow leaves like
those of flax. The small stem is divided at the top into sundry little
branches, whereon do grow pretty blue flowers bell-fashion. The root is
small and thready.

4. The yellow Bell-Flower is a very beautiful plant of an handful high,
bearing at the top of his weak and tender stalks most pleasant flowers
bell-fashion, of a fair and bright yellow colour. The leaves and roots
are like the precedent, saving that the leaves that grow next to the
ground of this plant are not so round as the former.


Fig. 686. Little White or Purple Bell-Flower (5, 6)

5. The Little White Bell-Flower is a kind of wild Rampions, as is that
which followeth, and also the last save one before described. This small
plant hath a slender root of the bigness of a small straw, with some few
strings annexed thereto. The leaves are somewhat long, smooth, and of a
perfect green colour, lying flat upon the ground: from thence rise up
small tender stalks, set here and there with a few leaves. The flowers
grow at the top, of a milk-white colour.

6. The other small Bell-Flower or wild Rampion differeth not from the
precedent but only in colour of the flowers; for as the others are white,
these are of a bright purple colour, which sets forth the difference.

7. Besides these here described, there is another very small and rare
Bell-Flower, which hath not been set forth by any but only by Bauhin, in
his Prodrom. under the title of Campanula cymbalaria foliis, and that
fitly, for it hath thin and small cornered leaves much after the maner of
Cymbalaria, and these are set without order on very small weak and tender
stalks some handful long; and at the tops of the branches grow little
small and tender Bell-Flowers of a blue colour. The root, like as the
whole plant, is very small and thready. This pretty plant was first
discovered to grow in England by Master George Bowles, Anno 1632, who
found it in Montgomeryshire, on the dry banks in the high-way as one
rideth from Dolgeogg a worshipful gentleman's house called Mr. Francis
Herbert, unto a market town called Machynlleth, and in all the way from
thence to the seaside. It may be called in English, The Tender Bell-
Flower.

The Place.

The two first grow in our London gardens, and not wild in England.

The rest, except that small one with yellow flowers, do grow wild in most
places of England, especially upon barren sandy heaths and such like
grounds.

The Time.

These Bell-Flowers do flourish from May unto August.

The Names.

Their several titles set forth their names in English and Latin, which is
as much as hath been said of them.

The Temperature and Virtues.

These Bell-Flowers, especially the four last mentioned, are cold and dry,
and of the nature of Rampions, whereof they be kinds.


CHAP. 118. Of Rampions, or Wild Bell-Flowers



Fig. 687. Great Rampion (1) 

Fig. 688. Small Rampion (2)
The Description.

1. The great Rampion being one of the Bell-Flowers, hath leaves which
appear or come forth at the beginning somewhat large and broad, smooth
and plain, not unlike to the leaves of the smallest Beet. Among which
rise up stems one cubit high, set with such like leaves as those are of
the first springing up, but smaller, bearing at the top of the stalk a
great thick bushy ear full of little long flowers closely thrust together
like a Fox-tail: which small flowers before their opening are like little
crooked horns, and being wide opened they are small blue-bells, sometimes
white, or sometimes purple. The root is white, and as thick as a man's
thumb.

2. The second kind being likewise one of the Bell-Flowers, and yet a wild
kind of Rampion, hath leaves at his first coming up like unto the garden
Bell-Flower. The leaves which spring up afterward for the decking up of
the stalk are somewhat longer and narrower. The flowers grow at the top
of tender and brittle stalks like unto little bells, of a bright blue
colour, sometimes white or purple. The root is small, long, and somewhat
thick.



Fig. 689. Wood Rampion (3) 

Fig. 690. Alpine Horned Rampion (4) 
	3. This is a wild Rampion that grows in woods: it hath small leaves
spread upon the ground, bluntly indented about the edges: among which
riseth up a straight stem of the height of a cubit, set from the bottom
to the top with longer and narrower leaves than those next the ground: at
the top of the stalks grow small Bell-Flowers of a watchet blueish
colour. The root is thick and tough, with some few strings annexed
thereto.

There is another variety of this: it differs from this last only in that
the flowers and other parts of the plant are lesser a little than those
of the last described.

4. This which grows amongst the rocks in the highest Alps hath a woody
and very wrinkled root an handful and half long, from which arise many
leaves set on pretty long stalks, somewhat round, and divided with
reasonable deep gashes, having many veins, and being of a dark green
colour: amongst these grow up little stalks, having one leaf about their
middles, and three or four set about the flower, being narrower and
longer than the bottom leaves. The flowers grow as in an umbel, and are
shaped like that chemical vessel we usually call a retort, being big at
their bottoms, and so becoming smaller towards their tops, and having
many threads in them, whereof one is longer than the rest, and comes
forth in the middle of the flower: it flowers in August. Pona was the
first that described this, under the name of Trachelium petræum minus.



Fig. 691. Mountain Horned Rampion (5) 

Fig. 692. Rock Rampion (6) 
	5. The roots of this other kind of horned Rampion grow after an
unusual manner; for first or lowermost is a root like to that of a
Rampion, but slenderer, and from the top of that cometh forth as it were
another root or two, being smallest about that place whereas they are
fastened to the under root, and all these have small fibres coming from
them. The leaves which first grow up are smooth, and almost like those of
a Rampion, yet rounder, and made somewhat after the maner of a violet
leaf, but nothing so big: at the bottom of the stalk come forth 7 or
eight long narrow leaves snipped about the edges, and sharp pointed, and
upon the rest of the stalk grow also three or four narrow sharp pointed
leaves. The flowers which are of a purple colour, at first resemble those
of the last described; but afterwards part themselves into five slender
strings with threads in the middles; which decaying, they are succeeded
by little cups ending in five little pointels, and, containing a small
yellow seed. This is described by Fabius Columna, under the name of
Rapuntium corniculatum montanum: and I received seeds and roots hereof
from Mr. Goodyer, who found it growing plentifully wild in the enclosed
chalky hilly grounds by Maple-Durham near Petersfield in Hampshire.

6. This which is described in Clusius his Curæ poster., by the name of
Pyramidalis, and was first found and sent to him by Gregory de Reggio a
Capuchin friar, is also of this kindred; wherefore I will give you a
brief description thereof. The root is white, and long lasting; from
which come divers round hairy and writhing stalks, about a span long more
or less. At the top of these stalks and all amongst the leaves, grow many
elegant blue flowers, which are succeeded by seed vessels like those of
the lesser Trachelium, being full of a small seed. The whole plant yields
milk like as the rest of this kind, and the leaves as well in shape as
hoariness on their undersides, well resemble those of the second French
or Golden Lungwort of my description. It was first found growing in the
chinks of hard rocks about the mouths of caves, in the mountains of
Brescia in Italy by the foresaid friar.

The Place.

The first is sown and set in gardens, especially because the roots are
eaten in salads. The second groweth in woods and shadowy places, in fat
and clayey soils.

The Time.

They flower in May, June, and July.

The Names.

Rampions by a general name are called Rapuntium and Rapunculus; and the
first by reason of the long spoky tuft of flowers is called Rapuntium
maius alopecuri comoso flore by Lobel and Pena: Rapunculum sylvestre, and
Rapunculus sylvestris spicatus by others. The second, which is the
ordinary Rampion is called Rapunculus, and Rapuntium minus; Lobel thinks
it the Pes Locustæ of Avicenna; and Columna judges it to be Erinus of
Nicander and Dioscorides. The third is the Rapunculus nemorosus secundus
of Tabernamontanus & the variety of it is Rapunculus nemorosus tertius.
The names of the rest are shown in their descriptions.

The Temperature.

The roots of these are of a cold temperature, and something binding.

The Virtues.

A. The roots are especially used in salads, being boiled and eaten with
oil, vinegar, and pepper.

B. Some affirm, that the decoction of the roots are good for all
inflammations or the mouth, and almonds of the throat, and other diseases
happening in the mouth and throat, as the other Throatworts.


CHAP. 119. Of Wallflowers, or Yellow Stock-Gillyflowers.



Fig. 693. Wallflower (1) 

Fig. 694. Double Wallflower (2)
The Kinds.

These plants which we term commonly in English, Wallflowers and Stock
Gillyflowers are comprehended under one general name of Leucoion, (1)
Viola alba, White Violet, leukos signifying white, and ion, a Violet,
which as some would have it is not from the whiteness of the flower, for
that the most and most usual of them are of other colours, but from the
whiteness or hoariness of the leaves, which is proper rather to the
Stock-Gillyflowers than to the Wallflowers, I therefore think it fit to
distinguish them into Leucoia foliis viridibus, that is Wallflowers; and
Leucoia foliis incanu, Stock-Gillyflowers. Now these again are
distinguished into several species, as you may find by the following
chapters Moreover you must remember there is another Viola alba or
Leucoion (which is thought to be that of Theophrastus and whereof we have
treated in the first book) which is far different from this, and for
distinction sake called Leucoium bulbosum.

The Description

1. The stalks of the Wallflower are full of green branches, the leaves
are long, narrow, smooth, slippery, of a blackish green colour; and
lesser than the leaves of Stock-Gillyflowers. The flowers are small,
yellow, very sweet of smell, and made of four little leaves, which being
past, there succeed long slender cods, in which is contained flat reddish
seed. The whole plant is shrubby, of a woody substance, and can easily
endure the cold of winter.

2. The double Wallflower hath long leaves, green and smooth, set upon
stiff branches, of a woody substance: whereupon do grow most pleasant
sweet yellow flowers very double; which plant is so well known to all,
that it shall be needless to spend much time about the description.

3. Of this double kind we have another sort that bringeth his flowers
open all at once, whereas the other doth flower by degrees, by means
whereof it is long in flowering.


Fig. 695. Wild Wallflower (4)

4. This plant hath many green leaves at the top of the root like to these
of the Wallflower, but narrower, and bitter of taste; among which rise up
one or more stalks of a foot or more in height, crested and set with
carinated leaves. The flowers grow at the tops of the stalks many
together, consisting of four yellow leaves apiece, lesser than those of
the ordinary Wallflowers; these flowers are succeeded by long cods
containing a flat seed. The root is long and whitish, with many fibres.

5. Besides these there is in some gardens kept another wallflower
differing from the first in the bigness of the whole plant, but
especially of the flower, which is yellow and single, yet very large and
beautiful.

6. Also there is another with very green leaves, and pure white and well-
smelling flowers.

The Place.

1. The first groweth upon brick and stone walls, in the corners of
churches everywhere, as also among rubbish and such other stony places.

2. The double Wallflower groweth in most gardens of England.

The Time.

They flower for the most part all the year long, but especially in
winter; whereupon the people in Cheshire do call them Winter-
Gillyflowers.

The Names.

The Wallflower is called in Greek Leukoion: in Latin, Viola lutea, and
Leucoium luteum: in the Arabic tongue, Keyri: in Spanish, Violettas
Amarillas: in Dutch, Violieren: in French, Girofles jaunes, Violieres des
murailles: in English, Wall-Gillyflower, Wallflower, Yellow Stock-
Gillyflower, and Winter-Gillyflower.

The Temperature.

All the whole shrub of Wall-Gillyflowers, as Galen saith, is of a
cleansing faculty, and of thin parts.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides writeth that the yellow Wallflower is most used in physic,
and more than the rest of Stock-Gillyflowers, whereof this is holden to
be a kind: which hath moved me to prefer it unto the first place. He
saith, that the juice mixed with some unctious or oily thing, and boiled
to the form of a liniment, helpeth the chops or rifts of the fundament.

B. The herb boiled with white wine, honey, and a little alum, doth cure
hot ulcers, and cankers of the mouth.

C. The leaves stamped with a little bay salt, and bound about the wrists
of the hands, taketh away the shaking fits of the ague.

D. A decoction of the flowers together with the leaves, is used with good
success to mollify scirrhus tumors.

E. The oil also made with these is good to be used to anoint a paralytic,
as also a gouty part to mitigate pain.

F. Also a strong decoction of the flowers drunk, moveth the courses, and
expelleth the dead child.


CHAP. 120. Of Stock-Gillyflowers.



Fig. 696. Stock-Gillyflower (1) 

Fig. 697. Double Stock-Gillyflower (2)
The Description.

1. The stalk of the great Stock-Gillyflower is two foot high or higher,
round, and parted into divers branches. The leaves are long, white, soft,
and having upon them as it were a down like unto the leaves of Willow,
but softer: the flowers consist of four little leaves growing all along
the upper part of the branches, of a white colour, exceeding sweet of
smell: in their places come up long and narrow cods, in which is
contained broad, flat, and round seed. The root is of a woody substance,
as is the stalk also.

The purple Stock-Gillyflower is like the precedent in each respect,
saving that the flowers of this plant are of a pleasant purple colour,
and the others white, which setteth forth the difference: of which kind
we have some that bear double flowers, which are of divers colours,
greatly esteemed for the beauty of their flowers, and pleasant sweet
smell.

This kind of Stock-Gillyflower that beareth flowers of the colour of a
Violet, that is to say of a blue tending to a purple colour, which
setteth forth the difference betwixt this plant & the other Stock-
Gillyflowers, in every other respect is like the precedent.

2. Here we have given (which was formerly wanting) a figure of the double
Stock, of which there are many and pretty varieties kept in the garden of
my kind friend Mr Ralph Tuggy at Westminster, and set forth in the books
of such as purposely treat of flowers and their varieties.


Fig. 698. Thorny Stock-Gillyflower (3)

3. To these I think it not amiss to add that plant which Clusius hath set
forth under the name of Leucoium spinosum creticum. It grows some foot or
more high, bringing forth many stalks which are of a grayish colour and
armed at the top with many and strong thorny prickles: the leaves which
adorn these stalks are like those of the Stock-Gillyflower, yet less and
somewhat hoary; the flowers are like those of Mullein, of a whitish
yellow colour, with some purple threads in their middles; the cods which
succeed the flowers are small and round, containing a little seed in
them. They use, saith Honorius Bellus, to heat ovens therewith in Candy,
where it plentifully grows; and by reason of the similitude which the
prickles hereof have with Stœbe and the white colour, they call it Gala
Stivida, or Galastivida, and not because it yields milk, which Gala
signifies.

The Place.

1, 2. These kinds of Stock-Gillyflowers do grow in most gardens
throughout England.

The Time.

They flower in the beginning of the spring, and continue flowering all
the summer long.

The Names.

The Stock-Gillyflower is called in Greek Leukoion, in Latin, Viola alba:
in Italian, Viola bianca, in Spanish Violettas blancas: in English,
Stock-Gillyflower, Guernsey Violet, and Castle Gillyflower.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. They are referred unto the Wallflower, athough in virtue much
inferior; yet are they not used in physic, except amongst certain
empirics and quacksalvers, about love and lust matters, which for modesty
I omit.

B. Ioachimus Camerarius reporteth that a conserve made of the flowers of
Stock-Gillyflower, and often given with the distilled water thereof,
preserveth from the apoplexy, and helpeth the palsy.


CHAP. 121. Of Sea Stock-Gillyflower.



Fig. 699. White Sea stock-Gillyflower (1) 

Fig. 700. Purple Sea Stock-Gillyflower (2)
The Kinds.

Of Stock-Gillyflowers that grow near unto the sea there be divers and
sundry sorts, differing as well in leaves as flowers, which shall be
comprehended in this chapter next following.

The Description.

1. The Sea Stock-Gillyflower hath a small woody root very thready; from
which riseth up an hoary white stalk of two foot high, divided into
divers small branches, whereon are placed confusedly many narrow leaves
of a soft hoary substance. The flowers grow at the top of the branches,
of a whitish colour, made of four little leaves; which being past, there
follow long cods and seed, like unto the garden Stock-Gillyflower.

2. The purple Stock-Gillyflower hath a very long tough root, thrusting
itself deep into the ground; from which rise up thick, fat, soft, and
hoary stalks. The leaves come forth of the stalks next the ground, long,
soft, thick, full of juice, covered over with a certain downy hoariness
and sinuated somewhat deep on both sides; after the manner you may see
expressed in the figure of the fourth described in this chapter. The
stalk is set here and there with the like leaves, but lesser. The flowers
grow at the top of the stalks, compact of four small leaves, of a light
purple colour. The seed is contained in long crooked cods like the garden
Stock-Gillyflower.

The figure of Lobel's which here we give you was taken of a dried plant,
and therefore the leaves are not expressed so sinuate as they should be.



Fig. 701. Broad-Leaved Sea Stock-Gillyflower (3) 

Fig. 702. Yellow Sea Stock-Gillyflower (4)  
	3. This Sea Stock-Gillyflower hath many broad leaves spread upon
the ground, somewhat snipped or cut on the edges; amongst which rise up
small naked stalks, bearing at the top many little flowers of a blue
colour tending to a purple. The seed is in long cods like the others of
his kind.

4. The Great Sea Stock-Gillyflower hath many broad leaves, growing in a
great tuft, slightly indented about the edges. The flowers grow at the
top of the stalks, of a gold yellow colour. The root is small and single.


Fig. 703. Small Yellow Sea Stock-Gillyflower (5)

5. The Small Yellow Sea Stock-Gillyflower hath many smooth, hoary, and
soft leaves, set upon a branched stalk: on the top whereof grow pretty
sweet smelling yellow flowers, bringing his seed in little long cods. The
root is small and thready. The flowers of this are sometimes of a red, or
purplish colour.

The place.

There plants do grow near unto the seaside, about Colchester, in the Isle
of Man, near Preston in Aunderness, and about Westchester, saith our
author, but I have not heard of any of these wild on our coasts but only
the second, which it may be grows in these places here set down; for it
was gathered by Mr. George Bowles upon the rocks at Aberdovey in
Merionethshire.

The Time.

They flourish from April to the end of August.

The Names.

There is little to be said as touching the names, more than hath been
touched in their several titles.
The Temperature and virtues.

There is no use of these in physic, but they are esteemed for the beauty
of their flowers.


CHAP. 122. Of Dame's Violets, or Queen's Gillyflowers.


Fig. 704. Purple or White Dame's Violets (1)

The Description.

1. Dame's Violets or Queen's Gillyflowers, have great large leaves of a
dark green colour, somewhat snipped about the edges: among which spring
up stalks of the height of two cubits set with such like leaves: the
flowers come forth at the tops of the branches, of a fair purple colour,
very like those of the Stock-Gillyflowers, of a very sweet smell, after
which come up long cods, wherein is contained small long blackish seed.
The root is slender and thready.

The Queen's White Gillyflowers are like the last before remembered saving
that this plant bringeth forth fair white flowers, and the other purple.

2. By the industry of some of our florists, within this two or three
years hath been brought to our knowledge a very beautiful kind of these
Dame's Violets, having very fair double white flowers, the leaves, stalks
and roots, are like to the other plants before described.



Fig. 705. Russet Dames Violets (3) 

Fig. 706. Melancholy Flower (4) 
	3, (4). This plant hath a stalk a cubit high, and is divided into
many branches, upon which in a confused order grow leaves like those of
the Dame Violet, yet a little broader and thicker, being first of
somewhat an acid, and afterwards of an acrid taste; at the tops of the
branches in long cups grow flowers like those of the Dame's Violet,
consisting of four leaves, which stand not fair open, but are twined
aside, and are of a overworn russet colour, composed as it were of a
yellow and brown with a number of black purple veins divaricated over
them. Their smell in the day time is little or none, but in the evening
very pleasing and sweet. The flowers are succeeded by long, and here and
there swollen cods, which are almost quadrangular and contain a reddish
seed like that of the common kind. The root is fibrous, and usually lives
not above two years, for after it hath borne seed it dies; yet if you cut
it down and keep it from seeding, it sometimes puts forth shoots whereby
it may be increased.

I very much suspect that this figure and description which I here give
you taken out of Clusius, is no other plant than that which is kept in
some of our gardens, and set forth in the Hortus Eystettensis by the name
of Leucoium melancholium: now I judge the occasion of this error to have
come from the figure of Clusius which we here present you with, for it is
in many particulars different from the description: first in that it
expresses not many branches: secondly, in that the leaves are not snipped
& divided: thirdly, in that the flowers are not expressed wrested or
twined: fourthly, the veins are not rightly expressed in the flower; &
lastly, the cods are omitted. Now the Leucoium melancholicum hath a hairy
stalk divided into sundry branches of the height formerly mentioned, and
the leaves about the middle of the stalk are somewhat sinuated or deeply
or unequally cut in; the shape and colour of the flower is the same with
that now described, and the seed vessels the same, as far as I remember:
for I must confess, did not in writing take any particular note of them
though I have divers times seen them, neither did I ever compare them
with this description of Clusius; only I took some years agone an exact
figure of a branch with the upper leaves and flowers, whereof one is
expressed as they usally grow twining back, and the rest fair open, the
better to set forth the veins that are spread over it. There are also
expressed a cod or seed vessel, and one of the leaves that grow about the
middle of the stalk; all which are agreeable to Clusius' description in
mine opinion; wherefore I only give you the figure that I then drew, with
the title that I had it by.

The Place.

They are sown in gardens for the beauty of their flowers.

The Time.

They especially flower in May and June, the second year after they are
sown.

The Names.

Dame's Violet is called in Latin Viola matrionalis, and Viola hyemalis,
or Winter Violets, and Viola damascena: It is thought to be the Hesperis
of Pliny, lib. 21, Chap. 7, so called, for that it smells more, & more
pleasantly in the evening or night, than at any other time. They are
called in French Violettes des dames, & de domas, and Girofles des dames,
or Matrones Violettes: in English, Damask Violets, Winter Gillyflowers,
Rogue's Gillyflowers, and Close Scineys.

The Temperature.

The leaves of Dame's Violets are in taste sharp and hot, very like in
taste and faculty to Eruca or Rocket, and seemeth to be a kind thereof.

The Virtues.

The distilled water of the flowers hereof is counted to be a most
effectual thing to procure sweat.


CHAP. 123. Of White Satin-Flower



Fig. 707. White Satin-Flower (1) 

Fig. 708. Long-Codded Satin-Flower (2)
The Description.


1. Bolbonac or the Satin-Flower hath hard and round stalks, dividing
themselves into many other small branches, beset with leaves like Dame's
Violets, or Queen's Gillyflowers, somewhat broad and snipped about the
edges, and in fashion almost like Sauce-Alone, or Jack-by-the-hedge, but
that they are longer and sharper pointed. The stalks are charged or laden
with many flowers like the common Stock-Gillyflower, of a purple colour,
which being fallen, the seed cometh forth contained in a flat thin cod,
with a sharp point or prick at one end, in fashion of the moon, and
somewhat blackish. This cod is composed of three films or skins, whereof
the two outmost are of an overworn ash colour, and the innermost, or that
in the middle, whereon the seed doth hang or cleave, is thin and clear
shining, like a shred of white satin newly cut from the piece. The whole
plant dieth the same year that it hath borne seed, & must be sown yearly.
The root is compact of many tuberous parts like key-clogs, or like the
great Asphodel.

2. The second kind of Bolbonac or White Satin hath many great and broad
leaves, almost like those of the great Burdock: among which riseth up a
very tall stem of the height of four cubits, stiff, and of a whitish
green colour, set with the like leaves, but smaller. The flowers grow
upon the slender branches, of a purple colour, compact of four small
leaves like those of the Stock-Gillyflower; after which come thin long
cods of the same substance and colour of the former. The root is thick,
whereunto are fastened an infinite number of long thready strings; which
roots dieth not every year as the other doth, but multiplieth itself as
well by falling of the seed, as by new shoots of the root.

The Place.

These plants are set and sown in gardens; notwithstanding the first hath
been found wild in the woods about Pinner, and Harrow on the Hill, twelve
miles from London; and in Essex likewise about Hornchurch.

The second groweth about Watford, fifteen miles from London.

The Time.

They flower in April the next year after they be sown.

The Names.

They are commonly called Bolbonac by a barbarous name; we had rather call
it with Dodonæus & Clusius, Viola latifolia, and Viola lunaris, or as it
pleaseth most herbarists, Viola peregrina: the Brabanters name it
Penninck Bloemen, of the fashion of the cods, like after a sort to a
groat or testern, and Paesch Bloemen, because it always flowereth near
about the Feast of Easter: most of the later herbarists do call it
Lunaria: Others, Lunaria græca, either of the fashion of the seed, or of
the silver brightness that it hath, or of the middle skin of the cods,
when the two outermost skins or husks and seed likewise are fallen away.
We call this herb in English Penny-flower, or Money-flower, Silver Plate,
Prick-songwort; in Norfolk, Satin, and White Satin, and among our women
it is called Honesty: it seemeth to be the old herbarists' Thlaspi
alterum, or second Treacle Mustard, and that which Crateuas describeth,
called of divers Sinapi persicum; for as Dioscorides saith, Crateuas
maketh mention of a certain Thlaspi or Treacle Mustard, with broad leaves
and big roots, and such this Violet hath, which we surname Latifolia or
broad leafed: generally taken of all to be the great Lunaria, or
Moonwort.

Their Temperature and Virtues.

A. The seed of Bolbonac is of temperature hot and dry, and sharp of
taste, and is like in taste and force to the seed of Treacle Mustard; the
roots likewise are somewhat of a biting quality, but not much: they are
eaten with salads as certain other roots are.

B. A certain chirurgeon of the Helvetians composed a most singular
unguent for wounds of the leaves of Bolbonac and Sanicle stamped
together, adding thereto oil and wax. The seed is greatly commended
against the falling sickness.


CHAP. 124. Of Galen and Dioscorides' Moonworts or Madworts.



Fig. 709. Galen's Madwort (1) 

Fig. 710. Dioscorides' Moonwort or Madwort (2)
The Description.

1. This might be one of the number of the Horehounds, but that Galen used
it not for a kind thereof, but for Alysson, or Madwort: it is like in
form and show unto Horehound, and also in the number of the stalks, but
the leaves thereof are lesser, more curled, more hoary, & whiter, without
any manifest smell at all. The little coronets or spoky whorls that
compass the stalks round about are full of sharp prickles: out of which
grow flowers of a bluish purple colour like to those of Horehound. The
root is hard, woody, and diversely parted.

2. I have one growing in my garden, which is thought to be the true &
right Lunary or Moonwort of Dioscorides' description, having his first
leaves somewhat round, and afterward more long, whitish, and rough, or
somewhat woolly in handling: among which rise up rough brittle stalks,
some cubit high, divided into many branches, whereupon do grow many
little yellow flowers; the which being past, there follow flat and rough
husks of a whitish colour; in shape like little targets or bucklers,
wherein is contained flat seed, like to the seeds of Stock-Gillyflowers,
but bigger. The whole husk is of the same substance, fashion, and colour
that those are of the white Satin.

The Place.

These plants are sown now and then in gardens, especially for the
rareness of them; the seed beeing brought out of Spain and Italy, from
whence I received some for my Garden.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in May; the seed is ripe in August, the second
year after their sowing.

The Names.

1. Madwort, or Moonwort is called of the Latins Alyssum: in English,
Galen's Madwort: of some, Heal-dog: and it hath the name thereof, because
it is a present remedy for them that are bitten of a mad dog, as Galen
writeth; who in his second book De Antidotis, in Antonintis Cous his
composition describeth it in these words: Madwort is an herb very like to
Horehound, but rougher, and more full of prickles about the flowers: it
beareth a flower tending to blue.

2. The second by Dodonæus, Lobel, Camerarius and others, is reputed to be
the Alysson of Dioscorides; Gesner names it Lunaria aspera; and Columna,
Leucoium montanum lunatum.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Galen saith it is given unto such as are enraged by the biting of a
mad dog, which thereby are perfectly cured, as is known by experience
without any artificial application or method at all. The which experiment
if any shall prove, he shall find in the working thereof. It is of
temperature meanly dry, digesteth and something scoureth withal: for this
cause it taketh away the morphew and sun-burning, as the same author
affirmeth.


CHAP. 125. Of Campion of Constantinople.


Fig. 711. Campion of Constantinople

The Kinds.

There be divers sorts of Rose-Campions; some of the garden, and others of
the field: the which shall be divided into several chapters: and first of
the Campion of Constantinople.

The Description.

The Campion of Constantinople hath sundry upright stalks, two cubits high
and full of joints, with a certain roughness; and at every joint two
large leaves, of a brown green colour. The flowers grow at the top like
Sweet-Williams, or rather like Dame's Violets, of the colour of red lead,
or orange tawny. The root is somewhat sharp in taste.

There are divers varieties of this, as with white and blush coloured
flowers, as also a double kind with very large, double and beautiful
flowers of a vermilion colour like as the single one here described.

The Place.

The Flower of Constantinople is planted in gardens, and is very common
almost everywhere.

The white and blush single, and the double one are more rare, and not to
be found but in the gardens of our prime florists.

The Time.

It flowereth in June and July, the second year after it is planted, and
many years after; for it consisteth of a root full of life; and endureth
long, and can away with the cold of our climate.

The Names.

It is called Constantinopolitanus flos, and Lychnis chalcedonica: of
Aldrovandus, Flos creticus, or Flower of Candy: of the Germans, Flos
hierosolymitanus, or Flower of Jerusalem: in English, Flower of
Constantinople; of some, Flower of Bristol, or Nonsuch.

The Temperature and Virtues.

 Flower of Constantinople, besides that grace and beauty which it hath in
gardens and garlands, is, for ought we know, of no use, the virtues
thereof being not as yet found out.


CHAP. 126. Of Rose-Campion.



Fig. 712. Red Rose-Campion (1) 

Fig. 713. White Rose-Campion (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Rose-Campion hath round stalks very knotty and
woolly, and at every knot or joint there do stand two woolly soft leaves
like Mullein, but lesser, and much narrower. The flowers grow at the top
of the stalk, of a perfect red colour; which being past, there follow
round cods full of blackish seed. The root is long and thready.

2. The second Rose-Campion differs not from the precedent in stalks,
leaves, or fashion of the flowers: the only difference consisteth in the
colour; for the flowers of this plant are of a milk white colour, and the
other red.


Fig. 714. Double Rose-Campion (3)

3. This also in stalks, roots, leaves, and manner of growing differs not
from the former; but the flowers are much more beautiful, being composed
of some three or four ranks or orders of leaves lying each above other.

The Place.

The Rose Campion grows plentifully in most gardens.

The Time.

They flower from June to the end of August.

The Names.

The Rose Campion is called in Latin Dominarum rosa, Mariana rosa, cæli
flos: of Dioscorides, Lychnis coronaria, or sativa: Gaza Lacernula,
because the leaves thereof be soft, and fit to make wicks for candles,
acccording to the testimony of Dioscorides: it was called Lychnis or
Lychnides, that is, a torch, or such like light, according to the
signification of the word, clear, bright, and light-giving flowers: and
therefore they were called the Gardner's Delight, or the Gardener's Eye:
in Dutch, Christes eie: in French, Oeillets, & Oeillets Dieu: in High
Dutch, Marien Roszlin, and Himmel Roszlin.
The Temperature.

The seed of Rose-Campion, saith Galen, is hot and dry after a sort in the
second degree.

The Virtues.

A. The seed drunken in wine is a remedy for them that are stung with a
Scorpion, as Dioscorides testifieth.


CHAP. 127. Of Wild Rose-Campions.


Fig. 715. Kinds of Wild Rose-Campion (1-4)

The Description

1. The wild Rose-Campion hath many rough broad leaves somewhat hoary and
woolly; among which rise up long soft and hairy stalks branched into many
arms, set with the like leaves, but lesser. The flowers grow at the top
of the stalks, compact of five leaves of a reddish colour: the root is
thick and large, with some threads annexed thereto.

There also grows commonly wild with us another of this kind, with white
flowers, as also another that hath them of a light blush colour.

2. The Sea Rose-Campion is a small herb, set about with many green leaves
from the lower part upward; which leaves are thick, somewhat lesser and
narrower than the leaves of Sea Purslane. It hath many crooked stalks
spread upon the ground, a foot long in the upper part whereof there is a
small white flower, in fashion and shape like a little cup or box, after
the likeness of Behen album, or Spatling Poppy, having within the said
flower little threads of a black colour, in taste salt, yet not
unpleasant.

It is reported unto me by a gentleman one Mr. Tho. Hesket, that by the
seaside in Lancashire, from whence this plant came, there is another sort
hereof with red flowers.

3. This brings many stalks from one root, round, long, and weaker than
those of the first described, lying upon the ground: the leaves grow by
couples at each joint, long, soft, and hairy; amongst which alternately
grow the flowers, about the bigness of those of the first described, and
of a blush colour; and they are also succeeded by such seed-vessels,
containing a reddish seed. The root is thick and fibrous, yet commonly
outlives not the second year.

4. The fourth kind of wild Campions hath long and slender stems, dividing
themselves into sundry other branches, which are full of joints, having
many small and narrow leaves proceedingfrom the said joints, and those of
a whitish green colour. The flowers do grow at the top of the stalk, of a
whitish colour on the inner side, and purplish on the outer side,
consisting of five small leaves, every leaf having a cut in the end,
which maketh it of the shape of a fork; the seed is like the wild Poppy;
the root somewhat gross and thick, which also perisheth the second year.


Fig. 716. Kinds of Wild Campion (5-8)

5. The fifth kind of wild Campion hath three or four soft leaves somewhat
downy, lying flat upon the ground; among which riseth up an hairy ash-
coloured stalk, divided into divers branches; whereupon do grow at
certain spaces, even in the setting together of the stalk and branches,
small and grass-like leaves, hairy, and of an overworn dusky colour, as
is all the rest of the plant. The flowers grow at the top of the
branches, composed of five small forked leaves of a bright, shining red
colour. The root is small, and of a woody substance.

6. The sixth kind of wild Campion hath many long thick fat and hoary
leaves spread upon the ground, in shape and substance like those of the
garden Campion, but of a very dully overworn colour: among which rise up
small and tender stalks set at certain distances by couple with such like
leaves as the other, but smaller. The flowers do grow at the top of the
stalks in little tufts like those of Sweet Williams, of a red colour. The
root is small, with many thready strings fastened to it.

7. This grows some cubit high, with stalks distingushed with sundry
joints, at each whereof are set two leaves, green, sharp pointed, and
somewhat stiff: the flowers grow at the tops of the branches, like to
those of Muscipula or Catch-Fly, yet somewhat bigger, and of a dark red:
which past, the seed (which is ash-coloured, and somewhat large) is
contained in great cups or vessels covered with a hard and very much
crested skin or film; whence it is called Lychnis caliculis striatis, and
not Cauliculis striatis, as it is falsely printed in Lobel's Icones,
which some as foolishly have followed. The root is single, and not large,
and dies every year.

8. This at the top of the large fibrous and living root sendeth forth
many leaves somewhat green, and of some fingers' length, growing broader
by degrees, and at last ending again in a sharp point. The stalks are
some cubit high, set at each joint with two leaves as it were embracing
it with their footstalks; which leaves are less and less as they are
higher up, and more sharp pointed. At the tops of the branches grow the
flowers, consisting of five white leaves deeply cut in almost to the
middle of the flower, and have two sharp pointed appendices at the bottom
of each of them, and fine chives or threads come forth of their middles:
these when they fade contract and twine themselves up, and are succeeded
by thick and sharp pointed seed-vessels, containing a small round ash-
coloured seed.

The Place.

I have observed none of these, the first and second excepted, growing
wild with us. They grow of themselves near to the borders of ploughed
fields, meadows, and ditch banks, common in many places.

The Sea Campion groweth by the seaside in Lancashire, at a place called
Lytham, five miles from Wigan, from whence I had seeds sent me by Mr.
Thomas Hesketh; who hath heard it reported, that in the same place doth
grow of the same kind some with red flowers, which are very rare to be
seen. This plant (in my last Kentish simpling voyage, 1632, with Mr.
Thomas Hickes, Mr. Broad, &c.) I found growing in great plenty in the low
marsh ground in Thanet that lieth directly opposite to the town of
Sandwich.

The Time.

They flower and flourish most part of the summer even unto autumn.

The Names.

The wild Campion is called in Latin, Lychnis sylvestris: in English, Wild
Rose Campion.

The Temperature.

The temperature of these wild Campions are referred unto those of the
garden.

The Virtues.

A. The weight of two drams of the seed of Wild Campion beaten to powder
and drunk, doth purge choler by the stool, and it is good for them that
are stung or bitten of any venomous beast.


CHAP. 128. Of divers other wild Campions.



Fig. 717. Red Bachelor's Buttons (1) 

Fig. 718. White Bachelor's Buttons (2)
The Description

1. The first of these which we here give you is like in leaves, stalks,
roots, and manner of growing unto the ordinary wild Campion described in
the first place of the precedent chapter; but the flowers are very
double, composed of a great many red leaves thick packed together, and
they are commonly set in a short and broken husk or cod. Now the
similitude that these flowers have to the jagged cloth buttons anciently
worn in this kingdom gave occasion to our gentlewomen and other lovers of
flowers in those times to call them Bachelor's Buttons.

2. This differs not in shape from the last described, but only in the
colour of the flowers, which in this plant are white.


Fig. 719. Sorts of Wild Campion (3 & 4)

3. Neither in roots, Leaves, or stalks is there any difference between
this either degenerate or accidental variety of Bachelor's buttons, from
the two last mentioned, only the flowers hereof are of a greenish colour,
and sometimes through the midst of them they send up stalks, bearing also
tufts of the like double flowers.

4. This (saith Clusius) hath fibrous roots like to those of Primroses;
out of which come leaves of a sufficient magnitude, not much unlike those
of the great yellow Bear's-Ear, yet whiter, more downy, thick, and juicy.
The next year after the sowing thereof it tends up a stalk of two or
three cubits high, here and there sending forth a viscous and glutinous
juice, which detains and holds fast flies and such insects as do chance
to light thereon. At the top of the branches it yieldeth many flowers set
as it were in an umbel, even sometimes an hundred; yet sufficiently
small, considering the magnitude of the plant; and each of these consists
of five little yellowish green forked leaves.


Fig. 720. Creeping Mountain Campion (5)

5. The stalks of this are slender, jointed, and creeping like to those of
the greater Chickweed, and at each joint grow two leaves like those of
the Myrtle, or of Knot-Grass, yet somewhat broader. The flowers grow in
such long cups like as those of Saponaria, and are much less, yet of the
same colour. The root is small.

The Place.

1, 2. These are kept in many Gardens of this kingdom for their beauty,
especially the first, which is the more common.

4, 5. The fourth grows naturally in Candy; and the fifth by rivulets in
the mountainous places of Savoy.

The Time.

These flower in June and July with the other wild Campions.

The Names.

1. The first of these is Lychnis agrestis multiflora of Lobel; and
Ocymoides flore pleno of Camerarius.

2. The second is by Pena and Lobel also called Lychnis sylvestris
multiflora: it is the Ocymastrum multiflorum of Tabernamontanus.

3. Lobel hath this by the name of Lychnis agrestis abortiva multiplici
viride flore.

4. Clusius calls this Lychnis sylvestris latifolia; and he saith he had
the seed from Joseph de Casa Bona, by the name of Muscipula auriculæ ursi
facie: Bauhin hath it by the name of Lychnis auriculæ ursi facie.

5. This (according to Bauhin) was set forth by Matthiolus, by the name of
Cneoron aliud theophrasti: it is the Ocimoides repens polygonifolia flore
saponariæ, in the Adversaria: and Saponaria minor daleschampii, in the
Hist. Lugd. It is also Ocimoides alpinum, of Gesner: and Ocymoides
repens, of Camerarius.

The Nature and Virtues.

The natures and virtues of these, as of many others, lie hid as yet, and
so may continue, if chance, or a more curious generation than yet is in
being do not find them out.


CHAP. 129. Of Willow-Herb, or Loosestrife.



Fig. 721.  Yellow Willow-Herb (1) 

Fig. 722. Small Yellow Willow-Herb (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Willow-Herb hath long and narrow leaves of a grayish
green colour, in shape like the Willow or Sallow leaves, standing three
or four one against another at several diftances round about the stalk;
which toward the top divideth itself into many other branches, on the
tops whereof grow tufts of fair yellow flowers, consisting of five leaves
apiece, without smell: which being past there cometh forth seed like
Coriander. The root is long and slender.

2. This lesser of Clusius his description hath a stalk a cubit high, and
sometimes higher, firm, hard, and downy; about which at certain distances
grow commonly four leaves together, yet sometimes but three, and they are
soft and somewhat downy, lesser than those of the former, being first of
an acid taste, and then of an acrid; and they are usually marked on their
lower sides with black spots. About the top of the stalk, out of the
bosoms of each leaf come forth little branches bearing some few flowers,
or else footstalks carrying single flowers, which is more usual towards
the top of the stalk. The flowers are yellow, with somewhat a strong
smell, consisting of five sharp pointed yellow leaves, with so many
yellow threads in their middle. The root is jointed, or creeping here and
there, putting up new shoots.



Fig. 723. Yellow Willow-Herb with Bunched Flowers (3) 

Fig. 724. Tree Primrose (4) 
	3. This also may fitly be referred to the former. The stalk is a
cubit high, straight, and as it were jointed, naked oft times below by
the falling away of the leaves; but from the middle to the top set with
two leaves at a joint, like those of the former; and out of their bosoms
on short stalks grow round tufts of small yellow flowers as in bunches:
the root which creeps sends forth many small fibres at each joint. This
was set forth by Lobel under the title of Lysimachia lutea altera, or
Lysimachia salicaria: Dodonæus hath it by the name of Lysimachium
aquatile: and Clusius calls it Lysimachia lutea tertia, sive minor.

4. This Virginian hath been described and figured only by Prosper
Alpinus, under the title of Hyoscyamus virginianus: and by Mr. Parkinson,
by the name of Lysimachia lutea siliquosa virginiana: also Bauhin in the
Appendix of his Pinax hath a large description thereof, by the name of
Lysimachia lutea corniculata. The root hereof is longish, white, about
the thickness of one's thumb, from whence grows up a tall stalk divided
into many branches of an overworn colour, and a little hairy: the leaves
are like those of the former, but somewhat sinuated alongst their edges,
and having their middle vein of a whitish colour: toward the tops of the
branches amongst the leaves come up pretty thick cods, which growing
smaller on their tops sustain pretty large yellow flowers consisting of
four leaves, with a pistil in the middle upon which stand four yellowish
thrums in fashion of a cross; and there are also eight threads with their
pointels in the middles of them. These flowers have somewhat the smell of
a Primrose (whence Mr. Parkinson gave it the English name, which I have
also here given you.) After the flowers are fallen, the cods grow to be
some two inches long, being thicker below, and sharper at the top, and
somewhat twined, which in fine open themselves into four parts to shatter
their seed, which is black and small; and sown, it grows not the first
year into a stalk, but sends up many large leaves lying handsomely one
upon another Rose-fashion. It flowers in June, and ripens the seed in
August.



Fig. 725. Spiked Willow-Herb (5) 

Fig. 726. Codded Willow-Herb (6) 
	5. This kind of Willow-Herb in stalks and leaves is like the first,
but that the leaves are longer, narrower, and greener. The flowers grow
along the stalk toward the top, spike-fashion, of a fair purple colour:
which being withered turn into down, which is carried away with the wind.

6. This Lysimachia hath leaves and stalks like unto the former. The 
flower groweth at the top of the stalk, coming out of the end of a small
long cod, of a purple colour, in shape like a Stock-Gillyflower, and is
called of many Filius ante Patrem (that is, The son before the father)
because that the cod cometh forth first, having seeds therein, before the
flower doth show itself abroad. The leaves of this are more soft, large,
and hairy than any of the former: they are also snipped about the edges,
and the flower is large, wherein it differs from the twelfth, hereafter
described; and from the eleventh in the hairiness of the leaves, and
largeness of the flowers also, as you shall find hereafter.


Fig. 727. Kinds of Willow-Herb and Loosestrife (7-10)

7. This being thought by some to be a bastard kind, is (as I do esteem
it) of all the rest the most goodly and stately plant, having leaves like
the greater Willow or Osier. The branches come out of the ground in great
numbers, growing to the height of six foot, garnished with brave flowers
of great beauty, consisting of four leaves apiece, of an orient purple
colour, having some threads in the middle of a yellow colour. The cod is
long like the last spoken of; and full of downy matter, which flieth away
with the wind when the cod is opened.

8. This also, which is the Chamænerion of Gesner, as also his Epilobion,
a Violet or flower upon a cod, may justly challenge the next place.
Dodonæus calls it Pseudolysimachium purpureum minus: and it is in the
Histor. Lugdun. under the name of Linaria rubra. It groweth up with
stalks some foot high, set with many narrow leaves like those of
Toadflax, of a grayish colour, and the stalk is parted into divers
branches, which at their tops upon long cods carry purple flowers
consisting of four leaves apiece. The root is long, yellowish, and woody.

9. There is another bastard Loosestrife or Willow-Herb having stalks like
the other of his kind, whereon are placed long leaves snipped about the
edges, in shape like the great Veronica or Herb Fluellen. The flowers
grow along the stalks, spike-fashion, of a blue colour; after which
succeed small cods or pouches. The root is small and fibrous: it may be
called Lysimachia cœrulea, or blue Willow-Herb.

10. We have likewise another Willow-Herb that groweth near unto the banks
of rivers and watercourses. This I found in a watery lane leading from
the Lord Treasurer his house called Theobald's, unto the backside of his
slaughter-house, and in other places, as shall be declared hereafter.
Which Lobel hath called Lysimachia galericulata, or Hooded Willow-Herb.
It hath many small tender stalks trailing upon the ground, beset with
divers leaves somewhat snipped about the edges, of a deep green colour,
like to the leaves of Scordium or Water Germander: among which are placed
sundry small blue flowers fashioned like a little hood, in shape
resembling those of Ale-Hoof. The root is small and fibrous, dispersing
itself under the earth far abroad, whereby it greatly increaseth.

 

Fig. 728. Wild Willow-Herb (11) 

Fig. 729. Small Purple Willow-Herb (13) 
	11. The Wild Willow-Herb hath frail and very brittle stalks,
slender, commonly about the height of a cubit, and sometimes higher;
whereupon do grow sharp pointed leaves somewhat sinpped about the edges,
and set together by couples. There come forth at the first long slender
cods, wherein is contained small seed, wrapped in a cottony or downy
wool, which is carried away with the wind when the seed is ripe: at the
end of which cometh forth a small flower of a purplish colour; whereupon
it was called Filius ante Patrem, because the flower doth not appear
until the cod be filled with his seed. But there is another Son before
the Father, as hath been declared in the chapter of Meadow-Saffron. The
root is small and thready. This differeth from the sixth only in that the
leaves are less, and less hairy, and the flower is smaller.

12. The Wood Willow-Herb hath a slender stalk divided into other smaller
branches, whereon are set long leaves rough and sharp pointed, of an
overworn green colour. The flowers grow at the tops of the branches,
consisting of four or five small leaves, of a pale purplish colour
tending to whiteness: after which come long cods, wherein are little
seeds wrapped in a certain white down that is carried away with the wind.
The root is thready. This differs from the sixth in that it hath lesser
flowers. There is also a lesser sort of this hairy Lysimachia with small
flowers.

There are two more varieties of these codded Willow-Herbs; the one of
which is of a middle growth, somewhat like to that which is described in
the eleventh place, but less, with the leaves also snipped about the
edges, smooth, and not hairy: and it may fitly be called Lysimachia
siliquosa glabra media, or minor, The Lesser Smooth-Leaved Willow-Herb.
The other is also smooth-leaved, but they are lesser and narrower:
wherefore it may in Latin be termed, Lysimachia siliquosa glabra minor
angustifolia: in English, The Lesser Smooth and Narrow-Leaved Willow-
Herb.

13. This Lesser Purple Loosestrife of Clusius, hath stalks seldom
exceeding the height of a cubit, they are also slender, weak and
quadrangular, towards the top, divided into branches growing one against
another, the leaves are less and narrower than the common purple kind,
and growing by couples, unless at the top of the stalks and branches,
whereas they keep no certain order; and amongst these come here and
there-cornered cups containing flowers composed of six little red leaves
with threads in their middles. The root is hard, woody, and not creeping,
as in others of this kind, yet it endures all the year, and sends forth
new shoots. It flowers in June and July, and was found by Clusius in
divers wet meadows in Austria.

The Place.

1. The First Yellow Lysimachus, groweth plentifully in most meadows,
especially along the meadows as you go from Lambeth to Battersea near
London, and in many other places throughout England.

2, 3. The second and third I have not yet seen.

4. The fourth groweth in many gardens.

5. The fifth groweth in places of greater moisture, yea almost in the
running streams and standing waters, or hard by them. It groweth under
the Bishop's house wall at Lambeth, near the water of Thames, and in
moist ditches in most places of England.

6. The sixth groweth near the waters (and in the waters) in all places
for the most part.

7. The seventh groweth in Yorkshire in a place called the Hook, near unto
a close called a cow-pasture, from whence I had these plants, which do
grow in my garden very goodly to behold, for the decking up of houses and
gardens.

8. The eighth I have not yet found growing.

9. The ninth grows wild in some places of this kingdom, but I have seen
it only in gardens.

10. The tenth grows by the ponds' and waters' sides in Saint James his
Park, in Tothill Fields and many other places.

11. The eleventh groweth hard by the Thames, as you go from a place
called the Devil's Neckerchief to Redriff, near unto a stile that
standeth in your way upon the Thames bank, among the planks that do hold
up the same bank. It groweth also in a ditch side not far from the place
of execution, called Saint Thomas' Waterings.

The other varieties of this grow in wet places, about ditches, and in
woods and such like moist grounds.

The Time.

These herbs flower in June and July, and oftentimes until August.

The Names.

Lysimachia, as Dioscorides and Pliny write, took his name of a special
virtue that it hath in appeasing the strife and unruliness which falleth
out among oxen at the plough, if it be put about their yokes: but it
rather retaineth and keepeth the name Lysimachia of King Lysimachius the
son of Agathocles, the first finder out of the nature and virtues of this
herb, as Pliny saith in his 25th book chap. 7, which retaineth the name
of him unto this day, and was made famous by Erasistratus. Ruellius
writeth, that it is called in French Cornelle and Corneola: of the
Latins, Lysimachium: of Pliny, Lysimachia: of the later Writers,
Salicaria: in High Dutch, Wederick; in English, Willow-Herb, or Herb
Willow, and Loosestrife.

Chamænerium is called of Gesner, Epilobion; in English, Bay Willow, or
Bay Yellow herb.

The names of such as I have added have been sufficiently set forth in
their titles and histories.

The Nature.

The yellow Lysimachia, which is the chief and best for physic uses, is
cold and dry, and very astringent.

The Virtues.

A. The juice, according to Dioscorides, is good against the bloody flux,
being taken either by potion or clyster.

B. It is excellent good for green wounds, and stancheth the blood: being
also put into the nostrils, it stoppeth the bleeding at the nose.

C. The smoke of the burned herb driveth away serpents, and killeth flies
and gnats in a house; which Pliny speaketh of in his 25th book, chap. 8.
Snakes, saith he, crawl away at the smell of Loosestrife. The same author
affirmeth in his 26th book, last chap. that it dyeth hair yellow; which
is not very unlike to be done by reason the flowers are yellow.

D. The others have not been experimented, wherefore until some matter
worthy the noting doth offer itself unto our consideration, I will omit
further to discourse hereof.

E. The juice of yellow Lysimachia taken inwardly, stoppeth all flux of
blood, and the dysentery or bloody flux.

F. The juice put into the nose, stoppeth the bleeding of the same, and
the bleeding of wounds, and mightily closeth and healeth them, being made
into an unguent or salve.

G. The same taken in a mother suppository of wool or cotton, bound up
with threads (as the manner thereof is, well known to women) stayeth the
inordinate flux or overmuch flowing of women's terms.

H. It is reported, that the fume or smoke of the herb burned, doth drive
away flies and gnats, and all manner of venomous beasts.


CHAP. 130. Of Barrenwort.


Fig. 730. Barrenwort

The Description

This rare and strange plant was sent to me from the French King's
herbarist, Robinus, dwelling in Paris at the sign of the Black Head, in
the street called Du Bout du Monde, in English, The End of the World.
This herb I planted in my garden, & in the beginning of May it came forth
of the ground, with small, hard & woody crooked stalks: whereupon grow
rough & sharp pointed leaves, almost like Alliaria, that is to say,
Sauce-Alone, or Jack-by-the-hedge. Lobel and Dodonæus say, that the
leaves are somewhat like ivy; but in my judgement they are rather like
Alliara, somewhat snipped about the edges, and turning themselves flat
upright, as a man turneth his hand upwards when he receiveth money, upon
the same stalks come forth small flowers, consisting of four leaves,
whose outsides are purple, the edges on the inner side red, the bottom
yellow, & the middle part of a bright red colour, and the whole flower
somewhat hollow. The root is small, and creepeth almost upon the
uppermost face of the earth. It beareth his seed in very small cods like
Saracen's Confound, (to wit that of our author formerly described, Chap
102) but shorter: which came not to ripeness in my garden, by reason that
it was dried away with the extreme and unaccustomed heat of the Sun,
which happened in the year 1590, since which time from year to year it
bringeth seed to perfection. Further, Dioscorides and Pliny do report,
that it is without flower or seed.

The Place.

It groweth in the moist meadows of Italy about Bologna and Vicenza: it
groweth in the garden of my friend Mr. John Milion in Old Street; and
some other gardens about town.

The Time.

It flowereth in April and May, when it hath taken fast hold and setled
itself in the earth a year before.

The Names.

It is called Epimedium: I have thought good to call it Barrenwort in
English; not hecause that Dioscorides saith it is barren both of flowers
and seeds, but because (as some authors affirm) being drunk it is an
enemy to conception.

The Temperature and Virtues.

Galen affirmeth that it is moderately cold, with a watery moisture: we
have as yet no use hereof in physic.


CHAP. 131. Of Fleabane.



Fig. 731. Great Fleabane (1) 

Fig. 732. Small Fleabane (2)
The Description.

1. This great Fleawort or Fleabane, from a thick long living fibrous root
sends forth many stalks of some yard high or more; hard, woody, rough,
fat, and of an overworn colour: the leaves are many, without order, and
alternately embrace the stalks, twice as big as those of the Olive tree,
rough and fat, being as it were besmeared with a gumminess or tattiness,
and of a yellowish green colour: the flowers grow after a sort spoke
fashion, standing at the ends of footstalks coming out of the bosoms of
the leaves, and they are yellow and round almost like to Groundsel, and
fly away in down like as they do; the seed is small and ash-coloured. The
whole plant is fatty and glutinous, with a strong, yet not altogether
unpleasant smell. This grows not that I know of in these cold countries,
unless sown in gardens. Clusius found it by Lisbon, and in divers places
of Spain. He, as also Dodonæus, Lobel, and others, call this Conyza
maior, and it is thought to be the Conyzamas of Thoephrastus, and Conyza
maior of Dioscorides.

2. The lesser seldom sends up more than one stalk, and that of a cubit
high, yet usually not so much: it is divided into little branches, and
also rough and glutinous as the precedent, but more green. The leaves are
three times less than those of the former, somewhat shaped like those of
Toadflax, yet hairy and unctuous; the tops of the branches as in the
bigger, carry less, and less shining and sightly flowers, vanishing in
like sort into down. The root is single and annual, and the whole plant
more fruiting than the former. This is judged the Conyza fœmina of
Theophrastus; and Conyza minor of Dioscorides; it is the Con. minor of
Gesner, Lobel, Clusius and others. It grows in divers parts of Spain and
Provence in France, but not here, unless in gardens.



Fig. 733. Middle Fleabane (3) 

Fig. 734. Dwarf Fleabane (4) 
	3. The root of this middle kind is pretty large and fibrous, from
whence ariseth a branched stalk of some cubit high, engirt at certain
spaces with thick, rough, grayish green leaves: at the tops of the
branches grow pretty fair yellow flowers of the bigness of a little
Marigold; which fading turn to down, and are carried away with the wind.
This flowers in July and August, and may be found growing in most places
about rivers and pond sides, as in St. James his Park, Tothill Fields,
&c. This is Conyza media of Matthiolus, Dodonæus, and others. Some have
referred it unto the Mints, as Fuchsius, who makes it Calaminthæ 3.
genus; and Lonicerus, who calls it Mentha Lutea. In Cheapside the herb-
women call it Herb Christopher, and sell it to empirics, who with it (as
they say) make medicines for the eyes; but against what affect of them,
or with what success I know not.

4. In like places or rather such as are plashy in winter this may be
plentifully found growing. The roots are small and fibrous; from whence
ariseth a branched stalk some foot high, set with small longish leaves
somewhat roundish pointed, soft also and woolly, with a smell not
altogether unpleasant, like as the last described: the flowers are
composed of many yellowish threads like to the middle part of Camomile
flowers, or those of Tansy: and as the former, turn into down, and are
carried away with the wind; it flowers in July and August; This is the
Conyza minor of Tragus, Matthiolus, and others: Lobel and Dodonæus call
it Conyza minima.



Fig. 735. Great Jagged-Leaved Fleabane (5) 

Fig. 736. Water Snipped Fleabane (6) 
	5. This cut-leaved Fleabane hath small fibrous roots, from which
arise thick, crested, & hollow stalks, divided towards the tops into
sundry branches; the leaves that encompass the stalk are gashed, or else
only sinuated on the edges: the flowers are star-fashion and yellow, and
also fly away in down; the whole plant is covered over with a soft and
tender down, and hath somewhat the smell of honey. This is a variety of
the third, and is called by Dodonæus Conyza media species altera, Lobel
names it Conyza helenitis foliis laciniatis.

6. This hath a large root which sends forth many fibres, and a crested
hollow stalk some two cubits or more high, which is unorderly set, with
long, yet narrow snipped leaves somewhat hairy and sharp pointed: the top
is divided into branches, which bear pretty large yellow flowers, made
after the manner of those of Ragwort, and like as they, are also carried
away with the wind. This Thalius calls Conyza maxima serratifolia. It is
the Lingua maior of Dalechampius, and the Consolida palustris of
Tabernamontanus. It groweth near water sides, and flowers towards the
latter end of summer: I have not yet heard that it doth grow wild amongst
us.


Fig. 737. Kinds of Fleabane (7-10)

7. The stalks of this are about a foot high, straight; stiff, hard, and
covered with a whitish down; the leaves at the root grow upon long
stalks; and are soft and hairy; but those which are higher up, have a
short, or else no stalk at all; and rubbed, they yield no unpleasant
smell; and tasted, theyare somewhat bitter and acrid. The flowers that
grow upon the tops of the branches are large, and fashioned like those of
Elecampane, and are of the same yellow colour. The root is long, slender
and blackish, creeping and putting up new stalks; it hath many white
fibres and a resinous smell. Clusius found it growing on dry hilly places
in Austria, and calls it Conyza 3. austriaca.

8. This which Lobel sets forth under the title of Conyza helenitis
mellita incana, I take to be the same plant that I last figured and
described out of Clusius, only the root is better expressed in Clusius
his figure; otherwise by the figures I cannot find any difference, though
Bauhin reckon it up in his Pinax, as differing therefrom.

9. This also seems not much to differ from the last mentioned, but only
in the hairiness of the leaves and stalks, and that the flowers are
smaller. This Lobel calls Conyza helenitis mellita incana: helenitis,
because the flowers and leaves have some semblance of Elecampane; and
mellita, for that they smell somewhat like honey. These last grow upon
mountains, but none of them with us in England that I can yet hear of.

10. This hath a small fibrous and yellowish root, of a very hot and
biting taste, which sends up divers longish leaves about the head
thereof; the stalk is some foot and half high, and set alternately with
twined, longish, narrow and somewhat rough leaves of an overworn green
colour; the top of the stalk and branches are adorned with flowers set in
longish leafy heads like those of Hieracium: the outer little leaves are
of a faint blue colour, and the inner threads are yellow. It flowers in
August, and the flowers quickly turn into down, and are carried away with
the wind. It grows on many chalky hills, and I first observed it in the
company of Mr. George Bowles, Mr. John Bugs and others, close by
Farmingham in Kent; and the last year Mr. William Broad found it growing
at the Blockhouse at Gravesend. Tragus calls it Tinctorius flos alter:
Dodonæus because the flower quickly turns to down makes it Erigeron
quartum: and Gesner for that the root is hot, and draws rheum like as
Pellitory of Spain, which therefore is used against the toothache, names
it Dentelaria: he also calls it Conyza muralis, and Conyzoides cærulea:
Tabernamontanus also calls it Conyza cærulea: and lastly Fabius Columna
hath it by the name of Amellus montanus, to which kind it may in mine
opinion be as fitly reserved, as to these Conyzas.

The Place, Time, and Names.

All these have been sufficiently shown in their particular titles and
descriptions.

The Nature.

Conyza is hot and dry in the third degree.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves and flowers be good against the strangury, the jaundice,
and the gnawing or griping of the belly.

B. The same taken with vinegar, helpeth the epilepsy or falling sickness.

C. If women do sit over the decoction thereof, it greatly easeth their
pains of the mother.

D. The herb burned, where flies, gnats, fleas, or any venomous things
are, doth drive them away.


CHAP. 132. Of Starwort.



Fig. 738. Starwort (1)

Fig. 739. Italian Starwort (2)
The Description.

1. The first kind of Aster or Inguinalis, hath large broad leaves like
Verbascum salvifolium or the great Conyza: among which riseth up a stalk
four or five handfuls high, hard, rough and hairy, beset with leaves like
Rose-Campions, of a dark green colour. At the top of the said stalks come
forth flowers, of a shining and glistering golden colour; and underneath
about these flowers grow five or six long leaves, sharp pointed and
rough, not much in shape unlike the fish called Stella marina.[Starfish]
The flowers turn into down, and are carried away with the wind. The root
is fibrous, of a binding and sharp taste.

2. The second called Italian Starwort hath leaves not much unlike
Marigolds, but of a dark green colour, and rough, and they are somewhat
round at the upper end: the stalks are many, and grow some cubit high;
and at their tops are divided into sundry branches, which bear fair
blueish-purple flowers, yellow in their middles, and shaped like
Marigolds, and almost of the same bigness; whence some have called them
blue Marigolds.



Fig. 740. Mountain & Hairy Starworts
(3 & 4) 

Fig. 741. Fleabane Starwort (5)
	3. The third kind hath leaves so like Italian Starwort, that a man
can scarcely at the sudden distinguish the one from the other. The single
stalk is a cubit long, upright and slender; on the top whereof grow fair
yellow flowers, like those of Enula campana, and they fly away in down:
the root is small and thready.

4. The fourth kind in tallness and flower is not much unlike that last
before specified, but in stalk and leaves more hairy, and longer,
somewhat like our small Hound's-Tongue; and the roots are less fibrous or
thready than the former.

5. There is another sort that hath a brown stalk, with leaves like the
small Conyza. The flowers are of a dark yellow, which turn into down that
flieth away with the wind like Conyza. The root is full of threads or
strings.


Fig. 742. Kinds of Starwort (6-9)

6. There is also another that hath leaves like the great Campion,
somewhat hairy; amongst which come up crooked crambling stalks, leaning
lamely many ways. Whereupon do grow fair yellow flowers, star-fashion;
which past, the cups become so hard, that they will scarcely be broken
with one's nails to take forth the seed. The root is long and straight as
a finger, with some few strings annexed unto the uppermost part thereof.
It groweth wild in some parts of Spain.

7. There groweth another kind of Starwort, which hath many leaves like
Scabious, but thinner, and of a more green colour, covered with a woolly
hairiness, sharp and bitter in taste; amongst which springeth a round
stalk more than a cubit high, often growing unto a reddish colour; set
with the like leaves, but smaller and sharper pointed, dividing itself
toward the top into some few branches; whereon do grow large yellow
flowers like Doronicum or Sonchus. The root is thick and crooked. This is
Aster pannonicus maior, sive tertius of Clusius and his austriacus
primus.

8. We have seen growing upon wild mountains another sort, which hath
leaves much lesser than the former, somewhat like to the leaves of
Willow, of a fair green colour, which do adorn and deck up the stalk even
to the top; whereupon do grow yellow flowers star-fashion, like unto the
former. The root is small and tender, creeping far abroad, whereby it
mightily increaseth. This is Aster pannonicus salignis foliis, sive aster
4 austriacus 2 of Clusius. It is Bubonium luteum of Tabernamontanus.

9. Clusius hath set forth a kind that hath an upright stalk, somewhat
hairy, two cubits high, beset with leaves somewhat woolly like to those
of the Sallow, having at the top of the stalk fair yellow flowers like
Enula campana, which turn into down that is carried away with the wind;
the root is thick, with some hairs or threads fastened thereto. This is
Aster lanuginoso folio, sive 5 of Clusius. It is Aster flore luteo of
Tabernamontanus.



Fig. 743. Narrow-Leaved Starwort (10) 

Fig. 744. Dwarf Daisy-Leaved Starwort (11).
	10. He hath likewise described another sort, that hath leaves,
stalks, flowers, and roots like the ninth, but never groweth to the
height of one cubit: it bringeth forth many stalks, and the leaves that
grow disorderly upon them are narrower, blacker, harder and sharper
pointed than the former, not unlike those of the common Ptarmica, yet not
snipped about the edges: the flowers are yellow and like those of the
last described, but less. This is the Aster angustifolius sive sextus of
Clusius.

11. There is likewise set forth in his Pannonic Observation, a kind of
Aster that hath many small hairy leaves like the common great Daisy:
among which riseth up an hairy stalk of a foot high, having at the top
fair blue flowers inclining to purple, with their middle yellowish, which
turn (in the time of seeding) into a woolly down, that flieth away with
the wind. The whole plant hath a drying, binding, and bitter taste. The
root is thready like the common Daisy, or that of Scabious. This is Aster
alpinus cæruleo flore, sive 7 of Clusius.

12. There are kept in the gardens of Mr. Tradescant, Mr. Tuggy, and
others, two Starworts different much from all these formerly mentioned:
the first of them is to be esteemed, for that it flowers in October and
November when as few other flowers are to be found: the root is large and
living, which sends up many small stalks some two cubits high, woody,
slender, and not hollow, and towards the top they are divided into
abundance of small twiggy branches: the leaves that grow alternately upon
the stalks, are long, narrow, and sharp pointed, having four or six
scarce discernable nicks on their edges: the flowers which plentifully
grow on small branches much after the manner of those of Virga aurea,
consist of twelve white leaves set in a ring, with many threads in their
middles; which being young are yellow, but becoming elder and larger they
are of a reddish colour, and at length turn into down. I have thought fit
to call this plant, not yet described by any that I know of, being
reported to be a Virginian, by the name of Aster virginianus fruticosus,
Shrubby Starwort.

13. This which in gardens flowers one month before the former, grows not
so high, neither are the stalks so straight, but often crooked, yet are
they divided into many branches which bear small bluish flowers like
those of the former: the leaves are longish and narrow. This also is said
to have come from Canada or Virginia; and it may be called Aster
fruticosus minor, Small Shrubby Starwort.

The Place

The kinds of Starwort grow upon mountains and hilly places, and sometimes
in woods and meadows lying by rivers' sides.

The two first kinds do grow upon Hampstead Heath four miles from London,
in Kent upon Southfleet Down, and in many other such downy places, saith
our author. I could never yet find nor hear of any of these Starflowers
to grow wild in this kingdom, but have often seen the Italian Starwort
growing in gardens. These two kinds that our author mentions to grow on
Hampstead Heath and in Kent, are no other than two Hieracia, or
Hawkweeds, which are much differing from these.

The Time.

They flower from July to the end of August

The Names.

This herb is called in Latin, Aster atticus, bubonium, and inguinalis: of
some, Asterion, Asteriscon, and Hyophthalmon: in High Dutch, Megetkraut:
in Spanish, Bobas: In French, Estrille, and Asper goutte menne: in
English, Starwort and Sharewort.

The Nature.

It is of a mean temperature in cooling and drying. Galen saith it doth
moderately waste and consume, especially while it is yet soft and new
gathered.

That with the blue flower or purple, is thought to be that which is of
Virgil is called flos Amellus: of which he maketh mention in the fourth
book of his Georgics.

Est etiam flos in pratis, cui nomen Amello
Fecere agricolæ facilis quærentibus herba;
Namque uno ingentem tollit de cespite sylvam
Aureus ipse, sed in foliis, quæ plurima circum
Funduntur, violæ sublucet purpura nigræ.

In English thus.

In meads there is a flower Amello named,
By him that seeks it easy to be found,
For that it seems by many branches framed
Into a little wood: like gold the ground
Thereof appears, but leaves that it beset
Shine in the colour of the violet.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Aster or Inguinalis stamped, and applied unto botches,
imposthumes, and venereous buboes (which for the most part happen in
inguine, that is, the flank or share) doth mightily maturate and
suppurate them, whereof this herb Aster took the name Inguinalis.

B. It helpeth and prevaileth against the inflammation of the fundament,
and the falling forth of the gut called Saccus ventris.

C. The flowers are good to be given unto children against the squinancy,
and the falling sickness.


CHAP. 133. Of Woad.



Fig. 745. Garden Woad (1) 

Fig. 746. Wild Woad (2)
The Description.

1. Glastum or Garden Woad hath long leaves of a bluish green colour. The
stalk groweth two cubits high, set about with a great number of such
leaves as come up first, but smaller, branching itself at the top into
many little twigs, whereupon do grow many small yellow flowers: which
being past, the seed cometh forth like little blackish tongues: the root
is white and single.

2. There is a wild kind of woad very like unto the former in stalks,
leaves, and fashion, saving that the stalk is tenderer, smaller, and
browner, and the leaves and little tongues narrower; otherwise there is
no difference betwixt them.

The Place.

The tame or garden Woad groweth in fertile fields, where it is sown: the
wild kind grows where the tame kind hath been sown.

The Time.

They flower from June to September.

The Names.

Woad is called in Latin Isatis, and Glastum; Cæsar in his fifth book of
the French wars saith, that all the Britons do colour themselves with
Woad, which giveth a blue colour: the which thing also Pliny in his 22nd
book, chap. 1, doth testify: "In France they call it Glastum which is
like unto Plantain, wherewith the British wives and their daughters are
coloured all over, and go naked in some kind of sacrifices." It is
likewise called of divers Guadum: of the Italians, Guado; a word as it
seemeth, wrung out of the word Glastum: in Spanish and French, Pastel: in
Dutch, Weet: in English, Woad, and Wade.

The Nature.

Garden Woad is dry without sharpness: the wild Woad drieth more, and is
more sharp and biting.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of Woad drunken is good for such as have any stopping or
hardness in the milt or spleen, and is also good for wounds or ulcers in
bodies of a strong constitution, as of country people, and such as are
accustomed to great labour and hard coarse fare.

B. It serveth well to dye and colour cloth, profitable to some few; and
hurtful to many.


CHAP. 134. Of Cow Basil.



Fig. 747. Cow Basil (1) 

Fig. 748. Quick-Fading Flower (2)
The Description.

1. This kind of wild Woad hath fat long leaves like Valeriana rubra
dodonæi, or Behen rubrum: the stalk is small and tender, having thereupon
little purple flowers consisting of four leaves; which being past, there
come square cornered husks full of round black seed like Coleworts. The
whole plant is covered over with a clammy substance like bird-lime, so
that in hot weather the leaves thereof will take flies by the wings (as
Muscipula doth) in such manner that they cannot escape away.

2. Ephemerum matthioli hath long fat and large leaves like unto Woad, but
much less; among which riseth up a round stalk a cubit high, dividing
itself into many branches at the top, the which are set with many small
white flowers consisting of five leaves, which being past, there follow
little round bullets containing the seed. The root is small and full of
fibres.

The Place.

Cow Basil groweth in my garden: but Ephemerum is a stranger as yet in
England.

The Time.

They flower in May and June.

The Names.

1. Cow Basil is by Cordus called Thamecnemon: by some, according to
Gesner, Lychnis & Perfoliata rubra: Lobel terms it Isatis sylvestris, and
Vaccaria: the last of which names is retained by most late writers.

2. This by Lobel is laid to be Ephemerum of Matthiolus; yet I think
Matthiolus his figure, (which was in this place formerly) was but a
counterfeit; and so also do Columna and Bauhin judge of it; and Bauhin
thinks this of Lobel to be some kind of Lysimachia.

The Nature and Virtues.

A. I find not any thing extant concerning the Nature and Virtues of
Vaccaria or Cow Basil. Ephemerum (as Dioscorides writeth) boiled in wine,
and the mouth washed with the decoction thereof, taketh away the tooth-
ache.


CHAP. 135. Of Sesamoides, or Bastard Weld or Woad.



Fig. 749. Great Bastard Woad (1) 

Fig. 750. Small Bastard Woad (2)
The Description.

1. The great Sesamoides hath very long leaves and many, slender toward
the stalk, and broader by degrees toward the end, placed confusedly upon
a thick stiff stalk: on the top whereof grow little foolish or idle white
flowers: which being past, there follow small seeds like unto Canary seed
that birds are fed withal. The root is thick, and of a woody substance.

2. This lesser Sesamoides of Salamanca, from a long living, white, hard,
and pretty thick root sends up many little stalks set thick with small
leaves like those of Line; and from the middle to the top of the stalk
grow many flowers, at first of a greenish purple, and then putting forth
yellowish threads; out of the midst of which appear as it were four green
grains, which when the flower is fallen grow into little cods full of a
small blackish seed. It grows in a stony soil upon the hills near
Salamanca, where it flowers in May, and shortly after perfects his seed.


Fig. 751. Buck's-Horn Gum Succory (3)

3. Our author formerly in the Chapter of Chondrilla spoke (in Dodonæus
his words) against the making of this plant a Sesamoides; for of this
plant were the words of Dodonæus; which are these: Divers (saith he) have
taken the plant with blue flowers to be Sesamoides parvum, but without
any reason; for that Sesamoides hath borrowed his name from the likeness
it hath with Sesamum: but this herb is not like to Sesamum in any one
point, and therefore I think it better referred unto the Gum Succories;
for the flowers have the form and colour of Gum Succory, and. it yieldeth
the like milky juice. Our author it seems was either forgetful or
ignorant of what he had said; for here he made it one, and described it
merely by the figure and his fancy. Now I following his tract, have
(though unfitly) put it bere, because there was no history nor figure of
it formerly there, but both here, though false and unperfect. This plant
hath a root somewhat like that of Goat's-Beard from which arise leaves
rough and hairy, divided or cut in on both sides after the manner of
Buck's-Horn, and larger than they. The stalk is some foot high, divided
into branches, which on their tops carry flowers of a fair blue colour
like those of Succory, which stand in rough scaly heads like those of
Knapweed.

The Place.

These do grow in rough and stony places, but are all strangers in
England.
The Time.

These flower in May and June, and shortly after ripen their seed.

The Names.

1. I think none of these to be the Sesamoides of the ancients: The first
is set forth by Clusius under the name Sesamoides salamanticum magnum: it
is the Muscipula altera muscoso flore of Lobel: Viscago maior of
Camerarius.

2. This also Clusius and Lobel have set forth by the name Sesamoides
salamanticum parvum.

3. Matthiolus, Camerarius, and others have set this forth for Sesamoides
parvum: in the Historia Lugd. it is called Catanance quorundam: but most
fitly by Dodonæus Chondrillæ species tertia, The third kind of Gum-
Succory.

The Temperature.

Galen affirmeth that the seed containeth in itself a bitter quality, and
saith that it heateth, breaketh, and scoureth.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides affirmeth, that the weight of an half-penny of the seed
drunk with mead or honeyed water purgeth phlegm and choler by the stool.

B. The same being applied doth waste hard knots and swellings.


CHAP. 136. Of Dyer's Weed.


Fig. 752. Dyer's Weed or Yellow Weed

The Description.

Dyer's weed hath long narrow and greenish yellow leaves, not much unlike
to Woad, but a great deal smaller and narrower; from among which cometh
up a stalk two cubits high, beset with little narrow leaves: even to the
top of the stalk come forth small pale yellow flowers, closely clustering
together one above another, which do turn into small buttons, cut as it
were cross-wise, wherein the seed is contained. The root is very long and
single.

The Place.

Dyers weed groweth of itself in moist, barren, and untiled places, in and
about villages almost everywhere.

The Names.

Pliny, lib. 33 cap. 5 maketh mention by the way of this herb, and calleth
it Lutea: Vitruvius in his seventh book, Lutum: it is the Anticarhinum of
Tragus: & Pseudostruthium of Mathiolus: Virgil, in his Bucolics, Eclog 4,
calls it also Lutum; in English, Weld, or Dyer's Weed.

The Time.

This herb flourisheth in June and July.

The Nature.

It is hot and dry of temperature.

The Virtues.

A. The root as also the whole herb heats and dries in the third degree:
it cuts, attenuates, resolveth, opens, digests. Some also commend it
against the punctures and bites of venomous creatures, not only outwardly
applied to the wound, but also taken inwardly in drink.

B. Also it is commended against the infection of the plague: some for
these reasons term it Theriacaria; Matthiolus.


CHAP. 137. Of Stavesacre.


Fig. 753. Stavesacre

The Description.

Stavesacre hath straight stalks of a brown colour, with leaves cloven or
cut into sundry sections, almost like the leaves of the wild Vine. The
flowers do grow upon short stems, fashioned somewhat like unto our common
Monk's-Hood, of a perfect blue colour; which being past, there succced
welted husks like those of Wolf's-Bane, wherein is contained triangular
brownish rough seed. The root is of a woody substance, and perisheth when
it hath perfected his seed.

The Place.

It is with great difficulty preserved in our cold countries, albeit in
some mild winters I have kept it covered over with a little fern, to
defend it from the injury of the March wind, which doth more harm unto
plants that come forth of hot countries, than doth the greatest frosts.

The Time.

It flowereth in June, and the seed is ripe the second year of his sowing.

The Names.

It is called in Latin, Herba Pedicularis, and Peduncularia, as Marcellus
reporteth. Pliny in his 26th Book chap. 13 seemeth to name it Uva
taminia: of some, Pituitaria, and Passula montana: in shops, Staphis-
agria: in Spanish, Yerva piolente: in French, Herbe aux poulx: in High
Dutch, Lens kraut: in Low Dutch, Luyscruit: in English, Stavesacre,
Lousewort, and Louse-powder.

The Temperature.

The seeds of Stavesacre are extreme hot, almost in the fourth degree, of
a biting and burning quality.

The virtues.

A. Fifteen seeds of Stavesacre taken with honeyed water, will cause one
to vomit gross phlegm and slimy matter, but with great violence, and
therefore those that have taken them ought to walk without staying, and
to drink honeyed water, because it bringeth danger of choking and burning
the throat, as Dioscarides noteth. And for this cause they are rejected,
and not used of the physicians, either in provoking vomit, or else in
mixing them with other inward medicines.

B. The seed mingled with oil or grease, driveth away lice from the head,
beard, and all other parts of the body, and cureth all scurvy itch and
manginess.

C. The same boiled in vinegar, and holden in the mouth, assuageth the
tooth-ache.

D. The same chewed in the mouth draweth forth much moisture from the
head, and cleanseth the brain, especially if a little of the root of
Pellitory of Spain be added thereto.

E. The same tempered with vinegar is good to be rubbed upon lousy
apparel, to destroy and drive away lice.

F. The seeds hereof are perilous to be taken inwardly without good
advice, and correction of the same: and therefore I advise the ignorant
not to be over-bold to meddle with it, sith it is so dangerous that many
times death ensueth upon the taking of it.


CHAP. 138. Of Palma Christi



Fig. 754. Palma Christi (1) 

Fig. 755. Palma Christi of America (2)
The Description.

1. Ricinus, Palma Christi, or Kik hath a great round hollow stalk five
cubits high, of a brown colour, dyed with a bluish purple upon green. The
leaves are great and large, parted into sundry sections or divisions,
fashioned like the leaves of a fig-tree, but greater, spread or wide open
like the hand of a man; and hath toward the top a bunch of flowers
clustering together like a bunch of grapes, whereof the lowest are of a
pale yellow colour, and wither away without bearing any fruit; and the
uppermost are reddish, bringing forth three-cornered husks which contain
seed as big as a kidney bean, of the colour and shape of a certain vermin
which haunteth cattle, called a tick.

2. This Palma Christi of America grows up to the height and bigness of a
small tree or hedge shrub, of a woody substance, whose fruit is expressed
by the figure, being of the bigness of a great bean, somewhat long, and
of a blackish colour, rough and scaly.

The Place.

The first kind of Ricinus or Palma Christi groweth in my garden and in
many other gardens likewise.

The Time.

Ricinus or Kik is sown in April, and the seed is ripe in the end of
August

The Name, and cause thereof.

Ricinus (whereof mention is made in the fourth chapter and sixth verse of
the prophecy of Jonah) was called of the Talmudists, Kik, for in the
Talmud we read thus, Velo beschemen kik, that is, in English, And not
with the oil of Kik: which oil is called in the Arabian tongue, Alkerva,
as Rabbi Samuel the son of Hophni testifieth. Moreover, a certain Rabbi
moveth a question, saying, what is Kik? Hereunto Resch Lachish maketh
answer in Ghemara, saying, Kik is nothing else but Jonas his Kikaijon.
And that this is true, it appeareth by that name Kike: which the ancient
Greek physicians, and the Ægyptians used; which Greek word cometh of the
Hebrew word Kik. Hereby it appeareth, that the old writers long ago
called this plant by the true and proper name. But the old Latin writers
knew it by the name Cucurbita, which evidently is manifested by an
history which Saint Agustine recordeth in his Epistle to Saint Jerome,
where in effect he writeth thus; That name Kikaijon is of small moment,
yet so small a matter caused a great tumult in Africa. For on a time a
certain Bishop having an occasion to entreat of this which is mentioned
in the fourth chapter of Jonah his prophecy (in a collation or sermon,
which he made in his cathedral church or place of assembly) said, that
this plant was called Cucurbita, a Gourd, because it increased unto so
great a quantity, in so short a space, or else (saith he) it is called
Hedera. Upon the novelty and untruth of this his doctine, the people were
greatly offended, and thereof suddenly arose a tumult and hurly-burly; so
that the bishop was enforced to go to the Jews, to ask their judgment as
touching the name of this plant. And when he had received of them the
true name, which was Kikaijon: he made his open recantation, and
confessed his error, & was justly accused for a falsisier of the holy
scripture. The Greeks called this plant also Ricinus, by reason of the
similitude that the seed hath with that insect, to wit, a tick.

The Nature.

The seed of Palma Christi, or rather Kik, is hot and dry in the third
degree.

The Virtues.

A. Ricinus his seed taken inwardly, openeth the belly, and causeth vomit,
drawing slimy phlegm and choler from the places possessed therewith.

B. The broth of the meat supped up, wherein the seed hath been sodden, is
good for the colic and the gout, and against the pain in the hips called
sciatica: it prevaileth also against the jaundice and dropsy.

C. The oil that is made or drawn from the seed is called Oleum Cicinum:
in shops it is called Oleum de Cherva. It heateth and drieth, as was said
before, and is good to anoint and rub all rough hardness and scurviness
gotten by itch.

D. This oil, as Rabbi David Chimchi writeth, is good against extreme
coldness of the body.


CHAP. 139. Of Spurge.


Fig. 756. Kinds of Spurge (1-4)

The Description.

1. The first kind of Sea Spurge riseth forth of the sands, or beach of
the sea, with sundry reddish stems or stalks growing upon one single
root, of a woody substance: and the stalks are beset with small, fat, and
narrow leaves like unto the leaves of Flax. The flowers are yellowish,
and grow out of little dishes or saucers like the common kind of Spurge.
After the flowers come triangle seeds, as in the other Tithymals.

2. The second kind (called Helioscopius, or Solisequius: and in English,
according to his Greek name, Sun Spurge, or Time Tithymal, of turning or
keeping time with the sun) hath sundry reddish stalks of a foot high: the
leaves are like unto Purslane, not so great nor thick, but snipped about
the edges: the flowers are yellowish, and growing in little platters.

3. The third kind hath thick, fat, and slender branches trailing upon the
ground, beset with leaves like Knee-Holm, or the great Myrtle tree. The
seed and flowers are like unto the other of his kind.

4. The fourth is like the last before mentioned, but it is altogether
lesser, and the leaves are narrower; it groweth more upright, otherwise
alike.


Fig. 757. Kinds of Spurge (5-8)

5. Cypress Tithymal hath round reddish stalks a foot high, long and
narrow like those of Flax, and growing bushy, thick together like as
those of the Cypress tree. The flowers, seed, and root, are like the
former, sometimes yellow, oftentimes red.

6. The sixth is like the former, in flowers, stalks, roots, and seeds,
and differeth in that, this kind hath leaves narrower, and much smaller,
growing after the fashion of those of the Pine tree, otherwise it is
like.

7. There is another kind that groweth to the height of a man; the stalk
is like the last mentioned, but divided into sundry branches a finger
thick, and somewhat hairy, not red as the others, but white: the leaves
be long and narrow, whitish, and a little downy: the flowers are yellow,
but in other points like to the rest of this kind.

8. The eighth kind riseth up with one round reddish stalk two cubits
high, set about with long thin and broad leaves like the leaves of the
Almond tree: the flowers come forth at the top like the others, and of a
yellow colour. The seed and root resemble the other of his kind.


Fig. 758. Kinds of Spurge (9-12)

9. The ninth (which is the common kind growing in most woods) is like the
former, but his leaves be shorter and less, yet like to the leaves of an
Almond tree: the flowers are also yellow: and the seed contained in
three-cornered seed-vessels.

10. This fourth kind of Tithymalus Characias, or Valley Tithymal (for so
the name imports) hath long, yet somewhat narrower leaves than the
former, whitish also, yet not hoary; the umbels or tufts of flowers are
of a greenish yellow, which before they be opened do represent the shape
of a longish fruit, as an Almond, yet in colour it is like the rest of
the leaves: the flowers and seeds are like those of the former, and the
root descends deep into the ground.

11. The fifth Characias hath also long leaves sharp pointed, and broader
at their setting on, and of a light green colour, and snipped or cut
about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The umbels are smaller, yet
carry such flowers and seeds as the former.

12. This kind hath great broad leaves like the young leaves of Woad, set
round about a stalk of a foot high, in good order: on the top whereof
grow the flowers in small platters like the common kind, of a yellow
colour declining to purple. The whole plant is full of milk, as are all
the rest before specified.



Fig. 759. Great Tree Tithymal (13) 

Fig. 760. Quacksalver's Turpeth (14) 
	13. There is another kind of Tithymal, whose figure was taken forth
of a manuscript of the Emperors by Dodonæus, that hath a stalk of the
bigness of a man's thigh, growing like a tree unto the height of two tall
men, dividing itself into sundry arms or branches toward the top, of a
red colour. The leaves are small and tender, much like unto the leaves of
Myrtus: the seed is like unto that of wood Tithymal, or Characia,
according to the authority of Peter Bellone.

14. There is a kind of Tithymal called Esula maior, which Martinus
Rulandus had in great veneration, as by his extraction which he used for
many infirmities may and doth appear at large, in his books entitled
Centuriæ Curationum Empericarum, dedicated unto the Duke of Bavaria. This
plant of Rulandus hath very great and many roots covered over with a
thick bark, plaited as it were with many surculous sprigs; from which
arise sundry strong and large stems of a finger's thickness, in height
two cubits, beset with many pretty large and long leaves like Lathyris,
but that they are not so thick: the seed and flower are not unlike the
other Tithymals.



Fig. 761. Small Esula (15) 

Fig. 762. Venetian Sea Spurge (16) 
	15. This is like the fifth, save that it hath smaller and more
feeble branches; and the whole plant is altogether lesser, growing but
four span or foot high; and the flowers are of a red or else a green
colour.

16. There is another rare and strange kind of Esula, in alliance and
likeness near unto Esula minor, that is the small Esula or Pityusa used
among the physicians and apothecaries of Venice as a kind of Esula, in
the confection of their benedicta and cathartic pills, instead of the
true Esula: it yieldeth a fungous, rough, and brown stalk two cubits
high, dividing itself into sundry branches, furnished with stiff and fat
leaves like Liquorice, growing together by couples. The flowers are
pendulous, hanging down their heads like small bells, of a purple colour,
and within they are of a dark colour like Aristolochia rotunda.


Fig. 763. Kinds of Spurge (17-20)

17. There grows in many chalky grounds and such dry hilly places, among
corn, a small Spurge which seldom grows to two handfuls high; the root is
small, and such also are the stalks and leaves, which grow pretty thick
thereon; which oft times are not sharp, but flat pointed: the seed-
vessels and flowers are very small, yet fashioned like those of the other
Tithymals. It is to be found the corn fields in July and August.

18. The bigger Cataputia or the common garden Spurge is best known of all
the rest, and most used; wherefore I will not spend time about his
description.

The small kind of Cataputia is like unto the former, but lesser, whereby
it may easily be distinguished; being likewise so well known unto all,
that I shall not need to describe it.

These two (I mean the bigger and lesser Cataputia of our author) differ
not but by reason of their age, and the fertileness and barrenness of the
soil, whence the leaves are sometime broader, and otherwhiles narrower.

19. The nineteenth kind called Peplus, hath a small, and fibrous root,
bringing forth many fruitful branches two handfuls long, but little and,
tender, with leaves like the Sun Tithymal, but rounder and much smaller;
it hath also small yellow flowers: which being past there appeareth a
slender pouchet, three-cornered like the other Tithymals, having within
it a very medullous whitish seed like Poppy, the whole plant yielding a
milky juice, which argueth it to be a kind of Tithymal.

20. As in name so in shape this twentieth resembleth Peplus, and cometh
in likelihood nearer the signification of Peplum, or Flammeolum than the
other; therefore Dioscorides affirmeth it to be Thamnos amphilaphes, for
that it bringeth forth a greater plenty of branches, more closely knit
and wound together, with shining twists and claspers an hand full and a
half long. The leaves are lesser than those of Peplus, of an indifferent
likeness and resemblance between Chamæsyce and wild Purslane. The seed is
great, and like that of Peplus: the root is small and single.



Fig. 764. Spurge Thyme (21) 
Fig 765. Knobbed Spurge (22) 
	21. The one and twentieth kind may be easily known from the two
last before mentioned, although they be very like. It hath many branches
and leaves creeping on the ground of a pale green colour, not unlike to
Herniaria, but giving milk as all the other Tithymals do, bearing the
like seed, pouch, and flowers, but smaller in each respect.

22. The two and twentieth kind of Tithymal hath a round root like a small
Turnip, as every author doth report: yet myself have the same plant in my
garden which doth greatly increase, of which I have given divers unto my
friends, whereby I have often viewed the roots, which do appear unto me
somewhat tuberous, and therein nothing answering the descriptions which
Dioscorides, Pena and others have expressed and set forth. This argueth,
that either they were deceived, and described the same by hearsay, or
else the plant doth degenerate being brought from his native soil. The
leaves are set all alongst a small rib like Fraxinela, somewhat round,
green above, and reddish underneath. The seed groweth among the leaves
like the seed of Peplus. The whole plant is full of milk like the other
Tithymals.


Fig. 766. Long Knotty-Rooted Spurge (23)

23. This, saith Clusius, hath also a tuberous root, but not pear-
fashioned like as the former, but almost everywhere of an equal
thickness, being about an inch and sometimes two inches long, and the
lower part thereof is divided into some other roots, or thick fibres,
growing smaller by little and little, and sending forth some few fibres:
it is black without, and white within, & full of a milky juice: the
stalks are short and weak, set with little leaves like those of the
former: the flowers are of a yellowish red colour, and the seed is
contained in such vessels as the other Tithymals. This is Tithymalus
tuberosus, or Ischass altera of Clusius.

The Place.

The first kind of Spurge groweth by the seaside upon the rolling sand and
beach, as at Lee in Essex, at Landguard point right against Harwich, at
Whitstable in Kent, and in many other places.

The second groweth in grounds that lie waste, and in barren arable soil, 
almost everywhere. The third and fourth, as also the fourteenth and
eighteenth, grow in gardens, but not wild in England.

The ninth Spurge called Characias groweth in most woods of England that
are dry and warm.

The eighteenth and nineteenth grow in salt marshes near the sea, as in
the Isle of Thanet by the seaside, betwixt Reculver and Margate in great
plenty.

The Time.

These plants flower from June to the end of July.

The Names.

Sea Spurge is called in Latin Tithymalus paralius: in Spanish, Leche
tresua: in High Dutch, Wolfer milch, that is to say Lupinum lac, or
Wolf's milk. Wood Spurge is called Tithymalus characias. The first is
called in English Sea Spurge, or Sea Wartwort. The second, Sun Spurge;
the third and fourth, Myrtle Spurge: the fifth Cypress Spurge; or among
women, Welcome-To-Our-House; the sixth Pine Spurge; the seventh Shrub
Spurge, and Tree Myrtle Spurge: the eighth and ninth Wood Spurge; the
twelfth Broad-Leaved Spurge: the thirteenth Great Tree Spurge: the
fourteenth and fifteenth Quacksalver's Spurge; the sixteenth Venice
Spurge, the seventeenth Dwarf Spurge: the eighteenth Common Spurge; the
nineteenth and twentieth Petty Spurge; the one and twentieth Spurge
Thyme: The two and twentieth, True Apios or the Knobbed Spurge.

The Temperature.

A. All the kinds of Tithymals or Spurges are hot and dry almost in the
fourth degree, of a sharp and biting quality, fretting or consuming:
First the milk and sap is in special use, then the fruit and leaves, but
the root is of least strength. The strongest kind of Tithymal, and of
greatest force is that of the sea.

B. Some write by report of others, that it inflameth exceedingly, but
myself speak by experience; for walking along the sea coast at Lee in
Essex, with a gentleman called Mr. Rich, dwelling in the same town, I
took but one drop of it into my mouth; which nevertheless did so inflame
and swell in my throat that I hardly escaped with my life. And in like
case was the gentleman, which caused us to take our horses, and post for
our lives unto the next farmhouse to drink some milk to quench the
extrernity of our heat, which then ceased.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of Tithymal, I do not mean Sea Tithymal, is a strong
medicine to open the belly, and causing vomit, bringeth up tough phlegm
and choleric humours. Like virtue is in the seed and root, which is good
for such as fall into the dropsy, being ministered with discretion and
good advice of some excellent physician, and prepared with his
correctories by some honest Apothecury.

B. The juice mixed with honey, causeth hair to fall from that place which
is anointed therewith, if it be done in the sun.

C. The juice or milk is good to stop hollow teeth, being put into them
warily, so that you touch neither the gums, nor any of the other teeth in
the mouth with the said medicine.

D. The same cureth all roughness of the skin, manginess, leprosy, scurf,
and running scabs, and the white scurf of the head. It taketh away all
manner of warts, knobs, and the hard callousness of pustules, hot
swellings and carbuncles.

E. It killeth fish, being mixed with any thing that they will eat.

F. These herbs by mine advice would not be received into the body,
considering that there be so many other good and wholesome potions to be
made with other herbs, that may be taken without peril.


CHAP. 140. Of Herb Terrible.



Fig. 767. Herb Terrible (1) 

Fig. 768. Gutwort (2)
The Description.

1. Herb Terrible is a small shrub two or three cubits high, branched with
many small twigs, having a thin rind first brown, then purple, with many
little and thin leaves like Myrtle. The flowers are rough like the middle
of Scabious flowers, of a blue purple colour. The root is two fingers
thick, brown of colour, and of a woody substance: the whole plant very
bitter, and of an unpleasant taste like Chamelæa, yea somewhat stronger.

2. Tartonraire, called in English Gutwort, groweth by the sea, and is
cathartical, and a stranger with us. In the mother tongue of the
Massilians, it is called Tartonraire, of that abundant and unbridled
faculty of purging, which many times doth cause dysentery, and such like
immoderate fluxes, especially when one not skilful in the use thereof
shall administer the powder of the leaves, mixed with any liquor. This
plant groweth in manner of a shrub, like Chamelæa and bringeth forth many
small, tough, and pliant twigs, set about with a thin and cottony
hairiness, & hath many leaves of a glistering silver colour, growing from
the lowest part even to the top: altogether like Alypum before mentioned:
and upon these tough and thick branches (if my memory fail not) do grow
small flowers, first white, afterward of a pale yellow: the seed is of a
russet colour: the root hard and woody, not very hot in the mouth,
leaving upon the tongue some of his inbred heat and taste, somewhat
resembling common Turpeth, and altogether without milk.

The Place.

These plants do grow upon the mountains in France, and other places in
the gravelly grounds, and are as yet strangers in England.

The Time.

They flourish in August and September, saith our author. The first
Clusius found flowering in divers parts of Spain, in February and March,
and I conjecture the other flowers about the same time, yet I can find
nothing said thereof in such as have delivered the history of it.

The Names

The first of these is the Alypum montis ceti & Herba terribilis of Lobel;
Clusius calls it Hippoglossum valentinum; & in Hist Lugd. it is named
Alypum penæ, & Empetrum phacoides: the second is the Tartonraire
galloprovinciæ massiliensium, in the Adversaria; Sesamoides maium
multorum of Dalechampius & the Sesamoides maius scalegeri of
Tabernamontanus.

The Temperature and virtues.

Both these plants have a strong purging faculty like as the Tithymals;
but the latter is far more powerful, and comes near to the quality of
Merzecon; wherefore the use of it is dangerous, by reason of the violence
and great heat thereof.


CHAP. 141. Of Herb Aloe or Sea Houseleek.



Fig. 769. Common Aloe

Fig. 770. Prickly Herb Aloe
The Description.

1. Herb Aloe hath leaves like those of sea Onion, very long, broad,
smooth, thick, bending backwards, notched in the edges, set with certain
little blunt prickles, full of tough and clammy juice like the leaves of
Houseleek. The stalk, as Dioscorides saith, is like to the stalk of
Asphodel: the flower is whitish; the seed like that of Asphodel; the root
is single, of the fashion of a thick pile thrust into the ground. The
whole herb is extreme bitter, so is the juice also that is gathered
thereof.

2. There is another herb Aloe that groweth likewise in divers provinces
of America; the leaves are two cubits long, also thicker, broader,
greater, and sharper pointed than the former, and it hath on the edges
far harder prickles. The stalk is three cubits high, and a finger thick,
the which in long cups bears violet coloured flowers.

The Place.

This plant groweth very plentifully in India, and in Arabia, Cœlosyria, &
Egypt, from whence the juice put into skins is brought into Europe. It
groweth also, as Dioscorides writeth, in Asia, on the sea coasts, and in
Andros, but not very fit for juice to be drawn out. It is likewise found
in Apulia, and in divers places of Granada and Andalusia, in Spain, but
not far from the sea: the juice of this is also unprofitable.

The Time.

The herb is always green, and likewise sendeth forth branches, though it
remain out of the earth, especially if the root be covered with loam, and
now and then watered: for so being hanged on the ceilings and upper posts
of dining rooms, it doth not only continue a long time green, but it also
groweth and bringeth forth new leaves: for it must have a warm place in
winter time, by reason it pineth away if it be frozen.

The Names.

The herb is called in Latin, and in shops also, Aloe and so is likewise
the juice. It is named in French, Poroquet: in Spanish, Azevar, and Yerba
bavosa: in English, Aloes, Herb Aloes, Sea Houseleek, Sea Allgreen.

The herb is called of the latter herbarists oftentimes Sempervivum, and
Sempervivum marinum, because it lasteth long after the manner of
Houseleek. It seemeth also that Columella in his tenth book nameth it
Sedum, where he setteth down remedies against the canker-worms in trees.

Profuit & plantis latices insfundere amaros
Marrubii, multoque Sedi contingere succo.

In English thus
Liquors of Horehound profit much being poured on trees:
The same effect Sea Houseleek works as well as these.

For he reciteth the juice of Sedum or Houseleek among the bitter juices,
and there is none of the Houseleeks bitter but this.

The Temperature.

Aloe, that is to say, the juice which is used in physic, is good for many
things. It is hot, and that in the first or second degree, but dry in the
third, extreme bitter, yet without biting. It is also of an emplastic or
clammy quality, and something binding, externally applied.

The virtues.

A. It purgeth the belly, and is withal a wholesome and convenient
medicine for the stomach, if any at all be wholesome. For as Paulus
Aegineta writeth, when all purging medicines are hurtful to the stomach,
Aloes only is comfortable. And it purgeth more effectually if it be not
washed: and if it be, it then strengtheneth the stomach the more.

B. It bringeth forth choler, but especially it purgeth such excrements as
be in the stomach, the first veins, and in the nearest passages. For it
is of the number of those medicines, which the Grecians call of the
voiding away of the ordure; and of such whose purging force passeth not
far beyond the stomach. Furthermore Aloe is is an enemy to all kinds of
putrefactions; and defendeth the body from all manner of corruption. It
also preserveth dead carcasses from putrefying; it killeth and purgeth
away all manner of worms of the belly. It is good against a stinking
breath proceeding from the imperfection of the stomach: it openeth the
piles or haemorrhoids of the fundament; and being taken in a small
quantity, it bringeth down the monthly courses: it is thought to be good
and profitable against obstructions and stoppings in the rest of the
entrails. Yet some there be who think, that it is not convenient for the
liver.

C. One dram thereof given is sufficient to purge. Now and then half a
dram or little more  is enough.

D. It healeth up green wounds and deep sores, cleanseth ulcers, and
cureth such sores as are hardly to be helped, especially in the fundament
and secret parts. It is with good success mixed with medicines which
stanch bleeding, and with plasters that be applied to bloody wounds; for
it helpeth them by reason of his emplastic quality and substance. It is
profitably put into medicines for the eyes forasmuch as it cleanseth and
drieth without biting.

E. Dioscorides saith, that it must be torrified or parched at the fire,
in a clean and red hot vessel, and continually stirred with a spatula, or
iron ladle, till it be torrified in all the parts alike: and that it must
also be washed, to the end that the unprofitable and sandy dross, may
sink down unto the bottom, and that which is smooth and most perfect be
taken and reserved.

F. The same author also teacheth, that mixed with honey it taketh away
black and blue spots, which come of stripes: that it helpeth the inward
ruggedness of the eye-lids, and itching in the corners of the eyes: it
remedieth the headache, if the temples and forehead be anointed
therewith, being mixed with vinegar and oil of Roses: being tempered with
wine, it stayeth the falling off of the hair, if the head be washed
therewith: and mixed with wine and honey, it is a remedy for the swelling
of the uvula, and swelling of the almonds of the throat, for the gums &
all ulcers of the mouth.

G. The juice of this herb Aloe (whereof is made that excellent and most
familiar purger, called Aloe Succotrina, the best is that which is clear
and shining, of a brown yellowish colour) it openeth the belly, purging
cold, phlegmatick, and choleric humours, especially in those bodies that
are surcharged with surfeiting, either of meat or drink, and whose bodies
are fully replete with humours, faring daintily, and wanting exercise.
This Aloes I say, taken in a small quantity after supper (or rather
before) in a stewed prune, or in water the quantity of two drams in the
morning, is a most sovereign medicine to comfort the stomach, and to
cleanse and drive forth all superfluous humours. Some use to mix the same
with Cinnamon, Ginger, and Mace, for the purpose above said; and for the
jaundice, spitting of blood, and all extraordinary issues of blood.

H. The same used in ulcers, especially those of the secret parts or
fundament, or made into powder, and strewed on fresh wounds, stayeth the
blood, and healeth the same, as those ulcers before spoken of.

I. The same taken inwardly causeth the haemorrhoids to bleed, and being
laid thereon it causeth them to cease bleeding.


CHAP. 142. Of Houseleek or Sengreen.



Fig. 771. Great Houseleek (1) 

Fig. 772. Tree Houseleek (2)
The Kinds.

Sengreen, as Dioscorides writeth, is of three sorts, the one is great,
the other small, and the third is that which is called Illicebra, biting
Stonecrop, or Wall Pepper

The Description.

1. The great Sengreen, which in Latin is commonly called Iovis barba,
Jupiter's beard, bringeth forth leaves hard adjoining to the ground and
root, thick, fat, full of tough juice, sharp pointed, growing close and
hard together, set in a circle in fashion of an eye, and bringing forth
very many such circles, spreading itself out all abroad; it often times
also sendeth forth small strings, by which it spreadeth farther, and
maketh new circles; there riseth up oftentimes in the middle of these an
upright stalk about a foot high, covered with leaves growing less and
less toward the points, parted at the top into certain wings or branches,
about which are flowers orderly placed, of a dark purplsh colour: the
root is all of strings.

2. There is also another great Houseleek or Sengreen (surnamed Tree
Houseleek) that bringeth forth a stalk a cubit high, sometimes higher,
and often two; which is thick, hard, woody, tough, and that can hardly be
broken, parted into divers branches, and covered with a thick gross bark,
which in the lower part reserveth certain prints or impressed marks of
the leaves that are fallen away. The leaves are fat, well bodied, full of
juice, an inch long and somewhat more, like little tongues, very
curiously minced in the edges, standing upon the tops of the branches,
having in them the shape of an eye. The flowers grow out of the branches,
which are divided into many springs; which flowers are slender, yellow,
and spread like a star; in their places cometh up very fine seed, the
springs withering away: the root is parted into many offsprings. This
plant is always green, neither is it hurt by the cold in winter, growing
in his native soil; whereupon it is named Sempervivum, or Sengreen.

3. There is also another of this kind, the circles whereof are answerable
in bigness to those of the former, but with lesser leaves, more in
number, and closely set, having standing on the edges very fine hairs as
it were like soft prickles. This is somewhat of a deeper green: the stalk
is shorter, and the flowers are of a pale yellow. This is the third of
Dodonæus' description, Pemptad. 1. lib. 5. cap. 8.

4. There is likewise a third to be referred hereunto: the leaves hereof
be of a whitish green, and are very curiously nicked roundabout. The
flower is great, consisting of six white leaves; this is that described
by Dodonæus in the 4th place: and it is the Cotyledon altera secunda of
Clusius.

5. There is also a fourth, the circles whereof are lesser, the leaves
sharp pointed, very closely set, of a dark red colour on the top, and
hairy in the edges: the flowers on the sprigs are of a gallant purple
colour. This is the fifth of Dodonæus; and the Cotytedon altera tertia of
Clusius.

The Place.

1. The great Sengreen is well known not only in Italy, but also in
France, Germany, Bohemia and the Low Countries. It groweth on stones in
mountains, upon old walls, and ancient buildings, especially upon the
tops of houses. The form hereof doth differ according to the nature of
the soil; for in some places the leaves are narrower and lesser, but more
in number, and have one only circle; in some they are fewer, thicker, and
broader: they are green, and of a deeper green in some places; and in
others of a lighter green: for those which we have described grow not in
one place, but in divers and sundry.

2. Great Sengreen is found growing of itself on the tops of houses, old
walls, and such like places in very many provinces of the East, and of
Greece: and also in the islands of the Mediterranean Sea; as in Crete,
which now is called Candy, Rhodes, Zante, & others; neither is Spain
without it: for (as Carolus Clusius witnesseth) it groweth in many places
of Portugal; otherwise it is cherished in earthen pots. In cold
countries, and such as lie northward, as in both the Germanies, it
neither groweth of itself, nor yet lasteth long, though it be carefully
planted, and diligently looked to, but through the extremity of the
weather, and the overmuch cold of winter it perisheth.

The Time.

1. The stalk of the first doth at length flower after the Summer
Solstice, which is in June about Saint Barnabas' day, and now and then in
the month of August; but in April, that is to say, after the equinoctial
in the spring, which is about a month after the spring is begun, there
grow out of this among the leaves small strings, which are the groundwork
of the circles, by which being at length full grown, it spreadeth itself
into very many circles.

2. Houseleek that groweth like a tree, doth flower in Portugal at the
beginning of the year presently after the winter Solstice, which is
December, about St. Lucy's day.

The Names.

The first is commonly called Iovis Barba, or Jupiter's Beard, and also
Sedum maius vulgare: the Germans call it Hanszwurtz, Grosz Donderbaer:
they of the Low Countries, Donderbaert: the Hollanders, Huysloock: the
Frenchmen Ioubarbe: the Italians, Semprevivo maggiore: the Spaniards,
Siempreviva, Yerva pentera: the Englishmen, Houseleek, and Sengreen, and
Ay-Green: of some, Jupiter's Eye, Bullock's Eye, and Jupiter's Beard: of
the Bohemians, Netreske. Many take it to be Cotyledon altera dioscoridis;
but we had rather have it one of the Sengreens: for it is continually
green, and always flourisheth, and is hardly hurt by the extremity of
winter.

The other without doubt is Dioscorides his Sempervivum magnum, or Sedum
maius, great Houseleek, or Sengreen: Apuleius calleth it Vitalis, and
Semperflorium.

The Temperature.

The great Houseleeks are cold in the third degree: they are also dry, but
not much, by reason of the watery essence that is in them.

The Virtues.

A. They are good against Saint Anthony's fire, the shingles, and other
creeping ulcers and inflammations, as Galen saith, that proceed of rheums
and fluxes: and as Dioscorides teacheth, against the inflammations or
fiery heat in the eyes: the leaves, saith Pliny, being applied, or the
juice laid on, are a remedy for rheumatic and watering eyes.

B. They take away the fire in burnings and scaldings; and being applied
with Barley meal dried, do take away the pain of the gout.

C. Dioscorides teacheth, that they are given to them that are troubled
with a hot lask: that they likewise drive forth worms of the belly if
they be drunk with wine.

D. The juice put up in a pessary do stay the fluxes in women, proceeding
of a hot cause; the leaves held in the mouth do quench thirst in hot
burning fevers.

E. The juice mixed with Barley meal and vinegar prevaileth against St.
Anthony's fire, all hot burning and fretting ulcers, and against
scaldings, burnings, and all inflammations, and also the gout coming of
an hot cause.

F. The juice of Houseleek, Garden Nightshade, and the buds of Poplar
boiled in axungia porci or hogs grease, maketh the most singular Populeon
that ever was used in chirurgery.

G. The juice hereof taketh away corns from the toes and feet, if they be
washed and bathed therewith, and every day and night as it were
emplastered with the skin of the same Houseleek, which certainly taketh
them away without incision or such like, as hath been experimented by my
very good friend Mr. Nicholas Belson, a man painful and curious in
searching forth the secrets of Nature.

H. The decoction of Houseleek or the juice thereof drunk, is good against
the bloody flux, and cooleth the inflammation of the eyes being dropped
thereinto, and the bruised herb layed upon them.


CHAP. 143. Of the Lesser Houseleeks or Prick-Madams.



Fig. 773. Prick-Madam (1) 

Fig. 774. White-Flowered Prick-Madam (2)
The Description.

1. The first of these is a very little herb, creeping upon the ground
with many slender stalks, which are compassed about with a great number
of leaves, that are thick, full of joints, little, long, sharp pointed,
inclining to a green blue. There rise up among these, little stalks, a
handful high, bringing forth at the top, as it were a shadowy tuft; and
in these fine yellow flowers: the root is full of strings.

2. The other little Sengreen is also a small herb, bringing forth many
slender stalks, seldom above a span high; on the tops whereof stand
little flowers like those of the other, in small loose tufts; but they
are white and something lesser: the leaves about the stalks are few and
little, but long, blunt, and round, bigger than wheaten corns, something
lesser than the kernels of the pineapples, otherwise not unlike; which
oftentimes are something red, stalks and all: the roots creepeth upon the
superficial or uppermost part of the earth, sending down slender threads.


Fig. 775. Kinds of Sengreen or Prick-Madam (3-6)

3. There is a small kind of Stonecrop, which hath little narrow leaves,
thick, sharp pointed, and tender stalks, full of fatty juice; on the top
whereof do grow small yellow flowers, star fashion. The root is small,
and running by the ground.

4. There is likewise another Stonecrop called Frog Stonecrop, which hath
little tufts of leaves rising from small and thready roots, creeping upon
the ground like unto Kali or Frog-Grass; from the which tufts of leaves
riseth a slender, stalk, set with a few such like leaves, having at the
top pretty large yellow flowers, the smallness of the plant being
considered.

5. This is like that which is described in the second place, but that the
stalks are lesser, and not so tall, and the flowers of this are star
fashioned, and of a golden yellow colour.

6. There is another Stonecrop, or Prick-Madam called Aizoon scorpioides,
which is altogether like the great kind of Stonecrop, and differeth in
that, that this kind of Stonecrop or Prick-Madam hath his tuft of yellow
flowers turning again, not much unlike the tail of a Scorpion, resembling
Myositis scorpioides, and the leaves somewhat thicker, and closer thrust
together. The root is small and tender.



Fig. 776. Portland Sengreen (7) 

Fig. 777. Small Rock Sengreen (8) 
	7. There is a plant called Sedum portlandica, or Portland
Stonecrop, of the English island called Portland, lying in the South
coast, which hath goodly branches and a rough rind. The leaves imitate
Laureola, growing among the Tithymals, but thicker, shorter, more fat and
tender. The stalk is of a woody substance like Laureola, participating of
the kinds of Crassula, Semperviuum, and the Tithymals, whereof we think
it to be a kind; yet not daring to deliver any uncertain sentence, it
shall be less prejudicial to the truth, to account it as a shrub,
degenerating from both kinds.

8. There is a plant which hath received his name Sedum petræum, because
it doth for the most part grow upon the rocks, mountains, & such like
stony places, having very small leaves, coming forth of the ground in
tufts like Pseudo-Moly, that is, our common herb called Thrift: among the
leaves come forth slender stalks an handful high, laden with small yellow
flowers like unto the common Prick-Madam: after which come little thick
sharp pointed cods, which contain the seed, which is small, flat, and
yellowish.

The Place.

The former of these groweth in gardens in the Low Countries: in other
places upon stone walls and tops of houses in England almost everywhere.

The other groweth about rubbish, in the borders of fields, and in other
places that lie open to the sun.

The Time.

They flower in the summer months.

The Names.

The lesser kind is called in Latin, Sedum, and Sempervivum minus: of the
Germans, Kleyn Donderbaer, and Kleyn Hauszwurtz: of the Italians,
Sempervivo minore: of the Frenchmen, Trique-madame: of the English men,
Prick-Madam, Dwarf Houseleek, and Small Sengreen.

The second kind is named in shops Crassula minor; and they surname it
minor, for difference between it and the other Crassula, which is a kind
of Orpine: it is also called Vermicularis: in Italian, Pignola,
Granellosa, and Grasella: in Low Dutch, Blader loosen: in English, Wild
Prick-Madam, Great Stonecrop, or Worm-Grass. That which is vulgarly known
and called by the name of Stonecrop is the Illecebra described in the
following chapter, and such as grow commonly with us of these small
Houseleeks mentioned in this chapter are generally named Prick-Madams:
but our author hath confounded them in this and the next chapter; which I
would not alter, thinking it sufficient to give you notice thereof.

The Temperature and Virtues.

All these small Sengreens are of a cooling nature like unto the great
ones, and are good for those things that the others be. The former of
these is used in many places in salads, in which it hath a fine relish,
and a pleasant taste: it is good for the heartburn.


CHAP. 144. Of divers other small Sengreens.


Fig. 778. Kinds of Small Sengreen (1-4)

The Description.

1. The stalk of this small water Sengreen is some span long, reddish,
succulent, and weak: the leaves are longish, a little rough, and full of
juice: the flowers grow upon the tops of the stalks, consining of six
purple or else flesh-coloured leaves; which are succeeded by as many
little cods containing a small seed: the root is small and thready, and
the whole plant hath an insipid or waterish taste. This was found by
Clusius in some watery places of Germany about the end of June; and he 
calls it Sedum minus 3 sive palustre.

2. This second from small fibrous and creeping roots sends up sundry
little stalks set with leaves like those of the ordinary Prick-Madam, yet
less, thick, and flatter, and of a more astringent taste: the flowers,
which are pretty large, grow at the tops of the branches, and consist of
five pale yellowish leaves. It grows in divers places of the Alps, and
flowers about the end of July, and in August. This is the Sedum minus 6
or Alpinum 1 of Clusius.

3. This hath small little and thick leaves, lying bedded, or compact
close together, and are of an ash colour inclining to blue: the stalks
are some two inches long, slender, and almost naked; upon which grow
commonly some three flowers consisting of five white leaves apiece, with
four yellow threads in the middle. This mightily increases, and will mat
and cover the ground for a good space together. It flowers in August, and
grows upon the craggy places of the Alps. Clusius calls it Sedum minus
nonum, sive alpinum 3.

4. The leaves of this are somewhat larger and longer, yet thick, and
somewhat hairy about their edges; at first also of an acid taste, but
afterwards bitterish and hot: it also sendeth forth shoots, and in the
midst of the leaves it puts forth stalks some two inches high, which at
the top as in an umbel carry some six little flowers consiting of five
leaves apiece, having their bottoms of a yellowish colour. It is found in
the like places, and flowers at the same time as the former. Clusius
makes it his Sedum minus 10 alpinum 4 and in the Hist. Lugd. it is called
Iasme montana.


Fig. 779. Long-Leaved Rock Sengreen (5)

5. For those last described we are beholden to Clusius; and for this
fifth to Pona, who thus describes it: It hath one thick and large root
with few or no fibres, but form knots bunching out here and there: it is
covered with a thick bark, and is of a blackish red colour on the
outside: the leaves are many, long and narrow, lying spread upon the
ground; the stalk grows four foot high, and is round and naked, and at
the top carries flowers consisting of 7 sharp pointed pale yellow leaves;
which are succeeded by seeds like those of Bupleurum, and of a strong
smell. It flowers about the middle of July, and the seed is ripe about
the middle of August. Pona, who first observed this growing upon Mount
Baldus in ItaIy, sets it forth by the name of Sedum petræum
bupleurifolio. Bauhin hath it by the name of Perfoliata alpina gramineo
folio, and Bupleuron angustifolium alpinum.

The Temper and Virtues.

The three first described without doubt are cold, and partake in virtues
with the other small Sengreens; but the two last are rather of an hot and
attenuating faculty. None of them are commmonly known or used in physic.


CHAP. 145. Of Stonecrop, called Wall-Pepper.


Fig. 780. Stonecrop or Wall-Pepper

The Description.

This is a low and little herb: the stalks be slender and short: the
leaves about these stand very thick, and small in growth, full bodied,
sharp pointed, and full of juice: the flowers stand on the top, and are
marvellous little, of colour yellow, and of a sharp biting taste: the
root is nothing but strings.

The Place.

It groweth everywhere in stony and dry places, and in chinks and crannies
of old walls, and on the tops of houses: it is always green, and
therefore it is very fitly placed among the Sengreens.

TheTime.

It flowereth in the summer months.

The Names.

This is Tertium sempervivum dioscoridis, or Dioscorides his third
Sengreen, which he saith is called of the Romans, Illecebra. Pliny also
witnesseth, that the Latins name it Illecebra. The Germans call this herb
Maurpfeffer, and Katzen treuble: the French men, Pain d'oiseau: the Low
Country men, Muer pepper: the English men, Stonecrop, and Stonehore,
Little Stonecrop, Pricket, Mouse-Tail, Wall-Pepper, Country Pepper, and
Jack-of-the-Buttery.

The Temperature.

This little herb is sharp and biting, and very hot. Being outwardly
applied it raiseth blisters, and at length exulcerateth.

The Virtues.

A. It wasteth away hard kernels, and the King's evil, if it be laid unto
them, as Dioscorides writes.

B. The juice hereof extracted or drawn forth, and taken with vinegar or
other liquor, procureth vomit, and bringeth up gross and phlegmatic
humours, and also choleric; and doth thereby oftentimes cure the quartan
ague and other agues of long continuance: and given in this manner it is
a remedy against poisons inwardly taken.


CHAP. 146. Of Orpine.



Fig. 781. Spanish Orpine (1) 

Fig. 782. Common Orpine (2)
The Descripion.

1. The Spanish Orpine sendeth forth round stalks, thick, slippery, having
as it were little joints, somewhat red now and then about the root: the
leaves in like manner be thick, smooth, gross, full of tough juice,
sometimes slightly nicked in the edges, broader-leaved, and greater than
those of Purslane; otherwise not much unlike; which by couples are set
opposite one against another upon every joint, covering the stalk in
order by two and two: the flowers in the round tufts are of a pale
yellow: the root groweth full of bumps like unto long kernels, waxing
sharp toward the point: these kernels be white, and have strings growing
forth of them.

2. The second, which is our common Orpine, doth likewise rise up with
very many round stalks that are smooth, but not jointed at all: the
leaves are gross or corpulent, thick, broad and oftentimes somewhat
nicked in the edges, lesser than those of the former, placed out of
order. The flowers be either red or yellow, or else whitish: the root is
white, well bodied, and full of kernels. This plant is very full of life:
the stalks set only in clay continue green a long time; and if they be
now and then watered they also grow. We have a wild kind of Orpine
growing in corn fields and shadowy woods in most places of England, in
each respect like that of the garden, saving that it is altogether
lesser.

The Place.

They prosper best in shadowy and stony places, in old walls made of loam
or stone. Oribasius saith, That they grow in vineyards and tilled places.
The first groweth in gardens; the other everywhere: the first is much
found in Spain and Hungary; neither is Germany without it; for it groweth
upon the banks of the river of Rhine near the vineyards, in rough and
stony places, nothing at all differing from that which is found in Spain.

The second groweth plentifully both in Germany, France, Bohemia, England,
and in other countries among vines, in old loamy daubed and stony walls.

The Time.

The Orpines flower about August or before.

The Names.

1. The first is that which is called of the Latins, Telephium, and
Sempervivum sylvestre, and Illecebra: but Illecebra by reason of his
sharp and biting quality doth much differ from it, as we have declared in
the former chapter. Some there be that name it Portulaca sylvestris: yet
there is another Portulaca sylvestris, or wild Purslane, like to that
which groweth in gardens, but lesser: we may call this in English,
Spanish Orpine, Orpine of Hungary, or jointed Orpine.

2. The second kind of Orpine is called in shops Crassula, and Crassula
fabaria and Crassula maior, that it may differ from that which is
described in the chapter of little Houseleek: it is named also Fabaria:
in High Dutch, Mundkraut, Knavenkraut, Fortzwang, and Fotzweyn: in
Italian, Faba grassa: in French, Ioubarbe des vignes, Feue espesse: in
Low Dutch, Smer wortele, and Hemel sleutel: in English, Orpine; also
Liblong, or Live-long.

The Temperature.

The Orpines be cold and dry, and of thin or subtle parts.

The virtues.

A. Disocorides saith, That being laid on with vinegar it taketh away the
white morphew: Galen saith the black also; which thing it doth by reason
of the scouring or cleansing quality that it hath. Whereupon Galen
attributeth unto it an hot faculty, though the taste showeth the
contrary: which aforesaid scouring faculty declareth, that the other two
also be likewise cold. But cold things may as well cleanse, if dryness of
temperature and thinness of essence be joined together in them.


CHAP. 147. Of the Smaller Orpines.



Fig. 783. Purple Orpine (1) 

Fig. 784. Never-Dying Orpine (2)
The Description.

1. The Orpine with purple flowers is lower and lesser than the common
Orpine: the stalks be slenderer, and for the most part lie along upon the
ground. The leaves are also thinner and longer, and of a more blue green,
yet well bodied, standing thicker below than above, confusedly set
together without order: the flowers in the tufts at the tops of the
stalks be of a pale blue tending to purple. The roots be not set with
lumps or knobbed kernels, but with a multitude of hairy strings.

2. This second Orpine, as it is known to few, so hath it found no name,
but that some herbarists do call it Telephium sempervivum or virens: for
the stalks of the other do wither in winter, the root remaineth green;
but the stalks and leaves of this endure also the sharpenss of winter;
and therefore we may call it in English, Orpine Everlasting, or Never-
dying Orpine. This hath lesser and rounder leaves than any of the former:
the flowers are red, and the root fibrous.


Fig. 785. Creeping Orpine (3)

3. Cluisus received the seeds of this from Ferranto Imperato of Naples,
under the name of Telephium legitimum; and. he hath thus given us the
history thereof: It produces from the top of the root many branches
spread upon the ground, which are about a foot long, set with many
leaves, especially such as are not come to flower; for the other have
fewer: these leaves are smaller, less thick also and succulent than those
of the former kinds, neither are they so brittle: their colour is green,
inclining a little to blue: the tops of the branches are plentifully
stored with little flowers, growing thick together, and composed of five
little white leaves apiece: which fading, there succeed cornered seed-
vessels, full of a brownish seed. The root is sometimes as thick as one's
little finger, tough, white, divided into some branches, and living many
years.

The Place, Time, Names, Temperature, and Virtues.

The first grow not in England. The second flourishes in my garden. The
third is a stranger with us. They flower when the common Orpine doth.
Their names are specified in their several descriptions: and their
temperature and faculties in working are referred to the common Orpine.


CHAP. 148. Of Purslane.



Fig. 786. Garden Purslane (1) 

Fig. 787. Wild Purslane (2)
The Description.

1. The stalks of the great Purslane be round, thick, somewhat red, full
of juice, smooth, glittering, and parted into certain branches trailing
upon the ground: the leaves be an inch long, something broad, thick, fat,
glib, somewhat green, whiter on the nether side: the flowers are little,
of a faint yellow, and grow out at the bottom of the leaves. After them
springeth up a little husk of a green colour, of the bigness almost of
half a barley corn, in which is small black seed; the root hath many
strings.

2. The other is lesser and hath like stalks, but smaller, and it
spreadeth on the ground: the leaves be like the former in fashion,
smoothness, and thickness, but far lesser.

The Place.

1. The former is fitly sown in gardens, and in the ways and alleys
thereof being digged and dunged; it delighteth to grow in a fruitful and
fat soil not dry.

2. The other cometh up of his own accord in alleys of gardens and
vineyards, and oftentimes upon rocks: this also is delighted with watery
places being once sown, if it be let alone till the seed be ripe it doth
easily spring up afresh for certain years after.

The Time.

It may be sown in March or April; it flourisheth and is green in June,
and afterwards even until winter.

The Names.

Purslane is called in Latin, Portulaca: in High Dutch, Burkelkraut: in
French, Poupier: in Italian, Prochaccia; in Spanish, Verdolagas: in
English, Purslane, and Porcelane.

The Temperature.

 Purslane is cold, and that in the third degree, and moist in the second:
but wild Purslane is not so moist.

The Virtues.

A. Raw Purslane is much used in salads, with oil, salt, and vinegar: it
cooleth an hot stomach, and provoketh appetite; but the nourishment which
cometh thereof is little, bad, cold, gross, and moist: being chewed it is
good for teeth that are set on edge or astonied; the juice doth the same
being held in the mouth, and also the distilled water.

B. Purslane is likewise commended against worms in young children, and is
singular good, especially if they be feverish withal, for it both allays
the overmuch heat, and killeth the worms: which thing is done through the
saltness mixed therewith, which is not only an enemy to worms, but also
to putrefaction.

C. The leaves of Purslane either raw, or boiled, and eaten as salads, are
good for those that have great heat in their stomachs and inward parts,
and do cool and temper the inflamed blood.

D. The same taken in like manner is good for the bladder and kidneys, and
allayeth the outrageous lust of the body: the juice also hath the same
virtue.

E. The juice of Purslane stoppeth the bloody flux, the flux of the
haemorrhoids, monthly terms, spitting of blood, and all other fluxes
whatsoever.

F. The same thrown up with a mother syringe, cureth the inflammations,
frettings, and ulcerations of the matrix; and put into the fundament with
a clyster pipe, helpeth the ulcerations and flux of the guts.

G. The leaves eaten raw, take away the pain of the teeth, and fasteneth
them; and are good for teeth that are set on edge with eating of sharp or
sour things.

H. The seed being taken, killeth and driveth forth worms, and stoppeth
the lask.


CHAP. 149. Of Sea Purslane, and of the Shrubby Sengreens.


Fig. 788. Kinds of Purslane (1-4)

The Description.

1. Sea Purslane is not a herb as garden Purslane, but a little shrub: the
stalks whereof be hard and woody: the leaves fat, full of substance, like
in form to common Purslane, but much whiter and harder: the mossy purple
flowers stand round about the upper parts of the stalks, as do almost
those of Blite, or of Orach: neither is the seed unlike, being broad and
flat: the root is woody, long lasting, as is also the plant, which
beareth out the winter with the loss of a few leaves.

2. There is another Sea Purslane or Halimus, or after Dodonæus, Portulaca
marina, which hath leaves like the former, but not altogether so white,
yet are they somewhat longer and narrower, not much unlike the leaves of
thee Olive tree. The slender branches are not above a cubit or cubit and
half long, and commonly lie spread upon the ground, and the flowers are
of a deep overworn herby colour, and after them follow seeds like those
of the former, but smaller.

3. Our ordinary Halimus or Sea Purslane hath small branches four foot or
better long, lying commonly spread upon the ground, of an overworn
grayish colour, and sometimess purple; the leaves are like those of the
last mentioned, but more fat and thick; yet less hoary. The flowers grow
on the tops of the branches, of an herby purple colour, which is
succeeded by small seeds like to that of the second kind.

4. There is found another wild Sea Purslane, whereof I have thought good
to make mention; which doth resemble the kinds of Aizoons. The first kind
groweth upright, with a trunk like a small tree or shrub, having many
upright woody branches of an ash colour, with many thick, dark, green
leaves like the small Stonecrop, called Vermicularis: the flowers are of
an herby yellowish green colour: the root is very hard and fibrous: the
whole plant is of a salt tang taste, and the juice like that of Kali.


Fig. 789. Greater Tree Stonecrop (5)

5. There is another kind like the former, and differeth in that, this
strange plant is greater, the leaves more sharp and narrower, and the
whole plant more woody, and cometh near to the form of a tree. The
flowers are of a greenish colour.

The Place.

The first and second grow upon the sea coasts of Spain and other hot
countries: and the third groweth in the salt marshes near the seaside, as
you pass over the King's ferry unto the Isle of Sheppey, going to
Sherland house (belonging sometime unto the Lord Cheiny and in the year
1590 unto the worshipful Sir Edward Hobby) fast by the ditch's sides of
the same marsh: it groweth plentifully in the Isle of Thanet as you go
from Margate to Sandwich, and in many other places along the coast. The
other sorts grow upon banks and heaps of land on the sea coasts of
Zeeland, Flanders, Holland, and in like places in other countries, as
besides the Isle of Purbeck in England, and on Ravenspurn in Holderness,
as I myself have seen.

The Time.

These flourish and flower especially in July and August

The Names.

Sea Purslane is called Portulaca marina: it is also called in Latin
Halimus: in Dutch, Zee porceleijne: in English, Sea Purslane.

The bastard ground Pines are called of some, Chamæpitys virmiculata: in
English, Sea Ground Pine, or more fitly, Tree Stonecrop, or Pricket, or
Shrubby Sengreen.

The Temperature.

Sea Purslane is (as Galen saith) of unlike parts, but the greater part
thereof is hot in a mean, with a moisture unconcocted, and somewhat
windy.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves (saith Dioscorides) are boiled to be eaten: a dram weight
of the root being drunk with mead or honeyed water, is good against
cramps and drawings awry of sinews, burstings, and gnawings of the belly:
it also causeth nurses to have store of milk. The leaves be in the Low
Countries preserved in salt or pickle as capers are, and be served and
eaten at men's tables in stead of them, and that without any mislike of
taste, to which it is pleasant. Galen doth also report, that the young
and tender buds are wont in Cilicia to be eaten, and also laid up in
store for use.

B. Clusius saith, that the learned Portugal knight Damianus à Goes
assured him, that the leaves of the first described boiled with bran, and
so applied, mitigate the pains of the gout proceeding of an hot cause.


CHAP. 150. Of Herb Ivy, or Ground Pine.


Fig. 790. Kinds of Ground Pine (1-4)

The Description.

1. The common kind of Chamæpitys or Ground Pine is a small herb and very
tender, creeping upon the ground, having small and crooked branches
trailing about. The leaves be small, narrow and hairy, in savour like the
Fir or Pine tree; but if my sense of smelling be perfect, methinks it is
rather like unto the smell of hemp. The flowers be little, of a pale
yellow colour, and somtimes white: the root is small and single, and of a
woody substance.

2. The second hath pretty strong four square jointed stalks, brown and
hairy, from which grow pretty large hairy leaves much cloven or cut: the
flowers are of a purple colour, and grow about the stalks in roundels
like the Dead Nettle: the seed is black and round, and the whole plant
savoureth like the former: which showeth this to be fitly referred to the
Chamæpytis, and not to be well called Chamædrys fœmina, or Jagged
Germander, as some have named it.

3. This kind of Herb Ivy, growing for the most part about Montpellier in
France, is the least of all his kind, having small white and yellow
flowers, in smell and proportion like unto the others, but much smaller.

4. There is a wild or bastard kind of Chamæpitys, or Ground Pine, that
hath leaves somewhat like unto the second kind, but not jagged in that
manner, but only snipped about the edges. The root is somewhat biger,
woody, whitish, and bitter, and like unto the root of Succory. All this
herb is very rough, and hath a strong unpleasant smell, not like that of
the Ground Pines.



Fig. 791. Bastard Ground Pine (5) 

Fig. 792. Austrian Ground Pine (6) 
	5. There is another kind that hath many small and tender branches
beset with little leaves for the most part three together, almost like
the leaves of the ordinary Ground Pine: at the top of which branches grow
slender white flowers which being turned upside down, or the lower part
upward, do somewhat resemble the flowers of Lamium: the seeds grow
commonly four together in a cup, and are somewhat big and round: the root
is thick, whitish, and long lasting.

6. There groweth in Austria a kind of Chamæpitys, which is a most brave
and rare plant, and of great beauty, yet not once remembered either of
the ancient or new writers, until of late that famous Carolus Clusius had
set it forth in his Pannonic Observations who for his singular skill and
industry hath won the garland from all that have written before his time.
This rare and strange plant I have in my garden, growing with many square
stalks of half a foot high, beset even from the bottom to the top with
leaves so like our common Rosemary, that it is hard for him which doth
not know it exactly to find the difference; being green above, and
somewhat hairy and hoary underneath: among which come forth round about
the stalks (after the manner of roundels or coronets) certain small cups
or chalices of a reddish colour; out of which come the flowers like unto
Archangel in shape, but of a most excellent and stately mixed colour, the
outside purple declining to blueness, and sometimes of a violet colour.
The flower gapeth like the mouth of a beast, and hath as it were a white
tongue; the lower and upper jaws are white likewise, spotted with many
bloody spots: which being past, the seeds appear very long, of a shining
black colour, set in order in the small husks as the Chamæpitys spuria.
The root is black and hard, with many hairy strings fastened thereto.

The Place.

Our author saith: These kinds of Chamæpitys (except the two last) grow
very plentifully in Kent, especially about Gravesend, Cobham, Southfleet,
Horton, Dartford, and Sutton, and not in any other shire in England that
ever I could find.

None of these, except the first, for any thing I know, or can learn, grow
wild in England; the second I have often seen in gardens.

The Time.

They flower in June, And often in August.

The Names.

Ground Pine is called in Latin, Ibiga, Aiuga, and Abiga: in shops, Iva
arthritica and Iva moschata: in Italian, Iva: in Spanish, Chamæpiteos: in
High Dutch Bergis mich nicht: in Low Dutch Uelt Ciipres: in French, Ive
moschate: In English, Herb Ivy, Forget-Me-Not, Ground Pine and Field
Cypress.

1. The first of these is the Chamæpitys prima, of Matthiolus, Dodonæus
and others, and is that which is commonly used in shops and in physic.

2. This Matthiolus calls Chamædrys altera: Lobel, Chamædrys laciniatis
foliis: Lonicerus, Trixago vera; Tabernamontanus, Iva moschata and
Dodonæus (whom in this chapter we chiefly follow) Chamæpitys altera.

3. Thirdly, this is the Chamæpitys 1 of Fuchsius and others; the
Chamæpitys dioscoridis odoratior of Lobel; and the Chamæpitys 3 of
Matthiolus and Dodonæus.

4. Gesner calls this Chamæpitys species monspellii: Clusius, Dodonæus,
Anthyllis altera and Lobel, Anthyllis Chamæpityides minor; and
Tabernamontanus, Iva moschata monspeliensium.

5. This is Chamæpitys adulterina of Lobel: Pseudochamæpitys and Aiuga
adulterina of Clusius: and Chamæpitys spuria altera of Dodonæus.

6. This is Chamæpitys Austriaca of Clusius; and Chamæpitys cærulea of
Camerarius.

The Nature.

These herbs are hot in the second degree, and dry in the third.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves of Chamæpytis tunned up in ale, or infused in wine, or
sodden with honey, and drunk by the space of eight or ten days, cureth
the jaundice, the sciatica, the stoppings of the liver, the difficulty of
making water, the stoppings of the spleen, and causeth women to have
their natural sickness.

B. Chamæpytis stamped green with honey cureth wounds, malignant and
rebellious ulcers, and dissolveth the hardness of women's breasts or
paps, and profitably helpeth against poison, or biting of any venomous
beast.

C. The decotion drunk, dissolveth congealed blood, and drunk with vinegar
driveth forth the dead child. It cleanseth the entrails: it helpeth the
infirmities of the liver and kidneys; it cureth the yellow jaundice being
drunk in wine: it bringeth down the desired sickness, and provoketh
urine: being boiled in mead or honeyed water and drunk it helpeth the
sciatica in forty days. The people of Heraclea in Pontus do use it
against Wolf's-Bane instead of a counterpoison.

E. The powder hereof taken in pills with a fig, mollifieth the belly: it
wasteth away the hardness of the paps: it healeth wounds, it cureth
putrefied ulcers being applied with honey: and these things the first
Ground Pine doth perform, so doth the other two: but not so effectually,
as witnesseth Dioscorides.

F. Clusius of whom mention was made, hath not said any thing of the
virtues of Chamæpytis austriaca: but verily I think it better by many
degrees for the purposes aforesaid: my conjecture I take from the taste,
smell, and comely proportion of this herb, which is more pleasing and
familiar unto the nature of man, than those which we have plentifully in
our own country growing.


CHAP. 152. Of Navelwort, or Pennywort of the Wall.



Fig. 793. Wall Pennywort (1) 

Fig. 794. Jagged or Rose Pennywort (2)
The Description.

1. The Great Navelwort hath round and thick leaves, somewhat bluntly
indented about the edges, and somewhat hollow in the midst on the upper
part, having a short tender stem fastened to the midst of the leaf, on
the lower side underneath the stalk whereon the flowers do grow, is small
and hollow, an handful high and more, beset with many small flowers of an
overworn incarnate colour. The root is round like an olive, of a white
colour.

The root is not well expressed in the figure, for it should have been
more unequal or tuberous, with the fibres not at the bottom but top
thereof.

2. The second kind of Wall Pennywort or Navelwort hath broad thick leaves
somewhat deeply indented about the edges: and are not so round as the
leaves of the former, but somewhat long towards the setting on, spread
upon the ground in manner of a tuft, set about the tender stalk, like to
Sengreen or Houseleek; among which riseth up a tender stalk whereon do
grow the like leaves. The flowers stand on the top consisting of five
small leaves of a white colour, with red spots in them. The root is small
and thready. This by some is called Sedum Serratum.


Fig. 795. Kinds of Pennywort or Navelwort (3-6)

3. This third kind hath long thick narrow leaves, very finely snipped or
nicked on the edges, which lie spread very orderly upon the ground; and
in the midst of them rises up a stalk some foot high, which bears at the
top thereof upon three or four little branches, divers white flowers
consisting of five leaves apiece.

4. The leaves of this are long and thick, yet not so finely snipped about
the edges, nor so narrow as those of the former: the stalk is a foot
high, set here and there with somewhat shorter and rounder leaves than
those below; and towards the top thereof, out of the bosoms of these
leaves come sundry little footstalks, bearing on their tops pretty large
flowers of colour white, and spotted with red spots. The roots are small,
and here and there put up new tufts of leaves, like as the common
Houseleek.

5. There is a kind of Navelwort that groweth in watery places, which is
called of the husbandmen Sheeps' Bane, because it killeth sheep that do
eat thereof: it is not much unlike the precedent, but the round edges of
the leaves are not so even as the other; and this creepeth upon the
ground, and the other upon the stone walls.

6. Because some in Italy have used this for Umbilicus veneris, and other
some have so called it, I thought it not amiss to follow Matthiolus, and
give you the history thereof in this place, rather than to omit it, or
give it in another which may be perhaps as unfit, for indeed I cannot
fitly rank it with any other plant. Bauhin sets it between Hedera
terrestris, and Nasturtium umbilicum: and Columna refers it to the
Linarias, but I must confess I cannot refer it to any; wherefore I think
it as proper to give it here as in any other place. The branches of this
are many, long, slender, and creeping, upon which grow without any
certain order many little smooth thick leaves fashioned like those of Ivy
and fastened to stalks of some inch long: and together with these stalks
come forth others of the same length, that carry spur-fashioned flowers,
of the shape and bigness of those of the female Fluellen: their outside
is purple, their inside blue, with a spot of yellow in the opening. The
root is small, creeping, and thready. It flowers toward the end of
summer, and grows wild upon walls in Itay, but in gardens with us.
Matthiolus calls it Cymbalaria (to which Lobel adds) Italica hederaceo
folio: Lonicerus terms it Umbilicus veneris officinarum and lastly
Columna calls it Linaria hederæ folio.

The Place.

1. The first kind of Pennywort groweth plentifully in Northampton upon
every stone wall about the town, at Bristol, Bath, Wells, and most places
of the West Country upon stone walls. It groweth upon Westminster Abbey,
over the door that leadeth from Chaucer's tomb to the old palace, saith
our author. In this last place it is not now to be found.

2, 3, 4. The second, third, and fourth grow upon the Alps near Piedmont,
and Bavaria, and upon the mountains of Germany: I found the third growing
upon Beeston Castle in Cheshire.

5. The fifth grows upon the bogs upon Hampstead Heath, and many such
rotten grounds in other places.

The Time.

They are green and flourish especially in winter: They flower also in the
beginning of summer.

The Names.

Navelwort is called in  Latin, Umbilicus veneris, and acetabulum: of
divers, Herba Coxendicum: Iacobus Manlius nameth it Scatum Cœli, and
Scatellum: in Dutch, Navelcruyt: in Italian, Cupertoiule: in French,
Escuelles: in Spanish, Capadella: of some, Hortus veneris, or Venus'
garden, and Terræ umbilicus or the Navel of the earth: in English,
Pennywort, Wall-Pennywort, Lady's navel, Hipwort and Kidney-wort.

Water Pennywort is called in Latin Cotyledon palustris: in English,
Sheep-killing Pennygrass, Penny-Rot, and in the North Country White-Rot:
for there is also Red-Rot, which is Rosa folis: in Norfolk it is called
Flukewort. Columna and Bauhin fitly refer this to the Ranunculi, or
Crowfeet; for it hath no affinity at all with the Cotyledons (but only in
the roundness of the leaf) the former of them calls it Ranunculus
aquaticus umbilicato folio, and the later, Ranunculus aquat. cotyledonis
folio.

The Temperature.

Navelwort is of a moist substance and somewhat cold, and of a certain
obscure binding quality: it cooleth, repelleth, or driveth back,
scoureth, and consumeth, or wasteth away, as Galen testifieth.

The Water Pennywort is of an hot and ulcerating quality, like to the
Crowfeet, whereof it is a kind. The bastard Italian Navelwort seems to
partake with the true in cold and moisture.

The Virtues.

A. The juice of Wall Pennywort is a singular remedy against all
inflammations and hot tumors, as erysipelas, Saint Anthony's fire, and
such like: and is good for kibed heels, being bathed therewith, and one
or more of the leaves laid upon the heel.

B. The leaves and roots eaten do break the stone, provoke urine, and
prevail much against the dropsy.

C. The ignorant apothecaries do use the Water Pennywort instead of this
of the wall, which they cannot do without great error, and much danger to
the patient: for husbandmen know well, that it is noisome unto sheep, and
other cattle that feed thereon, and for the most part bringeth death unto
them, much more to men by a stronger reason.


CHAP. 152. Of SeaPennywort.



Fig. 796. Sea Navelwort (1) 

Fig. 797. One Summer's Navelwort (2)
The Description.

1. The Sea Navelwort hath many round thick leaves like unto little
saucers, set upon small tender stalks, bright, shining, and smooth, of
two inches long, for the most part growing upon the furrowed shells of
cockles or the like, every small stem bearing upon the end or point one
little buckler and no more resembling a navel; the stalk and leaf set
together in the middle of the same. Whereupon the herbarists of
Montpellier have called it Umbilicus marinus, or Sea Navel. The leaves
and stalks of this plant, whilst they are yet in the water, are of a pale
ash colour, but being taken forth, they presently wax white, as Sea Moss,
called Corallina, or the shell of a cockle. It is thought to be barren of
seed, and is in taste saltish.

2. The second Androsace hath many leaves lying flat upon the ground like
to those of Plantain, but lesser and of a pale green colour, and toothed
about the edges, soft also and juicy, and of somewhat a biting taste.
Amongst these leaves rise up five or six stalks of an handful high,
commonly of a green, yet sometimes of a purple colour, naked and somewhat
hairy, which at their tops carry in a circle fine roundish leaves also a
little toothed and hairy; from the midst of which arise five or more
footstalks, each bearing a greenish rough or hairy cup, parted also into
five little leaves or jags, in the midst of which stands a little white
flower parted also into five; after which succeed pretty large seed
vessels which contain an unequal red seed like that of Primroses, but
bigger: the root is single and slender, and dies as soon as the seed is
perfected. It grows naturally in divers places of Austria, and amongst
the corn about the baths of Baden; whereas it flowers in April, and
ripens the seed in May and June.

The Place.

1. Androsace will not grow any where but in water: great store of it is
about Frontignan by Montpellier in Languedoc, where every fisherman doth
know it.

2. The second groweth upon old stone and mud walls: notwithstanding I
have (the more to grace Matthiolus' great jewel) planted it in my garden.

The Time.

The bastard Androsace flowereth in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.

1. Androsace is of some called Umbilicus marinus, or Sea Navel.

2. The second is known and called by the name of Androsace altera
matthioli.

The Temperature.

The Sea Navel is of a diuretic quality, and more dry than Galen thought
it to be, and less hot than others have deemed it: there can no moisture
be found in it.

The Virtues.

A. Sea Navelwort provoketh urine, and digesteth the filthiness and
sliminess gathered in the joints.

B. Two drams of it, as Dioscorides saith, drunk in wine, bringeth down
great store of urine out of their bodies that have the dropsy, and maketh
a good plaster to cease the pain of the gout.


CHAP. 153. Of Rosewort, or Roseroot.


Fig. 798. Rosewort.

The Description.

Rosewort hath many small, thick, and fat stems, growing from a thick and
knobby root: the upper end of it for the most part standeth out of the
ground, and is there of a purplish colour, bunched & knobbed like the
root of Orpine, with many hairy strings hanging thereat, of a pleasant 
smell when it is broken, like the Damask Rose, whereof it took his name.
The leaves are set round about the stalks, even from the bottom to the
top, like those of the field Orpine, but narrower, and more snipped about
the edges. The flowers grow at the top of a faint yellow colour.

The Place.

It groweth very plentifully in the North part of England, especially in a
place called Ingleborough Fells, near unto the brooks' sides, and not
elsewhere that I can as yet find out, from whence I have had plants for
my garden.

The Time.

It flowereth and flourisheth in July, and the seed is ripe in August.

The Names.

Some have thought it hath taken the name Rhodia of the Island in the
Mediterranean sea, called Rhodes: but doubtless it took his name Rhodia
radix, of the root which smelleth like a rose: in English, Rose-Root, and
Rosewort.

The Virtues.

There is little extant in writing of the faculties of Rosewort: but this
I have found, that if the root be stamped with oil of Roses and laid to
the temples of the head, it easeth the pain of the head.


CHAP. 144. Of Samphire



Fig. 799. Rock Samphire (1) 

Fig. 800. Thorny Samphire (2)
The Description.

1. Rock Samphire hath many fat and thick leaves, somewhat like those of
the lesser Purslane, of a spicy taste with a certain saltness; amongst
which riseth up a stalk, divided into many small sprays or sprigs; on the
top whereof do grow spoky tufts of white flowers, like the tufts of
Fennel or Dill; after that cometh the seed like the seed of Fennel, but
greater. The root is thick and knobby, being of smell delightful &
pleasant.

2. The second Samphire called Pastinaca marina, or Sea Parsnip, hath long
fat leaves, very much jagged or cut even to the middle rib, sharp or
prickly pointed, which are set upon large fat jointed stalks; on the top
whereof do grow tufts of whitish, or else reddish flowers. The seed is
wrapped in thorny husks. The root is thick and long, not unlike to the
Parsnip, very good and wholesome to be eaten.


Fig. 801. Golden Samphire (3)

3. Golden Samphire bringeth forth many stalks from one root, compassed
about with a multitude of long fat leaves, set together by equal
distances; at the top whereof come yellow flowers. The seed is like those
of the Rock Samphire.

The Place.

1. Rock Samphire groweth on the rocky cliffs at Dover, Winchelsea, by
Rye, about Southhampton, the Isle of Wight, and most rocks about the West
and North-west parts about England.

2. The second groweth near the sea upon the sands, and beach between
Whitstable and the Isle of Thanet, by Sandwich, and by the sea near
Westchester.

3. The third groweth in the miry marsh in the Isle of Sheppey, as you go
from the King's Ferry, to Sherland house.

The Time.

Rock Samphire flourisheth in May and June, and must be gathered to be
kept in pickle in the beginning of August.

The Names.

1. Rock Samphire is called in Latin, Crithmum: and of divers, Bati: in
some shops, Creta marina: of Petrus, Crescentius, Cretamum, and Rincum
marinum: in High Dutch, Meer fenchel: which is in Latin Fœniculum
marinum, or Sea Fennel: in Italian, Fenocchio marina, Herba di San
Pietro; and hereupon divers name it Sampetra: in Spanish, Perexil de la
mer, Hinoio marino, Fenolmarin: in English, Samphire and Rock Samphire,
and of some, Crestmarine; and these be the names of the Samphire
generally eaten in salads.

2, 3. The other two be also Crithma or Samphires, but most of the later
writers would draw them to some other plant: for one calleth the second
Pastinaca marina, or Sea Parsnip, and the third Aster atticus marinus;
and Lobel names it Chrysanthemum littoreum: but we had rather entertain
them as Matthiolus doth, among the kinds of Crithmum, or Samphire.

The Temperature.

Samphire doth dry, warm, and scour, as Galen saith.

The Virtues.

A. The leaves, seeds, and roots, as Dioscorides saith, boiled in wine and
drunk, provoke urine, and women's sickness, and prevail against the
jaundice.

B. The leaves kept in pickle, and eaten in salads with oil and vinegar,
is a pleasant sauce for meat, wholesome for the stoppings of the liver,
milt, kidneys and bladder: it provoketh urine gently; it openeth the
stoppings of the entrails, and stirreth up an appetite to meat.

C. It is the pleasantest sauce, most familiar, and best agreeing with
man's body, both for digestion of meats, breaking of the stone, and
voiding of gravel in the reins and bladder.


CHAP. 155. Of Glass Saltwort.



Fig. 802. Glass Saltwort (1) 

Fig. 803. Snail Glasswort (2)
The Description.

1. Glasswort hath many gross, thick and round stalks a foot high, full of
fat and thick sprigs, set with many knots or joints, without any leaves
at all, of a reddish green colour. The whole plant resembleth a branch of
coral. The root is very small and single.

2. There is another kind of Saltwort, which hath been taken among the
ancient herbarists for a kind of Samphire. It hath a little tender stalk
a cubit high, divided into many small branches, set full of little thick
leaves very narrow, somewhat long and sharp pointed, yet not pricking;
amongst which cometh forth small seed, wrapped in a crooked husk, turned
round like a crooked perwinkle. The stalks are of a reddish colour. The
whole plant is of a salt and biting taste. The root is small and thready.


Fig. 804. Small Glasswort (3)

3. There is likewise another kind of Kali, whereof Lobel maketh mention
under the name of Kali minus, which is like to the last before
remembered, but altogether lesser, having many slender weak branches
lying commonly spread upon the ground, and set with many small round long
sharp pointed leaves, of a whitish green colour: the seed is small and
shining, not much unlike that of Sorrel: the root is slender with many
fibres; the whole plant hath a saltish taste like as the former. Dodonæus
calls this Kali album.
The Place.

There plants are to be found in salt marshes almost everywhere; the
second excepted, which grows not here, but upon the coasts of the
Mediterranean sea.

The Time.

They flower and flourish in the summer months.

The Names.

Saltwort is called of the Arabians Kali, and Alkali. Avicenna, chap. 724,
describeth them under the name of Usnen, which differeth from Usnee: for
Usnee is that which the Latins call Muscus, or Moss of some, as Baptista
Montanus: it hath been judged to be Empetron.

The ashes hereof are named of Matthiolus Silvaticus, Soda: of most, Sal
Alkali: divers call it Alumen catinum.

Others make this kind of difference between Sal Kali, and Alumen catinum,
that Alumen catinum is the ashes itself: and that the salt that is made
of the ashes is Sal Alkali.

Stones are beaten to powder, & mixed with [the] ashes, which being melted
together become the matter whereof glasses are made. Which while it is
made red hot in the furnace, and is melted, becoming liquid and fit to
work upon, doth yield as it were a fat floating aloft; which, when it is
cold, waxeth as hard as a stone, yet it is brittle, and quickly broken.
This is commonly called Axungia vitri. In English, Sandiver: in Frnech,
Suin de Voirre: in Italian, Flor de cristalo, .i. Flower of Crystal, The
herb is also called of divers Kali articulatum, or Jointed Glasswort: and
in English, Crab-Grass, and Frog-Grass.

The Temperature.

Glasswort is hot and dry: the ashes are both drier and hotter, and that
even to the fourth degree: the ashes have a caustic or burning quality.

The Virtues.

A. A little quantity of the herb taken inwardly, doth not only mightily
provoke urine, but in like sort casteth forth the dead child. It draweth
forth by siege waterish humours, and purgeth away the dropsy.

B. A great quantity taken is mischievous and deadly. The smell and smoke
also of this herb being burnt doth drive away serpents.

C. The ashes are likewise tempered with those medicines that serve to
take away scabs and filth off the skin: it easily consumeth proud and
superfluous flesh that groweth in poisonsome ulcers, as Avicenna and
Serapio report.

D. We read in the copies of Serapio, that Glasswort is a tree so great,
that a man may stand under the shadow thereof. but it is very like, that
this error proceeded rather from the interpreter, than from the author
himself.

E. The flower of crystal, or (as they commonly term it, sandiver) doth
wonderfully dry. It easily taketh away scabs and manginess, if the foul
parts be washed and bathed with the water wherein it is boiled.


CHAP. 156. Of Thoroughwax.



Fig. 805. Common Thoroughwax (1) 

Fig. 806. Codded Thoroughwax (2)
The Description.

1. Thoroughwax or Thoroughleaf, hath a round, slender, and brittle stalk,
divided into many small branches which pass or go through the leaves, as
though they had been drawn or thrust through, and to make it more plain
every branch doth grow through every leaf making them like hollow cups or
saucers. The seed groweth in spoky tufts or roundels like Dill, long and
blackish. The flowers are of a faint yellow colour. The root is single,
white and thready.

2. Codded Thoroughwax reckoned by Dodonæeus among the Brassicas or
Coleworts, and making it a kind thereof, and calling it Brassica
sylvestris perfoliata: though in mine opinion without reason, sith it
hath neither shape, affinity, nor likeness with any of the Coleworts, but
altogether most unlike, resembling very well the Common Thoroughwax,
whereunto I rather refer it. It hath small, tender, and brittle stalks
two foot high, bearing leaves, which wrap and enclose themselves round
about, although they do not run through as the other do, yet they grow in
such manner, that upon the sudden view thereof, they seem to pass through
as the other: upon the small branches do grow little white flowers: which
being past, there succeed slender and long cods like those of Turnips or
Navews whose leaves and cods do somewhat resemble the same, from whence
it hath the name Napifolia, that is, Thoroughwax with leaves like unto
the Navew. The root is long and single, and dieth when it hath brought
forth his seed.

There is a wild kind hereof growing in Kent, in many places among the
corn, like to the former in each respect, but altogether lesser: the
which no doubt brought into the garden would prove the very same.

The Place.

1. The first described grows plentifully in many places about Kent, and
between Farningham and Ainsford it grows in such quantity (as I have been
informed by Mr. Bowles) in the cornfields on the tops of the hills, that
it may well be termed the infirmity of thern.

2. The later grows not wild with us that ever I could find, though Lobel
seems to affirm the contrary.

They grow in the gardens of herbarists, and in my garden likewise.

The Time.

They flower in May and June, and their seed is ripe in August.

The Names.

1. It hath been called from the beginning Pefoliata, because the stalk
doth pass through the leaf, following the signification of the same: we
call it in English, Thoroughwax, or Thoroughleaf.

2. This by the most and best part of writers (though our author be of
another opinion) is very fitly referred to the wild Coleworts, and called
Brassica campestris by Clusius and by Camerarius; Brassica agrestis by
Tragus: yet Lobel calleth it Perfoliata napifolia anglorum siliquosa.

The Temperature.

Thoroughwax is of a dry complexion.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of Thoroughwax made of water or wine healeth wounds. The
juice is excellent for wounds made either into an oil or unguent.

B. The green leaves stripped, boiled with wax, oil, rosin and turpentine,
maketh an excellent unguent or salve to incarnate, or bring up flesh in
deep wounds.


CHAP. 157. Of Honeywort.



Fig. 807. Great Honeywort (1) 

Fig. 808. Rough Honeywort (2)
The Description.

1. Cerinthe or Honeywort riseth forth of the ground after the sowing of
his seed, with two small leaves like those of Basil, between the which
leaves cometh forth a thick, fat, smooth, tender, and brittle stalk full
of juice, that divideth itself into many other branches; which also are
divided in sundry other arms or branches likewise, crambling or leaning
toward the ground, being not able without props to sustain itself, by
reason of the great weight of leaves, branches, & much juice, the whole
plant is surcharged with; upon which branches are placed many thick rough
leaves, set with very sharp prickles like the rough skin of a Thornback,
of a bluish green colour, spotted very notably with white streaks and
spots, like those leaves of the true Pulmonaria or Cowslips of Jerusalem,
and in shape like those of the codded Thoroughwax, which leaves do clip
or embrace the stalks round about: from the bosom whereof come forth
small clusters of flowers, yellow, or purple, and sometimes of both
commixed, with a hoop or band of bright purple round about the middle of
the yellow flower. The flower is hollow, fashioned like a little box, of
the taste of honey when it is sucked, in the hollowness whereof are many
small chives or threads; which being past, there succeed round black
seed, contained in soft skinny husks. The root perisheth at the first
approch of winter.

2. The leaves of this other great Honeywort (of Clusius' description) are
shaped like those last described, but that they are narrower at their
setting on, and rougher; the flowers are also yellow of colour, but in
shape & magnitude like the former, as it is also in the seeds, & all the
other parts thereof.


Fig. 809. Small Honeywort (3)

3. This other Cerinth or Honeywort hath small, long and slender branches,
reeling this way and that way, as not able to sustain itself, very
brittle, beset with leaves not much unlike the precedent, but lesser,
neither so rough nor spotted, of a bluish green colour. The flowers be
small, low, and yellow. The seed is small, round, and as black as jet:
the root is white, with some fibres, the which dieth as the former. There
is a taste as it were of new wax in the flowers or leaves chewed, as the
name doth seem to import.

The Place.

These plants do not grow wild in England, yet I have them in my garden;
the seeds whereof I received from the right honourable the Lord Zouch, my
honorable good friend.

The Time.

They flower from May to August, and perish at the first approach of
winter, and must be sown again the next spring.

The Names.

1. The first of these by Gesner is called Cynoglossa montana and
Cerinthe: Dodonæus calleth it Maru herba and Lobel and others, Cerinthe
maior.

2. The second is Cerinthe quorundam maior flavo flore of Clusius.

3. The third by Dodonæus is called Maru herba minor: and by Clusius,
Cerinthe quorundam minor flavo flore: Lobel also calls it Cerinthe minor.

The Temperature and virtues.

Pliny and Avicenna seem to agree, that these herbs are of a cold
complexion; notwithstanding there is not any experiment of their virtues
worth the writing.


CHAP. 158. Of St. John's Wort.



Fig. 810. St. John's Wort (1) 

Fig. 811. Rue St. John's Wort (2)
The Description.

1. Saint John's Wort hath brownish stalks beset with many small and
narrow leaves, which if you behold betwixt your eyes and the light do
appear as it were bored or thrust through in an infinite number of places
with pins' points. The branches divide themselves into sundry small
twigs, at the top whereof do grow many yellow flowers, which with the
leaves bruised do yield a reddish juice of the colour of blood. The seed
is contained in little sharp pointed husks, black of colour, and smelling
like rosin. The root is long, yellow, and of a woody substance.

2. The second kind of St. John's Wort named Syriacum, of those that have
not seen the fruitful and plentiful fields of England, wherein it groweth
abundantly, having small leaves at almost like to Rue or Herb-Grace:
wherein Dodonæus hath failed, entitling the true Androsæmum by the name
of Ruta sylvestris; whereas indeed it is no more like Rue than an apple
to an oyster. This plant is altogether like the precedent, but smaller,
wherein consisteth the difference.


Fig. 812. Lobel's Woolly St. John's Wort (3a)

3a. Woolly St. John's Wort hath many small weak branches trailing upon
the ground, beset with many little leaves, covered over with a certain
soft kind of downiness: among which cometh forth weak and tender branches
charged with small pale yellow flowers. The seeds and roots are like unto
the true St. John's Wort.


Fig. 813. Clusius' Woolly St. John's Wort (3b)

3b. There is another Woolly St. John's Wort described by Clusius, which
is taller, more white and hairy, and hath the flowers growing along
little footstalks, and not in the manner of an umbel, as in the other.


Fig. 814. Small Creeping St. John's Wort (4)

4. Besides these two creeping hoary St. John's Worts here described,
there is another small kind which is called by Dodonæus, Hypericum minus;
and by Lobel, Hypericum minimum supinum septentrionale. It grows four
handful or more high, with weak and slender branches set with leaves like
those of the ordinary kind, but less: the flowers are also like those of
the first described, but fewer in number, and less. It is to be found in
dry and barren grounds, and flowers at the same time as the the former.

5. I have observed growing in St. John's wood and other places, that kind
of St. John's Wort which by Tragus is called Hypericum pulchrum; and both
by him and Lonicerus is thought to be Dioscorides his Androsæmum; the
which we in English may for distinction's sake call Upright Saint John's
Wort. It hath roots like those of the ordinary kind; from which arise
straight slender stalks some cubit high, set at equal spaces with pretty
smooth leaves, broad, and almost encompassing the stalk at their setting
on, and being sometimes of a green, and otherwhiles of a reddish colour:
towards the top they are parted into some few branches, which bear such
yellow flowers as the common kind, but somewhat smaller. It flowers about
the same time as the former, or a little later.

The Place
They grow very plentifully in the pastures in every country.

The Time.
They flower and flourish for the most part in July and August.

The Names.
S. John's wort is called in Latin, Hypericum: in shops, Perforata: of
divers, Fuga dæmonum: in Dutch, San Johans kraut: in Italian, Hyperico:
in Spanish, Caraconzillo: in French, Mille Pertuis: in English, St.
John's Wort, or St. John's Grass.

The Temperature.

St. John's Wort (as Galen teacheth) is hot and dry, being of substance
thin.

The Virtues.

A. St. John's Wort with his flowers and seed boiled and drunken,
provoketh urine, and is right good against the stone in the bladder, and
stoppeth the lask. The leaves stamped are good to be laid upon burnings,
scaldings, and all wounds; and also for rotten and filthy ulcers.

B. The leaves, flowers, and seeds stamped, and put into a glass with
olive oil, and set in the hot sun for certain weeks together, and then
drained from those herbs, and the like quantity of new put in, and sunned
in like manner, doth make an oil of the colour of blood, which is a most
precious remedy for deep wounds, and those that are through the body, for
sinews that are pricked, or any wound made with a venomed weapon. I am
accustomed to make a compound oil hereof; the making of which ye shall
receive at my hands, because that I know in the world there is not a
better, no not natural balsam itself; for I dare undertake to cure any
such wound as absolutely in each respect, if not sooner and better, as
any man whatsoever shall or may with natural balsam.
Take white wine two pints, olive oil four pounds, oil of Turpentine two
pounds, the leaves, flowers and seeds of St. John's Wort, of each two
great handfuls gently bruised; put them all together into a great double
glass, and set it in the sun eight or ten days; then boil them in the
same glass per balneum Mariæ, that is, in a kettle of water with some
straw in the bottom, wherein the glass must stand to boil: which done,
strain the liquor from the herbs, and do as you did before, putting in
the like quantity of herbs, flowers, and seeds, but not any more wine.
And so have you a great secret for the purposes aforesaid.

C. Dioscorides saith, That the seed drunk for the space of forty days
together, cureth the sciatica, and all aches that happen in the hips.

D. The same author saith, That being taken with wine it taketh away
tertian and quartan agues.


CHAP. 159. Of Saint Peter's Wort, or Square St. John's Grass.


Fig. 815. St. Peter's Wort (1)

The Description.

1. Saint Peter's Wort groweth to the height of a cubit and a half, having
a straight upright stalk somewhat brown, set by couples at certain
distances, with leaves much like those of St. John's Wort, but greater,
rougher, and rounder pointed: from the bosom of which leaves come forth
many smaller leaves, the which are not bored through, as those of St.
John's wort are; yet Sometime there be some few so bored through. The
flowers grow at the top of the branches of a yellow colour: the leaves
and flowers when they are bruised do yield forth a bloody juice as doth
St. John's wort, whereof this is a kind. The root is tough, and of a
woody substance.

2. Upon divers boggy grounds of this kingdom is to be found growing that
St. Peter's Wort which Clusius describes in his Auctarium, by the name of
Ascyrum supinum. This sends forth divers round hairy creeping stalks,
which here and there put out new fibres or roots; and these are set at
certain spaces with very round and hairy leaves of a whitish colour, two
at a joint, and on the tops of these stalks grow a few small yellow
flowers which consist of five leaves apiece; these stalks seldom send
forth branches unless it be one or two at the tops. It may well be called
in English, Round-Leaved St.Peter's Wort.

The Place.

St. Peters Wort, or St. John's Grass groweth plentifully in the North
part of England, especially in Londsdale and Craven: I have found it in
many places of Kent, especially in a copse by Master Sidley's house near
Southfleet.

The Time.


It flowereth and flourisheth when St. John's Wort doth.

The Names.

The Latins have no other name but this Greek name Ascyron. It is called
of some Androsæmum: Galen maketh it both a kind of Tutsan, and St. John's 
Wort: and saith it is named Ascyron, and Ascyroides: in English,
St.Peter's Wort, Square or Great St. John's Grass: and of some, Hardhay.
Few know it from St. John's wort.

The Temperature.

This herb is of temperature hot and dry.

The Virtues.

A. It is endued with the same virtues that St. John's Wort is endued
withal. The seed, saith Dioscorides, being drunk in four ounces and a
half of mead, doth plentifully purge by siege choleric excrements. Galen
doth likewise affirm the same.


CHAP. 160. Of Tutsan or Park-Leaves.



Fig. 816. Tutsan (1) 

Fig. 817. Tutsan St. John's Wort (2)
The Description.

1. The stalks of Tutsan be straight, round, chamfered or crested, hard
and woody, being for the most part two foot high. The leaves are three or
four times bigger than those of St. John's wort, which be at the first
green; afterwards, and in the end of summer of a dark red colour: out of
which is pressed a juice not like black blood, but Claret or Gascoigne
wine. The flowers are yellow, and greater than those of St.Peter's Wort;
after which riseth up a little round head or berry, first green,
afterwards red, last of all black, wherein is contained yellowish red
seed. The root is hard, woody, and of long continuance.

2. This, which Dodonæus did not unfitly call Ruta sylvestris
hypericoides, and which others have set forth for Androsæmum, may fitly
stand in competition with the last described, which may pass in the first
place for the Androsæmum of the ancients, for adhuc sub judice lis est
["the case is still before the judge"]. I will not here insist upon the
point of controversy, but give you a description of the plant, which is
this: It sends up round slender reddish stalks some two cubits high, set
with fewer yet bigger leaves than the ordinary St. John's Wort, and these
also more hairy: the flowers and seeds are like those of the common St.
John's Wort, but somewhat larger. It grows in some mountainous and woody
places, and in the Adversaria it is called Androsæmum excellentius, seu
magnum: and by Dodonæus (as we but now noted) Ruta sylvestris
hypericoides, thinking it to be the Ruta sylvestris which is described by
Dioscorides, lib. 2, cap. 48, in the old Greek edition of Manutus. And in
that of Marcellus Virgilius his Interpretation, in the chapter and book
but now mentioned; but rejected amongst the Notha in the Paris Edition,
Anno 1549. You may find the description also in Dodonæus, Pempt. primæ,
lib. 3, cap. 21, whither I refer the curious, being loath here to insist
further upon it.

The Place.

Tutsan groweth in woods and by hedges, especially in Hampstead Wood,
where the Golden-Rod doth grow; in a wood by Rayleigh in Essex, and many
other places.

The Time.

It flowereth in July and August: the seed in the mean time waxeth ripe.
The leaves become red in autumn; at that time is very easily pressed
forth his winy juice.

The Names.

It is called in Latin Androsæmum: it is likewise called Dionysias, as
Galen witnesseth. They are far from the truth that take it to be
Clymenum, and it is needless to find fault with their error. It is also
called Siciliana, and Herba siciliana: in English Tutsan, and Park-
Leaves.

The Temperature

The faculties are such as St. Peter's Wort which doth sufficiently
declare it to be hot and dry.

The Virtues.

A. The seed hereof beaten to powder, and drunk to the weight of two
drams, doth purge choleric excrements, as Dioscorides writeth; and is a
singular remedy for the sciatica, provided that the patient do drink
water for a day or two after purging.

B. The herb cureth burnings, and applied upon new wounds it stancheth the
blood, and healeth them.

C. The leaves laid upon broken shins and scabbed legs healeth them, and
many other hurts and griefs, whereof it took his name Tout-saine, or
Tutsan, of healing all things.


CHAP. 161. Of Bastard St. John's Wort.



Fig. 818. Matthiolus' Bastard St. John's Wort (1) 

Fig. 819. French Bastard St. John's Wort (2) 


The diligence of these later times hath been such to find out the Materia
medica of the ancients, that there is scarce any plant described by them,
but by some or other of late there have been two or more several plants
referred thereto: and thus it hath happened unto that which Dioscorides
lib. 3, cap. 174, hath set forth by the name of Coris; and presently
describes after the kinds of Hypericon. Some also call this Hypericon; to
which Matthiolus and others have fitted a plant, which is indeed a kind
of Hypericon, as you may perceive by the figure and description which I
give you in the first place. Some (as Hesychius) refer it to Chamæpytis,
(and indeed by Dioscorides it is placed between Androsæmum and
Chamæpytis) and to this that which is described by Pena and Lobel in the
Adversaria and by Clusius in his History, may fitly be referred: this I
give you in the second place.

The Description.

1. The first hath a woody thick and long lasting root, which sendeth up
many branches some foot or more high, and it is set at certain spaces
with round leaves like those of the small Glass-Wort or Sea-Spurry, but
shorter: the tops of the stalks are divided into sundry branches, which
carry flowers like those of St. John's Wort, of a whitish red colour,
with threads in their middles having little yellow pendants. It grows in
Italy and other hot countries, in places not far from the sea side. This
is thought to be the true Coris, by Matthiolus, Gesner, Lonicerus,
Lacuna, Bellus, Pona, and others.
2.  This from a thick root red on the outside sendeth up sundry stalks,
some but an handful, other some a foot or more long, stiff, round,
purplish, set thick with leaves like those of Heath, but thicker, more
succulent and bitter, which sometimes grow orderly, and otherwhiles out
of order. The spikes or heads grow on the tops of the branches,
consisting of a number of little cups, divided into five sharp points,
and marked with a black spot in each division: out of these cups comes a
flower of a blue purple colour, of a most elegant and not fading colour;
and it is composed of four little bifid leaves, whereof the two uppermost
are the larger: the seed, which is round and blackish, is contained in
seed-vessels having points somewhat sharp or prickly. It flowers in April
and May, and is to be found growing in many places of Spain, as also
about Montpellier in France; whence Pena and Lobel called it Coris
monspeliaca; and Clusius, Coris quorundam gallorum & hispanorum.

The Temperature.

These plants seem to be hot in the second or third degree.

The Virtues.

A. Dioscorides saith, That the seed of Coris drunk move the courses and
urine, are good against the biting of the spider Phalangium, the
sciatica; and drunk in wine, against that kind of convulsion which the
Greeks call opisthotonos, (which is when the body is drawn backwards) as
also against the cold fits in agues. It is also good anointed with oil,
against the aforesaid convulsion.


CHAP. 161. Of the Great Centaury.



Fig. 820. Great Centaury (1) 

Fig. 821. Whole-Leaved Great Centaury (2)
The Description.

1. The Great Centaury bringeth forth round smooth stalks three cubits
high: the leaves are long, divided as it were into many parcels like to
those of the Walnut tree, and of an overworn grayish colour, somewhat
snipped about the edges like the teeth of a saw. The flowers grow at the
top of the stalks in scaly knops like the great Knapweed, the middle
thrums whereof are of a light blue or sky colour: when the seed is ripe
the whole knop or head turneth into a downy substance like the head of an
Artichoke, wherein is found a long smooth seed, bearded at one end like
those of Bastard Saffron, called Cartamus, or the seed of Cardus
Benedictus. The root is great, long, black on the outside, and of a
sanguine colour on the inside, somewhat sweet in taste, and biting the
tongue.

2. There is likewise another sort, having great and large leaves like
those of the Water Dock, somewhat snipped or toothed about the edges. The
stalk is shorter than the other, but the root is more oleous or fuller of
juice, otherwise like. The flower is of a pale yellow purplish colour,
and the seed like that of the former.

The Place.

The Great Centaury joyeth in a fat and fruitful soil, and in sunny banks
full of grass and herbs. It groweth very plentifully, saith Dioscorides,
in Lycia, Peloponnesus, Arcadia, and Morea: and it is also to be found
upon Baldus a mountain in the territories of Verona, and likewise in my
garden.

The Time

It flowereth in summer, and the roots may be gathered in autumn.

The Names.

It is called of Theophrastes Centauris: in divers shops falsely Rha
ponticum: for Rha ponticum is Rha growing in the countries of Pontus; a
plant differing from great Centaury. Theophrastus and Pliny set down
among the kinds of Panaces or All-Heals, this great Centaury, and also
the lesser, whereof we will write in the next chapter following. Pliny
reciting the words of Theophrastus, doth in his twenty-fifth book and
fourth chapter write, that they were found out by Chiron the centaur, and
surnamed Centauria. Also affirming the same thing in his sixth chapter
(where he more largely expoundeth both the Centauries) he repeateth them
to be found out by Chiron: and thereupon he addeth, that both of them are
named Chironia. Of some it is reported, That the said Chiron was cured
therewith of a wound in his foot, that was made with an arrow that fell
upon it when he was entertaining Hercules into his house; whereupon it
was called Chironium: or of the curing of the wounds of his soldiers, for
the which purpose it is most excellent.

The Temperature.

It is hot and dry in the third degree. Galen saith, by the taste of the
root it showeth contrary qualities, so in the use it performeth contrary
effects.

The Virtues.

A. The root taken in the quantity of two drams is good for them that be
bursten, or spit blood; against the cramp and shrinking of sinews, the
shortness of wind or difficulty of breathing, the cough and gripings of
the belly.

B. There is not any part of the herb but it rather worketh miracles than
ordinary cures in green wounds; for it joineth together the lips of
simple wounds in the flesh, according to the first intention, that is,
gluing the lips together, not drawing to the place any matter at all.

C. The root of this plant (saith Dioscorides) is a remedy for ruptures,
convulsions, and cramps, taken in the weight of two drams, to be given
with wine to those that are without a fever, and unto those that have,
with water.

D. Galen saith, that the juice of the leaves thereof performeth those
things that the root doth; which is also used instead of Lycium, a kind
of hard juice of a sharp taste.


CHAP. 163. Of Small Centaury.



Fig. 822. Small Centaury (1) 

Fig.  823. Yellow Centaury (2)
The Description.

1. The lesser Centaury is a little herb: it groweth up with a cornered
stalk half a foot high, with leaves in form and bigness of St. John's
Wort: the flowers grow at the top in a spoky bush or roundel, of a red
colour tending to purple; which in the day time and after the sun is up
do open themselves, but towards evening shut up again: after them come
forth small seed-vessels, of the shape of wheat corns, in which are
contained very little seeds.The root is slender, hard, and soon fading.

2. The Yellow Centaury hath leaves, stalks, and seed like the other, and
is in each respect alike, saving that the flowers hereof are of a perfect
yellow colour, which setteth forth the difference. This is of two sorts;
the one with broad leaves through which the stalks passe; and the other
hath narrow leaves like those of the common Centaury.

The Place.

1. The first is growing in great plenty throughout all England, in most
pastures and grassy fields.

2. The yellow doth grow upon the chalky cliffs of Greenhithe in Kent, and
such like places.

The Time.

They are to be gathered in their flowering time, that is in July and
August: of some that gather them superstitiously they are gathered
between the two Lady days.

The Names.
In Latin it is called Centaurium minus; yet Pliny nameth it Libadion, and
by reason of his great bitterness, Fel terræ. The Italians in Etruria
call it Biondella: in Spanish, Centoria: in low-Dutch, Centorye: in
English, Small, Little, or Common Centaury: in French, Centoire.

The Temperature.

The Small Centaury is of a bitter quality, and of temperature hot and dry
in the second degree; and the Yellow Centaury is hot and dry in the third
degree.

The Virtues.

A. Being boiled in water and drunk it openeth the stoppings of the liver,
gall, and spleen, it helpeth the yellow jaundice, and likewise long and
lingering agues: it killeth the worms in the belly; to be brief, it
cleanseth, scoureth, and maketh thin humors that are thick, and doth
effectually perform whatsoever bitter things can.

B. Dioscorides, and Galen after him report, that the decoction draweth
down by siege choler and thick humors, and helpeth the sciatica; but
though we have used this often and luckily, yet could we not perceive
evidently that it purges by the stool any thing at all, and yet it hath
performed the effects aforesaid.

C. This Centaury being stamped and laid on whilst it is fresh and green,
doth heat and close up green wounds, cleanseth old ulcers, and perfectly
cureth them.

D. The juice is good in medicines for the eyes; mixed with honey it
cleanseth away such things as hinder the sight; and being drunk it hath a
peculiar virtue against the infirmities of the sinews, as Dioscorides
teacheth.

E. The Italian Physicians do give the powder of the leaves of yellow
Centaury once in three days in the quantity of a dram, with anise or
caraway seeds, in wine or other liquor, which prevaileth against the
dropsy and green sickness. Of the red flowered, Ioannes Postius hath thus
written:

Flos mihi suave rubet, sed inest quoque succus amarus,
Quis obsessum bile, aperitque jecur.
My flower is sweet in smell, bitter my juice in taste,
Which purge choler, and helps liver, that else would waste.


CHAP. 164. Of Calves'-Snout, or Snapdragon.


Fig. 824. Kinds of Snapdragon (1-5)

The Description.

1. The Purple Snapdragon hath great and brittle stalks which divideth
itself into many fragile branches, whereupon do grow long leaves sharp
pointed, very green, like unto those of wild flax, but much greater, set
by couples one opposite against another. The flowers grow at the top of
the stalks, of a purple colour, fashioned like a frog's mouth, or rather
a dragon's mouth, from whence the women have taken the name Snapdragon.
The seed is black, contained in round husks fashioned like a calf's
snout, (whereupon some have called it Calves'-Snout) or in mine opinion
it is more like unto the bones of a sheep's head that hath been long in
the water, the flesh consumed clean away.

2. The second agreeth with the precedent in every part, except in the
colour of the flowers, for this plant bringeth forth white flowers, and
the other purple, wherein consists the difference.

3. The Yellow Snapdragon hath a long thick woody root, with certain
strings fastened thereto; from which riseth up a brittle stalk of two
cubits and a half high, divided from the bottom to the top into divers
branches, whereupon do grow long green leaves like those of the former,
but greater and longer. The flowers grow at the top of the main branches,
of a pleasant yellow colour, in shape like unto the precedent.

4. The Small or Wild Snapdragon differeth not from the others but in
stature: the leaves are lesser and narrower: the flowers purple, but
altogether smaller: the heads or seed-vessels are allo like those of the
former.

5. There is another kind hereof which hath many slender branches lying
oft times upon the ground: the leaves are much smaller than those of the
last described: the flowers and seed-vessels are also like, but much
lesser, and herein consists the only difference.
The Place.

The three first grow in most gardens; but the yellow kind groweth not
common, except in the gardens of curious herbarists.

The fourth and fifth grow wild amongst corn in divers places.

The Time.

That which hath continued the whole winter doth flower in May, and the
rest of summer afterwards; and that which is planted later, and in the
end of summer, flowereth in the spring of the following year: they do
hardly endure the injury of our cold winter.

The Names.

Snapdragon is called in Latin also Antirrhinum: of Apuleius, Canis
cerebrum, Herba simiana, Venusta minor, Opalis grata, and Orontium: it is
thought to be Leo herba which Columella, lib. 10, reckons among the
flowers: yet Gesner hath thought that this Leo is Columbine, which for
the same cause he hath called Leontostomium: but this name seemeth to us
to agree better with Calves'-Snout than with Columbine; for the gaping
flower of Calves'-Snout is more like to Lion's-Snap than the flower of
Columbine: it is called in Dutch Diant: in Spanish, Cabeza de ternera: in
English, Calves'-Snout, Snapdragon, and Lion's-Snap: in French, Teste de
chien and Teste de Veau.

The Temperature.

They are hot and dry, and of subtle parts.

The virtues.

A. The seed of Snapdragon (as Galen saith) is good for nothing in the use
of physic and the herb itself is of like faculty with Bubonium or
Starwort, but not so effectual.

B. They report (saith Dioscorides) that the herb being hanged about one
preserveth a man from being bewitched, and that it maketh a man gracious
in the sight of people.

C. Apuleius writeth, that the distilled water, or the decoction of the
herb and root made in water, is a speedy remedy for the watering of eyes
proceeding of a hot cause, if they be bathed therewith.


CHAP. 165. Of Toad-Flax



Fig. 825. Great Toad-Flax (1) 

Fig. 826. Sweet Purple Toad-Flax (2)
The Description.

1. Linaria being a kind of Antirrhinum, hath small, slender, blackish
stalks; from which do grow many long narrow leaves like flax. The flowers
be yellow, with a spur hanging at the same like unto a lark's spur,
having a mouth like unto a frog's mouth, even such as is to be seen in
the common Snapdragon; the whole plant before it come to flower so much
resembleth Esula minor, that the one is hardly known from the other but
by this old verse
Esula lactescit, sine lacte Linaria crescit;
Esula with milk doth flow
Toad-flax without milk doth grow.

2. The second kind of Toad-Flax hath leaves like unto Bellis maior, or
the Great Daisy, but not so broad, and somewhat jagged about the edges.
The stalk is small and tender, of a cubit high, beset with many purple
flowers like unto the former in shape. The root is long, with many
threads hanging thereat, the flowers are of a reasonable sweet savour.



Fig. 827. Variable Toad-Flax (3) 

Fig. 828. Valencian Toad-Flax (4) 
	3. The third, being likewise a kind of Toad-Flax, hath small and
narrow leaves like unto the first kind of Linaria: the stalk is a cubit
high, beset with flowers of a purple colour, in fashion like Linaria, but
that it wanteth the tail or spur at the end of the flower which the other
hath. The root is small and thready.

4. Linaria valentina hath leaves like the lesser Centaury, growing at the
bottom of the stalk by three and three, but higher up towards the top,
without any certain order: the stalks are of a foot high; and it is
called by Clusius, Valentina, for that it was found by himself in Agro
Valentino, about Valencia in Spain, where it beareth yellow flowers about
the top of the stalk like common Linaria, but the mouth of the flower is
downy or mossy, and the tail of a purple colour. It flowereth at Valencia
in March, and groweth in the meadows there, and hath not as yet been seen
in these Northern parts.


Fig. 829. White Toad-Flax (5)

5. Osyris alba hath great, thick and long roots, with some threads or
strings hanging at the same, from which rise up many branches very tough
and pliant, beset towards the top with flowers not much unlike the common
Toad-Flax, but of a pale whitish colour, and the inner part of the mouth
somewhat more wide and open, and the leaves like the common Toad-Flax.


Fig. 830. Purple Toad-Flax (6)
6. Osyris purpurocærulea is a kind of Toad-Flax that hath many small and
weak branches, trailing upon the ground, beset with many little leaves
like flax. The flowers grow at the top of the stalk like unto the common
kind, but of a purple colour declining to blueness.The root is small and
thready.


Fig. 831. Creeping Yellow Toad-Flax (7)

7. This hath many small creeping branches some handful or better high,
and hath such leaves, flowers, and seed, as the common kind, but all of
them much less, and therein consisteth the difference. It grows naturally
in the dry fields about Salamanca in Spain, and flowers all summer long.
Lobel calls it Osyris flava sylvestris: and Clusius Linaria hispanica.



Fig. 832. Four-Leaved Creeping Toad-Flax (8) 

Fig. 833. Golden Star-Flowered Toad-Flax (9) 
	8. The branches of this eighth kind are spread upon the ground, and
of the length of those of the last described: the leaves are lesser than
those of the common Toad-Flax, thick, juicy, and of a whitish green
colour, and they grow not disorderly upon the stalks, but at certain
spaces sometimes three, but most usually four together: the flowers in
shape are like those of the ordinary kind, but of a most perfect violet
colour, and the lower lip where it gapes of a golden yellow, the taste is
bitter. After the flowers are past come vessels round & thick, which
contain a flat black seed in two partitions or cells: the root is
slender, white, and long lasting, and it flowers unto the end of autumn.
It grows naturally upon the highest Alps. Gesner calls it Linaria alpina,
and Clusius, Linaria styriaca.

9. Forasmuch as this plant is stalked and leafed like common Flax and
thought by some to be Osyris, the new writers have called it Linosyris:
it hath stalks very stiff and woody, beset with leaves like the common
Linaria, with flowers at the top of the stalks of a faint shining yellow
colour, in form and shape somewhat like unto Conyza maior. The whole
plant groweth to the height of two cubits, and is in taste sharp and
clammy, or glutinous, and somewhat bitter. The root is compact of many
strings, entangled one within another.


Fig. 834. Kinds of Toad-Flax (10-13)

10. Guillandinus calleth this plant Hyssopus umbellifera dioscoridis,
that is, Dioscorides his Hyssop, which beareth a tuft in all points like
Linosyris, whereof it is a kind not differing from it in show & leaves.
The stalks are a cubit high, divided above into many small branches, the
tops whereof are garnished with tufts of small flowers, each little
flower being parted into five parts with a little thread or pistil in the
middle, so that it seems full of many golden hairs or thrums. The seed is
long and blackish, and is carried away with the wind. Bauhine in his
Pinax makes this all one with the former, but unfitly, especially if you
mark the descriptions of their flowers which are far unlike. Fabius
Columna hath proved this to be the Chrysocome described by Dioscorides
lib.4, cap. 55.

11. Scoparia, or after Dodonæus, Osyris, which the Italians call
Belvidere, hath very many shoots or sprigs rising from one small stalk,
making the whole plant to resemble a Cypress tree, the branches grow so
handsomely: now it grows some three foot high, and very thick and bushy,
so that in some places where it groweth they make besoms of it, whereof
it took the name Scoparia. The leaves be small and narrow almost like to
the leaves of flax. The flowers be small, and of an herby green all the
winter, saith our author. I never knew it here to ripen the seed, nor to
out-live the first frost.

12. This plant also for resemblance' sake is referred to the Linaries,
because his leaves be like Linaria. At the top of the small branched
stalks do grow little yellowish flowers pale of colour, somewhat like the
tops of Chrysocome. John Mouton of Tournai taketh it to be Chrysocome
altera. And because there hath been no concordance among writers, it's
sufficient to set forth his description with his name Passerina. Bauhine
refers it to the Gromwells, and calls it Lithospermum linariæ folio
monspeliacum.

13. This which Tabernamontanus calls Lingua passerina, hath a small
single whitish root, from which it sends up a slender stalk some cubit
and half high, naked on the lower part, but divided into little branches
on the upper, which branches are set thick with little narrow leaves like
those of Winter Savory or Thyme: amongst which grow many little longish
seeds of the bigness and taste of Millet, but somewhat hotter and
bitterer. The flowers consist of four small yellow leaves. Tragus calls
this Passerina: Dodonæus makes it Lithospermum minus: and Columna hath
set it forth by the name of Linaria altera botryodes montana.


Fig. 835. Bastard Toad-Flax (14)

14. This which Clusius, hath set forth by the name of Anonymos, or
Nameless, is called in the Hist. Lugd. pag. 150. Anthyllis montana; and
by Tabernamontanus Linaria adulterina. It hath many hard pale green
branches of some foot high; and upon these without any order grow many
hard narrow long leaves like those of flax, at first of a very tart, and
afterwards of a bitterish taste: the tops of the stalks are branched into
sundry foot-stalks, which carry little white flowers consisting of five
small leaves lying star-fashion, with some threads in their middles:
after which at length come single seeds five-cornered, containing a white
pith in a hard film or skin. The root is white, divided into sundry
branches, and lives long, every year sending up many stalks, and
sometimes creeping like that of Toad-Flax. It flowers in May, and grows
upon mountainous places of Germany; Mr. Goodyer found it growing wild on
the side of a chalky hill in an enclosure on the right hand of the way,
as you go from Droxford to Poppy Hill in Hampshire.

The Place.

The kinds of Toad-Flax grow wild in many places, as upon stone walls,
gravelly grounds, barren meadows, and along by hedges, saith our author.
I do not remember that I have seen any of there growing wild with us,
unless the first ordinary kind, which is everywhere common.

The Time.

They flower from June to the end of August.

The Names.

Toad-Flax is called of the herbarists of our time, Linaria, or Flax-weed,
and Urinalis: of some, Osyria, in high Dutch, Lynkraut, and Onser Fraumen
Flasch: low Dutch, Wilt Vlas: in English, Wild-Flax, Toad-Flax, and Flax-
Weed: the eleventh is called in Italian, Belvidere, or Fair in sight. The
same plant is also called Scoparia, and Herba studiosorum, because it is
a fit thing to make brooms of wherewith scholars and students may sweep
their own studies and closets. The particular names are expressed both in
Latin and English in their several titles, whereby they may be
distinguished. It is thought by most that this Belvidere, or Scoparia is
the Osyris described by Dioscorides lib. 4, cap.143. For besides the
notes, it hath agreeing with the description: it is at this day called by
the Greeks Azyris.

The Temperature.

The kinds of Toad-Flax are of the same temperature with wild Snapdragons,
whereof they are kinds.

The Virtues.

A. The decoction of Toad-Flax taketh away the yellowness and deformity of
the skin, beeng washed and bathed therewith.

B. The same drunken, openeth the stoppings of the liver and spleen, and
is singular good against the jaundice which is of long continuance.

C. The same decoction doth also provoke urine, in those that piss drop
after drop, unstoppeth the kidneys and bladder.


CHAP. 166. Of Garden Flax.


Fig. 836. Garden Flax

The Description.

Flax riseth up with slender and round stalks. The leaves thereof be long,
narrow, and sharp pointed: on the tops of the sprigs are fair blue
flowers, after which spring up little round knops or buttons, in which is
contained the seed, in form somewhat long, smooth, glib or slippery, of a
dark colour.The roots be small and thready.

The Place.

It prospereth best in a fat and fruitful soil, in moist and not dry
places; for it requireth as Columella saith a very fat ground, and
somewhat moist. Some, saith Palladius, do sow it thick in a lean ground,
& by that means the flax groweth fine. Pliny saith that it is to be sown
in gravelly places, especially in furrows: Nec magis festinare aliud ["No
other grows more quickly"] and that it burneth the ground, and maketh it
worse: which thing also Virgil testifieth in his Georgics:
Urit lini campum seges, urit avena
Urunt lethæo perfusa papavera somno
In English thus:
Flax and Oats sown consume
The moisture of a fertile field:
The same worketh Poppy, whose
Juice a deadly sleep doth yield.

The Time.

Flax is sown in the spring, it flowereth in June and July. After it is
cut down (as Pliny in his 19th book, first chapter saith) the stalks are 
put into the water subject to the heat of the sun, and some weight laid
on them to be steeped therein; the looseness of the rind is a sign when
it is well steeped: then is it taken up and dried in the sun, and after
used as most housewives can tell better than myself.

The Names.

It is called both in Greek and Latin, Linum: in high Dutch, Flachsz: in
Italian and Spanish, Lino: in French, Du lin: in low Dutch, Vlas: in
English, Flax, and Line.

The Temperature and Virtues.

A. Galen in his first book Of the Faculties of Nourishments saith, that
divers use the seed hereof parched as a sustenance with garum; no
otherwise than made salt.

B. They also use it mixed with honey, some likewise put it among bread
but it is hurtful to the stomach, and hard of digestion, and yieldeth to
the body but little nourishment: but touching the quality which maketh
the belly soluble, neither will I praise or dispraise it; yet that it
hath some force to provoke urine, is more apparent when it is parched:
but then it also stayeth the belly more.

C. The same author in his books Of Faculties of Simple Medicines saith,
that Linseed being eaten is windy although it be parched, so full is it
of superfluous moisture: and it is also after a sort hot in the first
degree, and in a mean between moist and dry. But how windy the seed is,
and how full of superfluous moisture it is in every part, might very well
have been perceived a few years since as at Middleborough in Zealand,
where for want of grain and other corn, most of the citizens were fain to
eat bread and cakes made hereof with honey and oil, who were in short
time after swollen in the belly below the short ribs, faces, & other
parts of their bodies in such sort, that a great number were brought to
their graves thereby: for these symptoms or accidents came no otherwise
than by the superfluous moisture of the seed, which causeth windiness.

D. Linseed as Dioscorides hath written, hath the same properties that
Fenugreek hath: it wasteth away and mollifieth all inflammations or hot
swellings, as well inward as outward, if it be boiled with honey, oil,
and a little fair water, and made up with clarified honey; it taketh away
blemishes of the face, and the sun-burning, being raw and unboiled; and
also foul spots, if it be mixed with saltpetre and figs: it causeth
rugged and ill favoured nails to fall off, mixed with honey and Water
Cresses.

E. It draweth forth of the chest corrupted phlegm and other filthy
humors, if a composition with honey be made thereof to lick on, and
easeth the cough.

F. Being taken largely with pepper and honey made into a cake, it
stirreth up lust.

G. The oil which is pressed out of the seed, is profitable for many
purposes in physic and surgery and is used of painters, picture makers,
and other artificers.

H. It softeneth all hard swellings; it stretcheth forth the sinews that
are shrunk and drawn together, mitigateth pain, being applied in manner
of an ointment.

I. Some also give it to drink to such as are troubled with pain in the
side and colic; but it must be fresh and newly drawn: for if it be old
and rank, it causeth aptness to vomit, and withal it overmuch heateth.

K. Linseed boiled in water with a little oil, and a quantity of Anise-
seed empowdered and emplastered upon an angina, or any swelling in the
throat, helpeth the same.

L. It is with good success used plaster-wise, boiled in vinegar, upon the
diseases called coliaca and dysenteria, which are bloody fluxes and pains
of the belly.

M. The seeds stamped with the roots of wild Cucumbers, draweth forth
splinters, thorns, broken bones, or any other thing fixed in any part of
the body.

N. The decoction is an excellent bath for women to sit over for the
inflammation of the secret parts, because it softeneth the hardness
thereof, and easeth pain and aching.

O. The seed of Lin and Fenugreek made into powder, boiled with Mallows,
Violet leaves, Smallage, and Chickweed, until the herbs be soft; then
stamped in a stone mortar with a little hog's grease to the form of a
cataplasm or poultice, appeaseth all maner of pain, softeneth all cold
tumours or swellings, mollifieth and bringeth to suppuration all
apostumes; defendeth wounded members from swellings and rankling, and
when they be already rankled, it taketh the same away being applied very
warm evening and morning.


CHAP. 167. Of Wild Flax.



Fig. 837. Wild White Flax (1) 

Fig. 838. Thin-Leaved wild Flax (2)
The Description.

1. This Wild kind of Line or Flax hath leaves like those of garden Flax,
but narrower, growing upon round bright and shining sprigs, a foot long,
and flowers like the manured flax, but of a white colour. The root is
tough and small, with some fibres annexed thereto. This is sometimes
found with deep blue flowers, with violet coloured flowers, and sometimes
with white, streaked with purple lines.

2. The narrow and thin-leaved kind of Line is very like to the common
Flax, but in all points lesser. The flowers of a light purple or flesh
colour consist of five leaves; which do soon fade and fall away, having
many stalks proceeding from one root, of a cubit high, beset with small
leaves, yet lesser than those of Linaria purpurea.



Fig. 839. Broad-Leaved Wild Flax (3) 

Fig. 840. Dwarf Wild Flax (4) 
	3. There is a kind of wild Flax which hath many hairy branches,
rising up from a very small root, which doth continue many years without
sowing, increasing by roots into many other plants, with stalks amounting
to the height of one cubit, beset with many rough and hairy broad leaves.
At the top of the stalks do grow many blue flowers, compact of five
leaves, much greater and fairer than common Line or Flax; which being
past, there succeed small sharp pointed heads full of seeds, like
Linseed, but of a blackish shining colour.

4. Chamælinum (of some called Linum sylvestre perpusillum, and may be
called in English very low or Dwarf Wild Flax for this word Chamæ joined
to any simple, doth signify, that it is a low or dwarf kind thereof)
being scarce an handful high, hath pale yellow flowers: but as it is in
all things like unto Flax, so the flowers, leaves, and stalks, and all
other parts thereof, are four times lesser than Linum.



Fig. 841. Mill-Mountain (5) 

Fig. 842. Clusius' 3rd Broad-Leaved Flax (6) 	5. There is also growing
wild in this kingdom a small kind of wilde Flax, which I take to be the
Linocarpos described by Thalius, and mentioned by Camerarius, by the name
of Linum sylvestre pusillum candicantibus floribus. Anno 1629, when as I
first found it, in a journal (written of such plants as we gathered) I
set down this by the name of Linum sylvestre pusillum candidis floribus,
which my friend Mr. John Goodyer seeing, he told me he had long known the
plant, and referred it to Lines, but there were some which called it in
English, Mill-Mountain, and used it to purge, and of late he hath sent me
this history of it, which you shall have as I received it from him.

Linum sylvestre catharticum. Mill-mountain.

It riseth up from a small white thready crooked root, sometime with one,
but most commonly with five or six or more round stalks, about a foot or
nine inches high, of a brown or reddish color, every stalk dividing
itself near the top, or from the middle upward into many parts or
branches of a greener colour than the lower part of the stalk: the leaves
are small, smooth, of colour green, of the bigness of Lentil leaves, and
have in the middle one rib or sinew, and no more that may be perceived, &
grow alongst the stalk in very good order by couples, one opposite
against the other: at the tops of the small branches grow the flowers, of 
a white colour, consisting of five small leaves apiece, the nails whereof
are yellow: in the inside are placed small short chives also of a yellow
colour, after which come up little knobs or buttons, the top whereof when
the seed is ripe divideth itself into five parts; wherein is contained
small, smooth, flat, slippery, yellow seed: when the seed is ripe the
herb perisheth: the whole herb is of a bitter taste, and herby smell. It
groweth plentifully in the unmanured enclosures of Hampshire, on chalky
downs, & on Purfleet hills in Essex, and in many other places. It riseth
forth of the ground at the beginning of the spring, and flowereth all the
summer.

I came to know this herb by the name of Mill-Mountain, and his virtue by
this means. On the second of October 1617, going by Mr. Colson's shop an
apothecary of Winchester in Hampshire, I saw this herb lying on his
stall, which I had seen growing long before: I desired of him to know the
name of it, he told me that it was called Mill-Mountain, and he also told
me that beeing at Doctor Lake his house at Saint Cross a mile from
Winchester, seeing a man of his have this herb in his hand, he desired
the name; he told him as before, and also the use of it, which is this.

Take a handfull of Mill-Mountain, the whole plant, leaves, seeds, flowers
and all, bruise it and put it in a small tun or pipkin of a pint filled
with white wine, and set in on the embers to infuse all night, and drink
that wine in the morning fasting, and he said it would give eight or ten
stools. This Doctor Lake was afterward made Bishop of Bath and Wells, who
always used this herb for his purge, after the said manner, as his man
affirmed.
July 20. 1619. John Goodyer.

I have not as yet made trial hereof but since in Gesner de Lunariis pag.
34, I have found the like or a more purging faculty attributed to this
herb, as I think (for I cannot refer it to any other) where he would have
it to be Helleborine of the Ancients; I think it not amiss here to set
down his words, because the book is not commonly to be had, being set
forth Anno 1555:

Ante annos 15 aut circiter cum Anglus quidam, ex Italia rediens, me
salutaret (Turnerus is fuerit, vir excellentis tum in re medicæ tum aliis
plerisque disciplinis doctrinæ, aut aliis quispiam, vix satis memini)
inter alias rariorum stirpium icones quas depingendas commodabat,
Elleborinem quoque ostendebat pictam, herbulam fruticosum, pluribus ab
una radice cauliculis qinque fere digitorum proceritate erectis foliolis
perexiguis, binis per intervalla (cuismodi ut ex aspectu genus quoddam
Alsinæ exiguum videretur) vasculis in summo exiguis, rotundis tanquam
lini. Hanc ajebat crescere in pratis siccis, vel clivis montium; inutili
radice, subamara purgare utrinque & in Anglia vulgaro usurpari a
rusticis.
["About 15 years ago, a certain Turner, whom I acknowledge as a man of
outstanding learning in medicine as well as many other disciplines,
brought to Italy on his return from England, along with other rare things
a painting of Hellebore. It is a very bushy herb, with many stalks about
five fingers high springing from a single root. The stalks bear a few
leaves in pairs resembling those of Chickweed. The seed vessels are thin,
and round like those of Flax, but smaller. It grows in dry meadows and on
steep hillsides. The root is slightly bitter and is used as a purge by
country folk in England"]

Thus much for Gesner.

6. Clusius amongst other wild Lines or Flaxes hath set forth this, which
from a living, thick, writhing root, sendeth up many stalks almost a
cubit high, somewhat red and stiff, set with pretty large and thick
leaves not rough and hairy, but smooth and hard; the flowers grow
plentifully on the tops of the stalks, being large, and composed of five
leaves of a fair yellow colour, with fine threads comming forth of their
middles, with as many smaller and shorter hairs. The seed is contained in
flatter heads than those of the first described, containing a black, but
not shining seed: It flowers in June and July, and ripens the seed in
August. It grows naturally upon divers hills in Germany.


Fig. 843. Yellow-Flowered Wild Flax (7)

7. Matthiolus and Dodonæus have under the name of Linum sylvestre and
Lobel by the name of Linum marinum luteum narbonense set forth another
yellow flowered wild flax. This grows with slender stalks some cubit
high, set with leaves like those of flax, but somewhat lesser, and fewer
in number: at the tops of the stalks grow flowers smaller than those of
the common Line, and yellow of colour. It grows naturally upon the coasts
of France that lie towards the Mediterranean sea, but not in England that
I have heard of.

The Place.

They grow generally in gravelly grounds. The first groweth in well
manured places, as in gardens and such like soils. The second groweth by
the sea side. The third and fourth grow upon rocks and cliffs near to the
sea side; I have seen them grow upon the sea banks by Lee in Essex, and
in many places of the Isle of Sheppey. They grow also between
Queenborough and Sherland house. (Thus saith Gerard. I have not seen any
of these growing wild, but only the fifth of my description.)

The Time.

They flower from May to the midst of August.

The Names.

Their names are sufficiently expressed in their several titles.

The Nature and Virtues.

The faculties, of these kinds of Wild Flax are referred unto the manured
Flax, but they are seldom used either in physic or chirurgery.


CHAP. 168. Of Black Saltwort.


Fig. 844. Black Saltwort or Sea Milkwort

The Description.

In old time, say the authors of the Adversaria, this plant was used for
meat, and received among the Legumina. It was called Glaux, by reason of
the colour of the leaves, which are of a blueish grey colour, called in
Latin, glaucus color, such as is in the Sallow leaf: of others it is
called Galax or Glax and Eugalacton, quasi lactea or lactifica, because
it is good to increase milk in the breasts of women, if it be much used.
Ruellius and others have set down Galega, Securidica, Polygala, and many
other plants for the true Glaux, which hath bred a confusion. The true
Glaux of Dioscorides hath many small branches, some creeping on the
ground, and some standing upright, tender and small, beset with many
little fat leaves like Tribulus terrestris, or Herniaria, growing along
the stalks by couples; between whom grow small purple flowers; which
being past, there succeed certain little bullets or seed vessels. The
root is very small and thready, and taking hold of the upper face of the
earth, as it doth run abroad, by which means it doth mightily increase.

The Place.

The true Glaux or Milkwort groweth very plentifully in salt places &
marshes near the sea, from whence I have brought it into my garden, where
it prospereth as well as in his native soil. I found it especially
between Whitstable and the Isle of Thanet in Kent, and by Gravesend in
the same county, by Tilbury Block-house in Essex, and in the Isle of
Sheppey, going from Kingsferry to Sherland House.

The Time.

It flowereth in May, and the seed is ripe in Iune.

The Names.

The names have been sufficiently spoken of in the description. It shall
suffice to call it in English, Sea Milkwort.

The Nature.

Paulus Aegineta saith, it is hot and moist of temperature.

The Virtues.

This Milkwort taken with milk, drink, or pottage, engendereth store of
milk, and therefore it is good to be used by nurses that want the same.


CHAP. 169. Of Milkwort


Fig. 845. Kinds of Milkwort (1-4)

The Description.

1. There have been many plants nearly resembling Polygala, and yet not
the same indeed, which doth verify the Latin saying, Nullum simile est
idem.["No likeness is exact identity"] This near resemblance doth rather
hinder those that have spent much time in the knowledge of simples, than
increase their knowledge. And this also hath been an occasion that many
have imagined a sundry Polygala, unto themselves, and so of other plants.
Of which number, this (whereof I speak) is one, obtaining this name of
the best writers and herbarists of our time, describing it thus. It hath
many thick spreading branches, creeping on the ground: bearing leaves
like them of Herniaria, standing in rows like the Sea Milkwort; among
which do grow small whorls, or coronets of white flowers, the root being
exceeding small and thready.

2. The second kind of Polygala is a small herb with pliant slender stems,
of a woody substance, an handful long, creeping by the ground; the leaves
be small & narrow like to Lentils, or little Hyssop.The flowers grow at
the top, of a blue color, fashioned like a little bird, with wings, tail,
and body, easy to be discerned by them that do observe the same: which
being past, there succeed small pouches, like those of Bursa pastoris,
but lesser.The root is small and woody.

3. This third kind of Polygala or Milkwort, hath leaves and stalks like
the last before mentioned, and differeth from it herein, that this kind
hath smaller branches, and the leaves are not so thick thrust together,
and the Roots are like the other, but that they be of a red or purple
colour.

4. The fourth kind is like the last spoken of in every respect, but that
it hath white flowers; otherwise it is very like.


Fig. 846. Purple Milkwort (5)

5. Purple Milkwort differeth from the others in the colour of the
flowers; it bringeth forth more branches than the precedent, and the
flowers are of a purple colour; wherein especially consisteth the
difference.

6. The sixth Milkwort is like unto the rest in each respect, saving that
the flowers are of an overworn ill-favoured colour, which maketh it to
differ from all the other of his kind.

The Place.

These plants or Milkworts grow commonly in every wood or fertile pasture
wheresoever I have travelled.

The Time.

They flower from May to August.

The Names.

Milkwort is called by Dodonæus, Flos ambarvalis; so called because it
doth especially flourish in the Cross or Gang week; or Rogation week; of
which flowers the maidens which use in the countries to walk the
procession do make themselves garlands and nosegays: in English we may
call it Cross-flower, Procession-flower, Gang-flower, Rogation-flower,
and Milkwort, of their virtues in procuring milk in the breasts of
nurses. Hieronymus Tragus, as also Dioscorides, calleth it Polygalon.
Gesner calls this Crucis flos; and in his Epistles he nameth it Amarella:
it is vulgarly known in Cheapside to the herb-women by the name of Hedge-
Hyssop; for they take it for Gratiola, or Hedge-Hyssop, and sell it to
such as are ignorant for the same.

The Virtues.

A. Galen, Dioscorides, and Theophraftus do account these for Milkworts,
and that they may without error be used for those purposes whereunto
Glaux serveth.

B. I doubt that this is not the Polygalon of Dioscorides; for Gesner
affirms that an handful hereof steeped all night in wine, and drunk in
the morning, will purge choler effectually by stool without any danger,
as he himself had tried.


CHAP. 170. Of Knot-Grass.


Fig. 847. Common Knot-Grass
The Description.

1. The common male Knot-Grass creeps along upon the ground, with long
slender weak branches full of knots or joints, whereof it took his name.
The leaves grow upon the weak branches, like those of small St. John's
Wort, but longer and narrower. The flowers are marvellous little, and
grow out of the knots, of an herby colour; in their places come up
triangular seed. The root is long, slender, and full of strings.

2. The second differeth not from the former, but only that it is
altogether lesser, wherein especially consisteth the difference. Because
the difference is no otherwise, I have thought good to omit the figure.

3. The authors of the Adversaria mention another larger Knot-Grass which
grows in divers places of the coast of the Mediterranean sea, having
longer and larger branches and leaves, and those of a white shining
colour. The seeds grow at the joints in chaffy white husks and the whole
plant is of a salt and astringent taste. They call it Polygonum marinum
maximum.

The Place.

These Knot-Grasses do grow in barren and stony places almost everywhere.

The Time.

They are in flower and seed all the summer long.

The Names.

Knot-Grass is called of the Grecians, Polygonum mas, or Male Knot-Grass:
in Latin, Seminalis, Sanguinaria: of Columella, Sanguinalis: in shops,
Centumnodia, and Corrigiola: of Apuleius, Proserpinaca: in High Dutch,
Moagdryt: in Low Dutch, Verkens gras, and Duijsent knop: in Italian,
Polygono: in Spanish, Corriola: in French,  Renovee: in Walloon,
Mariolaine de Cure: in English, Knot-Grass, and Swine's Grass: in the
North, Bird's Tongue.

The Temperature.

Knot-grass (as Galen teacheth) is of a binding quality, yet is it cold in
the second, if not in the beginning of the third degree.

The Virtues,

A. The juice of Knot-Grass is good against the spitting of blood, the
pissing of blood, and all other issues or fluxes of blood, as Brasanolus
reporteth: and Camerarius saith he hath cured many with the juice
thereof, that have vomited blood, given in a little styptic wine. It
greatly prevaileth against the gonorrhœa, that is, the running of the
reins, and the weakness of the back coming by means thereof, being shred
and made in tansy with eggs and eaten.

B. The decoction of it cures the disease aforesaid in as ample manner as
the juice: or given in powder in a rear egg it helpeth the back very
much.

C. The herb boiled in wine and honey cureth the ulcers and inflammations
of the secret parts of man or woman, adding thereto a little alum, and
the parts washed therewith.

D. Dioscorides saith that it provoketh urine, and helpeth such as do piss
drop after drop, when the urine is hot and sharp.

E. It is given unto swine with good success, when they are sick and will
not eat their meat; whereupon the country people do call it Swine's Grass
and Swine's Skire.


CHAP. 171. Of Sundry Sorts of Knot-Grasses.


Fig. 848. Kinds of Knot-Grass (1-4)

The Description.

1. The snowy white and least kind of Polygonum or Knot-Grass, called of
Clusius, Paronychia Hispanica, is a strange and worthy plant to behold,
handle, and consider, although it be but small. It is seldom above a foot
long, having small branches, thick, tough, hard, and full of joints; out
of which the leaves come forth like small teeth, lesser than the leaves
of Herniaria, or Thymum tenuifolium. At the top of the stalks stand most
delicate flowers framed by nature as it were, with fine parchment leaves
about them, standing in their singular whiteness and snowy colour,
resembling the perfect white silk, so many in number at the top, and so
thick, that they overshadow the rest of the plant beneath. The root is
slender, and of a woody substance. The seed is covered as it were with
chaff, and is as small as dust, or the motes in the sun.

2. Anthyllis of Valencia, being likewise a kind of Knot-Grass, hath small
leaves like Glaux exigua, or rather like Chamæsyce, set orderly by
couples at the joints: among which come flowers consisting of four little
whitish purple leaves, and other small leaves like the first but
altogether lesser. The root is small, black, and long, and of a woody
substance.

3. Of this I have received a better descripton from my oft mentioned
friend Mr. Goodyer, which therefore I thought good to impart to you.

Polygonum alterum pusillo vermiculata serpilli foliolo Pena. This hath
many small round smooth woody branches, somewhat reddish, trailing upon
the ground, nine inches or a foot long; whereon by small distances on
short joints grow tufts of very small short blunt topped smooth green
leaves, in a manner round, like those of the smallest Thyme, but much
smaller, and without smell, dividing themselves at the bosoms of those
leaves into small branches at the tops of which branches grow small
flowers, one flower on a branch, and no more, consisting of four little
round-topped leaves apiece of a faint or pale purplish colour: I observed
no seed. The root is woody, blackish without, very bitter, with some
taste of heat, and groweth deep into the ground. The leaves are nothing
so full of juice as Aizoon. I found it flowering the third day of
September, 1641, on the ditch banks at Bursledon ferry by the seaside in
Hampshire. Jo. Goodyer.

4. Among the Knot-Grasses may well be suited this small plant, but lately
written of, and not so commonly known as growing in England, being about
an handful high, and putting out from a fibrous root sundry slender
stalks full of little branches and joints: about which grow confusedly
many narrow leaves, for the most part of an unequal quantity, yet here
and there two longer than the rest, and much alike in greatness: at the
outmost parts of the branches and stalks (where it hath thickest tufts)
appear out of the midst of the leaves little flowers of an herby colour,
which are succeeded by seed-vessels ending in five sharp points: the
whole plant is of a whitish colour. If my memory fail me not, Pena means
this herb where he speaketh of Saxifraga anglicana in his Adversaria. p.
103, and also reporteth that he found this plant by the wayside as he
rode from London to Bristol, on a little hill not far from Chippenham:
his picture doth very well resemble the kind of Knot-Grass called among
the Germans Knawel, and calling it Saxifraga anglicana causeth me to
think, that some in the west parts where he found it do call it
Saxifrage, as we do call sundry other herbs, especially if they serve for
the stone. My friend Mr. Stephen Bredwell, practioner of physic in those
parts, heard of a simple man who did much good with a medicine that he
made with Parsley Piert against the stone, which he ministered unto all
sorts of people. This my friend requested the poor man to show him the
herb called Parsley Piert; who frankly promised it him, and the next
morning brought him an handful of the herb, and told him the composition
of his medicine withal, which you shall find set down in the virtues, and
proved by sundry of good account to be a singular remedy for the same.



Fig. 849. Chickweed Saxifrage (5) 

Fig. 850. Small Water Saxifrage (6) 
	5. This plant is a small little herb growing thick, with very many
branches some two or three inches high, with some stalks standing 
upright, and other some creeping: at each joint grow two short narrow
sharp pointed green leaves, out of whose bosoms come divers lesser
leaves: at the tops of the branches upon pretty long stalks grow upon
each stalk one round whitish scaly head, consisting commonly of four
under greenish leaves which make the cup, and four greyish or whitish
leaves which are the flower. Now after these come to some maturity they
appear all of a whitish colour, and through the thin films of these heads
appears the seed, which at the first view seems to be pretty large and
black; for it lies all clustering together; but if you rub it out you
shall find it as small as sand, and of a dark reddish colour. The taste
of this plant is very hot and piercing, like that of Goldenrod or our
common Saxifrage, and without doubt it is more effectual to move urine
than the former Knawel. I have found it growing in many places about
brick and stone walls, and upon chalky barren grounds.

6. Alsine palustre foliis tenuissimis: sive Saxifraga palustris
alsinefolia. This hath a great number of very small grass-like leaves,
growing from the root, about an inch long, a great deal smaller and
slenderer than small pins; amongst which spring up many small slender 
round smooth firm branches some handful or handful and half high, from
which sometimes grow a few other smaller branches, whereon at certain
joints grow leaves like the former, and those set by couples with other
shorter coming forth of their bosoms; and so by degrees they become
shorter and shorter towards the top, so that toward the top this plant
somwhat resembleth Thymum durius. The flowers are great for the
slenderness of the plant, growing at the tops of the branches, each
flower consisting of five small blunt roundish-topped white flowers, with
white chives in the midst. The seed I observed not. The root is small,
growing in the mire with a few strings. This groweth plentifully on the
boggy ground below the red well of Wellingborough in Northamptonshire.
This hath not been described that I find. I observed it at the place
aforesaid, August 12, 1626. John Goodyer.

The Place.

The first and second are strangers in England: the rest grow in places
mentioned in their descriptions.

The Time.

These flower for the most part from May to September.

The Names.

That which hath been said of their names in their several descriptions
shall suffice.

The Nature.

They are cold in the second degree, and dry in the third, astringent and
making thick (saith Gerard).

These, especially the three last, are hot in the second or third degree,
and of subtle parts; but the Parsley Piert seemes not to be so hot as the
other two.

The Virtues.

A. Here according to my promise I have thought good to insert this
medicine made with Knawel, which herb is called (as I said before) Parley
Piert, but if I might without offence it should be called Petra pungens:
for that barbarous word Parsley Piert was given by some simple man (as
also the other, that savours of as much simplicity) who had not well
learned the true term. The composition which followeth must be given in
warm white wine, half a dram, two scruples, or more, according to the
constitution of the body which is to receive it.

The leaves of Parsley Piert, Mouse-Ear, of each one ounce when the herbs
be dried; Bay berries, Turmeric, Cloves, the seeds of the great Bur, the
seeds in the berries of Hips or Briar-Tree, Fenugreek, of each one ounce;
the stone in the ox gall, the weight of 24 Barley corns, or half a dram;
made together into a most fine and subtle powder, taken and drunk in
manner aforesaid hath been proved most singular for the disease
aforesaid.

B. The fifth and sixth are of the same faculty, and may be used in the
like cases.


CHAP. 172. Of Rupturewort.



Fig. 851. RuptureWort (1) 

Fig. 852. Dwarf Allseed (2)
The Description.

1. There is also a kind of Knot-Grass commonly called in Latin Herniaria:
in English, Rupturewort, or Rupture Grass. It is a base and low creeping
herb, having many small slender branches trailing upon the ground, yet
very tough, and full of little knots somewhat reddish, whereupon do grow
very many small leaves like those of Thyme; among which come forth little
yellowish flowers which turn into very small seed, and great quantity
thereof, considering the smallness of the plant, growing thick clustering
together by certain spaces. The whole plant is of a yellowish green
colour. The root is very slender and single.

2. There is another kind of Herniaria, called Mille grana or Allseed,
that groweth upright a handful high, with many small and tender branches,
set with leaves like the former, but few in number, having as it were two
small leaves & no more. The whole plant seemeth as it were covered over
with seeds or grains, like the seed of Panic, but much lesser. I have not
seen many plants of this, but all that ever I yet saw never attained to
the height of two inches.

The Place.

1. It joyeth in barren and sandy grounds, and is likewise found in
dankish places that lie wide open to the sun: it doth grow and prosper in
my garden exceedingly.

2. I found this in Kent on a Heath not far from Chislehurst, being in
company with Mr. Bowles and divers others, in July, 1630.

The Time.

It flowereth and flourisheth in May, June, July, and August.

The Names.

It is called of the later herbarists Herniaria and Herniola; taken from
the effect in curing the disease hernia: of divers, Herba turca, and
Empetron; in French, Boutenet: in English, Rupturewort and Burstwort.

The Temperature and Virtue

A. Rupturewort doth notably dry, and throughly closeth up together and
fasteneth. It is reported that being drunk it is singular good for
ruptures, and that very many that have been bursten, were restored to
health by the use of this herb; also the powder hereof taken with wine,
doth make a man to piss that hath his water stopped; it also wasteth away
the stones in the kidneys, and expelleth them.


CHAP. 173. Of Wild Thyme.



Fig. 853. Wild Thyme (1) 

Fig. 854. Great Purple Wild Thyme (3)
The Description.

1. Both Dioscorides and Pliny make two kinds of Serpillum, that is, of
creeping or Wild Thyme; whereof the first is our common creeping Thyme
which is so well known, that it needeth no description; yet this ye shall
understand, that it beareth flowers of a purple colour, as everybody
knoweth. Of which kind I found another sort with flowers as white as
snow, and have planted it in my garden, where it becometh an herb of
great beauty.

2. This wild Thyme that bringeth forth white flowers differeth not from
the other, but only in the colour of the flowers, whence it may be called
Serpillum vulgare flore albo, White-Flowered Wild Thyme.

There is another kind of Serpillum, which groweth in gardens, in smell
and savour resembling Marjoram. It hath leaves like Oregano, or Wild
Marjoram, but somewhat whiter, putting forth many small stalks, set full
of leaves like Rue, but longer, narrower, and harder. The flowers are of
a biting taste, and pleasant smell. The whole plant groweth upright,
whereas the other creepeth along upon the earth, catching hold where it
grows, & spreading itself far abroad.

3. This great wild Thyme creepeth not as the others do, but standeth
upright, and bringeth low little slender branches full of leaves like
those of Rue; yet narrower, longer, and harder. The flowers be of a
purple colour, and of a twingeing biting taste: it groweth upon rocks,
and is hotter than any of the others.

4. This other great one with white flowers differeth not from the
precedent, having many knops or heads of a milk-white colour, which 
setteth forth the difference; and it may be called Serpillum maius flore
albo, Great White-Flowered Wild Thyme.


Fig. 855. Kinds of Wild Thyme (5-8)

5. This wild Thyme creepeth upon the ground, set with many leaves by
couples like those of Marjoram, but lesser, of the same smell: the
flowers are of a reddish color. The root is very thready.

6. Wild Thyme of Candy is like unto the other wild Thymes, saving that
his leaves are narrower and longer and more in number at each joint. The
smell is more aromatical than any of the others, wherein is the
difference.

7. There is a kind of wild Thyme growing upon the mountains of Italy,
called Serpillum citratum, that is, having the smell of a Pome Citron, or
a lemon, which giveth it the difference from the other wild Thymes. It
grows in many gardens also, and (as I have been told) wild in divers
places of Wales.

8. This (which is the Serpillum Pannonicum 3 of Clusius) runs or spreads
itself far upon the ground. For though it have a hard and woody root like
as the former kinds, yet the branches which lie spread round about here
and there take root, which in time become as hard and woody as the
former. The leaves and stalks are like those of the last described, but
rough and hoary: the flowers also are not unlike those of the common
kind. The whole plant hath a kind of resinous smell. It flowers in June
with the rest, and grows upon the like mountainous places; but whether
with us in England or no I cannot yet affirm anything of certainty.

The Place.

The first groweth upon barren hills and untoiled places: the second
groweth in gardens. The white kind I found at Southfleet in Kent, in a
barren field belonging to one Mr. William Swan.

The Time.

They flower from May to the end of summer.

The Names.

Wild Thyme is called in Latin Serpillum, à serpendo, of creeping: in high
and low Dutch, Nuendel, and Wilden Thymus, and also Dufer Vrouwen
bedstroo: in Spanish, Serpoll: in Italian, serpillo: in French, Pillolet:
in English, Wild Thyme, Puliall Mountain, Pella mountain, running Thyme,
creeping Thyme, Mother of Thyme: in shops it is called Serpillum: yet
some call it Pulegium montanum: and it is everywhere (saith Dodonæus)
thought to be the Serpillum of the Ancients. Notwithstanding it answereth
not so well to the wild Thymes as to Dioscordes his Saxifranga; for if it
be diligently compared with the description of both the Serpilla and the
Saxifranga, it shall be found to be little like the wild Thymes, but very
much, like the Saxifranga: for (saith Dioscorides ) Saxifranga is an herb
like Thyme, growing on rocks, where our common wild Thyme is oftentimes
found.

Ælianus in his ninth book of his sundry Histories seemeth to number wild 
Thyme among the flowers. Dionysius Junior (saith he) coming into the city
Locris in Italy, possessed most of the houses of the city, and did strew
them with roses, wild Thyme, and other such kinds of flowers. Yet Virgil
in the second Eclogue of his Bucolics doth most manifestly testify that
wild Thyme is an herb, in these words:

Thestylis & rapido fessis messoribus astu
Allia, serpillumque, herbas contundit olentes.
Thestylis for mowers tired with parching heat
Garlic, wild Thyme, strong smelling herbs doth beat.

Out of which place it may be gathered, that common wild Thyme is the true
and right Serpillum, or wild Thyme, which the Grecians call Erpillos.
Marcellus an old ancient author among the Frenchmen saith it is called
Gilarum; as Plinius Valerianus saith it is called of the same, Laurio.

The Temperature.

Wild Thyme is of temperature hot and dry in the third degree: it is of
thin and subtle parts, cutting and much biting.

The Virtues

A. It bringeth down the desired sickness, provoketh urine, applied in
baths and fomentations it procureth sweat: being boiled in wine, it
helpeth the ague, it easeth the strangury, it stayeth the hicket, it
breaketh the stones in the bladder, it helpeth the lethargy, frenzy, and
madness, and stayeth the vomiting of blood.

B. Wild Thyme boiled in wine and drunk, is good against the wambling and
gripings of the belly, ruptures, convulsions, and inflammations of the
liver.

C. It helpeth against the bitings of any venomous beast, either taken in
drink, or outwardly applied.

D. Aetius writeth, That Serpillum infused well in vinegar, and then
sodden and mingled with rose water, is a right singular remedy to cure
them that have had a long frenzy or lethargy.

E. Galen prescribeth one dram of the juice to be given in vinegar against
the vomiting of blood, and helpeth such as are grieved with the spleen.

END OF VOLUME TWO
2

