Title page

HARRIS'S LIST 
OF
COVENT-GARDEN LADIES
OR
Man of Pleasure's
KALENDER
For the year 1793
Containing
The Histories and some curious Anecdotes of the most celebrated 
Ladies now on the Town, or in keeping, and also many of their 
keepers.
|=======================================|
LONDON.
Printed for H. RANGER (Formerly at No. 23 Fleet Street) at No. 9 
Little Bridges Street, near Drury Lane Play House.
Where may be had
The separate LISTS of many preceding Years



Miss D—vis, No. 22, Upper Newman-street.

Artful ways beguile the implicit rake.

THIS is a fine lively girl, about twenty-one, rather above the middle 
size, genteely made; has several good friends, but is much attached 
to young Br—om, the lottery-office-keeper, who is now in prison, 
where she often visits him; is ever obliging, and seldom out of 
humour, understands a great deal of her business, and never fails to 
please. She enjoys her favourite man with ecstasy; and pleases, with 
cold indifference, managed by art, the rest of her votaries; who are 
content with thinking they have fathomed the deepest part of a girl 
so replete with sensation; in short, she can so well counterfeit the 
passions of love and lust, that many of the most knowing rakes of the 
town would be easily deceived. This lady occupies the parlour.



Miss Godf—y, No. 22, Upper Newman-street.

If parts can conquer great and small, 
Sure — and Godf—y must needs do all.

This lady is a kind of boatswain in her way, and when she speaks, 
every word is uttered with a thundering and vociferous tone. She is a 
fine lively little girl, about twenty-two, very fond of dancing, has 
dark eyes and hair, well shaped, and an exceeding good bed-fellow, 
will take brandy with any one, or drink and swear, and though but 
little, will fight a good battle. We apprehend this lady would be an 
extraordinary good companion for an officer in the army, as she might 
save him the trouble of giving the word of command.

She resides in the first floor.



Mrs. P—ge, No. 26, Upper Newman-street.

Come, thou Goddess, fair and free, 
With the sweet simplicity.

The above two lines are highly descriptive of Mrs. P—, who for ease, 
freedom and simplicity is scarcely to be matched among the whole 
sisterhood, besides which, her beauty is by no means inconsiderable. 
She is about twenty, has been near five years in business, and has 
had tolerable fortune; her features are good, except her mouth, which 
is a little too wide, especially when she laughs, which is pretty 
often. Those who are inclined to mirth, will find her to be a good 
companion, without the least tincture of blasphemy, she is not of a 
mercenary disposition, yet she expects one pound one, but rather than 
lose a customer will put up with half the sum.



Mrs. R—ad, No. 66, Queen Anne Street East.

With the sports of the field, there's no Pleasure can vie, 
Then follow, follow, &c. the hounds in full cry.

A fine tall girl, about twenty-two, elegant in person, with a 
captivating countenance. She has found out the true art to please and 
be pleased. Mrs. R—d has very dark eyes and eye-brows, and plenty of 
the same colour hair on the enchanting spot of love, being a fine 
cover for game. This lady has tasted the sweets of many good things 
in purse and person, and relishes them all. Her predominant passion 
seems for horses, hounds, and the delights of the field. No one is 
more emulous than our heroine, to be in at the death; upon the whole 
we may pronounce this lady a woman of taste and spirit, which she 
displays in nothing more forcibly, hunting not excepted, than in the 
choice of her favourite, as he is still a hunter.



Mrs. L—tle—n, No. 3, Salisbury-street, Strand.

— Since we mortal lovers are, 
Ask not how long our love will last; 
But while it does, let us take care, 
Each minute be with pleasure past.

This is a fine plump girl, with dark hair, large eyes, and dark 
eyebrows. It is a very great misfortune for ladies, who depend on the 
public for a support, to be liable to particular attachments, where 
interest is out of the question, for it has been of great detriment 
to this lady, when she has had good keepers, who have discovered her 
intrigues, merely through her own carelessness, and have discarded 
her. As her circumstances are particularly fluctuating, so her dress 
is answerable to them. She is, upon the whole, an agreeable woman, 
and we make no doubt, might live exceeding genteel, were she more 
guarded in her conduct, and keep herself from falling in love where 
there is no pecuniary view; however, at present, she is in keeping 
with Mr. B., a couns—r in the Temp—e, but will not lose the enjoyment 
of other friends, who may fall in her way.



Mrs. Bi—d, No, 27, Salisbury-street, Strand.

For 'tis in vain to guess 
At women by appearances; 
They paint and patch their imperfections 
Of intellectual complexions, 
And daub their tempers o'er with washes, 
As artificial as their faces.

Those who keep ladies do not seem to regard their charms, but become 
keepers because it is the fashion. But she cannot be admired on 
account of her charms, for she has very few; indeed we are so blind 
that we cannot discern any. She is tall and lusty, has a dead eye and 
flattish nose, and good teeth, and is very much given to laughing, 
she wears short petticoats. We do not know whether her favours are 
bestowed for money or love, but this we are certain of, that C— H— is 
not the only man who experiences the happiness of her voluptuous 
favours, which are very numerous.



Miss Bro—n, No. 4, Princess-street, Cavendish square.

Say lovely youth would'st thou thus betray, 
My easy faith and lead my heart astray.

The situation of this lady is truly pitiable, for as we understand, 
her heart was betrayed by a young gentleman in the country, who soon 
forsook her, which she repeats with a good deal of apparent grief, 
and does not seem at all calculated for her present way of life, 
except in point of beauty. Is rather short, and has a clear fair 
skin, with a pleasing blue eye, her cheeks are very prettily dimpled, 
and she has a natural fresh colour, her hair is bright, and her teeth 
are good. She is now a lovely desirable girl, but if she continues 
long in her present situation, it is a great chance but that the 
becomes as false, inconstant and infamous as many others of the 
fraternity. By this remark we do not mean to anticipate any 
disagreeable circumstances, but mention it merely to her as a 
friendly caution that may possibly raise her pride and guard her 
against those baneful habits which are so often the disgrace and 
sometimes the ruin of many of the sex.



Miss Dav—s, No. 28, Margaret-street, Oxford Market.

Is a fine tall young woman, of about eighteen, has a fair complexion, 
and excellent features; her mouth is small, and looks when closed, 
like a rose when it begins to bud; her eyes, however, are no great 
advantage to her, as they are small and gray. She has the character 
of a spirited, spitefully-fond bed-fellow that will keep her spark to 
the mark of business as long as he has strength to follow his labour 
with any pleasure or ability. She is seldom guilty of those vices 
which have so frequently censured, and which defile the sex more then 
any other; we mean drinking and swearing. This, however, is not to be 
wondered at, when it is known, (which her company will easily 
discover,) that she has been excellently educated, and 
notwithstanding the unfortunate bent which the has taken, yet there 
are some of the stamina of the original virtues planted in her mind 
to be discovered, and which no practices will so eradicate as to 
render her vulgar or disagreeable.



Miss Sc—tt, No. 44, Margaret-street, Cavendish-square.

'Ads bobs she's wondrous pretty! 
Her looks are almost jetty; 
She's a finer wench than Betty, 
And lo! her eyes are blue!

We cannot call this lady a beauty of the first rate; She is what may 
be determined pretty, but nothing extraordinary, and tho' she cannot 
boast of all those external graces, which distinguish the beauties of 
some ladies; yet I've heard, when she is engaged in her business, 
there are very few who are her superiors. She is amorous to the 
greatest degree, and has courage enough not to be afraid of the 
largest and the strongest man that ever drew weapon in the cause of 
love. She has had a number of admirers in her time, all of which she 
had the satisfaction of pleasing during their temporary residence 
with her. She is now in keeping by one Mr. B—, who is not a little 
enamoured of her. Her person is of the middling fine, little black 
eyes, black hair, very fine teeth, and is altogether very agreeable.



Miss Ke—t, No. 9, Warren-street, Tottenham Court Road.

Round your neck, like the ivy, 
She'll fold her sweet arms, 
And wickedly wanton display all her charms; 
With transport she'll usher your hand to her breast, 
Whilst with her's she applies the tumid bold guest.

Here the epicures in youth and beauty may satisfy their most ardent 
longings. Here Venus seems to have shed her choicest influence; and 
Cupid has called forth his choicest arrow of the amorous kind to warm 
her little breast to soft enjoyment. 'Tis not a lukewarm flame that 
burns in her breast, no, 'tis an enthusiastic rapture which 
enlightens her whole soul with the divine spirit of love. Whenever 
she is offering incense at the shrine of Venus, her whole frame is 
agitated with pleasure, her eyes languish, her breasts heave, and her 
limbs quiver; while involuntary sighs and murmurs burst forth from 
her tender bosom, provoking the transports of the happy priest who 
administers with her. She is about twenty years old, has fine black 
eyes and hair, is very genteel, and full of spirits.



Miss Fra—r, No. 6, Queen-street, Golden Square.

The ridiculous distinctions which tradesmen make among one another, 
were the actual means of placing Miss F— in her present situation. We 
may see every day a wholesale dealer look upon a retailer as 
infinitely below him, and even the Tallow-chandler treats the Butcher 
with contempt, the Butcher in his turn looks down on the poor Barber; 
and the Barber has his triumph over the Blacksmith and the keeper of 
a Chandler's shop; none put themselves on an equality with all except 
the Attorney, who has an opportunity of profiting by other people's 
weakness and absurdities. Nancy is the daughter of a Tradesman, and 
was taught by her parents not for the world to keep company with Miss 
Rappee, the Tobacconist's daughter; who, in her turn was taught to 
despise the Cheesemonger's family: the consequence of which was, that 
being taught to look so much above their own sphere, they became an 
easy prey to men of fashion and were soon abandoned.

Nancy has a good deal of vivacity, and a pretty face, she has a very 
pleasing aquiline nose, has excellent teeth, and good hair, and is 
good natured but rather haughty, she does not much care to give her 
company to any body whose person is not in some measure pleasing to 
her, without they make it well worth her while. She has an open 
manner of discourse in company, which is highly agreeable, and though 
she expects a genteel present, she is by no means mercenary, but 
enjoys the sport with all the vigorous ardour that may be expected 
from a girl of one and twenty



Miss Go—ld, No. 61, Well-street.

Every woman has not the same talents to please alike, yet, all have 
some peculiar to themselves; the one sings, another dances with a 
peculiar grace. One charms by her sense and sensibility; another 
catches the heart by mere simplicity. Miss Go—ld's particular 
advantage is a surprising fond humour which she displays in the most 
agreeable manner imaginable. A mistress of such a turn, must sure be 
very desirable, as nothing in the world can please equal to good 
humour, joined with beauty. This lady lives in very gay life, and 
receives visits only from the best, of whom she makes whatever she 
thinks proper, by help of her agreeable talent. She is but slim made, 
is not above twenty years old, has fine dark brown glossy hair and 
eyes.




Miss Ric—son, No. 14, Titchfield-street.

Her heaving breast with rapture lies, 
And love her every with supplies.

The constraint put upon the inclinations of most young girls, proves 
very often an irresistible enticement for them to indulge them—Miss 
R— is an instance of this, her mother, by endeavouring to control 
her, raised the fire of desire in her breast, and she soon became a 
convert to love and libertinism—She is fond of the sport to excess, 
and, by her own account, has never yet been bless'd with a satisfying 
meal of manhood. She never consults the person of a man, for she 
cannot like him without he has extraordinary powers, which are the 
only credentials by which a person can recommend themselves to her.

She is about twenty-four, has a fair skin, and good eyes; is very 
full breasted, and has an agreeable lisp in her speech; she has 
genteel and good clothes, but dresses in a style peculiar to herself.



Miss Wils—n, No. 11, Green-street, Cavendish-square.

'Tis now before you, and the pow'r to chuse.

Miss W—n is about twenty-four, light hair, rather above the common 
size. How such a piece of goods first came to our market we are at a 
loss to guess: we have indeed heard that she lived some time servant 
in Wapping; and, as the tars are good-natured, free-hearted fellows, 
and, after long voyages, are not very nice in their choice, they 
might perhaps have done her a good-natured action; this is the only 
way we can account for it, every other seems absurd to us. Her hands 
and arms, her limbs indeed, in general, are more calculated for the 
milk-carrier, than the soft delights of love; however, if she finds 
herself but in small estimation with our sex, she repays them the 
compliment, and frequently declares that a female bed-fellow can give 
more real joys than ever she experienced with the male part of the 
sex; perhaps her demands in that way may be so great that she never 
found a man able to supply her; this is but a natural conclusion, 
when a lady is remarked for paying visits to a fellow only famous for 
ideotism. The proverb indeed is on her side, and perhaps she has 
found it true. The ingenious author of the Woman of Pleasure has 
given us a noble picture of it in the foolish nosegay man.

Many of the pranks she has played with her own sex in bed (where she 
is as lascivious as a goat) have come to our knowledge; but, from our 
regard to the delicacy of the sex, are suppressed, but in no sort as 
a favour to her; our plan indeed is too confined to admit of it but 
we can assure her, unless she gives over that scandalous itch of 
hers, to sow dissensions where harmony and peace should ever reign, 
and which she envies because she cannot attain to—we shall not forget 
her next year, but be more explicit—and moreover acquaint her drone 
of a keeper.



Mrs. Chis—lme, No. 11, Berner-street.

Gallants beware, look sharp; take care, 
The blind eat many a fly.

This lady whose genteel behaviour, animated with no small degree of 
vanity, might persuade one, from her first appearance, that she is a 
modest woman, is, nevertheless, among the number of come-at-able 
demireps, who meet you in a tete-a-tete, about three quarters of the 
way, to prevent mistakes from external prudery. She is, it must be 
acknowledged, a pretty little woman, has good eyes and fine hair, a 
handsome hand and arm, and a great deal of that small talk which 
women of this cast are so apt to take for pleasantry and wit. Her 
apparent disinterestedness is very seducing, as she puts on all the 
airs of a woman of consequence, whose sole vice in an intrigue is 
pleasure; but beneath this delusion, self-interest may easily be 
discriminated. She is, indeed, at the time of life when prudence 
ought to predominate over every passion; and yet women about four and 
thirty lose sight of it the most, and require the greatest 
indulgence. Philosophers account for it is you can! I will, in the 
mean while, hazard a conjecture from experience. When a woman 
perceives her charms decay, and finds every day estranges her still 
farther from her juvenile beauty, she regrets (if an amorous woman) 
the loss of every moment of her life that has not been consecrated to 
bliss, and risks an adventure that she would formerly have spurned, 
rather than lose the chance of an admirer, the perspective of a 
moment's enjoyment; by her late appearance, we suppose her much 
reduced.

This lady at present occupies the first floor, but how long she will 
keep it we cannot answer.



Miss Sto—s, No. 15, Steven-street.

Her eyes enflam'd and sparkling too; 
Her cheek, the rose and lily's hue; 
Her note was strait, and just its height, 
Her lips than coral far more bright; 
Her breasts two little hills of snow, 
In which two vivid rubies glow: 
Tho' one might span her slender waist, 
Her thighs would scarcely be embrac'd, 
Her taper leg by far excell'd 
All that was ever yet beheld.

What our warm poet here imagined, is in Miss St—es realized; for her 
face has the health of Hebe. She seems designed as the handmaid of 
love, and the servant of pleasure.

Her eyes sparkle, and emanate the flames which seem to glow in her 
bosom and inspire that life, fire, and vivacity which animates her 
conversation.

Her make is as elegant as imagination can paint. She is a very 
agreeable companion, and remarkable for her generosity; so that she 
is an object well worthy of the pursuit of a man of pleasure; yet in 
that pursuit, if he wishes the true pleasure resulting from the 
society of a desirable woman, he must prevent her drinking too much. 
She is about nineteen, and expects a brace of shiners.


Miss Molesw—h, No. 22, Oxendon-street.

Her youthful blood is all on fire, 
She is all love and hot desire; 
Her pulse beats high, her bosom heaves, 
The more is done the more the craves.

The novelty of this nymph upon town, must give her a high 
recommendation to those whose letch is a new face. She has however, 
other strong recommendations in the art the has adopted; for, besides 
being a very well made girl, with a very agreeable countenance, she 
is perfectly mistress of attitudes, and knows all the workings of 
human nature. Yet she is very decent and modest in company; and, 
though perfectly conversant in all that small talk which makes woman 
appear well educated, and is therefore very chatty, yet never known 
to swear. From being unhackneyed in her business, she is incapable of 
drinking; and we, for that, as well as other mysterious reasons, 
think her a very desirable companion, of only about nineteen years of 
age.

If you should think it necessary to enquire her perfections further 
apply as above, and, on a proper recommendation, marked in gold 
"George the Third," she will herself, give you a more full and better 
satisfaction as to her abilities in bed.



Miss Br—ley, No. 61, South Moulton-street.

The principal attractions of a female, in a public line of life are 
not to be confined merely to person. We have had frequent occasion to 
observe this in our review, but happy it is for those who wanting 
such attractions, can substitute others in lieu of them.

This lady has had that good fortune, and her agreeableness stands in 
lieu of beauty; for her face is in lack of such perfection, she has, 
however, a very good eye, which would alone be no small 
recommendation. But what recommends her much more, is a pleasantry 
which makes her courted as the laughter-loving goddess, and the 
patroness of mirth and good-humour, every where; this, in no small 
degree is assisted by a very good education, and good temper, which 
alike prevent her from swearing and drinking: and, in the whole, 
render her an object of esteem and attention. She is about twenty 
years of age, and ever satisfied with a single guinea.

This lady is said to be the natural daughter of L—d B—, and is of a 
fair complexion.



Miss Les—r, No. 23, Upper Newman-street.

Under how hard a fate are women born; 
Prais'd to their ruin, or exposed to scorn! 
If they want beauty, they of love despair, 
And are besieg'd like frontier towns if fair.

This lady was a few years since, a servant to a gentleman's family, 
near Holborn: in which capacity she used frequently to walk for the 
air, with her little ward, in Gray's Inn Gardens, A certain gentleman 
of the law, perceiving a very fine girl, which she was at that time, 
often in the walks, took an opportunity of conversing with her, and 
soon after persuaded her to come and make some tea for him in his 
chambers. The sequel, it were needless to relate: she was debauched, 
and soon after deserted by her betrayer. The consequence of which 
was, having lost her place, and being destitute of a character, she 
was obliged to have recourse to her beauty for a subsistance. She 
took lodgings near Red Lyon Square, and had a number of successive 
admirers. She was, at this time, not above twenty; tall and well 
made, with a fine open expressive countenance, large amorous eyes; 
her other features in due symmetry; her mouth very agreeable, and her 
teeth regular; in a word, she was at that time one of the finest 
women upon the town, and, accordingly, made one of the best figures 
from the emoluments of her employments. She was same time after taken 
into keeping by a man of fortune, with whom she made a summer 
excursion in o the country; but, upon his demise, her finances being 
exhausted, she was compelled to have recourse to a more general 
commerce, in which the has not been so successful, as before; and 
chagrin added to the usual irregularities accidental to her 
profession, has diminished those charms which were before so 
attracting; her face is now rather bloated, and she is grown somewhat 
masculine in her person; she may, nevertheless, still be pronounced a 
very good piece, and a desirable woman.



Miss Towns—d, No. 12, Gress-street.

The God of love with all his darts, 
Lives in her eyes to conquer hearts.

This lady adds to a genteel person, an excellent understanding; 
having had good success, the has been prudent enough to be saving, so 
as to enable herself to appear in an elegant manner, and to be 
provided in case of an emergency.

She is visited by liberal company, for no others are welcome to her 
as mere visitors. She is about twenty, has a fair face, with delicate 
and well formed features, her forehead is beautifully spacious, and 
the has a very handsome mouth, with good teeth, and is an almost 
constant attendant at the places of amusement, where she is well 
known by the men of pleasure, and is held in estimation by them, 
being universally allowed to be a very desirable woman.



Miss Char—ton, same house as the last lady.

Heaven in her eye, 
In every motion ectacy and love.

This is an old observation, but certainly a true one, that some of 
the finest women in England are those, who go under the denomination 
of ladies of easy virtue. Miss C— is a particular instance of the 
assertion; she came of reputable parents, bred delicately, and her 
education far superior to the vulgar; yet the address of a designing 
villain, too soon found means to ruin her; forsaken by her friends, 
pursed by shame and necessity; she had no other alternative, than to 
turn —, let the reader guess what.— She was long a favourite among 
the great, but some misconduct of hers, not to be accounted for, 
reduced to the servile and detestable fate of turning common. She is 
a fine figure, tall and genteel, has a fair round face, with a faint 
tinge of that bloom she once possessed, is rather melancholy, 'till 
inspired with a glass, and then is very entertaining company.

She lodges on the first floor, however, with the assistance of the 
last lady, who lives in the parlour, they sport a chariot, but some 
times the wheels get off, owing, we suppose, to the cash being low.



Miss Will—s, No. 6, Princess-street, Cavendish-square.

Temptation strong, who can withstand? 
When push'd to it hard with sword in hand.

A few years ago, at the time when that celebrated fair, called 
Bartholomew Fair was held, Miss W— went with some young women to see 
the diversions of that place, there were a parcel of young bucks 
singled her out. Immediately, one of them stuck close to her, took 
her round the fair, and bought her several trinkets; at last he 
prevailed on her to drop her acquaintances, as he did his, and to go 
in to the Crown to dance; he kept her there till towards morning, and 
then, had not much difficulty, (being warm with wine and dancing) to 
persuade her to go to his bed; next day being afraid to go home 
again, she consented to live with him, which she did for some time, 
and then parted by mutual consent; since that time she has lived on 
the town, and in different parts of it; dresses extremely genteel, is 
tall and lusty, has brown hair, black eyes, fair skin, and fresh 
colour, is rather delicate in her choice of customers, and high in 
her demands.



Mrs. Ha—on, No. 4, York-street, Queen Ann Street.

Be cautious, ye fair, of the man you trust.

A good pretty Scotch lass about twenty-four, strong features, dark 
hair, and eyes, with extraordinary good teeth. She was debauched by a 
Scotch gentleman in the army; but finding an opportunity to marry, he 
left her with a small present, promising her great things when he 
came into his wife's fortune, which was said to be considerable; but 
as this proved only a pretence to get rid of her, she was obliged to 
shift for herself and make the most of her person: she has some 
extraordinary good acquaintance, and does as well as most of her 
sisterhood.

She is always to be seen at the parlour window; her price is one 
pound one, but, like many others of the fraternity, will not turn her 
back on a less sum, she will rather accept of half a guinea, than her 
friend should return home with his burthen.



Miss Gronmos—d, No. 59, South-Moulton-street.
O! Parents, consider the child in future.

This is a decent, well-bred, young lady, about twenty-two, was 
brought up in France, her father being a man who had an extreme good 
place for life, during which period he could very well afford to 
bring her up in the way he did; but being too ambitious was the cause 
of her ruin; after his decease she was left to the wide world to 
shift for herself, her mother dying when she was very young. Which 
way to turn herself she knew not: the whole of the father's effects 
went to pay some debts, so that being totally out of subsistence, she 
applied to one of those handy old women who oblige gentlemen with the 
newest ware, an opportunity which to her seemed the dernier resource, 
consequently was resolved to embrace it: in short, after losing her 
maidenhead for a trifling consideration, she was obliged to commence 
trader, and has for some time past obtained a decent livelihood. She 
is a very elegant, genteel fair girl, light hair, and extreme fine 
skin; her price is from two to five guineas.



Mrs. Harris—n, next door to the Shoe-maker's Shop, Cleveland-street, 
New Moulton-street.
Let the present hour be mine.

A pompous heroic girl, without either wit or humour, but fancies 
herself clever without any person acquiescing with her whomsoever. 
She is of the red-haired kind and very vicious, too fond of the male 
kind for her business, which is the cause of her not succeeding as 
she should do. Her person is extremely well made, good eyes, fair 
skin, and incomparable fine hair; never so happy as when in bed with 
a pretty fellow, altho' the gets nothing by him—like the giddy girl, 
thinks of nothing but the present, leaving all future events to 
chance. She left an elderly man, who would have given her five 
guineas, to bed with a young fellow who had not a single sixpence, 
and having herself just one guinea thought it sufficient to defray 
the expense of the night and the following day, leaving herself 
without a farthing for the sake of a few hours indulgence with this 
favourite. Whatever money she receives from her indifferent customers 
she holds in a kind of contempt, and longs for an opportunity to 
throw away upon her favourite man—generally one who is penniless and 
glad of even a dinner.

This lady lives in the first floor, was lately in keeping with a 
young banker, but since with another gentleman.



Miss Sh—rd, No. 46, Goodge-street.

A woman if she's young and fair, 
Of lovers never need despair.

A very desirable companion, though in the knowing style, she is up to 
a thing or two, and is not to be had by a queer cull. She is of a 
middle size, inclined to be fat, and may be said, if we draw a kind 
view of things, or argued a posteriori, to incline to the luscious.

Her face is one of those where love seems to have chosen his seat for 
casting his darts from, especially from her eyes, which, from a 
certain peculiar cast, is all life, spirit, and fire; indeed, it 
seems rather to flame than burn. Her hand and arm are uncommonly 
neat; and her leg, thigh, and the demesnes adjacent remarkably 
tempting.

She drinks but little, swears less, and has that great attractive 
recommendation to every woman—an apparent modesty, which, if a woman 
wants the reality is certainly the best substitute for it. She is 
without doubt a most pleasing pupil of pleasure, and perfectly 
competent to the instruction of those who. desire to be announced 
Students in the mysteries of Venus. She is about 20, and a single 
guinea will content her.

This lady's apartments are on the first floor; has several city 
friends, and lawyers from Gray's Inn and the Temple.



Miss Mo—e, No. 1, Charles-street, Newman-street.

Such is the power of good nature, that it can stand in the place of 
the other requisites usually expected to be found in the followers of 
the mysteries of Venus. Beauty, which is arcanum, tho' the cosmetics 
which adulterate it are, is generally looked upon as the first and 
chief requisite; and next to it, an agreeable conversation. Here, 
however, is the reverse of the medal! for Miss M—e has nothing to 
boast of in point of beauty, as she has but a middling face, with 
large features, a coarse hand and arm, and in stature short and 
clumsy. So much for her person. Next, as to her conversation, she is 
ignorance itself; yet good-nature has force enough to bewitch and to 
continue the spell over those whom it has once bound.

Her age is about nineteen, and her favours may be had on very 
moderate terms.

She is an excellent bedfellow, being fond of the sport, and is just 
from the country.



Mrs. Abbing—on, next door to the Butcher's shop, Store-street.

In vain for youth we all contend, 
Age to beauty will soon put an end.

This lady was born of a good family, but being naturally of a froward 
disposition, she found means to deceive her parents, when a young 
Hibernian, who seeking out the natural bent of her inclinations, soon 
found an easy access to the fortress he had long been waiting to 
storm; but her father dying soon afterwards, my young gentleman was 
disappointed in his hopes of possessing any fortune at his decease, 
and therefore soon gave her an opportunity to seek for another 
keeper, which was one Mr. A—, whose name she now assumes. She lived 
with him as his wife for some time; he dying, she was again left to 
shift for herself; but, with prudence and industry, she soon acquired 
money sufficient to furnish a house.

She is genteel, dark hair, black eyes, neat ankles, and about the 
middle size, is about the age of forty, though seldom owns herself 
above twenty-five, remarkable for her amorous disposition, and 
earnest desire to please her customers whom she would rather treat in 
her turn, than part without being both mutually satisfied.




Mrs. Cor—ish, No. 66, Well-street.

A wanton widow, of a middle size, black eyes, plump made, and her 
skin good.

She is commonly at home at her apartments, which are very genteel, 
neat and elegant. Has a good set of friends, therefore is seldom seen 
at any public place of retort without an acquaintance.

Her behaviour is very genteel when she has mind, but can upon an 
occasion let fly a volley of small shot; but who, when they are 
provoked, have an absolute command of their tongue? Her dress is 
always in taste, and indeed rather elegant than otherwise.

She has always five or six ladies of her own stamp in the house with 
her; so is able to suit any gentleman with a young tit-bit, and by 
that means she has a very comfortable livelihood.



Mrs. Will—ms, No. 17, Pit-street.
Fond she is and e'er will be, 
Of our king's new guineas.

This is a fine tall lady, about twenty-four, a very fine figure, just 
returned from Brighton, has been in dock to have her bottom cleaned 
and fresh coppered, where the has washed away all the impurities of 
prostitution, and risen almost immaculate, like Venus, from the 
waves. She is now fit to carry any burthen, and sails from the rate 
of ten to twelve notches an hour. If the spring and even the summer 
of her beauty be past, she is not without hopes of a fruitful autumn. 
She at present has a young man of the pen who is her favourite, and 
lives on the first floor. Her footing is rather superior to the 
common run, and expects five pieces, but being often disappointed, is 
very well pleased with two or three.



Mrs, Elli—t, No. 24, Pit-street.

If in search of game you rove, 
For to sooth your melancholy; 
Here you may give a loose to love, 
With one that's lovely, brisk, and jolly,

Mrs. E—t is the only child of an eminent tradesman in London, who 
brought her up, and educated her in the best manner, but her being 
fond of dress, even to an extreme, her father could not satisfy her 
in all her desires, for which reason, and through the persuasions of 
a young officer who lodged in the house, she went away with him, to 
become a fine lady, but after he had got what he wanted, he changed 
his quarters; Mrs. E—t was afraid to go home again, so went and 
offered herself at a Bagnio; she was accepted being a fine girl, but 
was soon taken from thence into keeping by an old Letche; she did not 
stay long with him, but has shifted her keepers and lodgings many 
times: she now is at free liberty to trade upon her own bottom: is 
tall and comely, fair skin, light hair, blue eyes, and lively 
disposition; price high.



Miss Jo—es, No. 16, Edward-street, Cavendish-square.

Thro' various scenes of untir'd, Miss J—es has run 
And still to please she does, the best she can: 
Her well taught limbs, will twist, and turn, and wind, 
What more can wanton do, to suit your mind.

This lady was born in the country, but the circumstances of her 
parents, when she was sufficiently grown up, obliged them to send her 
into London to get a livelihood, she was not long before she got a 
place in St. James's Market, where, whither, by being accustomed to 
see the poor lambs bleed, or rather a desire of becoming a sacrifice 
to the goddess of love, is left for the reader to judge, but she was 
shortly found stabbed to the heart, in the most tender and 
susceptible part of her body, in short she was unable to withstand 
the powerful impulse of nature any longer, so was ravished with her 
own content, at the age of sixteen; her mistress, on the discovery, 
thought proper to send her going, for fear her good man should take 
it in his head to kill the lamb over again. She began now to shew the 
bent of her inclinations, she listed under the banners of Cupid, and 
marched at the head, being of a courageous disposition, and always 
ready to obey standing orders; she had great success, and often made 
the enemy to yield, by which means she gained no inconsiderable share 
of spoil, but her charitable disposition, (being always ready to 
relieve the naked and needy) soon reduced her. Her places of 
residence have been various; she is now about twenty-six, and though 
the has been many times besieged, and innumerable times bombarded; 
she looks well, and is remarkable for her gentleness and affability.



Miss Lawr—e, No. 6, Church-street, St. Ann's. Soho.

The religion of the Jews will not permit them to eat pork, or feast 
with Christians; how strictly this lady may adhere to these 
particulars in her articles of faith we cannot positively tell; but 
this we can say for truth, that she has not the least objection to 
Christian concupiscence, and will open her synagogue of love even on 
the sabbath, either to Jew, Turk, or Infidel, if they think proper to 
call on her as above.

This young Israelite renounced her Levitical friends for the sake of 
a Christian, who gave inward proofs of a new faith, which were so 
convincing to her, that she has continued a thorough orthodox convert 
ever since. She is of a sprightly disposition, has good teeth, dark 
hair, black eyes, a roman nose, a fresh colour, of a middle size, and 
is very wanton in her looks.



Miss Wa—s, No. 60, South Moulton-street.

Is ever killing, toying, shoving, 
And knows no end of lust but loving.

Our nymph seems cast by nature in one of the happiest moulds and 
happiest hours of love. She is tall and elegantly made, with a fair 
complexion, and about nineteen years of age: her eyes seem to beat an 
alarm to that of love, which her tongue, one would suppose, would 
invite to a parley with. Her foot and leg have the shape which the 
staturies give to the Medicean Venus; and the drapery of the figure 
exceeds even the beauty of it; for she is always dressed elegantly, 
and in a style of the first fashion.

Having said so much of the perfections of this lady, it is but just 
to give the remaining part of her character, rather in hopes of her 
amending than to condemn her, for an object, who, in the words of my 
motto, is ever loving, and is so peculiarly adapted for that 
business, ought to seize upon every means of increasing her charms.

Her companionableness is destroyed by her being fretful and 
tenacious; and her opinion of herself extends from her person to her 
conversation, of which she is vain though ignorant, But her principal 
defect is of a love of money, which she seems to prefer to every 
thing; for though she is fond of the sport, and admires a master of 
arts, yet she would forsake even such a one, so great is her 
mercenary disposition, if she should have the fortune to light on a 
pigeon.

She drives a chariot, has several city friends, both bankers and 
Israelites.



Miss We—ls, No. 35, Newman-street.

Virtue is the surest guide.

This a young genteel girl, of the Welch breed, and of which she is 
not a little proud, and thinks that the blood of Owen Tudor runs in 
her veins; she is willing to do business with any one. She is as wild 
as a goat, of a sandy colour, her features are small, and is a tight 
little piece.

This lady is said to be the daughter of a farmer in Wales, who sent 
her to London very young, to be under the care of an aunt, with whom 
she had not long resided before a young gentleman ingratiated him so 
far into her graces, as to gain her consent to make him happy by her 
ruin, under a promise of marriage—but no sooner had enjoyment damped 
the ardour of his love, than he abandoned her to the reproaches and 
calumny of a merciless world! till at length with shame and 
disappointment she quitted her aunt's, and entered on the town.

There is one thing to be said of her, which is, if she had not 
quitted the paths of virtue, the might have proved an honour and an 
ornament to her sex, as she is possessed of every good and amiable 
quality to make this true.

Her customers, whenever inclined to pay her a visit, are always sure 
to be received with a behaviour and politeness becoming a person in a 
higher station.

She is like many others, mighty good humoured when pleased. If you 
give her a piece of gold, before you enter the premises, she goes to 
work with great affability and sweetness of temper; but if not, she 
is cool enough, and thinks of nothing but the money during the time 
of enjoyment.



Miss Wats—n, No. 36, Well-street.

Fortune we all know, is a precarious Goddess, for although she smiles 
with the most enchanting grace, it is like an April day, when the sun 
shines delightfully, yet is suddenly over clouded. Miss Nancy was 
educated with the utmost degree of parental tenderness, and taught 
all the polite necessaries for female education which those in 
expectation of fortune generally have, and hers were not small; but 
alas! who can dive into the mysteries of fate. Her dependence was 
upon an old uncle, a Bachelor, who always promised her a very 
handsome fortune, but that arch rogue Cupid shot the old man, one day 
thro' the bright eyes of a buxom widow; in short he married her, and 
in a twelvemonth had a child by her, but dying soon after, bequeathed 
his whole fortune to his wife and child, and left poor Nancy without 
a farthing. This was a terrible circumstance, as she had long been 
solicited by a young citizen in trade, of whom she was doatingly 
fond, but he declined his visits when he heard of her fate; this had 
such an effect on her, that it threw her into a fit of illness, which 
had like to have cost her her life. This brought her artful swain to 
visit her, and when she got a little better, he took a country 
lodging for her. And in a short time got the better of her virtue; he 
kept her genteel for some time, but finding it expensive, frankly 
told her he could not afford it, and so left her. Poor Nancy was in a 
terrible situation, but finding no other remedy, determined to enlist 
herself in the train of Venus, where the has continued ever since; 
her customers are chiefly citizens, who visit very privately. She 
lives elegant, and is a great economist, is tall and genteel, about 
twenty-four years of age, rather dark complexion, a little pitted 
with the small pox, her price is one pound one, but will not refuse 
half a guinea.

She is in good condition for a journey, being possessed of long legs; 
and is first floor lodger.



Mrs. G—ge, No. 13, South Moulton-street.

This lady has not been in business long; she surrendered her citadel 
to a captain of the navy, who in his attack upon her, united the 
seaman with the lover, and the ingenuity of the one won her heart as 
much as the passion of the other. As a specimen of his epistolary 
method of corresponding with her, we shall subjoin a part of one of 
his letters to her, which runs exactly thus; he tells her that he had 
often thought to reveal to her the tempests of his heart by word of 
mouth, to scale the walls of her affection, but terrified with the 
strength of her fortifications, he had concluded to make more regular 
approaches, to attack her at farther distance, and try what a 
bombardment of letters would do, whether those carcases of love 
thrown into the sconces of her eyes, would break into the midst of 
her breast, beat down the out-guard of her aversion and indifference, 
and blow up the magazine of her cruelty, that she might be brought to 
terms of capitulation: which indeed she soon was and upon reasonable 
terms. The captain was with her but a short time, being obliged to 
repair to his station; and after his departure, she was kept by one 
in the army, who was obliged to give way to the more powerful 
solicitations of one of greater force. She is just thirty, pretty and 
amorous, has a charming lively eye and a handsome mouth; she is 
rather short but very delicately made, a charming colour which seems 
to be natural, is finely diffused over her cheeks, and sets her face 
off to great advantage, and she has fine brown hair, is good 
temper'd, and very free and merry.

She drives a very handsome curricle, and is in keeping by a Mr. C—ns.



Mrs. Str—ls, No. 88, Queen Ann Street East.

Her little heart, beats raptures to the joy; 
And love, from morn to night, is her employ.

This lady keeps the house, is a fat plump lass, about twenty-four 
years of age, and is at present in keeping with a country parson, who 
is seldom in town.

Much experience, and a natural propensity to the business, has 
rendered this lady a perfect mistress in the science she professes; 
and notwithstanding her great practice, she is not the least tired of 
it, but pursues it with as much eagerness as at first, though her 
long study has somewhat impaired her complexion, which she endeavours 
to disguise, by the assistance of art.

The most luxurious appetite of a pampered priest, might be satisfied 
with such a banquet as this, if there was any truth in the tales 
related of Jove's descending to embrace some beautiful mortal, he 
would certainly, before now, have had a tete a-tete with Mrs. S—.

At the beginning of her career in life, there was a particular 
severity in this lady's fate, who being naturally of a moist 
complexion, and being addressed by a number of suitors, the happened 
to make choice of a man who was by no means calculated to gratify the 
wishes of a longing girl; for, from a long course of debauchery, he 
had ruined his constitution; from this it may be reasonably supposed, 
that they were not long together. She soon found another to supply 
his deficiency. She loves a manly young bedfellow beyond every other 
felicity; and though she will not accept a trifle, she is by no means 
mercenary, for she will rather generously give a favour gratis, than 
accept of what the calls a dirty present.



Mrs. R—ssell, No. 17, Fludger-street, Westminster.

Is a fine plump girl, at the age of twenty-eight, rather dark hair 
and eyes, she keeps a house, and sometimes sports a chariot. This 
lady has been some years in the service, in London, where she was 
much in vogue with the bucks and bloods of the town, who admired her 
more for her vulgarity than any thing else, she being extremely 
expert at uncommon oaths, and, at her first commencing a lady of 
pleasure, she threw off all restraint, so that her modesty was never 
offended: her readiness to reveal all the secrets, which the delicate 
part of the sex think proper to conceal, brought her a number of 
clients among the youth, who are fond of beholding that mouth of the 
devil from whence all corruption issueth. These she took care to 
fleece sufficiently; so that by her economy, she is now enabled to 
keep her country house and receives visits from only a few, and has 
in some degree left off her habit of swearing.

This lady being a very good pen-woman, and much out of town, has a 
good opportunity of displaying her talents in that line to her 
lovers.



Mrs. H—rvey, No. 6, Upper Newman-street.

Here is a tall genteel lady, about twenty-six; as she is passionately 
fond of music and dancing, it may be reasonably presumed, that a 
small share of sport will not gratify the large desires she has for 
fun, and that rather than be foiled at her favourite diversion, she 
will set open her front door to any one who can enter in a 
gentlemanlike and manly manner.

She has followed dancing to that degree, that it had nearly consigned 
her to last home; she at present is retired into the country, in 
hopes to gain that strength which will enable her to return to her 
former pleasures. Though in the country is not without a friend, for 
the has Mr. J— of the P— Office with her. It is supposed she will be 
soon in town.

This is a brown beauty, and very agreeable, has fine eyes, and a good 
set of teeth. She became a proselyte to the sport of Venus very 
young, at what age we cannot tell, neither can we satisfy the reader 
whether she ever was married or not. She is a firm votary to the 
wanton goddess, and does not despise the good Bacchus, to whose rosy 
smiling cheeks she will often toss off a sparkling bumper. She is 
very active and nimble, and not a little clever in the performance of 
the art of friction, which renders her the more agreeable to all who 
have the pleasure of her embraces. We are told the always makes it a 
point to be faithful to her admirers. We wish all the ladies of 
profession would act in the same manner.

She is a lady of great sensibility, not that her feelings are painful 
to her, far otherwise, the more her tender sensations are touched, 
the more pleased she is, she is much delighted with All for love, and 
would relinquish her share in the government of the world for that 
darling passion; she thinks herself every way qualified to perform 
the part of Cleopatra, when ever she can meet with Mark Anthony; she 
lives in a very convenient house, and is pretty much visited.

She has been for some years a votary at the temple of Venus, and it 
may with truth be asserted, that she understands the up-and-down art 
of her posteriors as well as any lady of her profession. She has been 
so good a friend to the good old cause, that the number of travellers 
who have gone the path to the fountain of love have trodden all the 
grass away. This attracts a number of votaries, whose curiosity leads 
them to examine those curious parts. She is open, generous, and free. 
She takes the utmost pains imaginable to improve her acquaintance 
with the best, by going every day to some of the most eminent shops 
when in town, where she generally makes acquaintance with some young 
fool of quality or other, who supports her in her extravagance to the 
utmost pitch of vanity.

She has always been remarkably happy in her connexions; among her 
other attractives when the sport is over, you may listen to the 
melody of her voice until nature again revives, which she will 
endeavour, by all the art she is mistress of, shall not be long 
first.



Miss Co—way, No. 50, Slone-square.

Hail beauty, such is thine electric touch, 
It fills the veins, and animates the pulse 
Of all who but behold thee!

If we were called upon to name the lady whom we conceive to be 
handsome, it would certainly be the one we are now speaking of; she 
has so many enchanting graces, that they are quite irresistible. It 
is impossible to withstand the artillery of her eyes, as the winged 
lightening; then her hair, her lips, her every thing, are so 
transporting charming as to fill every beholder with rapture.

She is just twenty-two, of a most elegant form, and as we know her to 
be amorously inclined, we do not think that any young fellow need 
despair, if he has ability, and understands the method of bringing a 
thing to an end.

This lady has been several years in trade, and never in want of 
business. She was lately in keeping by L— S—, who was fond of her to 
excess. She was early initiated in the science of love, and she is 
determined to lose no time, while youth and vigour will give her 
leave to love; on any other subject, she is a woman of the strictest 
honour and generosity, has a free and open heart, is very agreeable, 
and her admirers never find that either their money or time is thrown 
away.

Her education has been liberal; her conversation is easy and 
unaffected; her taste for literature would not disgrace the greatest 
genius of the age, and if we could pass over in silence her present 
mode of life, she has every qualification to render her an ornament 
to the female world.

This lady lives in very high life, is not in keeping now, tho' she 
has had many very genteel overtures made to her on that account; 
variety is her delight, and she indulges her inclination to the 
utmost degree; yet 'tis said she has a favourite who is a foreigner 
and partakes of her purse as well as her favours.

She is fond of play, and never yet could meet with her match at all 
fours, for she begs one at the end of every deal, and seldom fails 
succeeding in her request till she has entirely beat her antagonist, 
who, like more losing gamesters, generally wishes to renew the game, 
when all his cash is spent and he is least able.



Miss B—lford, Titchfield-street.

The British fair to manly hearts inclin'd, 
Their passions open and their souls unbind, 
'Tis nature prompts, what harm can be in this, 
To give and take from each the balmy kiss.

This child of love looks very well when drest. She is rather subject 
to fits, alias counterfits, very partial to a Pantomime Player at 
Covent Garden Theatre. She may be about nineteen, very genteel, with 
a beautiful neck and chest, and most elegantly moulded breasts, her 
eyes are wonderfully piercing and expressive. She is always lively, 
merry, and cheerful, and in bed, will give you such convincing proofs 
of her attachment to love's game, that if you leave one guinea 
behind, you will certainly be tempted to renew your visits.



Mrs. V—cent, Wardour–street.

She'll nicely chose and neatly spread, 
Upon her cheek's the best French red.

This lady is about thirty, not of very advantageous mature, but her 
fine eyes cannot be looked upon without exciting all the thrilling 
emotions of desire in the soul of the beholder. She keeps the house, 
and is to be met with in the parlour, all her apartments being let 
out; nothing under gold will be here accepted.



Miss V—ghan, No. 24, Upper Newman-street.

Give me but thee, I will make a heav'n of earth, 
Each night should give to new-born pleasures birth. 
The sun of joy should Faint continual noon, 
And e'en on age of Noah pass on too soon.

This priestess of Venus is of a dark complexion, dark hair, and 
expressive eyes of the same colour. She is about twenty-one, rather a 
pretty genteel girl; she seems to be a pupil of Cato, whole opinion 
it was that a woman should divest herself of her modesty with her 
clothes. The scandalous chronicle says, she had a child by a coachman 
about nine months ago, whether it be true or not, she is nevertheless 
as agreeable a companion in bed, as she is a pleasing one out of it. 
She is tolerably reasonable, being very well satisfied with a guinea 
per night.



Mrs. D—nby, No. 82, Queen Ann-street.

A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush, 
Or, never let the Goldfinches hop the twig.

A fine plump lady, twenty-four years old, rather short, with sandy 
colour hair, fine blue eyes, rather of an amorous constitution; when 
in the arms of an equally lewd partner, she never wishes to fall in 
the arms of sleep, whilst Venus holds her court, Morpheus is kicked 
out of doors, as she keeps the house, any gentleman may have a 
night's lodging for one-pound one shilling, and half the money, if he 
can do the business well.



Mrs. B—ooks, next to the Pawnbroker, Newman-street.

Nature is nature Lalirus. 
Let the wife say what she will.

A genteel lady, about twenty-three, very keen, as you may judge by 
her eyes, as she looks both ways at once, however she is tolerable 
well made, with well formed projecting bubbies, that defy the result 
of any manual pressure, panting and glowing with unfeigned desire, 
and soon inviting the gratification of senses. As she keeps the 
house, any gentleman may with something less than a bank note, be 
admitted into her Sanctum Sanctorum.



Miss P—ctor, Cursitor-street, formerly of Gress-street.

I am the lass whose ever open arms, 
Both day and night stand ready to receive, 
The fierce assaults of Briton's amorous sons.

A nice girl about nineteen, lives in the first floor, her motive for 
moving was solely on account of some Temple friends, namely 
Attornies, Counsellors, and Clerks in office. She never rises before 
twelve, after which time she may be seen, ready to undress and go 
again to bed. She frequents the Theatre, where she gets an 
innumerable acquaintance; as a chatty, agreeable companion, her 
company must be courted by those who love a deal of chit chat to be 
served up first. She dresses well, but rather flighty; she is seldom 
tired of love's game, whilst the blind boy can find the way in, and 
is able to pay the toll, before he comes out; very cunning and never 
returns money after the curtain is drawn up. Price one pound one.



Miss W—by, No. 3, Gress-street, Rathbone-place.

— So beauteous young and gay, 
And dearly loves the am'rous play.

A pleasing countenance, of a middling size, her features are the 
delicacy of a court lady in their town use. This pretty little girl 
is about eighteen, lives in the parlour, is always to be seen in the 
day time, as she never dresses till time for the Theatres; in bed she 
performs all her paces in a pleasing manner, and keeps exact time to 
every motion, urges with every possible insinuations the coming 
pleasure, and returns the ecstatic with a flood of tepid delight, 
always urging repetitions. Her price is from half a guinea to what 
you please, but for a night's lodging, notice must previously be 
given her.



Miss M—tague, Meard-street.

Where there's no path, no track, he runs astray. 
But in a beaten road can ever find the way.

A well shaped girl about twenty-three, somewhat aversed to 
contradiction, must have her own way;—she is however good-natured,. 
and is said to be thoroughly experienced in the whole art and mystery 
of Venus's tactics, and can as soon reduce a perpendicular to less 
than the curve of a parabola; her eyes sparkle, and emanate the 
flames which seem to glow in her bosom, and inspire that life, fire, 
and vivacity which animates her conversation; she is rather generous, 
and you may sometimes find your way in there free of expence.



Miss H—rington, Newman-street.

She spins her web to catch male flies, 
Like sportsmen's black birds—by her eyes.

A knowing one, lives in the first floor, has two or three gentlemen 
favorites; by giving a double rap, this lady will instantly make her 
appearance, and if the returns you a favourable glance, she will 
immediately conduct you in a very complaisant manner to a convenient 
sofa, and suffer you there to take a view of her haven of delight, 
where pretty ringlets hang in tempting curls over the cupidinous 
font, in return she likewise expects a view of nature's gifts from 
you, which if the thinks clean and properly adopted, she will unload 
for two pounds two. She is rather a good figure, and about twenty-
five, with a tolerable good complexion, in company chatty, witty and 
agreeable.



Mrs. St—ton, at the Shoe-makers, Corner of Upper Newman-street.

All I ask of mortal man, 
Is to — me whilst I can.

A fine plump widow bewitched, as she says, she is the wife of a 
captain S—n, who is gone abroad; but her passions are not to be 
confined, and thinking life not worth her care, without the thorough 
gratification of that most noble sense, she gives an uncontrolled 
loose to all her desires, and places the tree of life into the garden 
of Eden, as often as inclination invites, and opportunity gives 
leave; and so exquisitely toned are the most sensible parts, that all 
the senses seem swallowed up at once in the gulf of Venus; she is 
good-natured, and does not seem to make money so much the object as 
love, if she thinks she has a flash-man who is a posture-master; but 
is not to be had by a queer-cull. She will not refuse a guinea from 
any man, and will take half sooner than go without. This jolly 
agreeable piece lives in the first floor.



Miss Le—, Berwick-street, Soho.

Oh pray mamma! let me down! 
You will find me the best boy in town; 
I'll never while I live offend, 
I promise you, you will find me mend

This young lady is tall and genteel, and about seventeen, with sandy 
colour hair, and fine blue eyes that are delicious; her complexion is 
delicate and fair, but we cannot refrain saying, she has a piece of 
the termagant about her, which, however, she qualifies with a 
whimsicality of humour that renders it supportable. She was debauched 
by a young counsellor, from a boarding-school near town, where she 
was apprentice. Her mistress surprising her one day with a certain 
naughty book, took her into the whipping-room, where having tied her 
on a horse that is always there for the use of correction, she 
whipped her with a large rod, made of green birch, till through 
fatigue, the rod dropped from her hands; the counsellor meeting with 
her a few days after, she told him how she had been used by her 
governess for the book he had lent her; he took immediately a room 
for her, and visited her till he went to Ireland. She found herself 
for some time very much embarrassed, till meeting with a merchant of 
the city, who is fond of the rod, she then appeared again at the 
theatres, which she frequents very much.

She dresses always very elegantly, and in the season she is very 
seldom without a most enormous nosegay of luscious flowers, which she 
generally wears very high on the left side of her bosom, having 
discovered that many gentlemen have a great partiality for that 
effeminate ornament. She is constantly visited by amateurs of birch 
discipline, being always furnished with brooms of green birch and of 
the best quality, and is always very happy to see any friend that 
feels himself inclinable to spend three or four guineas in her 
company.



Mrs. G—frey, No 6, Newman-street.

Here may the brisk, and able pour, 
An ocean of their liquid store.

This lady may be about thirty, rather plump, she has however, every 
requisite to make an agreeable bed-fellow, every nerve during the 
preludes to enjoyment, seem trembling alive to all the refined 
sensations, and every part about the frame is blessed with that 
corresponding aptness that cannot fail of producing the most 
desirable effects, neither has the too frequent use of the most 
bewitching spot rendered it the least callous to the joys of love; 
she still feels all that torrent of rapture, the mutual dissolution 
of two souls in liquid bliss can possibly afford; meets the coming 
moment with uncommon ecstasy, and asks the speedy return. She is very 
fond of black, as she pretends to be a widow; her price is one pound 
one tho' ten shillings and six-pence will do.



Miss J—nson, No. 17, Willow-walk, near the Dog and Duck.

Beauty soon grows familiar to the lover, 
Fades in the eye, and falls upon the sense.

This pretty filly is of a middling size near twenty, Norfolk gave her 
birth, her countenance is rather pleasing, with fine black eyes that 
are very attractive, good teeth, a fine skin, and of so amorous 
constitution, that in the arms of an equally lewd partner, she never 
wishes to fall in the arms of sleep; the dairy hills of delight are 
beautifully prominent, firm and elastic, the sable coloured grot 
below with its coral lipt janitor is just adopted to the sons of 
Venus, it is a pity this girl did not receive some sort of education, 
however, as there are people who admire a vulgarity of expression and 
a coarseness of manner which they account a kind of rustic naiveté, 
and which they prefer to the polish education or the attractions of 
bieuseance, it is no wonder if she has a few customers, tho' her 
clothes are always at the pawnbrokers. She seems always low spirited, 
except when the liquor exhilarates her spirits; extremely illiterate, 
ungrateful to her benefactors, peevish, addicted to swearing and to 
low company; this girl in a short time will be in the lowest class of 
prostitutes; however as she is young, she is still worthy the 
attention of an amateur who would rescue her from prostitution, as we 
think she still possesses a little sensibility; she is the only girl 
that frequents the D. and D. worth mentioning; her price from five 
shillings to half a guinea.



Mrs. C—ild No. 24, Newman-street.

Let puny foplings talk of puny bliss, 
Give me luxuriant bits that courts a kiss.

This lady is of a middle size, twenty-three years old, plump and 
fair, very wanton, wicked, blue eyes, her teeth tolerably good, her 
complexion of a delicate white, which, by the alliance of rouge, has 
the rose blended with the lily in a very voluptuous manner: a night's 
swim in this ocean of delight cannot be refused by the lovers of 
cheerfulness and good humour, when they know it is procurable at a 
trifling expense, but then it must be when a particular friend with 
whom she lives is not expected to give any interruption, this lady 
keeps the house.



Mrs. M—chall, No. 52, Margate-street.

Freedom in love is what I crave, 
And give me this, ye mighty gods.

A fine tall elegant woman rather lusty, full eyes, she has the 
character of a spirited, spitefully-fond bed fellow, that will keep 
her spark to the mark of business as long as he has strength to 
follow his labour with any pleasure or ability, her manners are easy 
and polite; nor is her appearance what would class her among rep or 
demireps; dresses very elegantly, generally appearing with a 
profusion of feathers on her head dress, and a large bouquet in her 
bosom. This lady is now kept by a gentleman, but as he is often out 
of town I make no doubt that she may be spoke with.



Miss B—df—d, No. 44, Mortimer-street, Cavendish-square.

If mutual love, if mutual fire, 
Can add a relish to desire, 
Come, ye voluptuous, to this feat; 
Her willing limbs will ne'er retreat, 
But cling with fervour to the kiss, 
Till all the soul dissolves in bliss.

In delineating the beauties of this charming little girl, the 
abilities of the first literary talents should be furnished for the 
immediate purpose of displaying her perfections to the best 
advantage. This wanton and enchanting nymph is a frequent visitor of 
the theatres; she is particularly attached to the Haymarket, for 
reasons best known to herself. She dresses with considerable taste, 
blended with a degree of neatness the frail fair are seldom 
accustomed to exhibit. Her accomplishments are various and brilliant; 
her polite and sensible conversation reflects much credit on her 
education, which is said to be liberal in the extreme.—This 
languishing fair one, when in bed with a gentleman of her own loving 
disposition, is amorous to distraction—her feelings at the critical 
moment are so excessive tender that she generally occasions her blind 
visitor to shed tears ere he quits her covered apartment. Her panting 
orbs, pouting lips, delicate shape, love-sparkling eyes (which are 
dark), regular set of teeth, together with a tempting leg and foot, 
compose the principal attractions of this goddess of pleasure. A 
cheerful glass of wine is not ill bestowed on this matchless heroine.

Generosity she rewards, 
Meanness she despises.

Good nature may with singular propriety be deemed a striking feature 
in this darling little girl. This offspring of delight is indebted to 
eighteen summers for the attainment of such charms as the reader may 
for a compliment of five guineas be in full possession of.



Miss L—w—s, No. 36, Wells-street, Oxford-street.

By that smile that decks thy face, 
By that dimple on thy chin, 
By each loving sweet embrace, 
Let me once more enter in.

The prolific soil of Salisbury is reported to have given birth to 
this whimsical Cyprian Goddess, a more beautiful face we never 
witnessed, and to her praise be it spoken, she is not under the 
smallest obligation to any performer,

No artificial tint adorns her lovely cheeks.

Pure nature and rosy health are her inseparable companions; her 
conversation displays so much artless simplicity that we are positive 
any gentleman would conceive himself happy in having an opportunity 
of standing before this lady with a view to obtain her mark of 
pleasure. She has lately been in keeping with a Ri—er, but we greatly 
fear he proved himself a bad horseman, as the lady will not, at this 
time, suffer him to enter her premises. Pecuniary embarrassments are 
the reasons assigned for his being deprived her present favours; her 
visitors must not be surprised if they are addressed with expressions 
of a simple nature from this votary of wantonness. She is very expert 
in milking a cow;—we mention this acquisition merely for the 
accommodation of any gentleman who is fond of witnessing such sport; 
her panting delicate white breasts are tempting, firm, and elastic; 
twelve months are scarcely elapsed since her virgin rose was plucked. 
An artist of some celebrity is said to be the fortunate reducer of 
her maiden treasure; her disposition is extremely lively; she is 
blessed with a pair of the most enchanting black eyes we ever beheld. 
It is impossible to gaze at this fascinating female without being 
captivated with her delightful charms; she exhibits a neat leg and 
foot; good-nature is a valuable ornament to this lady. Nineteen years 
is her real age, and two pounds two shillings will not be rejected as 
a reward for the disposal of her favours.



Miss H—nd—s, No. 6, Church-street, Soho.

Beauty like mine would warm a hermit's heart, 
Remove his calmness and disturb his rest, 
Expel religion from his sacred grove, 
And all his passions soften into love.

It gives peculiar pleasure to the writer of this biography to present 
the public with as delightful a female as ever graced the Cyprian 
train; if unaffected beauty blended with extreme good-nature be 
entitled to notice, this charming goddess of health must certainly 
attract admiration. A captain in the marines was lately with this 
dying nymph (by which name she now assumes) this lady's conversation 
breathes so much of the accomplished woman of fashion, that we advise 
none but what are real gentlemen to approach that shrine of this 
delicate fair one; her disposition is lively, amorous and engaging; 
her temper indisputably (for sweetness) surpasses any we ever have 
had occasion to mention; her beautiful person is not only to be seen 
but to be admired.

Here you may gaze with rapture on a world of charms.

She has a wonderful art in raising up those of her male friends who 
are inclined to droop while in her enchanting company. She never 
wishes any gentleman to come a second time unless he proves himself 
to be a man of honour at the first visit; five pounds five shillings 
is the present this lady expects for the distribution of her private 
concerns. Twenty years have been devoted in bringing to perfection 
this adorable siren.



Miss W-l—n, No. 27, Litchfield-street, Soho.

Her careless air, her easy mien and dress, 
Nor art, nor perfect negligence confess 
Admir'd by all, she treads the Cyprian stage, 
And one and twenty is the lady's age.

The land of Jamaica is the native foil of this wanton Cyprian female, 
though she cannot boast a complexion delicately fair, yet it must be 
acknowledged her features are very pleasing, she has a brilliant 
tell-tale love sparkling eye, which commonly attract admiration from 
most of her male visitors; she is a girl of considerable taste and 
fashion; Covent Garden Theatre is her constant evening lounge, at 
which place she is known by many of the gentlemen actors, one of 
which in the vocal line is said to have been closely connected with 
her; a beautiful leg and foot adorns her charming shape, a delicate 
pair of white silk stockings she likewise sports, this addition to 
her dress is considered by many of her admirers as a valuable 
acquisition to her appearance; report says she dances well, her vocal 
abilities are of no inconsiderable promise, as she warbles with much 
sweetness and science; she is pronounced an amorous bed-fellow, being 
spitefully loving, her conversation denotes her to be a girl of good 
sense, an elegant set of teeth (which for whiteness stands unrivalled 
in the whole Cyprian corps) and dark brown tresses which flow in 
careless ringlets across a pair of tempting rising promontories, 
compose the remainder of attraction in this enchanting goddess of 
whim; this lady's purse discovers so much elasticity that it will 
contain the largest thing any gentleman can present her with, however 
not the smallest thing will be accepted unless accompanied with two 
golden balls; twenty-one years she is indebted for the variety of 
accomplishments she possesses.



Miss L—the, No. 12, Castle-street, Oxford-market.

She wants no art to give her greater charms, 
And sure 'tis heaven to die in her arms.

This lovely fountain of transport is nineteen years old, her stature 
tall, but quite genteel, her eyes are of a beautiful sloe black, and 
beam a torrent of delight at every potent glance; a sweet breath and 
good teeth; her breasts are in the fullest proportion and will 
rebound with the more grateful ardour to the hand's soft pressure; 
her yielding limbs, though beautiful when together, are still more 
ravishing when separated, her temper is affable and complaisant; an 
air of gaiety and tenderness breathe round her, unfortunately for 
this girl, the has received no education, she possesses none of those 
happy talents which improve and heighten so much amorous delights; 
her face however good, is destitute of expression, her manner rather 
vulgar, which mark out a low original. Half a guinea is the price of 
admission for any of our readers to enter such premises as will not 
cause a moment's regret.



Mrs. D—l—v—t, No. 46, Hanover-street, Hanover-square.

To look at her majestic figure, 
Would make you caper with more vigor! 
The lightening slashing from each eye, 
Would lift your soul to ecstasy! 
Her bubbies o'er their bound'ry broke, 
Quick palpitating at each stroke! 
With vigor o'er the bouncing bum, 
She'd tell ungovern'd boys who ruled at home!

This lady is about thirty, she was bred a milliner, and married very 
young an attorney's clerk, but as his income was not sufficient to 
support her in the manner the wished to live, she listened to the 
addresses of an American gentleman who made her an handsome allowance 
whilst he remained in England, and took some pains to persuade her to 
accompany him in his present visit to that quarter of the world, but 
she preferred old to new England. She is at present a housekeeper, 
but soon intends to quit her situation and retire to a snug lodging, 
as she has experimentally found that the frail sisterhood are very 
bad pay-mistresses for first and second floors. Though not young, her 
charms have received no diminution from the hand of time, as the has 
always been very careful of herself, and eluding as much as possible 
the main action; she is celebrated for bush-fighting with a birchen 
rod, which she wields with dexterity to the uncommon gratification of 
many gentlemen, who have occasion for this operation to rouse the 
Venus lurking in their veins; it said she is very fond, as many 
ladies are, of handling this instrument of pain and delight; she 
keeps always in the house a number of excellent birch brooms and 
cutting rods ready made for present service; her price is various, in 
the birchen operation, she will not take less than half a guinea, but 
for the completion of bliss she never condescends to grant her 
favours for less than a guinea.



Miss S—wyn, Chelsea.

Hail beauty, such is thine electric touch, 
It fill the veins and animates the pulse, 
Of all who but beheld thee!

This lovely female is rather tall, but elegantly made with a most 
enchanting bosom, a fair complexion and excellent features, her mouth 
is small, but looks when closed like a rose when it begins to bud, 
fine expressive blue eyes and beautiful teeth; dresses most 
elegantly, and is just turned of sixteen; she is the natural daughter 
of an Officer, who died about twelve years ago in the East-India, and 
is now kept by a friend of her father's, who had her educated at a 
boarding school, and who took her from it about two years ago; this 
gentleman took for her a lodging on the King's Road, just by a lazy 
nursery, and like the celebrated R—s, is very fond of hair combing 
preparatory to the amorous conflict; and as soon as the hair-dresser 
is gone, he generally begins his operation, and combs with a 
tortoiseshell comb her beautiful tresses, which are always highly 
perfumed with the most odoriferous scent; when he has done, Miss 
retires into her bed-room to finish her dress, then take a walk into 
the nursery, and soon returns to the arms of her keeper with a most 
beautiful bouquet in her bosom, almost as large as a broom, being 
passionately fond, as well as her keeper, of the sweet perfume of 
flowers, particularly when she celebrates the rites of Venus; and it 
is questionable, as a certain author says, whether the enjoyment of a 
woman be not more luscious when dressed than in puris naturalibus; 
and it is demonstrable that one thus enjoys her in a two-fold manner, 
for it is an axiom in sensuality that the sight contributes very much 
to its gratification; by preferring her dressed, it must not be 
however understood to mean her when encumbered with all the articles 
that complete the court or ball dress: of stiff stays, she should by 
all means, be divested; white seems the most voluptuous dress; her 
hair elegantly dressed and highly perfumed; the head-dress adorned 
with large feathers, but an indispensable article in the dress of a 
young woman, is, a very large nosegay of natural flowers, or 
artificial ones well scented, and which she should wear on the left 
side of her bosom, as high as the ear,—this mode of wearing them 
being reckoned exceeding lascivious, and indeed there is no appendage 
in the whole catalogue of female dress which raises lust so 
powerfully as those enormous bouquets, which our women of fashion 
wear, their luxurious perfume not only provoke desires, but aggravate 
very much venereal enjoyments; they lose, however, their effect, if 
not worn, as mentioned before, very high on the left side of the 
bosom, and monstrously large, for the larger they are, the greater 
their influence on the amateurs of that most effeminate ornament; but 
to return to our charmer, a ten pound bank note will have its due 
influence if properly presented, and considering the inexpressible 
pleasure received in the arms of this young and delicate female, we 
think she deserves it. She is frequently to be noticed in the green 
boxes of the Theatres, and in the season at Ranelagh; generally 
dressed in white with a profusion of feathers, and seldom without a 
most enormous bouquet in her bosom; she keeps a chariot, and a negro 
servant always attends her.



The Miss B—yan and S—ith Sisters, No. 7, Windmill-street, Rathbone 
place.

Miss B— is tall and thin, her complexion is dark, her sister Miss S— 
is plump and fair, keeps a certain musician to play her now and then 
some tunes; the ladies have seen their thirtieth, are still however 
agreeable pieces for the winter season to those not over nice about 
delicacy, both illiterate and addicted to swearing; it is said they 
are very dexterous at the game of the birch rod; the price of these 
lecherous girls varies very much, but half a guinea is always 
acceptable to them.



Mrs. Ho—sey, No. 30, Crop-street, Lambeth-road.

If for the joy of love thy bosom pine, 
Sweet youth approach and ease thy pain on mine.

This young girl is about eighteen, middle size, well made, with dark 
eyes and chestnut hair; she is very affable and engaging in her 
disposition, and calls forth all her powers to give delight with 
success, and as she is abundantly supplied with that ornamental 
exuberance. we cannot without doing her a signal injustice, suspect 
her of an indifferent to those pleasures which no woman is more 
capable of communicating than she is; any gentleman possessing a 
superfluous half a guinea, will find her a desirable companion.



Miss —, at Mrs. Ross's, No. 7, Wardour-street.

Sure heav'n alone such graces can bestow, 
Where Nature's richest tints superbly glow; 
What pencil can do justice to the fair; 
So regular her form, so sweet her air, 
Each glance the coldest, densest breast must move 
To taste with her the richest joys of love.

Novelty, which in the lover's calendar, is always marked with a red 
letter, must excite the curious to experience its charms with this 
dear girl; she seems indeed to have collected a considerable share of 
the lightning so frequent in mountainous places, and darts such 
irresistible glances as can scarcely fail to engage the hearts of the 
beholders.

The barren unfrequented paths of Wales she thought too confined a 
situation to exert her power in, and has therefore transferred her 
empire to the great mart for beauty, where merit, such as hers, 
surely cannot fail of the most brilliant success.—She is but newly 
arrived, and has not as yet had time sufficient to exhibit her charms 
in that extensive line, that must at length gain her universal 
approbation, I could almost say preference, where I not restrained by 
the old adage, "every eye makes a beauty"—Who could think such an 
original dearly purchased at the price of five guineas.



Mrs. G—, at Mrs. L—es. No. 9, Wardour-street.

Let glittering meteors dart, along the skies, 
And for a moment flash in human eyes, 
Here milder radiance may be daily seen, 
Reflect its influence from the charming Green,

To attempt a degree of praise that could approach to the merit of 
this enchanting girl, would only expose us to the fate of Phaeton; 
and our want of skill might prove prejudicial to her, which is by no 
means our wish. For who can, with the most unerring knowledge of the 
English tongue, succeed in conveying an adequate idea of the yet 
scarcely ripened charms of a lass of eighteen; whose auburn tresses 
serve only as a foil to the loveliest skin that ever nature put the 
finishing hand to:—or who can find language sufficiently expressive 
to represent those swelling orbs, whose velvet softness is exceeded 
only by the solidity of their texture, where the capillary veins in 
meand'ring folds, conveys the azure tide, to and from the heart with 
a warmth that communicates itself to the whole frame; and excites 
such commotions as claim the highest approbation of those who have 
the happiness of participating in her feelings; and this any 
gentleman may do for two guineas, the moderate price of a single 
tete-a-tete: a night will be considered cheap at twice the sum.



Mrs. Pi—ce, No. 19, St. George's Row, Apollo Gardens.

This lovely girl can boast a power of charms, 
When love entwines her in her lover's arms.

This girl at present possesses every requisite to form the good, the 
agreeable bed-fellow. She is still in her teens, with fine dark eyes 
and hair, her mouth opens to display a regular set of teeth; pretty 
panting bubbies which do not require to be pressed or deformed by 
that very unnecessary covering, the stays; in bed she will twine and 
twist, sigh and murmur, pant and glow with unfeigned emotions, and 
never be tired of love's game, whilst the blind boy can find the way 
in, perfect good nature is predominant in all the features of this 
female, and her behaviour displays so much artless simplicity, that 
she never fails to win the affections of her male visitors; all the 
joys that is in the power of love to give, from her may be expected, 
for which a moderate computation satisfies her, as she is by no means 
mercenary.



Miss —, No. 44, Newman-street, Oxford street.

Here stop your wandering steps, thou am'rous youth, 
Behold this emblem of untainted truth; 
Her eyes declare the secret flame within, 
Her lovely form would tempt a saint to sin.

This petite belle has not yet attained her sixteenth year; and to 
make amends for her deficiency of height, she is elegantly formed, 
nor does she lack beauty. Her sparkling eyes would warm an anchorite. 
Her hair is beautifully fair: and her liveliness in conversation 
renders her a most agreeable companion. Two guineas will bring you 
better acquainted with this charmer; nor will you have cause for 
disagreeable reflections from her acquaintance.



Mrs. Mac—tney, Great Titchfield-street.

Come you young rascal, leave off crying, 
I will whip you while the rod will last! 
I will! I will! you're always lying, 
I will whip you for all offences past,

There is nothing gives me so much pride 
Than such amusement with a youth! 
To whip! To whip! his bold backside, 
When he tells lies, instead of truth!

Plunge and caper! roar and cry! 
I have you now within my power 
No kind protector now is nigh, 
Thro' life I'll make you bless this hour,

And bless this hand that holds the rod! 
And kiss it with a fervor sweet! 
And think yourself a demigod! 
While tasting the delicious treat!

Keep down your legs, let go my hand, 
Let, let your breeches remain down, 
This efficacious reprimand. 
Shall make you the best boy in town.

Here a very genteel figure unites with a beautiful countenance, 
heightened with a lovely fair complexion, and very expressive blue 
eyes; this lady, who is about twenty-five years, appears conscious of 
her own consequence, charms and attractions, and often gives herself 
some airs that were better laid aside, for pride and haughtiness in 
the finest woman cannot fail of being disagreeable. It is true she 
has a very genteel set of visitors, who pay proper attention to her 
extraordinary agreements, and she will not suffer a plebeian or a 
tradesman to be introduced to her. She was married very young to an 
officer, who died a very short time after; she then took a house and 
followed the mantua-making business; as she let lodgings, a Russian 
gentleman took her first floor; her first appearance in public life 
happened thus; at that time a niece of hers, a girl about thirteen, 
lived with her as an apprentice, she being exceeding lazy and wicked, 
her aunt used to smart her bum very often with the birch rod; one day 
she sent her to get change for a guinea, Miss, after staying a long 
while came at last, and with a most innocent air, told her aunt, she 
had lost in the way half a guinea out of the change, the other 
believed her; two or three days after, curiosity prompted her to look 
into her niece's box, there the found a number of new toys, 
particularly a large doll, which could not cost less than five 
shillings; she came down instantly, called her niece and asked her 
with what money she had bought all the toys the had just seen in her 
box, the girl at first said it was given to her, but soon by threats 
confessed that the bought them with the lost half guinea; the aunt 
flew into a violent passion, sent the maid immediately for a birch 
broom, and picked out of it about two dozen of the best and greenest 
twigs; she was just tying them up with a ribbon when the Russian 
gentleman entered; she acquainted him with the whole affair, and 
found him a great advocate for the punishment she was going to 
inflict on her niece. She then left him in the front parlour, and 
retired into a back one with the young minx, and, for near a quarter 
of an hour, flogged her like an enraged school-mistress; after she 
had done, she returned into the parlour where she had left the 
gentleman, who had seen the whole of the transaction through key-
hole; the conversation turned on the necessity of correcting 
children; the Russian, who was a most beautiful man, at last fixing 
his eyes on her beautiful bosom, which, from the exertion of the rod 
and the passion she was in, was still heaving, and paying her many 
compliments, told her how happy he would be to be a nephew of hers, 
and to be served just as she had her niece; at first she did not 
understand him, but recollecting herself, and having often heard of 
gentlemen who take a delight in being whipped by women, she listened 
to him, and on his enforcing his argument with a five pound bank 
note, she made a new rod, and whipt him till he was completely 
gratified. All the time he lived in the house, she used to go up to 
his bed-chamber, about eleven o'clock dressed, according to his 
desire, in a white deshabillé, with a black hat adorned with six 
large white ostrich feathers, her hair dressed in the extreme of 
fashion, and a beautiful bouquet in her bosom of a most enormous 
size, bought that very morning at Covent Garden, then she would whip 
him with a large bundle of new birch for not getting up sooner, with 
a severity scarce credible, the comedy would then finish by his 
plunging into the Gulf of Venus, raising her soul to ecstatic bliss, 
and giving her such a treat of voluptuous enjoyment, such a feast of 
amorous delight as to convince her of the magic of a birch rod. It is 
supposed that for the short time she lived with that gentleman she 
got near £500 from him; on his leaving London, having acquired a 
propensity for birch discipline, she bought a genteel day school for 
young ladies near town, which the kept a few years with much credit, 
and by the frequent and severe whippings the gave to her scholars, 
she forwarded them in their learning in such a manner as to give the 
utmost satisfaction to all her parents.

Mrs. M— has now with her two young beautiful tits, one about fifteen 
and the other sixteen, who are always dressed in frocks like school 
girls; a certain foreign nobleman often visits her, and being fond of 
the game of school mistress, to please him, she generally assumes the 
character of a governess, and makes the young misses read to her; on 
their not reading to her satisfaction, she takes up the young naughty 
girls on her lap, one after another, and whips them well with a good 
birch rod, to the great delight of the nobleman, who is soon served 
in the same manner by one of the naughty girls. No one can be 
admitted into her house without being first introduced.



Miss H—r—y, No. 16, Phoenix street, Soho.

Whisper'd plaints; and wanton wiles; 
Speeches soft, and soothing smiles, 
Teeth imprinted, tell-tale kisses, 
Intermix with all my kisses.

This young lady is possessed of considerable charms, which she 
endeavours to set off to the best advantage; but good friends is not 
the lot of every one, even if she deserve them. If unaffected good 
nature, natural blooming complexion, sparkling black eyes, expressive 
of deep penetration, a regular set of ivory teeth, with tresses 
flowing in tempting ringlets down her back are entitled to 
recommendation, this wanton and lovely Cyprian fair one can with 
justice boast to an eminent degree of those desirable 
accomplishments. Report says, she has been but a few months in public 
practice, which from good authority, we are given to understand is 
but Six. She is frequently to be met with at the original Thirteen 
Cantons, in King street, Soho. Any gentleman desirous of visiting 
this delicate girl, may rest perfectly satisfied of experiencing not 
only a polite reception, but infinite pleasure in the embraces of 
this loving and amorous female. One guinea for one night's repose 
will not be thought over much.—Nineteen years is the age of this 
nymph.



Miss W—ll—m's, No. 9, Upper Newman-street, Middlesex Hospital.

Balmy sweetness ever flowing 
From those ruby lips distil 
Roses on thy cheeks are blowing, 
And thy voice like music thrills.

In the memoirs of this wanton female, we present our readers with a 
tall, genteel girl, very pretty face, fair complexion, and desirable 
auburn coloured ringlets, which flow in tempting curls across a 
delicately white breath; her beautiful set of teeth, add considerably 
to her angelic appearance, which generally commands admiration from 
most of her visitors: her disposition is peculiarly amorous and 
engaging, assisted with a brilliant tell-tale and love sparkling eye. 
What is a great recommendation to this lovely Cyprian nymph is her 
vocal abilities, which may with truth be said to be of no 
inconsiderable power; her musical skill certainly is of great 
promise, and we are firmly persuaded, any gentleman who takes the 
trouble of visiting this divine syren will be fully satisfied in the 
above assertion. She is frequently to be noticed in the green boxes 
of the theatres, where by her natural good temper she gains many 
genteel admirers. She is reported to be an incomparable and 
enchanting bedfellow, and has a peculiar art in raising them that 
fall, and bringing the dead to life. Two pounds two shillings is the 
price of admission to enter her unfurnished parlour, which we are 
convinced is at a moment's notice ready for the reception of any 
gentleman. Twenty years is this lady's age.
