
KNOCKNAGOW, OR THE HOMES OF TIPPERARY
BY
CHARLES J. KICKHAM

AUTHOR OF "SALLY CAVANAGH," "FOR THE OLD LAND," ETC.


"Yet meet him in his cabin rude,
Or dancing with his dark-haired Mary,
You'd swear they knew no other mood,
But mirth and love in Tipperary."
  --  THOMAS DAVIS.


DEDICATION

I dedicate this Book
ABOUT THE HOMES OF TIPPERARY
TO
MY LITTLE NIECES, ANNIE AND JOSIE,
WITH MANY REGRETS AND APOLOGIES
THAT IN SPITE OF ALL THEIR ENTREATIES I WAS 
OBLIGED TO
"LET POOR NORAH LAHY DIE."
C. J. K.



CONTENTS.

Bibliographic note & acknowledgements

TITLE PAGE & DEDICATION

INTRODUCTION.
By MATTHEW RUSSELL, S.J.

CHAPTER I.
MR. HENRY LOWE BECOMES THE GUEST OF HIS UNCLE'S 
PRINCIPAL TENANT.

CHAPTER II.
"MY ELDEST DAUGHTER, SIR."

CHAPTER III.
MAT THE THRASHER.

CHAPTER IV.
THE TRACKS IN THE SNOW.

CHAPTER V.
THE DOCTOR MAKES HIMSELF COMFORTABLE.

CHAPTER VI.
THE STATION -- BARNEY BRODHERICK'S PENANCE -- 
MRS. SLATTERY CREATES A SENSATION

CHAPTER VII.
NORAH LAHY, -- THE OLD LINNET'S SONG.

CHAPTER VIII.
HONOR LAHY'S GOOD LUCK.

CHAPTER IX.
BILLY HEFFERNAN AND HIS FLUTE.

CHAPTER X.
"A LITTLE NOURISHMENT."

CHAPTER XI.
FATHER HANNIGAN'S SERMON.

CHAPTER XII.
MATRIMONY AND "MARRIAGE MONEY." -- THE WIDOW'S LAST WISH.

CHAPTER XIII.
THE DOCTOR IN A FIX.

CHAPTER XIV.
MOUNT TEMPE AND ITS MASTER.

CHAPTER XV.
A DAY'S SHOOTING LOST.

CHAPTER XVI.
AN UNINVITED VISITOR.

CHAPTER XVII.
LORY.

CHAPTER XVIII.
MISS LLOYD'S FOIBLES.

CHAPTER XIX.
WILL SIR GARRETT RENEW THE LEASE?

CHAPTER XX.
MR. LOWE GETS A LETTER OF WARNING.

CHAPTER XXI.
FIVE SHILLINGS WORTH OF DANCE.

CHAPTER XXII.
THE BLUE BODY-COAT WITH GILT BUTTONS -- ABSENCE OF MIND. 
"AULD LANG SYNE."

CHAPTER XXIII.
MAT DONOVAN AT HOME.

CHAPTER XXIV.
"GOD BE WITH YE!"

CHAPTER XXV.
PHIL LAHY IN THE BOSOM OF HIS FAMILY.

CHAPTER XXVI.
A BRIDEGROOM WHO COULDN'T DESCRIBE HIS BRIDE.

CHAPTER XXVII.
THE JAY.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
BARNEY WINS A BET, AND LOSES MUCH PRECIOUS TIME.

CHAPTER XXIX.
THE HAULING HOME. -- "IS NORAH LAHY STRONG?"

CHAPTER XXX.
NED BROPHY'S WEDDING

CHAPTER XXXI.
MR. LLOYD DOES WHAT IRISH LANDLORDS SELDOM DO.

CHAPTER XXXII.
AN OLD CROPPY'S NOTIONS OF SECURITY OF TENURE.

CHAPTER XXXIII.
BILLY HEFFERNAN'S TRIUMPH.

CHAPTER XXXIV.
LONELY

CHAPTER XXXV.
ON THE ROAD TO THE BIG TOWN WITH THE CLOUD OVER IT.

CHAPTER XXXVI.
HOME TO KNOCKNAGOW. -- A TENANT AT WILL.

CHAPTER XXXVII.
DISCONTENT AND RESIGNATION

CHAPTER XXXVIII.
ARE YOU IN LOVE, MARY?"

CHAPTER XXXIX.
THE HOOK-NOSED STEED.

CHAPTER XL.
THE DRAGOON'S PRESENT. -- THE BEAUTY RACE.

CHAPTER XLI.
MISS KATHLEEN HANLY THINKS IT ADVISABLE TO BE 
"DOING SOMETHING."

CHAPTER XLII.
A HAUNTED FARM.

CHAPTER XLIII.
TOM HOGAN BOASTS THAT HE NEVER FIRED A SHOT.

CHAPTER XLIV.
HUGH KEARNEY THINKS HE WILL GET HIS FISHING-ROD 
REPAIRED.

CHAPTER XLV.
TOM CUDDEHY BIDS HIS OLD SWEETHEART GOOD-BYE.

CHAPTER XLVI.
"MAT DONOVAN IS KILLED!"

CHAPTER XLVII.
BILLY HEFFERNAN WONDERS WHAT IS "COMING OVER" NORAH.

CHAPTER XLVIII.
THE "DEAD PAST" AND THE "LIVING PRESENT." -- 
MRS. DONOVAN'S SAD FACE.

CHAPTER XLIX.
IN THE LONESOME MOOR -- MEDITATING MURDER -- 
DARBY RUADH THINKS HIMSELF BADLY USED -- 
TOM HOGAN HAS AN ARGUMENT AGAINST PHIL LAHY.

CHAPTER L.
TOM CUDDEHY FEELS "SOMEWAY QUARE." -- 
A GLANCE BACKWARDS TO CLEAR UP THE MYSTERY OF
THE TRACKS IN THE SNOW.

CHAPTER LI.
MAT DONOVAN IN TRAMORE. -- MRS. KEARNEY AND 
HER "OWN CAR." -- THE "COULIN."

CHAPTER LII.
THE BULL-BAIT. -- THE CARRICK-MAN AND 
HIS DOG "TRUE-BOY." -- LORY PUNISHES BERESFORD PENDER,
 AND RIDES HOME BEHIND MR. BOB LLOYD, 
ON THE GREY HUNTER. -- MISS LLOYD INVOLUNTARILY SITS DOWN.

CHAPTER LIII.
THE HURLING IN THE KILN-FIELD -- CAPTAIN FRENCH 
THROWS THE SLEDGE AGAINST MAT THE THRASHER -- 
BARNEY IN TROUBLE. -- FATHER M'MAHON'S "PROUD WALK."

CHAPTER LIV.
BOB LLOYD IN DANGER. -- MAT DONOVAN'S OPINION OF 
"DESAVING" PEOPLE IN THE WAY OF COURTSHIP.

CHAPTER LV.
BILLY HEFFERNAN MAKES DR. KIELY A PRESENT, 
"AS A FRIEND OF PHIL LAHY'S."

CHAPTER LVI.
THE WHITE JACKET.

CHAPTER LVII.
A GREAT EVENT. -- TOMMY LAHY'S ACCOMPLISHMENTS. -- ARTHUR O'CONNOR.

CHAPTER LVIII.
FATHER CARROLL'S HOARDINGS.

CHAPTER LIX.
ANOTHER EVENTFUL DAY. -- "MAGNIFICENT TIPPERARY."

CHAPTER LX.
BURGLARY AND ROBBERY.--MAT DONOVAN A PRISONER. -- 
BARNEY DISAPPEARS -- MR. SOMERFIELD AND ATTORNEY HANLY
APPLY FOR LEASES, AND OLD ISAAC DREADS THE CONSEQUENCES.

CHAPTER LXI.
BARNEY IS CAPTURED -- HIS ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF -- 
MAT THE THRASHER IN CLONMEL JAIL, AND THE BIG DRUM SILENT.

CHAPTER LXII.
SAD NEWS FROM BALLINACLASH.

CHAPTER LXIII.
EJECTED. -- THE BAILIFFS IN THE OLD COTTAGE. -- 
BILLY HEFFERNAN PLAYS "AULD LANG SYNE" AGAIN, AND 
THE OLD LINNET SINGS IN THE MOONLIGHT.

CHAPTER LXIV.
A CONSPIRACY. -- THE "COULIN. " -- MISS LLOYD 
WANTS TO KNOW ALL ABOUT IT. -- VISIONS OF HAPPY DAYS.

CHAPTER LXV.
MAT DONOVAN FOLLOWS GRACE'S ADVICE; BUT BESSY MORRIS 
IS GONE. -- HONOR AND PHIL LAHY IN THEIR NEW HOME.

CHAPTER LXVI.
ONLY A WOMAN'S HAIR. -- MORE WEDDINGS THAN ONE -- A HEART 
AS "BIG AS SLIEVENAMON." -- BEAUTIFUL IRELAND. -- 
THE SORT OF A WIFE THAT BARNEY GOT.

CHAPTER LXVII.
GOOD-BYE. -- THE OLD ROOM. -- MRS. HEFFERNAN'S 
TROUBLES. "MAGNIFICENT TIPPERARY." -- 
A GLEAM OF SUNSHINE. -- BUT KNOCKNAGOW IS GONE!


INTRODUCTION.

	KNOCKNAGOW has been out of print for a considerable 
time, and very many eager inquiries have been made for it. It now 
reappears in a new and cheap edition, which may be usefully 
introduced by a brief account of its Author. The secondary title 
which he gave to his tale was  --   "The Homes of Tipperary." His 
own home was one of them.
	Charles Joseph Kickham was born in the year 1825, at 
Mullinahone, a small town of the County Tipperary. The Anner 
flows past the town, and Slievenamon rises not far away  --  the 
river and the mountain which figure often in his writings. His 
father, John Kickham, had a large drapery establishment in that 
place, and was widely respected for his intelligence and probity. 
His mother, Anne O'Mahony, was a pious and charitable woman, 
whom he lovingly described in the earliest of his stories, "Sally 
Cavanagh; or, Untenanted Graves." His uncle, Father Roger 
Kickham, was a zealous member of the Vincentian Order; and 
another uncle, whose name he bore, was a priest in the 
Archdiocese of Cashel. But the Author of KNOCKNAGOW was 
probably called after his grandfather, Charles Kickham. In his 
youth he was greatly influenced by The Nation of Davis and 
Duffy; and, like his kinsman, John O'Mahony, he took an active 
part in the '48 movement. He was the leading spirit in the 
Confederate Club, in Mullinahone, which he was chiefly 
instrumental in forming; and after the failure of the rising at 
Ballingarry, which was not far from his home, be was forced to 
hide himself for a time. A little later, while still a very young man, 
he worked earnestly in the Tenant Right League, hoping against 
hope that something would be done to keep the people at home. 
When that failed, he lost faith in legal agitation.
	In persevering in a political career, and devoting his life to 
what he believed to be the service of his country. Charles Kickham 
showed not a little of that iron will which enabled Henry Fawcett 
to achieve distinction as a public man, in spite of tremendous 
difficulties of a similar character. The Englishman, on the 
threshold of manhood, was totally deprived of sight by an accident 
in a shooting party; yet in spite of this misfortune (the more 
distressing because his father's hand fired the shot), Fawcett 
contrived to work on, to ride, to skate, to fish, to become a 
successful University professor, an active and influential Member 
of Parliament, and a most efficient Postmaster-General. Young 
Kickham's accident was not so tragical in its cause, nor so 
destructive in its effects, at least in one respect. One day, while he 
was drying a flask of damp gunpowder, it exploded, injuring 
permanently not only his sight, but his hearing. This was not (as 
we have seen stated in print) in his sixteenth year, but two or three 
years earlier. Both sight and hearing grew duller, and his frame 
less robust, as time went on; and the hardships of his prison life 
greatly increased these infirmities.
	For it was to a prison that his political career conducted 
him He was one of the writers in The Irish People, the organ of the 
Fenian movement. Of course, there was an informer working in the 
very office of the newspaper. Kickham was arrested in November, 
1865. He was tried in the court-house of Green Street, Dublin, on 
the 5th of January, 1866. He was found guilty, and Judge Keogh, 
after expressing his sympathy for the prisoner, and respect for his 
intellectual attainments, sentenced him to penal servitude for 
fourteen years. His attorney announced the sentence to him 
through his ear-trumpet. He heard it with a smile. As he was led 
away to his cell, something on the ground attracted his notice, and 
he picked it up. It was a little paper picture of the Blessed Virgin, 
and he kissed it reverently. "I was accustomed to have the likeness 
of the Mother of God morning and evening before my eyes since I 
was a child," he said to the warder. Will you ask the governor if I 
may keep this?" *[see note at end] In prison he showed great 
patience and fortitude. His health, already impaired, soon gave 
way, but he bore up bravely. He felt deeply his sister's death in the 
first year of his prison life. The sister of his associate, Mr. John 
O'Leary, asked in after years, did he pray much while there? He 
answered that he said exactly the same prayers as when he was out 
in the world. From the solitary confinement of Pentonville he was 
removed to the invalid prison at Woking. Once he was set to knit 
stockings. The warder pointed out that he was not making much 
progress in this novel art. "I have time enough to learn in fourteen 
years," he replied. What proficiency he had attained we do not 
know when this particular study was interrupted. His wretched 
health, helped no doubt by his blameless character and gentle 
demeanour, shortened very considerably his term of imprisonment. 
He was released in March, 1869.
	To somebody who asked what he had missed most in gaol, 
he replied, "Children, and women, and fires." He was very fond of 
little children, and knew how to win their hearts, "It delighted 
him," says one of his best friends," when the little ones tried to talk 
to him on their fingers; and he was most patient in teaching them, 
taking particular care not to allow them to speak incorrectly. 
Children who loved him, were playing about his feet in the 
sunshine when the stroke of paralysis came upon him at the last." 
There was much of what is best in woman and in child in his 
nature; and it was impossible, says another devoted young friend, 
to know him well without feeling that he was trustful, and kindly, 
and sympathetic as a woman. His slender hand was fashioned like 
a woman's, too. There was a great deal of silky grey hair in curls 
about his head, which was finely shaped and he was very tall.
	These last phrases are taken from a writer, who, in her 
affectionate obituary, speaks thus of the tale which we are now 
introducing anew to the public:-
	"No writer has produced more faithful pictures of Irish 
country life than Charles Kickham. For no other writer possessed a 
mind quicker to see, or wider to hold the best feelings of our 
people; none other owned head or hand more obedient to the 
highest impulses of the Celtic character, and his memory was filled 
with the traditions of our land and race. 'Knocknagow' illustrates 
many sides of his own personality and of his ready humour, which 
was never cynical. In this book, as in nearly all he wrote, tears and 
laughter are close together.
	"'Knocknagow' had always been my favourite Irish story, 
and when an opportunity of meeting its Author came, it was an 
event in my life. I remember giving him the sort of information he 
must have had from hundreds of persons   --   of what a pleasure 
his stories and songs were, and how dear to me and my friends 
were Grace Kiely, and Mary Kearney, and poor Norah Lahy, 
whom, in spite of his niece's entreaties, he had to let die. He bore 
the infliction good-humouredly and talked about his heroines as if 
they had just gone out for a walk."
	Besides the present novel and "Sally Cavanagh," and some 
shorter tales, Mr. Kickham left behind him a full length novel, 
which was published last year, in a cheap form, under the title of 
"For the Old Land." His knowledge and love of the Irish character 
in many different phases are shown in every page of this tale, and 
fun and pathos are very skilfully intermingled. Charles Kickham's 
poems are very few and short, those at least which be gave to print. 
Very many of our readers must be familiar with the pathetic little 
ballad about the Irish peasant girl who "lived beside the Anner, at 
the foot of Slievenamon." Also, "Rory of the Hills" and "Patrick 
Sheehan" have taken a great hold on the people.
	This Introduction has now, perhaps, served its purpose by 
letting the reader know something before hand about this book and 
its Author. With the addition of a few names and dates learned 
from his kinswoman, the Sister of Mercy who helped to make his 
death bed as holy as his life had been innocent, our sketch, as it has 
acknowledged more than once, has followed the published 
recollections of Miss Ellen O'Leary and Miss Rose Kavanagh. To 
the personal description cited from the latter, we may join that 
given by the former lady.
	"In person, Charles Kickham was tall and strongly built. He 
walked like a sailor, swaying from side to side. He had a fine 
picturesque head, on which the wavy brown hair, of late years 
thickly streaked with grey, grew in soft curls; a large forehead, 
keen, piercing eyes, which had a strange power of reading one's 
very thoughts, and a rough skin, somewhat scarred by that terrible 
powder accident. The expression of his face when in repose was 
striking  --   a face you'd love to look upon: earnest, thoughtful, 
rather sad, and so good. In conversation he showed wonderful 
powers of observation, an intuitive insight into character. His talk, 
when in good spirits, was very pleasant. He had a great fund of 
quiet humour, and would describe a scene or a character with a few 
well-painted strokes. Though gentle and kind in disposition, he 
could be a good hater as well as a fervent lover."
	Charles Joseph Kickham died at Blackrock, near Dublin on 
the 22nd of August, 1882. His body was brought home to the 
Tipperary graveyard where his father, and mother, and sister, and 
many kinsfolk were buried. In the Dublin Exhibition of 1864, he 
had lingered long before a painting, "the Head of a Cow," by one 
of the Old Masters, not on account of any subtle genius be 
discovered in it, but "because it was so like an old cow in 
Mullinahone." A quaint trait of the affectionate, home-loving 
nature which made it fitting that his grave should be where his 
cradle had been  --   "beside the Anner, at the foot of 
Slievenamon."

MATTHEW RUSSELL, S.J. 
Dublin, 27th Feb., 1887.

Note: This touching incident probably comes from Kickham 
himself, for we take it from an affectionate memorial written 
"before the first bloom of daisies was dead upon his grave," by the 
young lady whose kindness soothed his last years and his last 
hours, Miss Rose Kavanagh. She recalls a "parallel passage" in his 
life, when almost the last use his tongue made of language after the 
fatal blow came, was to say aloud the Rosary of the Blessed 
Virgin.



CHAPTER I.

MR. HENRY LOWE BECOMES THE GUEST OF HIS UNCLE'S 
PRINCIPAL TENANT.


	IT is Christmas Day.
	Mr. Henry Lowe has just opened his eyes, and is debating 
with himself whether it is the grey dawn, or only the light of the 
young moon he sees struggling through the two round holes in the 
window shutters of his room. He has slept soundly, as well he 
might, after a journey the day before of some eighty miles on the 
outside of the mailcoach, from the metropolis to the town of  --; 
supplemented by an additional drive of a dozen miles in his host's 
gig to his present not uncomfortable quarters.
	The young gentleman knows little of Ireland from personal 
experience, having spent most of his life in what is sometimes 
oddly enough called "the sister country."
	Mr. Henry Lowe is at present the guest of his uncle's 
principal tenant, Mr. Maurice Kearney. The visit was partly the 
result of accident and partly a stroke of policy on the part of the 
young man's mother. Her brother, Sir Garrett Butler, owned  --  at 
least nominally  --  extensive landed property in the South of 
Ireland; and the prudent mother was trying to induce him to give 
her son the agency. And Mr. Kearney having gone to Dublin to see 
the landlord about the renewal of his lease, it was agreed that the 
young gentleman  --   whom we intend to introduce to the reader 
when be gets out of bed  --   should accompany him, on his return 
home, and spend some weeks among his uncle's Tipperary tenants.
	And so we find Mr. Henry Lowe half buried in down, this 
clear Christmas morning, in the best bedroom of Ballinaclash 
Cottage  --   for so Maurice Kearney's commodious, if not 
handsome, residence is called.
	He had just settled the question with which his mind had been 
occupied for some ten minutes back, in favour of the moon, and was 
relapsing into slumber, when it suddenly occurred to him  --   
	That he was a land agent in embryo.
	That he was at that moment in the midst of a district not 
unknown to fame in connection with "agrarian outrages;" and
	That his room was on the ground floor.
	This train of thought gave the holes in the window-shutters 
a new interest in his eyes.
	He was beginning to succeed pretty well in calling up a 
vision of a blunderbuss loaded to the muzzle with slugs, and two 
tall figures in frieze coats and knee breeches, with crape over their 
faces, when a tremendous report  --   as if the blunderbuss had 
gone off and burst  --   made him start to a sitting posture.
	A second bang, if possible more stunning than the first, 
caused Mr. Henry Lowe to execute a jump  --   or rather to put 
forth a degree of muscular action which, under more favour able 
circumstances, would have resulted in that gymnastic feat; but 
which, owing to his position and the non-elasticity of a feather-
bed, must be pronounced a failure. The repetition of the sound a 
third, and a fourth, and a fifth time, was followed by as many 
vigorous but  -- whether we have regard to a "high" or a "long 
jump"  --   abortive efforts on the part of Mr. Henry Lowe.
	At this stage of the proceedings the bedroom door was 
opened, and Mr. Kearney entered with a lighted candle in his hand. 
He held the light above his head, and looked considerably 
astonished when his guest was revealed to him, performing, as he 
thought, the identical African dance which the Reverend Edward 
Wright, the missioner, had been describing to him a few days 
before.
	The gentlemen regarded each other with looks of mutual 
surprise and inquiry. But Mr. Kearney, divining the cause of his 
guest's perturbation, said, apologetically:
	"I'm sorry they're after disturbing you."
	"Wha  --  what is it?" gasped Mr. Lowe, who maintained 
his sitting position and his scared look.
	"The drum," replied his host, in a self-satisfied way, as if 
further explanation would be altogether superfluous." I came in to 
tell you not to mind it."
	"Oh! -- a drum," the young gentleman repeated, somewhat 
reassured, but evidently still bewildered. "Yes, there it is again. 
But what drum? What does it mean?"
	"The Knocknagow Drum," was the reply. "They always 
meet at the Bush. But don't stir. They'll shortly be off, and you can 
have a good sleep before breakfast is ready."
	"Knocknagow! The Bush! What o'clock is it?"
	"Not six yet. We're going to seven o'clock Mass. We'll be 
back to breakfast at nine. So stay where you are, snug and warm, 
till I call you."
	Am I to understand the whole family are going to prayers?" 
the visitor inquired; not at all relishing the idea of being left alone 
in the house.
	"Yes; we always go to early Mass on Christmas Day."
	"Would there be any objection to my going with you?"
	"Not the least. But the morning is very cold; hard frost."
	"Well, but I'd like to witness as many of the customs of the 
country as possible."
	"Very well. Please yourself. I'll send up Wattletoes with hot 
water to you."
	He laid the candlestick on the dressing-table, and Mr. Lowe 
soon heard him shouting to Wattletoes to bring hot water to the 
gentleman in the "middle room." 
	The gentleman in the middle room lay back upon his 
pillow, and surveyed the bearer of the hot water with some 
curiosity.
	The first thing that struck him was, that it would be 
impossible to say whether this individual were old or young or 
middle-aged. He was low-sized and stooped somewhat. But his 
face, though shrivelled and puckered in an extraordinary manner, 
was the face of a withered boy, rather than of an old man. He wore 
an old frock coat, which evidently reached to the knees of the 
original owner, but nearly touched the heels of its present 
possessor. The legs of his trousers, which were as much out of 
proportion as the other garment, were rolled up, and formed thick 
circular pads half-way between his knees and his ankles.
	Before Mr. Lowe could proceed further with his inspection, 
this odd-looking figure was disappearing through the door.
	"What is your name?" he asked.
	The grotesque figure stopped suddenly in the doorway, and, 
wheeling round, with his hand to his forehead, he answered with a 
grimace, of which it would be vain to attempt a description:
	"Barney, sir  --   Barney Brodherick."
	"Not Wattletoes," thought the young gentleman, as he 
pulled the blankets tightly over his shoulder. "I wonder who the 
devil is Wattletoes! Have I much time to dress?" he asked aloud.
	"Lots uv time, sir. On'y if you don't hurry you'll be too 
late."
	"Lots of time," Mr. Lowe repeated; "but I'll be too late if I 
don't hurry."
	Before he could ask for an explanation of this somewhat 
contradictory piece of information. Barney vanished, scratching his 
head and muttering something about "the boots," as if he felt 
himself in a difficulty.
	Mr. Lowe had nearly completed his toilet when Barney 
returned with his boots, followed by Mr. Kearney, whip in hand, 
and wrapped in a frieze great-coat.
	The master had evidently been "pitching into" the man for 
Barney explained as he placed the visitor's boots on the floor:
	"Blur-an-agers, have sinse, sir  --   have sinse."
	"Have sense yourself -- and that's what you'll never have, 
you ninny-hammer" retorted the master, in an apparently angry 
tone. "He was told," he continued, turning to his guest, "to bring 
blacking from Kilthubber yesterday; and they desired him to get 
Martindale's blacking. When they found they had no blacking, and 
asked him why he didn't bring it  --   'I tried every house,' he says, 
'from Gallowshilt to Quarryhole, and the devil a Martin Dale could 
I find,"
	Though no trace of a smile could be detected in Maurice 
Kearney's ruddy face while he spoke, his repeating Barney's 
explanation of the non-appearance of the blacking, twice over, 
showed that he enjoyed it in his own way.
	When they stood within the glow of the blazing wood fire 
in the parlour, the host again advised his guest to remain within 
doors till the family had returned from Mass. But the young 
gentleman repeated his desire to accompany them.
	The roll of the drum  -- the performer evidently using less 
force than when he so startled the stranger a while ago  --   
accompanied by the shrill but not unpleasing music of half-a-dozen 
fifes, signified that the procession  --   which consisted of nearly 
the whole population of Knocknagow  --   had set out for 
Kilthubber.
	Mr. Kearney and his guest were soon seated in the gig in 
which they had arrived the night before, and slowly following the 
crowd along the snow-covered road,
	It was too dark to see much either of the country or the 
people, and Maurice Kearney could do little more to amuse the 
stranger than to point out the direction in which some objects of 
interest would be visible in the daylight. But, even with the light 
they had, Mr. Lowe could not help being struck with the fine 
outline of the mountain range in front of them.
	The far-famed Knocknagow drum shook the windows of 
the old town of Kilthubber, as the procession marched through the 
principal street to the chapel, at the gate of which the music 
suddenly ceased.
	Barney Brodherick was in waiting to take the horse to the 
hotel, and Mr. Lowe was conducted by his host up the gallery 
stairs and soon found himself in a front pew, next a lady who, he 
rightly conjectured, was his host's eldest daughter, but to whom he 
had not yet been introduced, owing to the lateness of the hour 
when he arrived at the cottage the night before, and to the fact that 
Miss Kearney was on her way to church before he left his room in 
the morning.
	Never having been in a Catholic place of worship during 
divine service before, he looked around him with some curiosity, 
not unmingled with a sense of awe. The altar was brilliant with 
innumerable tapers and tastefully decorated with flowers and ever-
greens. Three branches, suspended by long chains from the ceiling, 
gave light to the congregation that filled the spacious aisle, while 
candles in sconces attached to the pillars and round the walls 
enabled the occupants of the pews in the gallery to read their 
prayer books. The tinkle of a small bell called back his attention to 
the altar, and he saw that during his survey of the church, the 
priest, accompanied by a number of boys in white surplices, had 
moved from the sacristy and now stood bowing with clasped hands 
in front of the altar. As he ascended the carpeted steps the organ 
pealed out solemnly; and in spite of his prejudices, the ceremony 
and the evidently earnest devotion of the worshippers impressed 
Mr. Lowe with a respect for their form of religion which he never 
had felt before. This feeling, however, was giving place to a sense 
of weariness, when he was startled by the suddenness with which 
the people rose from their knees and pressed forward towards the 
altar. He looked down with astonishment upon the swaying sea of 
upturned faces till it settled into stillness as the clergyman turned 
to address the congregation.
	A peculiar ring in the preacher's sweetly-modulated tones 
at once attracted the stranger's attention. Having read the text, he 
replaced the book on its stand, and, leaning back against the altar, 
commenced his sermon. At first his words came slowly and 
hesitatingly. But as he warmed with his subject he moved about, 
now to the right, now to the left, and sometimes straight forward to 
the verge of the altar-step, which formed the platform upon which 
he stood  --   pouring forth what seemed to the unaccustomed ears 
of Mr. Lowe a torrent of barbaric eloquence, which rose into a kind 
o gorgeous sublimity, or melted into pathos, sometimes homely, 
sometimes fancifully poetical. Such language Mr. Lowe would 
have thought ill-suited to such a crowd as he now looked down 
upon, if he had not witnessed the effect it produced. And he was 
surprised to find that it was the figurative passages that moved the 
people most. For instance, when the preacher depicted the Virgin 
wandering through the streets of Bethlehem, seeking for shelter 
and finding every door closed against her, and proceeded: "The 
snow falls; the cold winds blow  --   and the Lily of Heaven is 
withered," a cry burst from the congregation, and the sobs were so 
loud and, frequent that the preacher was obliged to pause till the 
emotion he had called forth had subsided.
	The sermon was short and withal practical; for while it 
comforted the poor, it impressed upon the rich the duty of 
alleviating their sufferings.
	And as the clock struck eight, the Knocknagow drum told 
such of the inhabitants of Kilthubber as had not yet left their beds 
that first Mass was over and the congregation were on their way 
homeward.



CHAPTER II.

"MY ELDEST DAUGHTER, SIR."

	MR. LOWE judged from the hearty "I wish you a merry 
Christmas, sir," which greeted his host so frequently on the way 
homeward, that Mr. Kearney was on excellent terms with his 
neighbours. They did not wait for the procession; and, after a brisk 
drive of twenty minutes, the young gentle man again found himself 
in front of the crackling wood fire. While looking out on the snow-
covered landscape, his attention was attracted by the extraordinary 
gait of a person approaching the house, swinging his legs and arms 
about in a manner impossible to be described. As he came nearer, 
the size and shape of the feet were particularly noticeable. And as 
the figure was passing the window, the fact flashed upon Mr. 
Henry Lowe, as if by inspiration, that after all Barney Brodherick 
was Wattletoes.
	He had the curiosity to raise one of the windows to see 
what Barney meant by stopping suddenly opposite the hall-door, 
and holding out his hand with a coaxing wink of his little grey 
eyes.
	Maurice Kearney's youngest son, a fat, innocent-looking 
boy, stood, with his shoulder leaning against the jamb of the door, 
picking the raisins out of a great slice of plum-cake.
	"I'll bring you to hunt the wran," said Barney.
	"I can go with Tom Maher," the boy replied.
	"I'll give you a ride on Bobby," Barney continued, in a still 
more insinuating voice.
	But the boy continued picking the raisins out of his plum-
cake.
	"Be gob, Mr. Willie, I'll -- I'll show you a thrish's nist!" 
exclaimed Barney, in a sort of stage whisper.
	The boy looked from the cake to the tempter, and hesitated.
	"With five young wans in it," continued Barney, pressing 
the advantage he saw he had gained," feathered an' all  --   ready to 
fly."
	This was too much. The thrush's nest carried the day; and 
Barney was in the act of taking a bite out of the plum-cake as he 
repassed the parlour window on his way round to the kitchen. But 
the promise of a thrush's nest, with five young ones in it, on a 
Christmas morning in our latitude, impressed Mr. Lowe with a 
high opinion of Barney Brodherick's powers as a diplomatist.
	"Come, Mr. Lowe," said his host, as he placed a chair for 
him at the breakfast table, "you ought to have a good appetite by 
this time. I'm sorry you would not take some thing before you went 
out this morning."
	"Oh, thank you," he replied, "but I'm all the better able to 
do justice to your viands now."
	As the young gentleman was sitting down, Mrs. Kearney's 
portly figure caught his eye in the doorway. She at once walked up 
to him, holding out her hand, and apologised for not having been 
prepared to receive him properly on his arrival "But indeed," she 
added, "we had not the least notion that any one was coming. Why 
did you not write to say that Mr. Lowe would be with you?" she 
asked, turning to her husband.
	"Where was the use of writing, when I knew I'd be home 
myself before the letter," was the reply, in a rather brusque 
manner, which was peculiar to Maurice Kearney.
	"The time," said Mr. Lowe, "is very unusual for such a 
visit; but you know I am a homeless wanderer at present."
	"My eldest daughter, sir," said Mr. Kearney, waving his 
hand towards the door, near which the young lady had stopped 
hesitatingly for a moment.
	Mrs. Kearney took her portly person out of the way; and 
her face beamed with pride and fondness as she surveyed the 
lovely girl, who, after curtseying gracefully, advanced, and, with a 
half-bashful smile, gave her hand to her father's guest.
	The young gentleman was taken completely by surprise. He 
had felt some curiosity to know what sort was the face hidden by 
the thick veil next him in the chapel. He thought it would be rather 
a pleasant discovery to find that the face was a handsome one; and 
was quite prepared for a blooming country girl in the person of his 
burly host's daughter. But the lady who now stood before him 
would have arrested his attention anywhere. She was tall, though 
not of the tallest. The driven snow was not whiter than her neck 
and brow. A faint blush at that moment tinged her usually pale 
cheek, which, together with a pair of ripe, rosy lips, and eyes of 
heavenly blue, imparted a warmth to what otherwise might be 
considered the marble coldness of her almost too ideal beauty.
	Mr. Henry Lowe, for once in his life, felt at a loss for 
something to say; but the entrance of two young girls spared him 
the necessity of making a speech. The taller of the two moved 
timidly behind her father's chair without venturing even to glance 
at the stranger; while the other surveyed him from head to foot, 
and then turned to Miss Kearney with a look of surprise if not 
reproach. Miss Kearney under stood the look, and said with a 
smile:
	"Mr. Lowe, let me introduce you to my friend, Miss Grace 
Kiely."
	"Miss Grace Kiely," said the little lady, drawing herself up 
to her full height, and bowing with great dignity.
	She was moving away, with an air of studied gravity, when 
Mr. Kearney said:
	"Come, Grace, sit here near me. 'Tis a long time since you 
and I had a talk together."
	Her face lighted up at once, and, forgetting all her womanly 
dignity, she ran with child-like glee to the chair which he had 
drawn close to his own. She resumed her serious look again; but 
her keen sense of the ludicrous was too much for it, and one of 
Maurice Kearney's characteristic observations had even the effect 
of making our dignified young lady laugh into her cup, and spill so 
much of the tea that Mrs. Kearney insisted upon filling her cup 
again.
	"How did you like the sermon, Mr. Lowe?" Miss Kearney 
asked.
	"It was so unlike anything I ever heard before," he replied, 
"that I really cannot venture to give an opinion. But he certainly 
moved his hearers as I have never seen an audience moved by a 
preacher. Some passages were quite poetical; and these, I was 
surprised to find, produced the greatest effect. It is very strange."
	I believe," said Miss Kearney, "we Irish are a poetical 
people."
	"I particularly admired that passage," Grace observed, with 
her serious look, "beginning, 'From the ripple of the rill to the 
rolling of the ocean; from the lily of the valley to the cedar on the 
mountain.' That passage was very beautiful."
	"Yes, I remember that," said Mr. Lowe, with a nod and a 
smile, which so flattered Miss Grace's vanity that she could only 
preserve her look of gravity by dropping her eyelids and almost 
frowning. But, in spite of her efforts, a glance shot from the corner 
of her eye which plainly showed how gratified she was.
	"She could preach the whole sermon to you," said Mr. 
Kearney, in his emphatic way. And then, after a pause, he added, 
still more emphatically: "I'd rather have her in the house than a 
piper."
	This was too much for Grace; and Miss Kearney and her 
mother joined in her ringing laugh, while Mr. Lowe looked quite 
as much puzzled as amused, as he turned full round and stared at 
his host, apparently expecting some explanation of this 
extraordinary testimony to Miss Grace's powers of pleasing.
	Mr. Kearney, however, rubbed his whiskers, 
contemplatively, to all seeming quite unconscious of their mirth, 
and added, with a jerk of his head:
	"Wait till you hear her play 'The Foxhunter's Jig.' Miss 
Butler is a fine girl," he observed, abruptly changing the subject.
	All eyes were turned upon Mr. Lowe, and he felt called 
upon to say something. So he said:
	"Indeed yes, a very fine girl."
	But the young gentleman felt that a certain opinion which 
he had always held regarding the respective merits of black and 
blue eyes, was considerably modified during the past half-hour.
	"She plays the harp," said Mr. Kearney confidently to 
Grace, who nodded, and evinced by her look that the concerns of 
great people possessed a great interest for her.
	"And the guitar," he added. "Though the devil a much I'd 
give for that, only for the singing. She has a fine voice, "he 
remarked, turning to Mr. Lowe.
	"Does Miss Kiely sing?"
	"She does, she does," his host replied, rather impatiently.
	"But I'm talking of your cousin, Miss Butler."
	"Oh, she sings very well," said Mr. Lowe.
	"I never heard 'Savourneen Dheelish' or the 'Coulin' played 
better. She brought the tears to my eyes."
	"She is quite an enthusiast about Irish music," said Mr. 
Lowe.
	"Kind father for her," put in Mrs. Kearney. "He and my 
Uncle Dan used to spend whole days and nights together playing 
Irish airs. My Uncle Dan played the fid -- violin," said Mrs. 
Kearney, correcting herself, for she liked to call things by their 
grandest names, Particularly when they happened to be connected 
with her Uncle Dan, or, indeed, with any of the great O'Carrol's of 
Ballydunmore. "Mr. Butler," she continued, "used to play the flute. 
He made some beautiful songs about Annie Cleary before they 
were married. He was not Sir Garrett then, for it was in Sir 
Thomas's time. My Uncle Dan, too, had a great turn for poetry, and 
he used to help Mr. Butler to arrange the music for the songs. 
'Twas my Uncle Dan," she added, turning to her husband, as if she 
were imparting a piece of information he had never heard before, 
"'twas my Uncle Dan that translated the 'Coravoth ' into English."
	"I know, I know," said her husband, rubbing the side of his 
head uneasily -- knowing from sad experience that when his portly 
better half once set off upon her hobby it was no easy matter to 
pull her up.
	"My Uncle Dan," she proceeded, "was the most talented of 
the family, though the Counsellor had the name."
	Mrs. Kearney closed her lips after uttering the word 
Counsellor, and then opened them with a kind of smack, followed 
by a gentle sigh, as she bent her head languidly to one side, and 
rested her folded hands upon her knees. Her husband rubbed his 
head more and more frantically; for these were infallible signs that 
the good lady was settling down steadily to her work. But 
fortunately Mr. Lowe, whose curiosity was really excited, averted 
the threatened infliction.
	"Did Sir Garrett," he asked, "really make verses?"
	"Oh, yes," Mrs. Kearney replied; "'Father Ned's sweet 
Niece,' and 'Over the Hills,' and several others,"
	"I knew his marriage was a romantic business," said Mr. 
Lowe. "But I was not aware that my uncle was a poet. He was 
greatly blamed by his family, but Sir Thomas's conduct was quite 
unjustifiable. There was nothing so extraordinary in such a 
marriage, after all."
	While Mr. Lowe was speaking, a robin flew round the 
room, and dashed itself against the window. Miss Kearney leaning 
back in her chair and shading her eyes from the light with her 
hand, looked up at the bird as it fluttered against the glass. And the 
picture thus presented had, we suspect, something to do with Mr. 
Henry Lowe's inability to see anything extraordinary in his uncle's 
marriage. She stood up to let the robin escape, and her father and 
Mr. Lowe also left the breakfast table. The latter, with an air of 
easy good breeding, put back the bolt and drew up the window; 
while the graceful girl gently took the robin in her hand, and, after 
looking for a moment into the bold, bright little eyes with a smile 
that made Mr. Henry Lowe swear mentally that eyes of bird or 
man never beheld anything more lovely, let him fly out into the 
sun shine.
	"As ready as he is to come in," she said, as she followed the 
released prisoner with a melancholy gaze, which in the difference 
her companion thought was even more killing than the smile it 
succeeded -- "as ready as he is to come in, he is always impatient 
to get away. I believe no bird loves liberty so well."
	"If you could set all your captives free as easily it would be 
well."
	"I'd wish to do so -- that is, if I had made any, of which I 
am unconscious."
	She felt conscious, however, of the young gentleman's 
disposition to be more openly complimentary than she thought 
quite agreeable, and to divert his attention to some thing else, she 
said:
	"I fear you will find our neighbourhood very dull. But my 
brothers will be home to-day, and I hope they may be able to find 
some amusement for you."
	This speech was calculated to have the very opposite effect 
of what she intended; but her father unintentionally came to her 
relief.
	"You have good snipe shooting in the bog," he said 
abruptly, "and if we have a thaw, the hounds will be out."
	"I am most anxious," said Mr. Lowe, "to have a day with 
the Tipperary hounds."
	"I can mount you well," said Mr. Kearney. "Come and I'll 
show him to you. Tell Wattletoes," he continued, turning to the 
servant who had come in to replenish the fire, "to lead out Mr. 
Hugh's horse."
	"He's gone to hunt the wren, sir," she replied.
	Mr. Lowe saved Barney from a storm of abuse by 
remarking that as often as he had heard of hunting the wren he had 
never seen it.
	"Let us walk over toward the fort," said his host, "and you'll 
see enough of it."
	"We'll go too, Mary," exclaimed Grace, leaping from the 
sofa upon which she had been reclining in a graceful attitude, and 
in what she persuaded herself was a dreamily sentimental mood.
	Miss Kearney held up her hand warningly, but her father 
turned round before he had reached the door and said:
	"Yes, Grace, let you and Mary come with us."
	"Of course you will come too, Ellie," said Miss Kearney to 
her young sister, who was reading a book near the fire, and 
apparently afraid of attracting attention.
	"Oh, no," she replied with a start, "mamma will want me."



CHAPTER III.

MAT THE THRASHER.

	AS the party approached the avenue gate, on their way to 
the fort, a tax-cart was seen coming from the direction of the 
village.
	"Oh! 'tis Richard," Grace exclaimed; "I'm so glad."
	She evinced her joy by a series of little bounds as she took 
Miss Kearney's arm and tried to hurry her forward. But her 
companion's pace was too slow for her impatience. and she ran on 
alone.
	"She is a very interesting child," said Mr. Lowe.
	"She would not thank you for calling her a child," said Miss 
Kearney, with a smile.
	"I should scarcely have called her a child a moment ago," 
he replied, "for she talked and even looked like a very sensible 
woman. Perhaps she is older than she seems?
	"No; she is a child in years. But she really astonishes me 
sometimes."
	"Who are the gentlemen?" he added, as the tax-cart 
stopped.
	"My brothers."
	Grace pulled open one side of the heavy gate with all her 
might; but as she was about exerting her strength with the other, 
she suddenly let go her hold, and ran out on the road. The taller of 
the two occupants of the tax-cart reached her his hand, and she was 
standing between his knees in an instant. They drove on; and Miss 
Kearney said, in reply to her companion's look of surprise:
	"They are going round to the back gate. Grace will bring 
them out immediately, you may be sure."
	"Is she a relative of yours?" he asked.
	"Her mother's sister is married to an uncle of mine," she 
replied. "Her father, Doctor Kiely, is a very eminent physician, and 
a man of distinguished talent."
	"Oh, I believe I have heard of him. Is he not one of your 
great agitators?"
	"Yes; I suppose you would call him an agitator. He does 
not try to conceal his patriotism; and yet, strange to say, he is the 
favourite doctor of nearly all the great families of the county, and 
he has ever so many public appointments. Grace would say, 'quite 
a monopoly of them,'" she added, smiling her angelic smile -- as 
much at her own homely phrase as at the more learned one her 
little friend would have used.
	"That tells well for the liberality of the aristocracy."
	"Perhaps it tells as well for the high character and skill of 
Dr. Kiely."
	"About what age is he?" Mr. Lowe asked.
	"I believe about fifty," she replied. "He is the finest looking 
man I ever saw."
	"Has he a large family?
	"No; two daughters. The eldest is a very beautiful girl; but 
Grace is her father's idol."
	"Has he no son?"
	"Yes; he has a son."
	There was a kind of hesitation in her manner of replying to 
his last question that caused Mr. Lowe to look inquiringly at her. 
But their conversation was interrupted by a tall, brawny peasant, 
who stopped, as he was passing the gate, to talk to Mr. Kearney.
	The peasant's name was Donovan, but he was universally 
known as Mat the Thrasher. He excelled in all kinds of work as a 
farm labourer, and never met his match at wielding a flail. As a 
consequence, he was in great request among farmers from October 
to March; and, indeed, during all the year round -- for Mat could 
turn a hand almost to anything, from soleing a pair of brogues to 
roofing and thatching a barn. His superiority as a ploughman was 
never questioned. As a proof of his skill in this line, we may 
mention that when Maurice Kearney was about running what in 
Ireland is called a "ditch" through the centre of the "kiln field," the 
difficulty presented itself -- how to make the fence perfectly 
straight. And, as a matter of course, Mat Donovan was 
immediately sent for.
	"Now," said Mat, after looking at the ground, "where do 
you want to run it?"
	"From this bush," his employer replied, laying his walking-
stick on a whitethorn bush in the fence, "to the ash-tree at the left-
hand side of the gap," pointing to a tree at the opposite side of the 
field, "In a straight line," he added, looking at Mat as if the 
problem were worthy to be grappled with even by his genius.
	Mat walked away without uttering a word, leaving Mr. 
Kearney and the half-dozen workmen, who, leaning on their 
spades, were waiting the order to begin at the construction of the 
new ditch, altogether unable to conjecture how he intended to 
proceed; but with unshaken faith in his ultimate success.
	Mat walked leisurely back to the "gurteen" where he had 
been at work, and was soon seen coming through the gap near the 
ash-tree with his plough and horses. With one huge hand he leant 
on the handle of the plough, thereby lifting the irons, so as that 
they might glide over the ground without cutting through it, till he 
came to the ash-tree. Facing his horses towards the whitethorn 
bush at the opposite end of the field, he fixed his eye steadily on 
that object.
	Mr. Kearney and the workmen heard his "Yo-up!" to the 
horses, and on he came, nearer and nearer, slow but sure, till they 
could catch the air of the song which he commenced to chant with 
as great solemnity of look and intonation as if its accurate 
rendering were a necessary condition of the success of his 
undertaking. They soon had the benefit even of the words, and as 
Mat pulled the horses to one side as their breasts touched the 
whitethorn bush, he continued while he reined them in: -- 

"Oh, had I the lamp of Aladdin.
And had I his geni also.
I'd rather live poor on the mountain,
With coleen dhas cruiteen amo."

"There it is for you," he exclaimed, as he folded his arms, after 
flinging down the reins, "as straight as the split in a peeler's pole."
	Mr. Kearney thrust his thumbs into the arm-holes of his 
waistcoat, and looked intensely solemn, which was his way of 
expressing extreme delight. The workmen looked at one another 
and shook their heads in silent admiration -- Jim Dunn, as he flung 
his coat against "the belly of the ditch," declaring in a decided 
tone, as if there could be no possible question of the fact, "that 
nothin' could bate him." And Tom Maher, after spitting first in one 
fist and then in the other (if we may be pardoned for chronicling 
such a proceeding), firmly clutched his spade with both hands, and 
eyeing his hero from head to foot, devoutly wished "bad luck to the 
mother that'd begrudge him her daughter. "By which Tom merely 
meant to express in a general way his belief that Mat the Thrasher 
was good enough for any woman's daughter, and intended no 
allusion to any particular mother or daughter. But the flush that 
reddened the honest face of the ploughman, and a certain softening 
of his grey eyes, told plainly enough that Tom Maher had 
unconsciously touched a sensitive chord in the heart of big Mat 
Donovan.
	Some readers may, perhaps, require an explanation of Mat's 
allusion to "the split in a peeler's poll." The fact is, that respectable 
"force," now known as the Royal Irish Constabulary, have always 
been noted for the extreme care bestowed by them on the hair of 
their heads. At the time of which we write, a "crease" down the 
back of the head was one of the distinguishing marks of a 
policeman in country districts where "swells" were scarce. And to 
such a pitch of perfection had the "force" attained in the matter of 
this crease, that Mat the Thrasher could find nothing in art or 
nature capable of conveying a just idea of the straightness of the 
line he had marked out for Maurice Kearney's new ditch but "the 
split in a peeler's poll." We have thought this explanation 
necessary, lest the split in the poll should be mistaken for a split in 
the skull -- a thing which our good-natured friend never once 
thought of. The "new ditch" is to this day the admiration of all 
beholders. To be sure, it never was and never will be the slightest 
earthly use -- a fact of which Hugh tried to convince his father 
before this whim was put into execution. But Maurice Kearney 
was headstrong, and would have his way in such matters. The new 
ditch narrowly escaped being a furze ditch -- or what in other parts 
of the country would be called a whin hedge -- by a characteristic 
blunder of Wattletoes, who was sent by his master to sow the seed 
of the "unprofitably gay" shrub. In due time a drill of turnips 
appeared along the top of the new ditch; while Hugh Kearney was 
astonished one fine morning to find a promising crop of furze in 
the very middle of his "purple-tops."
	Miss Kearney wished Mat a happy Christmas.
	"I wish you the same, and a great many of them, Miss," he 
replied, looking towards her for a moment, and then turned to 
resume the conversation with her father.
	"He is a magnificent specimen of the Irish peasant," said 
Mr. Lowe to Miss Kearney.
	"Let us wait till you hear him talk," said she. "You will be 
sure to hear something out of the common from Mat the Thrasher, 
as we call him."
	Mat, it appeared, wanted to know if Mr. Kearney would 
sell him "a couple of barrels of the Swedes."
	"No," replied the latter;" I won't sell any turnips. I'll want 
all I have; and more. But I thought you had a good crop of 
potatoes. I never saw finer."
	"They turned out bad," said Mat,
	"Were those the potatoes behind your house, Mat? Miss 
Kearney asked." Nelly pointed them out to me one day, and asked 
me did I ever see a flower-garden so blooming."
	"The very same, Miss, "Mat replied, with a sorrowful shake 
of the head." I never laid my eyes on such desavers."
	"I suppose they were blighted," said Miss Kearney. "No 
then, Miss," he replied, with a reproachful sadness in his look and 
voice." Every stalk uv 'em would make a rafter for a house the first 
of November. But put the best man in the parish to dig 'em after, 
and a duck 'ud swally all he'd be able to turn out from morning till 
night."
	The idea of a potato-stalk making a rafter for a house made 
Miss Kearney smile' in spite of herself; but the duck swallowing all 
the potatoes a man could dig in a day, forced her to laugh outright. 
To make amends for what she considered her ill-timed mirth, she 
said to her father
	I think, sir, you might give Mat the turnips he requires." 
"Do you want to have the whole parish coming for turnips?" 
exclaimed her father in no amiable tone.
	"Sure you can refuse the next person that comes.'
	"Very well," said he, with a resigned look and a shrug of 
the shoulder, as if there were no help for it.
	Mat Donovan expressed his thanks; but in a manner that 
showed he was pretty sure his request would have been granted in 
any case. He strode up the hill with an easy, swinging gait; and as 
he carried a huge stick in his hand and turned in the direction of the 
fort, Miss Kearney remarked that he was going to join the "wren 
boys."
	She should have known better, however, than use the words 
"wren boys" in the sense she did. They are only called wren boys 
who carry the wren in a holly bush decorated with ribbons from 
house to house on St. Stephen's Day; and many who hunt the wren 
do not join in this part of the proceedings. We may remark also 
that though the "king of all birds" is said and sung to be "caught in 
the furze" on St. Stephen's Day, he is invariably "caught," and 
often ruthlessly slain, too, on Christmas Day.
	Mr. Lowe was beginning to feel quite at home with his fair 
companion -- whom we shall call by her Christian name, Mary, in 
future -- and on seeing her brothers coming through the lawn 
toward them, asked her to tell him something about them.
	"Well," she replied, "my eldest brother, Hugh, lives at 
home and attends to the farm with my father. Richard is a surgeon; 
he has a great wish to go to Australia, but my father and mother are 
opposed to it."
	Richard and Grace came on merrily together; while Hugh 
walked thoughtfully, if not moodily, behind them. He was about 
the middle height, broad-shouldered and strongly built. His hair 
and beard were black as night, and his complexion so dark that 
strangers sometimes asked if he had been a sailor, or had lived 
under a tropical sun. His dress of grey tweed betokened the farmer; 
but a heavy gold watch chain seemed to indicate that he was not 
indifferent to display. He was not popular like his father; but the 
respect with which he treated even the humblest day-labourer, and 
a certain quiet independence in his bearing towards the gentry of 
his neighbourhood, won for him the esteem of all classes. On the 
whole, Hugh Kearney was looked upon as something of a puzzle 
by his friends. And latterly his sister Mary, who loved him above 
all her brothers, used to feel uneasy at the thought that he was not 
happy.
	Richard was a contrast to Hugh in almost every respect. He 
was tall, slender, fair-skinned, light-haired, gay, thought less, and 
talkative.
	Maurice Kearney introduced his sons to Mr. Lowe -- "Sir 
Garrett's nephew," and as Grace had told them all about that 
gentleman, and his intention of spending some days with them, 
Richard and he were on excellent terms immediately and had all 
the talk to themselves till they came up with the wren-hunters.
	Mr. Lowe was astonished to see an excited crowd of men 
and boys armed with sticks, and running along on either side of a 
thick, briery fence, beating it closely, and occasionally aiming 
furious blows at he knew not what. After a while, however, he 
caught a glimpse of the tiny object of their pursuit, as, escaping 
from a shower of blows, it flitted some ten yards along the fence, 
and disappeared from view among the brambles. The crowd, 
among whom Mat the Thrasher and Wattletoes were conspicuous, 
rushed after; and as they poked their sticks into the withered grass 
and beat the bushes, the poor little wren was seen creeping through 
the hedge, and the blows rained so thick and fast about it that its 
escape seemed miraculous. It did escape, however, and after a 
short flight had just found shelter in a low sloe-bush, when Mat the 
Thrasher leaped forward, and with a blow that crashed through the 
bush as if a forest-tree had fallen upon it, seemed beyond all doubt 
to have annihilated his kingship. Grace, who could only see the 
ludicrous side of the scene, laughed till she had to catch at Mary's 
cloak for support, while Mary turned away with an exclamation of 
pain. But though she kept her head turned away to avoid seeing the 
little mutilated representation of the protomartyr, even she was 
forced to laugh when the huge Thrasher shouted -- "I struck her! I 
struck her! and knocked my hat full of feathers out of her!"
	After a minute of complete silence, during which all eyes, 
except Mary's, were fixed upon the sloe-bush, a scream of delight 
from Grace surprised her into looking round. When, lot there was 
the wren, safe and sound, high up in the air! instead of taking 
refuge in the briery fence it changed its tactics altogether, and flew 
right across the field into a quarry overgrown with brambles, 
followed by all its pursuers except Mat the Thrasher, whose look 
of amazement, as he stared with open mouth after the wren, 
elicited another peal of laughter from Grace, in which Mary and 
the young men could not help joining. Mat, however, looked at 
them as if to his mind it was no laughing matter, and requested 
some person or persons unknown to "let him alone after that." 
Then, after pondering deeply for a moment, with his eyes fixed on 
the ground, he walked slowly away; as if, in spite of Jim Dunn's 
assertion to the contrary, he bad met some thing to "bate him" at 
last.
	It is very ridiculous," said Mr. Lowe, "to see grown men in 
pursuit of a little wren, and as much carried away by the 
excitement of the chase as if it were -- "
	"A big hare," said Mary, with an arch look that surprised 
Grace, and even her brother -- for archness, particularly in the 
presence of a stranger, was not in Mary's way.
	"Well," said Mr. Lowe, who was a little posed by the 
remark, "I believe hunting the wren is not the only kind of hunting 
that could easily be made to appear ridiculous."
	A couple of pointers that had kept close to Hugh's heels 
since he left the house suggested the subject of shooting; and Mary 
was relieved from the task of talking -- for it often was a task to 
her -- during their walk back to the cottage.



CHAPTER IV.

THE TRACKS IN THE SNOW.

	THE window of Mary's room faced the west, and she was 
fond of sitting there in the evening. It was a curious little bower, up 
in the pointed roof of the oldest part of the cottage -- which had 
been added to at different periods, and presented the appearance of 
a promiscuous collection of odds and ends of houses, not one of 
which bore the slightest resemblance to any of the rest. The 
window was the only one in the ivy-covered gable, and looked into 
a little enclosure, half garden and half shrubbery. Mary sat near the 
window, looking at the fast-sinking sun, while Grace stood 
opposite the loo king-glass arranging her hair.
	"Ah, Mary," she said, with a sigh, "that's the elegant young 
man."
	"Who?"
	"Mr. Lowe."
	"Is he, indeed? Then I suppose Richard is to be discarded?"
	"Oh, Richard is quite an Adonis. But, then, Mr. Lowe has 
such an air -- he is so aristocratic. He seems to admire you," she 
continued. "But that's of course. They all admire a b-e-a-u-t-y." 
Miss Grace dwelt upon the word with a curl of the lip, as if she had 
the most sovereign con tempt for beauty. At the same time she 
stood upon her toes and surveyed herself in the glass from every 
possible point of view.
	"Do you think yourself handsome, Grace?
	"Well, between you and me, Mary. I do. Though not in the 
usual way, perhaps."
	"You mean 'handsome is that handsome does?'"
	"Not at all! I was not thinking of that stupid old proverb. 
But there is Adonis in the garden, and -- what shall we call the 
other? -- Apollo."
	Mary looked round and saw her brothers and Mr. Lowe in 
the garden.
And what will you call Hugh?" she asked. "Oh, Nabuchodonosor, 
if you like -- or, Finn Macool," replied Grace, laughing. "I really 
don't know what to make of him. He seems to be always trying to 
calculate how many thorns in an acre of furze."
	Richard here called to his sister, saying:
	Can you tell us anything about the tracks in the snow? We 
are puzzled by them?
	"No," Mary replied, opening the window, and looking 
down with surprise.
	"The puzzle is," said Richard. "that there are no tracks
coming towards the house The person must have jumped from 
your window."
	"Do you think anything has been stolen?" she asked.
	"The tracks," he replied, "are those of slight high-heeled 
boots, such as gentlemen wear,"
	"I don't know on earth how to account for it," said Mary.
	"And he must have been well acquainted with the place," 
Richard continued;" for he faced straight to the stile behind the 
laurels: and no stranger would have done that,"
	Mary's face flushed crimson; but: to her great relief her 
brothers and Mr. Lowe were looking towards the laurels and did 
not observe her. They followed the footprints out on the road near 
"The Bush" -- where the lads and lasses of Knocknagow were 
wont to assemble -- and here all trace of them was lost in the 
trampled snow.
	The three young men returned to the house through the 
farmyard, Mr. Lowe having expressed a wish to see the horse of 
which his host had spoken in the morning.
"Really, Mary," said Grace, "it is like that one of the Melodies --  

Weep for the hour
When to Eveleen's bower
The lord of the valley with false vows came:

Is there a lord of the valley in the case?"
	"I don't know what to make of you," said Mary, looking at 
her as if she thought it just possible that Miss Grace Kiely might be 
the queen of the fairies. "But as you really must be a witch of 
some, kind -- "
	Not one of those ladies, I hope," Grace interrupted, "who 
nightly travel upon broomsticks."
	"Well," Mary resumed, laughing, "anything you like. But, 
perhaps, you could make out the mystery?"
	Well, let me see."
	She knelt down, and resting her elbows on the low window 
frame, put her hands under her chin, and with knitted brow 
contemplated the footprints in the snow.
	"The solution of the mystery is this," she gravely began. 
"There is nothing very extraordinary in a man's footprint in snow. 
The footprint is an ordinary affair enough; but the wonder is, as 
Sydney Smith said of the fly in the amber, 'how the devil it got 
there.' Have you read any of Sydney Smith's writings?"
	"No."
	"Never read Peter Plymley's Letters?"
	"Never," Mary replied.
	Grace shook her head, and was about proceeding with what 
she called the solution of the mystery, when she again broke off 
with --  "By-the-by, there was a discussion at our last literary 
dinner party, as I call them when we have the poets and editors -- 
about Longfellow's

'Footprints on the sands of time.'

'Tis to be hoped when I speak of Longfellow you do not suppose I 
mean your graceful brother?"
	"No," replied Mary, laughing, "I am not quite so illiterate 
as you suppose. Though I dare say your poets and editors would be 
apt to set me down for a fool,"
	"A fool!" Grace exclaimed. "Bless your innocence, they 
adore fools. No girl but a fool has the ghost of a chance of making 
any impression upon them. The 'Brehon,' to be sure, seems to 
appreciate your humble servant slightly, and has perpetrated an 
acrostic which I will repeat for you some time. But unfortunately 
the 'Brehon' is the rummest of the whole lot."
	"The what?"
	"Oh, such ignorance! The rummest, But 'Shamrock,' who 
writes divinely, and who is really a nice fellow -- I confess to a 
weakness for nice fellows -- is quite gone about my foolish sister.

'Now, if I am, indeed, a bard,
Immortal song, uncrowned, unstarred -- 
Though gold, and friends, and rivals guard -- 
Shall win thee, spite of Fate, Jessie.'

She substitutes 'Eva ' for 'Jessie,' and takes it all to herself, I fear 
the poor child's head is a little turned," sighed Miss Grace, with a 
very wise shake of her own.
	Mary laughed, for the poor child was five years her senior.
But Grace, without condescending to notice the interruption, went 
on:
	"To return, however, to the

'Footprints on the sands of time.'

It was objected that the returning tide would wash away a footprint 
from the sand, and therefore the idea was a bad one. But papa very 
properly observed that time, when compared with eternity, was 
nothing more than the strand between the ebbing and flowing of 
the tide. But to come to our footprints in the snow. We need not 
trouble ourselves with the notion that his Sable Majesty has had 
anything to do with them. Of course you read Robinson Crusoe?"
	"Yes," replied Mary, wondering what Robinson Crusoe 
could have to do with it.
	"Very good. Well, the solution of the mystery is this: our 
man Friday -- in a stylish pair of Wellington boots -- was standing 
there when the snow commenced to fall; and, like a patient savage 
as he was, there he remained till the snow left off -- and then 
walked away. Quod erat demonstrandum. Excuse my weakness for 
Latin."
	"I declare," said Mary, with a look of wonder, "that must be 
it."
	"Oh," exclaimed Grace, resuming her bright look, "there 
are a pair of feet 'making tracks,' as our Yankee friends would say, 
which might well frighten John the Baptist himself if he met them 
in the wilderness."
	And she pointed to Barney Brodherick, who was making 
for the stile behind the laurels, in his not-to-be-described mode of 
locomotion.
	Mary called to him, and Barney swung round and looked 
up at them.
	"Barney," said she, "did you meet anyone on your way 
from town last night?
	"Begob, I did, Miss," replied Barney, with a start. "An' God 
forgive me," he continued, pulling off his hat and taking a letter 
from the lining, "I forgot to give you this bit uv a note."
	He came under the window and threw the letter up to 
Grace, who caught it and handed it to Mary.
	"What o'clock might it be, Miss Grace?" Barney asked,
with the coaxing grin he always wore when speaking to her.
	"It is past four, Barney."
	"Thanum-on-dioul, can it be late so early? "he exclaimed. 
"Tare-an-'ouns, I'll be kilt." And Barney "make tracks' for the stile 
behind the laurels.
	Grace laughed, and turned round to repeat his words; but 
checked herself on seeing Mary with the open letter in her hand, 
gazing towards the distant mountains.
	"And now," she said abstractedly, "he is gone."



CHAPTER V.

THE DOCTOR MAKES HIMSELF COMFORTABLE.


	"I FEAR, Mr. Lowe," said Mary, "you will be put to some 
inconvenience to-morrow, as we are to have the Station."
	"What is that?" he inquired.
	"Oh, don't you know? Well, Catholics go to Confession and 
Communion at Christmas and Easter. And, in country districts, 
instead of requiring the people to go to the chapel, the priests come 
to certain houses in each locality to hear confessions and say Mass. 
So that our house is to be public property for some hours to-
morrow, and I fear you will find it unpleasant. But you can remain 
in your room; and I suppose you will have no objection to 
breakfast with the priests?"
	"By no means," he replied, "it will be a pleasure. Shall we 
have the gentleman who preached that remarkable sermon?"
	"Oh, of course. He is our parish priest, Father M'Mahon. 
He is a most charitable man, and almost adored by the people. It is 
commonly said that when Father M'Mahon dies he will not have as 
much money as will bury him. I must warn you, however, that you 
will find him reserved. and you may be tempted to think him 
haughty. But it is only his manner."
	"He looks awfully proud, at all events," said Grace.
	"He astonished us all a few weeks ago," Mary continued, 
by making this peculiarity the subject of his discourse from the 
altar."
	"He began in such an extraordinary way," said Grace. "I 
was very near being obliged to laugh."
	"Very near?" said Mary. "Why, you did laugh; and it was 
really too bad for a sensible young lady like you."
	I could not help it. Only think, Mr. Lowe, the first word he 
said was -- 'Ye say I have a proud walk.' And then he went on to 
explain to them in the most earnest manner, that when they thought 
he was walking proudly, he was, perhaps, not thinking of himself 
at all. 'Indeed,' he said, I never knew until lately that I had a proud 
walk. And I fear it is too late to try to correct it now. 'tis hard to 
break an old dog of his trot.' Sure everybody laughed then."
	It was a most instructive discourse," said Mary.
	Oh, of course," replied Grace. "And it must have been very 
consoling to people who give themselves airs, as we are not by any 
means to infer from the said airs that they are not all humility in 
their hearts. But I hope it is Father Hannigan Mr. Lowe will have 
an opportunity of hearing to-morrow."
	Yes, I think it is not unlikely, as Father M'Mahon has not 
been strong for some time back, and one of the curates usually says 
Mass now at the Stations. You can have no idea, Mr. Lowe, what 
an amount of labour an Irish priest has to go through."
	"I can imagine it must be very considerable from what you 
tell me," Mr. Lowe observed.
	"Come, Grace," said Mary, "the Rosary."
	Hugh stood up, and went with them to the kitchen, as he 
always, when at home, "headed" the Rosary.
	Instead of summoning the servants to prayers in the parlour 
it is the general custom, among Irish Catholics of the middle class, 
for the master and mistress of the house with their children and 
guests  --  unless the latter should happen not to be Catholics  --  to 
"say the Rosary" in the kitchen.
	In Hugh's absence the duty of beginning and ending the 
Rosary  --  the same person always "heads" and " finishes"   --  fell 
to Mrs. Kearney or Mary; which was looked upon as a grievance 
by Barney and some of the other servants.
	"I'd always like to have Mr. Hugh to head the Rosary," 
Barney used to say. "He never puts trimmin's to id like Miss Mary 
and the mistress."
	During the Rosary Richard and the stranger lighted their 
cigars in Hugh's room, and had a pleasant talk  --  the doctor as 
usual having the lion's share. His volubility was considerable; but 
though people generally found it pleasant enough to listen to him  -
-  young ladies particularly  --  it was not easy to tell what it was all 
about after.
	Hugh came in with a large book under his arm, and seemed 
unprepared for the honour that had been done him.
	Mr. Lowe was standing by the fire, with his elbow on the 
chimney-piece. The doctor had his two heels on it, and reclined in 
a curious old arm-chair at the other side of the fire.
	"We're just talking," said the latter, "of what we are to do 
with ourselves to-morrow. Mr. Lowe votes for the snipe."
	"Very well," Hugh replied, "I'll have everything ready; but 
you must be satisfied with a single-barrel."
	"Oh, 'tis all the same, except that I can't make so much 
noise. Curious," continued the doctor, contemplatively, "that there 
are some things that some people can't do. Though I blaze away, 
the birds don't fall. I generally forget that there is anything required 
but to pull the trigger. Or when it does occur to me that I must take 
aim, somehow I first think of my feet  --  a graceful attitude you 
know. And before I am all right the bird is a mile away. And then I 
fire."
	"You can ride better than you can shoot," said Mr. Lowe. 
"Pretty well at the riding; but I never could do that either, like 
Hugh. The cursed attitudinizing ruins me there, too. Do you 
remember Kathleen Hanly? "he asked, turning to his brother.
	"Yes, I remember," Hugh replied, laughing.
	"Oh, 'tis misery to think of it," the doctor continued, taking 
his feet from the chimney-piece, and thrusting his hands in the 
pockets of his shooting jacket.
	"What was it?" Mr. Lowe asked.
	"The prettiest girl in the country," replied the doctor, "I'll 
show you where she lives to-morrow,"
	"Well? " said Mr. Lowe.
	"Oh, you want to know all about it. Well, Hugh and I were 
out schooling one day, and I caught a glimpse of Kathleen walking 
up and down by a hedge not far from where we were. There was a 
wall about three feet high near where she was walking; and I 
thought I might as well ride down by the ditch and take a jump 
over the wall. I waited till she had turned at the end of her walk, 
and came on at the wall in a canter. I was thinking of a picture in 
one of Lever's novels, and my only regret was that the wall was not 
five instead of three feet high. Just as I was coming to the jump, it 
occurred to me that my left elbow was not at the proper angle. So I 
glanced at it and turned it more in  --  forgetting the necessity of 
keeping my seat and everything else but the elbow and Kathleen."
	The doctor paused and looked at the lighted end of his 
cigar, as if it were the miniature of a departed friend.
	"Well, what happened? " said Mr. Lowe.
	"Well, I was spun," replied the doctor, with a sigh, "out 
between his two ears. I resolved to get out of a window in the 
middle of the night, and run away and enlist in a regiment under 
orders for India. But I changed my mind."
	The doctor looked again at the ashes of his cigar, and shook 
his head.
	"Kathleen said afterwards," he resumed, "that she always 
thought of me with my heels in the air. Back view, you know. And 
my legs are rather long."
	The doctor took a last look at the ashes of his cigar, and 
flung the butt into the fire. He then stood up, and taking a cigar-
case from the chimney-piece, carefully selected the best one in it 
for himself.
	"Have a cigar? " said he, presenting one to Mr. Lowe; 
which was very civil, seeing that the case and its contents belonged 
to Mr. Lowe himself.
	"Do you know," said the doctor, turning to his brother, after 
resuming his place in the arm-chair, "we may as well make 
ourselves comfortable."
	"By all means," replied Hugh, tearing the corner off a 
newspaper, and offering it to him to light his cigar.
	"Hold on, old boy," said the doctor.
	He left the room and returned in a few minutes, with a 
decanter in one hand and a sugar-bowl in the other. Placing them 
on the table, he rather surprised Mr. Lowe by producing three 
tumblers and a wine-glass from the pockets of his shooting-coat. 
He then sat down, with his feet on the fender, and poked the fire. 
While thus employed, a servant came in with a kettle, which the 
doctor took with his disengaged hand, and spilled a little of the 
water under the grate to see that it was boiling.
	"All right, Judy," said he. "Mum's the word."
	"Yes, sir," the girl replied, and left the room,
	The doctor then mixed a stiff tumbler for himself, and 
motioned to Hugh and Mr. Lowe to follow his example; which 
they did.
	Having lighted his cigar, he turned sideways in his chair, 
throwing one of his long legs over the other, and said:
	"Now Hugh, your opinion is worth having on most 
subjects. But I want your opinion now on a subject, of which so far 
as ever I could see, you have had no personal experience."
	"What is it? " Hugh asked.
	"Love," replied the doctor, commencing to puff so 
vigorously that he was soon enveloped in a cloud.
	"Well, what about it?"
	"Do you believe in first love and love at first sight and all 
that sort of thing?
	"Of course, if there's love at all, there must be first love to 
begin with. And," he added, after a pause, "I rather think love at 
first sight is not an impossibility."
	"But is the first love the true love? The 'never forget, you 
know, and so forth?'"
	"I don't think so. It may or may not."
	"The fact is, you think there is no limit to the number of 
times a man may be really in love?"
	"Well, I do believe a man may be really in love more than 
once in his life. But I'll tell you what I believe," he continued, after 
a pause. "I believe it is the destiny of many to love once, or meet 
somebody whom they feel they could have loved as they never 
loved before and never can love again."
	"But they can love again!" said Mr. Lowe, who began to 
feel interested in the conversation.
	"Yes, certainly," replied Hugh. "A man can love again, and 
be happy in the love of another. But it will not be the same kind of 
happiness as might have been his."
	"Do you think this higher sort of happiness is the lot of 
many? I fancy, in the majority of cases, people must be satisfied 
with the secondary kind of happiness you allude to."
	"Yes, I think so, too," replied Hugh.
	"And why so? " Richard asked, as he took the kettle from 
the fire, and poured the boiling water carefully on the lumps f 
sugar in his tumbler. "Why should they not be supremely blessed?"
	And while pouring in the whiskey after the water, the 
doctor sang in a pleasing voice:

"Our life should resemble one long day of light,
And our death come on holy and calm as the night."

	"'Tis easily accounted for," replied Hugh. "The feeling may 
not be mutual; and even when it is, how many insurmountable 
obstacles may be in the way? But if it ever does happen, that a man 
or a woman can love only once, it is when two spirits rush together 
in this way, and are then parted by death, or some other cause that 
does not involve weakness of any kind on the part of either."
	"Now, did a case of this kind ever come within your 
knowledge?"
	"Yes," Hugh replied. "I know of one such case. And it is 
what I have observed in this instance that has made me think about 
the matter at all."
	"You seem to think," said Mr. Lowe, "that reciprocity is 
necessary to give immortality to the sentiment, if I may so express 
what I mean to convey."
	"I am inclined to think," Hugh replied, "that without that it 
will die a natural death."
	"Have you been taking large doses of poetry of late? said 
Richard. "It would scarcely surprise me to find some tender stanzas 
in this." And he opened the ledger which Hugh had laid on the 
table.
	"And that would be getting blood from a turnip," said the 
doctor, as he turned over the leaves. "But do you really keep your 
accounts in this way? I thought it was only merchants did that."
	"And why should not manufacturers?
	"Manufacturers? Do you mean that you are a butter 
maker?"
	"And a manufacturer of arable land," said Hugh.
	"That's nonsense," said the doctor, who had a dim 
recollection of a lecture on political economy which he had heard 
some time before. "Land cannot be manufactured."
	"Well if I were writing a treatise on the subject I might 
hesitate to use the expression; and yet it could, I think, be 
defended."
	"You mean a producer," said Richard, pedantically.
	"No, that would not express my meaning. I'll show you an 
example of it to-morrow."
	Richard commenced rubbing his chin with a rather serious 
expression of face, as he ran his eye down a column of figures. He 
opened his eyes and his mouth on coming to the "carried forward," 
and was about finding the page when Hugh glanced over his 
shoulder, and said:
	"Come, shut it up. You will look in vain for a stanza of any 
sort," Saying this, Hugh shut the book and pushed it away.
	The fact was the doctor had lighted upon a page where 
sundry sums were entered, which he himself had received  in the 
shape of half notes and post-office orders; and his brother good-
naturedly wished to prevent him from seeing what would be a very 
forcible illustration of the proverb that "many a little makes a 
muckle."
	The doctor took up a note which slipped from between the 
leaves of the account-book and read it. It ran thus:
	"DEAR HUGH  --  Send me five pounds by return like 'the 
quintessence concentrated of a sublimated brick,' as you are. I was 
obliged to pop my watch last night. Particulars in my next,  --  
Yours,
"DICK."
	The author of this pithy production shook his head gravely, 
and, folding the paper, was about lighting another cigar with it, but 
changing his mind, he took a short pipe from his pocket and 
lighted that instead.
	"I believe," said he, "I have been a little improvident in my 
time. But you have no idea how economical I have become. I got 
eleven bob from a Jew for two pair of trousers and an old coat," 
Here he pulled vigorously at his pipe till it was well kindled, and 
threw what remained unburned of the note into the fire. "And 
bought a second-hand clarionet at the back of the Bank," he added. 
"I'll give you a tune as soon as I get a new reed. Keating has given 
me some lessons."
	He smoked on with a placid look, evidently deriving 
exquisite pleasure from the contemplation of his economy, as well 
as from the weed, which he seemed to economise, too, so tiny were 
the wreaths that glided from between his lips.
	Hugh thought it well to take advantage of this virtuous 
mood, and suggested the advisability of retiring to rest, The doctor 
took Mr. Lowe's arm and conducted him to his room. And, after 
embracing that gentleman affectionately six times, he retired to his 
own apartment.
	Hugh made an entry or two in his account book; and after 
totting up a column of figures at one side, and comparing the 
amount with the sum total of a shorter account at the opposite side, 
he shook his head doubtfully, and closed the book. Opening his 
desk, he took out a letter and read it over. It was from Sir Garrett 
Butler to his father, referring him to his agent, Mr. Isaac Pender, on 
the subject of renewing the lease.
	"I fear," he thought, as he put the letter back into the desk  -
-  "I fear that there is foul play somewhere. And yet this old man is 
said to be so simple and kind-hearted it is hard to suspect him. But 
Pender and his hopeful son are a bad pair. Well, there's nothing to 
be gained by brooding over it, Let me think of something else."
	He was startled out of what was evidently a pleasant 
reverie, by a noise, which, after a moment's thought, he concluded 
was the death-shriek of an unlucky goose. Reynard was unusually 
active at that season, and he resolved upon going out and setting 
the dogs upon his track. But the sound being repeated in a 
somewhat less excruciating key, he smiled and proceeded to his 
brother's room.
	The doctor, with his coat and one boot off, was in the act of 
unscrewing the mouth-piece from the second-hand clarionet. 
	"D--n it!" be exclaimed, examining it with a solemn look, 
"I can get no good of it."
	Then putting the instrument, without the mouth-piece, to 
his lips, he hummed, "Believe me if all those endearing young 
charms," through it, with great feeling.
	"Dick," said his brother, "have you a mind to disturb the 
whole house? Do you know 'tis past twelve o'clock?
	"All right," said the doctor, with a jerk of his head side 
ways. And he dropped softly into "Nora Creena."
	"Come, go to bed, and don't make a fool of yourself."
	"Hugh, isn't Kathleen Hanly a devilish pretty girl?"
	"Decidedly. But what's the use of freezing for her? Go to 
bed and dream about her."
	The doctor was so struck with the wisdom of this 
suggestion that he pulled off the other boot with extraordinary 
quickness and energy; evidently bent upon following his brother's 
advice without the loss of a moment.
	Mr. Henry Lowe had his reveries, too.
	"No, no," he thought "it cannot be anything of that sort."
	He was thinking of the tracks in the snow, which Grace 
accounted for so logically.
	But even Grace's "solution of the mystery" was not 
altogether satisfactory to Mr. Henry Lowe.





CHAPTER VI.

THE STATION  --  BARNEY BRODHERICK'S PENANCE  --   
MRS. SLATTERY CREATES A SENSATION

	EVERYTHING was so quiet about the house next morning 
that Mr. Lowe quite forgot the station. But on reaching the hall he 
was taken by surprise to find it filled by a crowd of people; and, 
instead of pushing his way to the parlour, he beat a hasty retreat 
back to his bedroom. His attention was arrested by Barney 
Brodherick, who, holding a beads between his fingers, was 
kneeling in the lobby, praying with great energy and volubility. 
Barney sat back upon his heels and muttered his prayers in a 
breathless sort of way, evidently afraid of losing the clue before he 
had got all around the beads. When he did come to the end, it was 
with a rush; and throwing himself forward, with his elbows on the 
floor, he performed some ceremony which Mr. Lowe was quite 
unable to comprehend.
	After this, Barney fell back upon his heels and commenced 
the round of his beads again. Altogether, he had the look of a man 
walking over a river or ravine on a narrow plank, and feeling that 
to pause for an instant, or to swerve to the right or left, was as 
much as his life was worth. The manner in which he hurried on at 
the end and flung himself forward, completed the parallel.
	"In the name o' the Lord, Barney," exclaimed the house 
keeper. "what are you doing there?"
	She stood near Barney, with a silver coffee-pot in her hand, 
and her look of astonishment satisfied Mr. Lowe that Barney's 
proceedings were something out of the common.
	"Salvation saze your sowl  --  God forgive me for cursin'  --   
be off out uv that, and don't set me astray."
	"A nice lad you are," muttered the housekeeper, as she 
walked away, "to be goin' to your duty."
	Richard here made his appearance, looking as if he had not 
slept enough, and Mr. Lowe called his attention to the figure near 
the window. He, however, appeared quite as much puzzled as the 
housekeeper.
	Barney, at this moment, was leaning forward on his left 
and, and seemed be counting something on the floor with his right. 
The effort was evidently too much for him, for, scratching his poll, 
he looked about him in a bewildered way.
	"Mr. Dick," said he, on seeing the doctor, "come here and 
count 'em for me." 
	On coming near enough, the doctor and Mr. Lowe saw a 
pretty long score chalked upon the boards.
	"How many times, Mr. Dick?" Barney asked anxiously. 
Richard stooped down and counted the marks; and when Barney 
was informed of the number, he drew a long breath of relief, and 
got up from his knees, the effort appearing to cost him some pain.
	"Glory be to God", he exclaimed, pressing the knuckles of 
his left hand against his back, as if trying to straighten it, "I have id 
over me."
	"What is it you have over you? "Richard asked, who had 
only seen the last act of the drama.
	"The pinance, sir," replied Barney. "The pinance he put an 
me the last time; an' I'd have no business nixt or near him if I 
wasn't after doin' id."
	And Barney moved away as if a great load had been taken 
off his mind.
	The two young men stood at the window and amused 
themselves by observing the people who loitered about the house. 
Mat the Thrasher stood leaning against a cart, surrounded by a 
group of admirers, among whom were Jim Dunn and Tom Maher. 
But even their admiration evidently fell short of that of Billy 
Heffernan, the musical genius of Knocknagow  --  who dreamt a 
piece of music entitled " Heffernan's Frolic," and played it next 
morning to the wonder and delight of the whole hamlet. For Billy's 
mother ran out to proclaim the joyful news among her neighbours; 
and men, women, and children, came crowding around the inspired 
musician, and requesting him over and over again to play his new 
composition; till Billy, fairly out of breath, put his fife in his 
pocket and asked them all, with an injured look, "did they think he 
had Jack Delany's bellows in his stumack?"  --  Jack Delany being 
the village blacksmith. From which query it may be inferred that 
Billy Heffernan was under the impression that his stomach played 
an important part in the production of sweet sounds.
	Billy Heffernan now took his fife from his pocket, and after 
examining it minutely, handed it to Mat the Thrasher.
	Richard let down the window softly, to try and catch their 
conversation.
	After looking at the instrument, Mat said:
	"I'll reg'late that. I'll put a new ferl on id.'
	He handed back the fife to the owner, who put it to his lips 
and seemed to execute a pantomimic tune  --  for though his 
"flying fingers" played nimbly over the stops, no sound was 
audible. By degrees he breathed more and more strongly into the 
orifice till a lively air began to be fitfully distinguishable even to 
the two young men in the window. Mat the Thrasher commenced 
to "humour" the tune with his head; and after a while, resting his 
hands on the tail-board of the cart, he performed a few steps of a 
complicated character. Billy Heffernan moved a pace or two 
backwards, keeping his eyes fixed on the dancer's feet, evidently 
determined not to lose a single "shuffle." Indeed, the eyes of the 
whole group who had also moved back and formed a ring  --  were 
riveted en the dancer's brilliantly polished shoes. Mat's shoes 
presented a contrast to those of his companions in this respect; for 
while his shone resplendent, theirs were only greased.
	As Billy Heffernan "loud and louder blew," Mat the 
Thrasher's feet "fast and faster flew " and letting go his hold on the 
cart, he gave himself "ample room and verge enough," till even 
Mr. Lowe caught some of the enthusiasm his performance excited.
	"He's a splendid fellow,' he exclaimed, as Mat finished with 
a bound in the air, followed by a low "bow to the music."
	"Take notice of him," said Richard, pointing to a man who 
came from the kitchen door towards the group collected round Mat 
and his musical admirer, picking his steps carefully, and taking 
long strides, as if he were walking upon ice that he feared might 
break under him. He was dressed in  a black frock coat and dark 
trousers, very much the worse for the wear. His well-bleached shirt 
(save that the "bluebag" had been too liberally drawn upon in its 
"making-up"), of which there was an unusually extensive display 
of front and collar, presented a striking contrast to the dinginess of 
the rest of his habiliments. He had come from the house without 
his hat, notwithstanding the coldness of the morning; and carried a 
prayer-book, with his finger between the leaves, in his left hand.
	"I suppose he is the clerk?" said Mr. Lowe.
	"No; that is Phil Lahy, our tailor."
	Why, he is quite an important-looking personage, Yes," he 
continued, turning his head to listen, "he is remonstrating with 
them for their levity."
	"What's the harm in a bit uv divarsion?" said Billy 
Heffernan drawing the tip of his nose, which was very blue, across 
the sleeve of his coat,
	"That's thrue, Billy," Phil observed, gravely, "but there's a 
time for everything. And when a man is goin' to his duty," he 
added, still more impressively, "he ought to turn his mind to id."
	"He's right," said Mat the Thrasher, as he sat down on one 
of the shafts of the cart, resting his chin on his hands, and his 
elbows on his knees, with a penitent look.
	"Mat," said Phil, evidently satisfied with the impression he 
had made, "I'm not neglectin' you. I won't disappoint you. I'll do 
that job before Sunday."
	"Faith, 'twould be time for you."
	"But consider, I had two full shoots to make for Ned 
Brophy and Tom Brien. Ned is to be married as soon as everything 
is settled, an' Tom is goin' to match-make down to the county 
Limerick."
	"An' didn't I tell you I was to be Ned's sidesman?
	"I won't disappoint you."
	And Phil, taking his pipe from his waistcoat-pocket, was in 
the act of catching the wooden stem between his teeth, when his 
hand was caught by Billy Heffernan:
	"Aren't you goin' to resave?" Billy asked with a half 
alarmed, half reproachful look.
	"Yes, Billy; but I have liberty to take a blast on account of 
my constitution."
	And there was something quite pathetic in Phil's look as he 
pressed the spring of a small iron tobacco-box, in which an ounce 
of "Lomasny's" was tightly rolled up.
	"Give me a light, Mat," said he, after filling his pipe, with 
the air of a man about performing a solemn act of duty.
	Mat produced his flint and steel, and, lighting a bit of 
touch-paper, laid it with his own hand on Phil Lahy's pipe, while 
Phil commenced to "draw" with such vigour that his first "shough" 
frightened the sparrows from the fresh straw spread over the yard, 
as if a shot had been fired at them, and the sight and the fragrance 
of the blue tobacco smoke, as it curled in the frosty morning air, 
made more than one mouth water in the crowd that loitered about 
the yard awaiting the arrival of the priests. It may be necessary to 
inform some readers that a "shough o' the pipe," without special 
leave from the priest, is considered a violation of the rule "to be 
fasting from midnight" before Communion.
	When the two curates rode into the yard by the back 
entrance, Phil Lahy, evidently vain of his privilege, puffed away 
ostentatiously  --  which impressed upon the beholders an idea of 
Phil's importance, that all but placed him on a level with the priests 
themselves.
	Father Hannigan was the first to dismount. He was a tall 
man, in the prime of life, and the frieze riding-coat, flung loosely 
over his broad shoulders, set off his manly figure to the best 
advantage, and gave him a homely, warm, Irish look altogether. 
The other curate, Father O'Neill was a very young man, with an air 
of refinement suggestive of drawing-rooms rather than of Irish 
cabins and farm-houses. They were met by the "man of the house" 
before they reached the kitchen door, and as he gave a hand to 
each, Father Hannigan's hearty "Good-morrow, Maurice," struck 
Mr. Lowe as being admirably in keeping with his appearance. And 
the words  --  "The top of the morning to you, Miss Grace," 
suggested the idea that Father Hannigan affected the phraseology 
of the peasantry.
	"There is Father M'Mahon," said Richard, as a car passed 
the gate.
	"Is he not to be here?
	"Yes; but he is going round to the front gate. Come into the 
room, and you will See him arrive."
	The first thing that struck Mr. Lowe was that Father 
M'Mahon's servant was in livery, and that his horse and car were a 
decidedly handsome turn-out. When he leaped lightly from the car 
and walked towards the hall-door, with his shoulders thrown back, 
and his head raised and slightly leaning to one side, Mr. Lowe was 
not surprised that people said Father M'Mahon had a "proud walk."
	Barney Brodherick hurried to the car, and was taking the 
priest's cloak, which he had let drop from his shoulders upon 
alighting, to hang it up in the hall; but the servant snatched it from 
him. He was rushing headlong to resent the affront, when the 
return of the priest, who had left his breviary on the seat of the car, 
prevented hostilities. Barney shook his fist at the man in livery, 
from behind his master's back; but without deigning to notice the 
challenge, that important functionary led the horse to the car-house 
and commenced unharnessing him.
	The priest, without exchanging a word with any one, 
walked into the drawing-room. After saying a short prayer, he put 
on his stole and sat down in the arm-chair which was placed near 
the fire.
	The "man of the house" was already on his knees beside the 
chair, and at once commenced his confession.
	The door was now surrounded by a closely-packed crowd, 
who went in one by one, in their turn, to be "heard "  --   finding it 
no easy matter to push their way out again.
	An almost equally large and quite as eager a throng stood 
round the parlour door at the opposite side of the hall where Father 
O'Neill sat.
	Father Hannigan, by his own choice, remained in the 
kitchen, which was filled by his penitents  --  principally women  --  
who, in spite of his loud remonstrances, would crush and tumble 
almost up against his knees. He had repeatedly to stand up and 
push them off by main force; and was at last obliged to fence 
himself in with two chairs and a form.
	"If ye come apast that," said he, excitedly, "except in your 
turn, 'twill be worse for ye."
	Things got on pretty smoothly after this, save for a 
suppressed scuffle now and again when two equally resolute 
dames happened to meet in the front rank, and disputed the 
question of precedence with an energy only second to that which 
they threw into the "Hail Mary" or "Holy Mary" that accompanied 
every shove and jostle. One of those who had been several times 
pushed back at the very moment when victory seemed certain, lost 
all patience, and resolved to gain her point by stratagem. She 
walked along a form and stepped from one to another of two or 
three chairs ranged along the wall, with a dogged sort of 
determination to conquer or die. She was in the act of climbing 
over a high-backed settle behind the priest, when she missed her 
footing and fell backwards, bringing down with her a dish-cover 
and several other utensils with a tremendous crash and clatter. So 
great was the noise that Richard and Mr. Lowe hastened to the 
scene to see what could have happened.
	Father Hannigan jumped to his feet as if he thought the 
house was falling about his ears, and looked all around him, but 
could see nothing to account for the clatter. At last he looked 
behind the settle, which was a few feet out from the wall, and there 
beheld the too eager devotee on her back, with one foot caught in 
something that held it high in the air. Father Hannigan released the 
foot, and, as he did so, shaking his head and compressing his lips, 
muttered a proverb in the Irish language, the best translation of 
which we are able to give being  --  "A woman would beat a pig, 
and a pig would beat a fair."
	"Get up now," he continued, seeing her show no symptom 
of changing her position. "Sure you're not hurt?" he asked, 
reaching her his hand.
	The poor woman suffered herself to be raised up.
	"Are you hurt?" he repeated.
	She seemed to think it necessary to weigh the question well 
before replying to it. So long did she continue to ponder over it that 
Father Hannigan asked again, with some concern:
	"In the name of God, Mrs. Slattery, is there anything the 
matter with you?"
	Mrs. Slattery looked all around her, as if expecting that 
some one would come forward to set her mind at rest.
	"What in the world ails the woman?" exclaimed the priest.
	Mrs. Slattery looked into his face anxiously, and after 
another long pause, spoke:
	"I wonder am I killed?" said Mrs. Slattery.
	"Wisha, there's great fear of you," replied Father Hannigan. 
"And now go and say your prayers and take the world aisy like a 
Christian. Sure I'll be able to hear ye all before I go, and what more 
do ye want? There's a strange gentleman from England looking at 
ye; and what will he say of the Island of Saints when he goes back, 
if this is the way ye behave yourselves. Look at the men, how quiet 
and dacent they are. Can't you take pattern by the men? But 'tis 
always the way with the women," exclaimed Father Hannigan, 
with a gesture of both hands, "to run headlong; and never look 
before 'em."
	After this there was comparative order among Father 
Hannigan's penitents. But poor Mrs. Slattery made her way slowly 
to the hall, looking as if she were still quite unable to settle the 
question whether she was "killed" or not.



CHAPTER VII.

NORAH LAHY,  --  THE OLD LINNET'S SONG.


Richard's proposal to take a stroll to an old castle within about a 
mile of the house was readily agreed to by Mr. Lowe; and, as they 
passed through Knocknagow, the latter had a good opportunity of 
seeing for himself what an Irish hamlet looked like. Though most 
of the houses looked comfortless enough, and the place as a whole 
had the straggling appearance which he was accustomed to 
associate with an Irish village, there was none of that unredeemed 
squalor and wretchedness which certain writers had led him to 
expect. With one or two exceptions every house had at least two 
windows. Several had each a small out-house, and the little cart or 
"car," with a high creel in it, indicated that the owner was the 
proprietor of a donkey.
	Mat the Thrasher's habitation, with its whitewashed walls 
and elegantly thatched roof, was particularly noticeable. Mr. Lowe 
remarked also the little ornamental wooden gate, the work of Mat's 
own hands, that led to the kitchen-garden  --   invariably called the 
"haggart" in this part of the world  --   which was fenced all round 
by a thick thorn hedge, with a little privet and holly intermixed 
here and there. There were two or three small farm-houses, the 
owners of which held from ten to twenty acres each. Two pipes 
"across" a pound of soap, with a button of blue stuck to it, and a 
very yellow halfpenny candle in the windows  --  if we may 
dignify them with the name  --  of four or five poor cabins, showed 
that there was brisk competition in the shop-keeping line in 
Knocknagow.
	The title of "shop," however, was exclusively given to the 
establishment of Phil Lahy  --  or rather of Honor his wife  --  who 
occupied an old slated house with pointed gables and very thick 
chimneys, which had seen better days, and which tradition said had 
been an inn in the reign of Queen Anne. But a later tradition had 
fixed the name of "the barrack" on Phil Lahy's house, greatly to his 
annoyance. In spite of all he could say or do however, his 
neighbours persisted in calling his house "the barrack."
	The absence of the human face divine was easily accounted 
for, so far as the adults were concerned, seeing that they were all at 
the Station. But the fact that there was not one of the rising 
generation visible began to excite the surprise of the two young 
men as they sauntered leisurely through what seemed literally a 
deserted village, till a loud shout called their attention to a pretty 
considerable crowd in a deep quarry, near a limekiln, by the 
roadside  --  the attraction which the quarry possessed for the 
urchins on this occasion being a frozen sheet of water.
	The shout brought a curly-headed boy in corduroy jacket 
and trousers to Honor Lahy's shop-door. He looked wistfully 
towards the sliders, as if sorely tempted to join them,, when a very 
weak but singularly sweet voice called to him from inside: "Ah, 
Tommy, don't go."
	I'm not goin' to go," he replied. "I'm on'y goin' to look at 
my crib." 
	Mr. Lowe and Richard, as if moved by the same impulse, 
walked into the house. Sitting in a straw arm-chair, near the 
kitchen fire, was a young girl, whose back was towards them. Herr 
wasted hand, which was laid on the head of a large, rough terrier 
that sat near her, with its head, or rather, its throat resting on her 
knees, at once attracted Mr. Lowe's attention. She did not seem to 
be aware of their presence. The dog, however, watched them with 
no friendly eye; but, as if spellbound by the wasted hand on his 
head, he remained quite motionless save that his eyes alternately 
glared on the intruders and looked wistfully in her face.
	"Tommy," said she, "like a good boy, will you hold the 
prayer-book again, till I finish the Preparation for Confession? I 
won't be long."
	Richard placed his finger on his lips, and beckoned to the 
boy to do as she desired. The prayer-book was on her knees, but 
she had not sufficient strength to hold it up. The boy knelt down, 
and held the book open before her, so that she could read it. His 
fresh, round, rosy face and laughing blue eyes contrasted strikingly 
with her death-like paleness, and the deep melancholy of her eyes, 
which were almost black. She raised her emaciated hand slowly 
and painfully, as if the action were almost beyond her strength, and 
made the sign of the Cross. Then, with her hands clasped, and 
resting on her knees, she raised her eyes for a moment, as if 
offering up a short mental prayer, and commenced to read from the 
book which her brother held for her.
	The scene was so touching that the two young men stole 
softly from the house, neither of them uttering a word till they 
reached the old castle.
	"I suppose that poor girl cannot live long," said Mr. Lowe. 
"I never saw a human face so wasted away. It will haunt me, I fear, 
for some time. There is something unearthly in her eyes  --  and did 
you remark the long eyelashes, how they contrasted with the pale 
cheeks? I suppose she is dying of consumption?
	"I can't quite understand her case," replied Richard, with an 
air of professional importance; "it is rather peculiar. She has not 
had the use of her limbs for several years back. I think it is the 
spine, though Kiely says not."
	The view from the top of the old castle was very fine, 
though the breeze was too keen to allow of their dwelling for any 
length of time upon its beauties. Richard, how ever, remained so 
resolutely gazing in one direction, though the wind was directly in 
his face, that his companion suspected there was some object of 
peculiar interest in that quarter.
	"That is a pretty house on the side of the hill," he remarked.
	"Yes, the white house in the trees," said Richard, turning 
his eyes in quite a different direction.
	"No, I mean the house on the hill near that square grove. 
Who lives there?"
	"A Mr. Hanly."
	"I thought so. And have we any chance of getting a glimpse 
of the beauty?
	Richard stared at him with surprise.
	"You forget," said Mr. Lowe, laughing, "that you promised 
that night to show me where she lived. I dare say the wall  near the 
paling at the end of the grove is the scene of your misadventure?"
	 The doctor began pulling his moustache, and put on a 
grave, not to say a frowning look. He was trying to recall what he 
had said on the subject the night before, but apparently without 
success,
	"Yes," he replied, quite seriously, as if he considered it no 
subject for jest, "that is the place where the accident occurred. Miss 
Hanly is a highly respectable and very superior young lady. 
However," he added, fixing another lingering, look on the house 
near the grove, "this would be too early an hour to call. And, 
besides, we must be back before breakfast," He looked at his 
watch, and finding there was no time to be lost, they walked 
briskly back towards Ballinaclash.
	As they passed through the village, Tommy Lahy was in 
the act of climbing up a rather tall beech tree that stood in  front of 
the old house, the lower part of its trunk protected by a piece of 
mason-work which looked like a foot or two of a thick round gate 
pier. Tommy's laughing face looked down at them over his 
shoulder, as he mounted higher and higher, with the ease and 
regularity of a swimmer. But after reaching the topmost bough, he 
came tumbling down  with such breakneck precipitation that Mr. 
Lowe started, under the impression that he had missed his hold and 
was  grasping at the branches to save himself from being dashed to 
pieces. This view of the case was at once proved to be erroneous, 
when Tommy reached the smooth part of the tree, and slid down to 
the low pedestal, which he touched as lightly as a bird. Without a 
moment's pause he ran up the hill and into Mat the Thrasher's 
garden, where the thick hedge concealed him from view.
	"What the devil is he up to?" said Richard.
	"I can't imagine," replied Mr. Lowe, "let us hurry up and 
see."
	On looking over the hedge they saw Tommy standing in the 
middle of the cabbage plot, scratching his poll with a look of 
vexation and disappointment. He knelt for a moment among the 
cabbages, and stood up with a bird in his hand which he eyed with 
no friendly expression.
	"What is it? " Richard asked.
	Tommy looked up, surprised at finding himself observed, 
but immediately answered
	"A robineen, sir." And Tommy deliberately pulled the tail 
out of the robin, and then let it fly away. It perched on the square 
chimney of Mat the Thrasher's house  --  looking decidedly 
woebegone without its tail.
	"Why have you pulled out the bird's tail?" Mr. Lowe asked.
	"What made he knock my crib?" replied Tommy. I'd have a 
blackbird only for him."
	Richard explained to his companion that the robin was the 
plague of boys who had cribs set to catch birds, as he was 
perpetually getting himself caught, thereby making it necessary to 
"set" the crib again. And, as taking the life of cock-robin was a 
crime from which even the wickedest urchin would shrink aghast, 
pulling out his tail, which was looked upon as a legitimate mode of 
punishment, was the only revenge they could have for all the 
trouble and loss he put them to.
	"Did you catch much to-day, Tommy? " Richard asked.
	"No, sir; only two wran-boys an' an aeneen."
	"What have you your trap baited with?" Mr. Lowe 
inquired.
	Tommy opened his eyes wide, evidently not understanding 
the question.
	"He means," said Richard, "what have you under the crib to 
tempt the birds to go into it?
	"A bit of a biled pueata, sir," Tommy answered readily.
	an' a shillig-a-booka, and a few skhehoshies."
	Richard explained that the "biled pueata" meant a boiled 
potato, the shillig-a-booka a snail in its shell, and the skhehoshies 
the scarlet hips of the wild briar. While he was speaking, a 
blackbird flew across the garden and into the holly at the other 
side; and Tommy knelt down to put the crib in order for his 
capture. But as he turned away to leave the coast clear for the 
blackbird, his countenance fell, for on looking at his brogues, 
which felt even heavier than usual, he saw the red clay clinging to 
them. And this fatal symptom of the awful calamity of a thaw 
caused poor Tommy Lahy's heart to die within him.
	Remembering his promise, however, that he would not 
leave his sister till his mother returned from the Station, be hurried 
back towards home, merely stopping to climb to the top of Tom 
Hogan's gate, and take a look down into the quarry. The boys 
shouted and waved their hats at him, but Tommy felt no way 
shaken in his resolution not to join them till his mother came 
home. But the sight of Jacky Ryan gliding over the frozen pond on 
one leg was so frightful a temptation, that it was only by instantly 
shutting his eyes and flinging himself down from the gate that he 
was able to resist it. He rejoined his sister in high spirits. So proud 
was he, indeed, of the victory he had just gained, that even the 
apprehended misery of finding the frost all gone next morning was 
forgotten.
	"Mind," said he to his sister, "'twas settin' my crib I was."
	She smiled, and turned her large, sorrowful eyes towards 
him, but without turning her head, which rested against the back of 
her straw chair.
	"What did you ketch, Tommy?" she asked in her sweet, low 
voice.
	A robineen," he replied, "bad  --  ." He was going to say, 
"bad luck to him," but checked himself.
	"Did you pull the tail out of him?"
	"I  --  I  --  did." He was on the point of saying he did not; 
but, like the rough terrier, which was now coiled up at her feet, 
Tommy seemed under a spell in her presence. He could not curse 
or tell a lie while speaking to her. Wickedness of every kind 
seemed doubly wicked when Norah was by.
	"Ah! Tommy," said she, "I told you never to do that again. 
It is not so bad to kill the poor blackbirds, as we can roast 'em an' 
ate 'em; but to wantonly hurt any living creature  --  above all, the, 
poor little robin that hops into the house to us, an' that everybody 
loves."
	"That was the third turn wud him knockin' id to-day," said 
Tommy, almost beginning to blubber, for her reproaches affected 
him as nothing else could. "An' sure, what harm did it do him? 
On'y like Wat Corcoran, when the b'ys cut the tail off uv his 
bodycoat."
	This logic, and the recollection of Wat Corcoran's figure on 
the occasion referred to made the poor girl laugh; and Tommy felt 
that his peace was made. We should mention that Wat Corcoran 
was a bailiff who had received some rough handling in the 
neighbourhood a short time before.
	Tommy sat on a stool near the fire, to all appearances on 
excellent terms with himself. He had acquitted himself to his own 
entire satisfaction during the morning. The task of "having an eye 
to the shop" was almost a sinecure, as the customers were nearly 
all at the Station. So he took the tongs in his two hands and built up 
the turf fire till it blazed pleasantly.
	The twitter of a bird made him turn round and fix his merry 
eyes on a cage that hung near the window.
	"Norah," said he, " I think the goldfinch will shortly be 
tame enough for Miss Ellie. He's beginnin' to sing already."
	"That was the old linnet," she said.
	"No, 'twasn't," he replied positively. "Do you think I don't 
know the call of a linnet from a goldfinch? An' look out at the tree  
--  the lower branch at the right-hand side  --  an' you'll see what 
made him call. Don't lean your head that way. Wait, an' I'll turn the 
chair."
	He turned her chair round till she faced the window. Then 
with his chin resting on the hack of the chair, and his rosy cheek 
leaning against her dark hair, he pointed to two birds in the tree.
	"Do you see their yellow wings? "he exclaimed, gleefully, 
as the birds fluttered among the branches.
	"Oh, they're beautiful!" she replied, her dark eyes beaming 
with pleasure.
	"I could ketch them two, now, if I liked," said Tommy, 
"wud black buttons. But I won't, as I don't want 'em. But I'll bring 
the wan I have to Miss Ellie to-day or to-morrow. She sent for seed 
for him o' Saturday. But Wattletoes brought all hemp seed instead 
of having it mixed  --  half canary seed  --  as I tould him. Miss 
Grace said 'twas a sign he'd be hanged."
	"What sort of a girl is Miss Grace, Tommy? Is she as nice 
as Miss Ellie?
	"She'll never see the day," said Tommy, with emphasis. 
"She's as proud as a peacock," he continued. "'Who is that boy? Do 
you speak to such boys?'" And Tommy mimicked Grace's manner, 
and conveyed his opinion of that proud little lady by a very 
expressive toss of his curly head.
	"And what did Miss Ellie say?"
	"She said I was Tommy Lahy, an' why wouldn't she speak 
to me."
	"I think, Tommy, poor Dick wants water. Look, he'll choke 
himself trying to put his bill down to the bottom of the gallipot. 
You're not taking care of him since you got the goldfinch for Miss 
Ellie."
	Tommy immediately got upon a chair and filled the 
gallipot.
	"And now, Tommy, put a couple of sods behind the fire, 
and run to the well for a kettle of fresh water, and put it down to 
boil, as mother will soon be home."
	Tommy seized the kettle, and after whistling in a peculiar 
manner to his birds, with his underlip bulged out by his tongue, he 
trotted off to the well in the "rushy field" near the bridge. But 
stopping suddenly at the beech-tree he laid down the kettle and 
climbed sufficiently high to look at his crib in Mat the Thrasher's 
garden. The crib, however, was standing; so he slid down as slowly 
as he possibly could with his eyes shut  --  after the manner of boys 
when left "to die" on a swing-swong  --  and then, suddenly 
regaining his wonted vigour on touching mother earth, he caught 
up the kettle, and set off for the well in "buck-jumps."
	Norah Lahy watched the linnet as it sipped its water.
	"Ah, poor old Dick," said she, "you must not be forgotten 
for that gay young gentleman. When will he be able to sing like 
you, I'd like to know? As grand as he is with his golden wings, and 
his crimson-velvet head, and his pretty, sharp bill, I would not give 
one of your songs, poor old fellow, for all his grandeur."
	The linnet, as if he understood her praises, regained his 
perch with a single hop, and lying down upon his breast, ruffled 
out his feathers. Then, with his eyes closed, the old linnet poured 
forth a low, sweet, wondrously varied song. She listened till her 
bosom began to heave, and something which we cannot call a 
blush glowed on her cheek. And seldom has human heart thrilled 
with more exquisite pleasure than that which the song of the linnet 
awakened in the heart of Norah Lahy, as she sat there alone in her 
straw chair; though she felt and believed that God had willed she 
should never rise unassisted from that chair  --   never again join 
her young companions in their rambles by the hedge-rows and 
through the green fields, and along by the bank of the clear, noisy 
little brook, to gather the wild flowers, and listen to the lark high 
up in the sky, and the "bold thrush" on the tree-top, and the 
blackbird's whistle from the thicket, and, welcomest of all, the 
shout of the cuckoo, proclaiming that summer was come!
	Never again!
	And yet, as she listened there, alone, to the linnet's song, 
her whole being, every faculty of her soul, was a hymn of praise 
and gratitude to God for His boundless goodness.



CHAPTER VIII.

HONOR LAHY'S GOOD LUCK.

THE kettle was just beginning to join its song to the song of the 
old linnet when Mrs. Lahy  --  or Honor Lahy, as she was more 
generally called by her neighbours  --  returned from the Station. 
She was a comfortable-looking dame, enveloped in a blue cloth 
cloak, with the hood drawn over her head, and her hands encased 
in grey worsted mittens.
	During the greater part of her life, Honor Lahy had found it 
hard enough to make both ends meet. For honest Phil used to "take 
a drop," and his earnings seldom did more than clear off the 
weekly score at the public-house. His customers dropped off one 
by one, the few who remained faithful to him having often to keep 
their purchases for weeks and even months till they could catch 
him in their own houses; and then Phil Lahy and his goose and lap-
board were jealously guarded till the "new shoots" were finished 
off, when the artist was set at liberty, looking fat and healthy after 
a week or two of good fare and enforced sobriety. His wife eked 
out the necessaries of life by rearing poultry and fattening a pig; 
the pig going the way of most Irish pigs  --  to the landlord. In spite 
of all her exertions, however, she grew poorer and poorer, till at 
last she and her husband returned one fine evening from the fair of 
Ballymullin, and all the neighbours remarked that, instead of the 
"slip" which, as usual, they expected to see trotting before them, 
and which was sure to be a good one  --  for Phil Lahy was 
acknowledged to be "the best judge of a pig" in the county  --  Phil 
on this May evening carried a "bonneen" under his arm.
	When the next gale day came round  --  'twas an 
"admiration" how fast and sure gale days did come round in 
Knocknagow  --  "Berky," in spite of the care lavished on her  --   
including scratching her sides during meal times, to keep her in 
good humour  --  was little better than a "slip"; and poor Honor 
looked into her sick child's face with a heart almost breaking.
	One fine morning, however, Barney Brodherick tumbled 
himself out of the little blue donkey cart in which he made his 
daily journeys to town, and announced to Honor the startling piece 
of news that there was an American letter for her at the post-office.
	Honor flung her old cloak on her head, and set off to town 
in a very excited state of mind, a proceeding which caused every 
soul of a pretty numerous female crowd, who were "bittling" in the 
little stream, to "wonder" where she was going. There was a 
feeling of anxiety among the younger girls lest it might be that 
Norah had got suddenly worse. and that her mother was hastening 
for the priest or the doctor. But a girl standing on the bridge, with a 
child in her arms, removed their anxiety on this point by assuring 
hem that she could see Norah from where she stood, sitting in her 
straw chair under the beech tree, reading a book with "Friskey" on 
his haunches  --  "grug" was the word she used   --  on the "bench," 
snapping at the flies.
	When Honor came back from the post-office she passed 
Norah without uttering a word. She took off her cloak and hung it 
on its own proper peg, and sat upon a chair, for she was rather out 
of breath, and waited patiently and in silence till her husband had 
dismissed a boy who was looking into the tailor's face, and 
evidently awaiting an answer of some kind to a message which he 
had just delivered with a pair of trousers, which, as Phil held them 
up to the light, seemed very suitable to drape the limbs of a 
scarecrow.
	"Who sent this?" Phil asked, holding up the garment with 
both hands.
	"Mr. Andrews, sir."
	"Well, tell him," said Phil, in a tone of the blandest 
politeness  --  "tell him I don't mend. I only make and repair."
	The boy tucked the dilapidated garment under his arm and 
disappeared.
	Mrs. Lahy took the letter from her bosom, and let the hand 
which held it drop down by her side, looking into Phil's face as if 
she suspected he knew all about it, and was playing off some trick 
upon her.
	"Read it," she said at last calmly, and sat down again after 
handing him the letter.
	Phil put on his spectacles, and studied the superscription 
and the post-marks with great deliberation, a proceeding which 
Honor seemed to consider quite necessary, for when she saw him 
baffled by a blotted post-mark, she stood up and pulled aside the 
little window-curtain to give him more light.
	"'Twas posted in Boston, United States," said Phil, "on 
either the first or fourth of September, eighteen hundred and   --  "
	"Maybe, wud the help uv God, 'tis from Larry," said she, 
leaning affectionately on Phil's shoulder. "Open it, Phil, in the 
name uv God."
	Phil did so, and holding back his head, read: "My dear 
sister   --  "
	"'Tis Larry," she exclaimed, giving Phil a shake that made 
him request she would "be easy."
	"Thanks be to God! 'Tis Larry. He's alive. What did I tell 
you? Eh, Phil?"
	And she gave him another shake, which had the effect, of 
making Phil deliberately push back his chair and lean against the 
wail, thereby preventing further assaults from behind. He glanced 
at the end of the letter, and said after a pause:
	"'Tis from Larry."
	But on separating the leaves of the large sheet of letter-
paper a slip fell from between them on his knees.
	"There's ten pounds in id," said Phil, looking at the writing 
on the slip.
	"Arra whist, Phil! Where is id?"
	"Take this to the bank to-morrow, an' you'll get ten goold 
sovereigns for id."
	Honor fixed her eyes upon his face, as if his words were 
quite beyond her comprehension.
	"Phil achorra," said she, in a reproachful tone, and trying to 
recover her breath, "Phil, achorra, read the letter."
	She drew a low stool towards her, and gently pushing the 
dog from between Phil's legs, sat down in front of him with her 
hand under her chin. Phil read the letter in a steady monotonous 
tone, stopping occasionally to comment upon its contents, and 
leaving off altogether at one place, and fixing his eyes on the 
opposite wall, as if he were addressing a rather numerous audience, 
delivered an interesting lecture on the rapid growth of American 
cities; dwelling particularly on the fact that the man was still alive 
when the book from which be had his information was printed, 
who sold the ground upon which the city of Cincinnati was built 
for a "pony-horse"  --  greatly to the edification of his wife, who 
had a profound respect for his erudition.
	"Put that in your hussif," said Phil, handing her the cheque.
	She did so; and set about preparing Norah's boiled bread 
and milk without speaking a word.
	"Are you goin' to get that cheque cashed?" Phil asked next 
morning after breakfast, as he unfolded a newspaper the 
schoolmaster had just given him on his way to school.
	"Arra whist, Phil," was her only reply. 
	"Don't be makin' an oonshugh uv yourself," said Phil. "Go 
get yourself ready, and as soon as I finish this speech uv the 
counsellor's I'll go with you."
	During the afternoon of that day Mat the Thrasher observed 
Honor and Phil from the roof of Tom Hogan's barn, which he was 
thatching, slowly wending their way up the hill towards the hamlet. 
When they came opposite the first house Honor went in, and Phil 
slackened his pace to wait for her. There was nothing extraordinary 
in this, and Mat proceeded with his work. But when he saw the 
same thing occur at every house they passed, his curiosity was 
excited; and instead of looking over his shoulder, he turned round 
and sat upon the ladder to observe them more conveniently. He 
now saw that Honor, both on entering and leaving each house, held 
out her hand as if she were begging for alms. By the time she 
reached Tom Hogan's there was quite a crowd at her heels, the 
looks of most of whom expressed wonder and delight; but Mat did 
not fail to notice a dark scowl of envy in the faces of a few  --  
which only showed, how ever, that human nature in Knocknagow 
was like human nature all the world over. Mat came down from the 
roof of the house to see what it was all about.
	"Wisha, more uv that to you, Honor; an' didn't I always tell 
you the luck'd come when you laste expected id." exclaimed Tom 
Hogan's wife, as she followed Honor outside the door, with the 
stirabout stick smoking in her hand.
	And now Mat's own face assumed the look of astonishment 
which it so puzzled him to account for in the faces of those around 
him. For spread over the palm of Honor Lahy's extended hand he 
beheld ten bright gold sovereigns shining in the sun.
	Honor and Phil spent nearly the whole of that night 
discussing the important question of how their capital might be 
invested to the greatest advantage. Phil was divided between the 
purchase of a "new-milk's cow" and turning corn merchant.
	"As you won't agree to the cow," said Phil, "what do you 
think of buying oats? The loft 'd be very handy, by gettin' the holes 
mended. I always thought it a pity to see such 'a loft goin' astray. 
An' since the new school-house was built 'twasn't worth a penny to 
us  --  except the five shillings from the dancing-master, an' 
whatever trifle Biddy Murphy gave you for her benefit party."
	But Honor had her own plan, and was resolved upon 
following it.
	I'll talk to Mat Donovan to-morrow," said she, "an' he'll tell 
me what things'll be wanted to fit the place up properly."
	So Mat was consulted; and the second next day after, 
Wattletoes stopped his little blue cart at Phil Lahy's door again; but 
this time Phil was called out to assist in carrying in several inch 
and half-inch deal-boards. Tom Carey, the carpenter, was 
employed inside the house during the remainder of the week. And 
on a certain memorable Tuesday morning a straw basket heaped up 
with meal, with a bright tin measure on the top of the heap, was 
seen in the window of Phil Lahy's old house; a stand of the finest 
salt herrings that eye ever beheld  --  to judge from the three that 
glistened on the segment of the top of the barrel that was left  --  
stood outside the door; and Honor Lahy stood behind her new 
counter, upon which was laid a huge square of salt as white as her 
cap.
	From that day forward the world went well with Honor 
Lahy:  --  so well, indeed, that dark hints were thrown out by some 
people that the ten sovereigns were part of the contents of a 
"crock" found under the hearthstone in the "barrack," at the left-
hand side of the fire. There were no fewer than five living 
witnesses  --  but four of them happened to be in America  --  who 
could bear testimony to an important circumstance in connection 
with the story of the crock. The circumstance referred to was this: -
-  Three years before  --   the year of the big snow, in fact  --  Phil 
Lahy, while removing a projection of the hob, that encroached too 
far upon the fireplace, found a bad halfpenny all encrusted with 
mortar, which was so hard that Phil altogether failed to remove it 
from the coin by the application of his thumb. But when it was 
recollected that Phil himself had told his neighbours that the 
halfpenny was one of James the Second's  --  the truth of the story 
of the crock of gold was considered beyond all reasonable doubt.



CHAPTER IX.

BILLY HEFFERNAN AND HIS FLUTE.


HONOR LAHY, however, went on prospering; and on this fine 
frosty morning, after returning from the Station at Maurice 
Kearney's, we find her a perfect picture of comfort, good health, 
and good humour.
	"How is Norah? How is ma lanna machree? she asked, 
stooping down and looking into Norah's pale face.
	"Finely, mother," she replied, with a languid smile. "Will 
the priest come?
	"He will  --  Father M'Mahon himself, God bless him! He 
was goin' over to Boherbeg to answer a call, but the minute I tould 
him you wanted to go to confession to himself, he said he'd send 
Father O'Neill to answer the call."
	She pulled off her worsted mittens, and throwing back the 
hood of her cloak, thereby displaying a snow-white cap, a little 
crushed and crumpled by the weight of the hood, with a gorgeous 
broad ribbon as a band over the crown of her head and tied in a 
bow-knot under her chin, she sat on a low stool in front of Norah.
	"Give a guess what I have for you," she said, taking one of 
Norah's wasted hands between her own.
	"I don't know, mother."
	"Somethin' Miss Mary sent you for a Christmas-box."
	She put her hand into her ample pocket and took out a pair 
of handsome embroidered slippers.
	Norah's large eyes expressed the utmost surprise; for such a 
pair of slippers she had never seen before.
	Her mother slipped the wasted hand into one of them.
	"Isn't id cosy an' warm?" she asked, looking fondly in 
Norah's face, "lined with beautiful fur."
	She ran to the fire and held the slippers close to the blaze   -
-  which was purely a matter of form, for, even if they required 
warming, she allowed no time for the least heat to be imparted to 
them.
	Gently removing Norah's shoes, she put on the embroidered 
slippers, and looked up with a smile of delight. But the smile 
quickly vanished, giving place to a look of amazement and alarm. 
Norah's lips trembled and the tears gushed from her eyes.
	Surprise kept the poor woman passive for a moment; but 
recovering herself, she put her arm round her daughter's shoulder.
	"What is id, Norah? "she asked. "What ails my darlin'?" 
But it was after a long struggle Norah was able to answer. "Oh, 
mother," said she, "she is too good."
	And, pressing her face against her mother's breast, she 
sobbed so violently that the poor woman became quite alarmed.
	Phil Lahy hastened in from the shop door; where he had 
stopped to repeat his promise to Mat Donovan that he would not 
"disappoint him."
	"What ails her? " he asked.
	"Oh, wisha, what but she's so thankful to Miss Mary for the 
slippers," Honor replied. "I don't know what in the world to do 
wud her."
	"Have sense, Norah, have sense," said her father, gently. 
She recovered herself by an effort, and resumed her usual position 
with her head leaning against the back of her chair.
	"'Twill do me good, mother," said she.
	"Maybe so, wud the help uv God. An' Miss Mary tould me 
Doctor Kiely'll be out next week, an' she'll bring him over to see 
you; an' who knows, wud the blessin' uv God but he might be able 
to do somethin' for you. An' now," she continued, resuming her 
usual cheerful manner, "I'll go and get the breakfast ready. Sit 
down on that chair, Phil, an' talk to her, an' tell hey all Father 
Hannigan said; and 'tis he's the dhroll Father Hannigan. He'd have 
you laughin' wan minit an' cryin' the next. I wish we had Billy 
Heffernan to play a tune for her. That's what'd rise her heart. An', 
be all the goats in Kerry, but here he is himself. Sit down there in 
the corner, Billy, an' play a tune for Norah. She was so lonesome 
all the mornin', wud no wan but Tommy and Friskey to keep her 
company, a tune'll do her all the good in the world."
	Billy sat down on a bench near the window under the 
linnet's cage, and taking the joints of an old flute from his pocket, 
commenced screwing them together, without uttering a word. 
Norah preferred "the soft complaining flute" to the "ear-piercing 
fife," and because she did, Billy Heffernan  --  though he never 
said so  --  invested the proceeds of a load of turf in the purchase of 
this one, and patched up his old brogues to make them last another 
winter; to which last mentioned circumstance an occasional hiatus 
in his performance on this occasion  --  caused by a hurried 
application of the coat cuff to the nose  --  is, we think, to be 
attributed.
	"Billy, a chora," Mrs. Lahy exclaimed, remonstratively, 
laying down her cup without tasting it  --  for she and Phil were 
now at breakfast  --  " Billy, a chora, stop that. Her heart is too full 
to-day, for thim grievous ould airs. Play 'I buried my wife an' 
danced o' top uv her'  --  or somethin' lively."
	The musician took the hint, and delighted his audience with 
a succession of jigs and planxties that might "cure a paralytic."
	So captivated were they all that Father M'Mahon was 
actually standing with folded arms behind Norah's chair before any 
one was aware of his presence. A sudden break-off in the middle 
of a bar of "Paudheen O'Rafferty," and a sheepish dropping of the 
musician's under-jaw made Phil and Honor look around.
	Father M'Mahon at once relieved them from their evident 
embarrassment, by saying in a kindly way:
	"So, Billy, you are playing for Norah. That's right; that's 
right. I hope she'll soon be able to come to Mass and hear the 
organ." And he laid his hand softly on her head. She trembled as he 
did so, and in order to set her at ease he sat down on the chair 
which Honor carefully wiped with her apron, and said:
	"Come, Billy; 'Paudheen O'Rafferty' is a favourite of mine, 
so go on with it."
	Billy Heffernan, turning his head towards the wall, gave his 
troublesome nose a vigorous tweak, and obeyed.
	"Thank you, Billy. Thank you. Very good, indeed," said the 
priest.
	And with a gratified, though by no means cheerful, smile, 
and another assault upon his troublesome nose, Billy Heffernan left 
the house as silently as he entered it.
	"And now, Phil," said Father M'Mahon, "I want to have a 
serious word or two. with you. After the promise you made me I 
was exceedingly sorry to hear that you were under the influence of 
drink on Thursday at the fair."
	"An' you were tould I was under the influence of drink at 
the fair."
	"Yes."
	"An' would it be any harm to ax who tould you?"
	"Oh, I am not bound to give you my authority. But it was a 
person on whose word I can rely."
	"An' a person on whose word you can rely tould you that 
Phil Lahy was at the fair on Thursday  --  and that Phil Lahy was 
drunk? 
	"Yes," said the priest, for Phil paused for a reply.
	"An' now, will you tell me, did that person who tould you 
that Phil Lahy was at the fair and that Phil Lahy was dhrunk, tell 
you that Phil Lahy bought two pigs?"
	"Well, no; he did not mention that."
	"I'll be bound he didn't; for the devil a thing these people, 
on whose word yon can rely, ever think of telling but the bad 
thing."
	Father M'Mahon rubbed his hand over his face and tried o 
look very grave. But thinking it best not to pursue the argument 
further, he turned to Honor and said:
	"I think, Mrs. Lahy, I had better hear Norah's confession 
now.
	Phil and Honor left the kitchen, and Father M'Mahon put n 
his stole and drew his chair close to the sick girl to hear her 
confession.
	"Phil," said his wife, when the priest, was gone, "you may 
as well cut out that coat for Mat. 'Twould be too bad disappoint 
him, an' he goin' to be such a decent b'y's sidesman."
	"I won't disappoint him," Phil replied. "But I feel too wake 
to do anything to-day. I think I must take a stretch the bed."
	"Well, if you don't like the work, go out an' take a walk, 
'twill do you good." 
	"I can't do anything when this wakeness comes over me." d 
Phil did manage to look so faint, that a stranger would ver have 
suspected that he had just eaten a very hearty breakfast.
	"Tommy," he continued, "reach me the looking-glass."
	Tommy brought him a small looking-glass with the frame 
painted a bright red, and a brass ring in it to hang it up by; and 
after surveying his visage for some time, and pulling up his shirt 
collar, which was of the highest and stiffest, Phil aimed with his 
eyes still fixed on the glass:
	"Honor, I look very bad."
	 Phil, don't be makin' a fool uv yourself. I never you lookin' 
better in my life. Ax Norah."
	"You don't look bad at all, father," said Norah. "I feel very 
wake," said he, making a movement to rise, but looking as if he 
could not do so without assistance.
	"Wisha, wisha, what am I to do wud him at all at all?" 
Honor muttered to herself. "If wance he lies down there, he'll stay 
till Sunday mornin', at any rate. An' I don't like to sind for Miss 
Mary the day uv the Station, an' all   --  an' moreover a strange 
gintleman in the house."
	Honor had found from experience that no one but Miss 
Kearney could talk Phil out of his "weaknesses," and on critical 
occasions she was in the habit of sending for her unknown to the 
patient. Mary would come in, as it were, accidentally, and after a 
chat with Phil about "Columbkill's Prophecies," or some other 
interesting subject, she always succeeded in convincing him that he 
was perfectly well, that it was only his nerves  --  and that even the 
"inward pain" was imaginary.
	I think, Honor," said Phil, " I'll try the spirits o' turpentine. 
This pain is comin' at me."
	This decided Honor, and she whispered Tommy  --  to his 
great delight  --  to run and ask Miss Mary to take a walk over in 
the course of the day if she could at all.



CHAPTER X.

"A LITTLE NOURISHMENT."

	MARY, accompanied by her sister Ellie and Grace, soon 
made her appearance; and Phil jumped up from his chair with 
wonderful alacrity for a man who, a few minutes before seemed 
quite unable to rise without help.
	Poor Norah's eyes beamed with pleasure and gratitude and 
admiration as her beautiful friend bent over her and hoped, in her 
low, sweet voice, that she was better.
	"I am, Miss," was all Norah said. But she was so fascinated 
as to be unconscious of the little bunch of monthly roses which 
Ellie had silently placed in her hand.
	Grace cast a supercilious glance around, and seemed to 
think the conduct of her friends quite absurd. But when Mary 
moved aside and let the light from the window fall full upon the 
sick girl's face, Grace's haughty look gave place to one of pity. 
Unlike Mary or Ellie, however, her impulse was to shrink away 
from that pale face, and forget that she had ever seen it.
	When Mary turned round to speak to Phil Lahy, he 
suddenly remembered his weakness and dropped languidly back 
into his chair.
	Mrs. Lahy exchanged glances with her visitor, and placing 
a chair at a convenient distance from the rapidly sinking patient, 
said:
	"He's only poorly to-day, Miss. Maybe you could spare 
time an' sit down and talk to him for a start. I know he'd be in the 
better uv id."
	"I hope, Mr. Lahy," said Mary, "it is nothing serious. I 
thought you looked remarkably well this morning; and Father 
M'Mahon made the same remark."
	"I'd want a little nourishment," said Phil.
	Mary looked at his wife for an explanation; but Honor only 
shook her head.
	"Perhaps I could send you something," she remarked, still 
looking at Honor.
	But another shake of the head was the only reply.
	"He says," said Mary, "he requires nourishment."
	"That's what I want," said Phil, turning round and looking 
earnestly in her face. "A little nourishment."
	Mary again looked at Honor, evidently surprised that he 
should not have proper nourishment.
	"God help you, Miss," said Honor, at last, "don't you know 
the nourishment he wants? Nourishment!" she repeated. "I never 
heard him call anything but the wan thing nourishment."
	Mary now understood the state of the case, and changed the 
subject.
	"You asked me some time ago, Mr. Lahy," she said, "if I 
could lend you Moore's 'Lalla Rookh.' I hadn't it at the time, but I 
can give it to you now any day you come up."
	"Thank you, Miss," Phil replied "'Tis goin' on twenty years 
since I read id; an' I was wishin' to see id. What put id into my 
head was seein' some lines the counsellor brought into wan of his 
speeches an' I knew I seen 'em somewhere before:  --   

"Rebellion, foul, dishonouring word,
Whose wrongful blight so oft has stained
The holiest cause that tongue or sword
Of mortal ever lost or gained."

	I disremember if them lines isn't in ' Lalla Rookh.'"
	"Yes" said Mary smiling "those lines are from 'Lalla 
Rookh.'"
	"The Fire Worshippers" added Grace sententiously.
	"Sure enough 'tis the Fire Worshippers," said Phil looking 
at her with surprise.
	"But" he added turning to Mary "is the wan you have ge-
nu-ine?
	"Oh, I suppose it must be."
	"'Twas your Uncle Dan, God be good to him, that lint me 
the wan I read. An' by the same token 'twas the same day he gave 
me the 'Coravoth.' I was the fust that ever sung id in those parts. 
But I wouldn't give a pin for them little 'Lalla Rookhs' that's goin' 
now, That wan was as big as a double spellin' book."
	Mary who did her best to keep her countenance said she 
feared hers was one of the little ones; but as her brother Hugh had 
all her uncle's books she would see whether the genuine edition of 
"Lalla Rookh" was among them.
	Phil was by this time quite cured of his weakness and Mary 
rose to take her leave.
	During their conversation, Tommy was exhibiting the 
goldfinch's accomplishments to its new mistress.
	When the bird after much coaxing, moved sideways along 
its perch, now coquettishly advancing, now timidly holding back, 
at length picked hurriedly at the bunch of groundsel which Tommy 
held temptingly against the wires of its cage, Ellie's delight was 
only second to that of Honor Lahy herself, who gave much more 
attention to the little by-play at the window than to the 
conversation about "books and larnin'" between her husband and 
Miss Kearney.
	Mary, too, stopped for a moment to contemplate the scene.
 	Ellie's bonnet was hanging on her back, and her hair fallen 
loose over her face and shoulders; while the boy, who was on his 
knees, looked up at her with a triumphant smile, as the goldfinch 
snatched the groundsel through the wires, and, placing its foot on 
it, commenced pulling it to pieces.
	Mary thought the group would be a good subject for a 
pleasant picture.
	But how sad was the contrast when she turned to the straw 
chair, and the dark, melancholy eyes met hers. And when she felt 
the love  --  the almost worship  --  for herself that filled those 
melancholy eyes, Mary found it hard to keep back the emotion that 
swelled up from her heart. She turned her face away, and pulled 
down her veil before bidding Norah good-bye.
	"Oh, Mary," said Grace, when they had gone into the open 
air, "wouldn't it be well for that poor girl if she were dead, and for 
her mother, too?"
	"Oh, Miss!"
	Grace started and looked around.
	It was Honor Lahy who had followed them with Ellie's 
gloves, which she had forgotten. The poor woman's hands were 
stretched out as if begging for her child's life, and the tears stood in 
her eyes.
	"Oh, Miss, sure 'tis she brings all the luck to me!"
	This woman would snatch her child from the grave merely 
because "'twas she brought all the luck to her!"
	Ah, if that old house were built upon crocks of gold  --  
enough to purchase the fee-simple of broad Tipperary -- Honor 
Lahy would have flung it all into the sea, and been content to "beg 
the world" with her child, if by doing so she could keep the light in 
those languid eyes a little longer.
	Remonstrate with the heart-broken woman who paces the 
floor in wordless agony from morning till night, and often from 
night till morning. Tell her it is flying in the face of Providence; 
that it is time she should be reconciled to her loss; and she will 
reply: it is so sad a case. She had just settled her in the world; 
encroached upon the portions of her other children perhaps, in 
order to place her  --  her darling  --  in a home worthy of her. And 
now she is gone  --   the best and beautifulest of them all  --  and 
what a loss that money is! And she will try to make the wretched 
dross she had lost with her child the excuse for her sorrow. But if 
her darling's death had brought a queen's dowry to every other 
child of hers, the sorrow at her heart would be no lighter.
	Say to this other one: "You should let your child go where 
she can better herself. Do you want to keep her a drudge all her 
life?" And see, the tears are in her eyes, and she answers: "If she 
goes I won't have anyone to do anything for me." But give her a 
train of attendants to anticipate her every wish, and the tears will 
be in her eyes all the same.
	So, again, this other one, who has lighted upon a tiny pair 
of red woollen stockings at the bottom of an old drawer. The little 
feet they encased grew tired, and a sweet, sweet little voice said: 
"Carry me, mamma," and a little silky head drooped like a flower, 
and two violet eyes grew, first brighter and brighter, and then 
heavy, and fixed, and glazed  --  twenty years ago. And when she 
sees you shake your head she dries her eyes, and says, with a sigh: 
"If I had her now how useful she'd be to me." You foolish, woman! 
Look at those four healthy, blooming girls. Are they not good, and 
careful, and affectionate, and all that a mother's heart could wish? 
On the mere score of utility you have more help than you require, 
more hands than you can find employment for. And yet you would 
cheat us with: "How useful she would be to you." But we are 
forgetting our story.
	"Oh, Miss, sure 'tis she's bringin' all the luck to me," said 
Honor Lahy.
	Grace turned away, with her brows knit into something 
very like a frown.
	Mary was greatly moved, and felt at a loss for something to 
say that might soothe the poor woman, when Tommy's appearance 
relieved her from her embarrassment.
	Miss Ellie is certainly an untidy girl. She forgot her gloves, 
and now Tommy comes running, breathlessly, up to them with a 
woollen ruff held high above his head.
	"I hope, Mrs. Lahy," said Mary, "that Tommy continues to 
be a good boy."
	"He is, then, Miss," she replied, wiping the tears from her 
eyes with the corner of her apron, "very good at his books. An' 
every way  --  on'y for the climbin'."
	Ellie looked laughingly at the delinquent, who scratched his 
curly poll, and returned her smile with a shrug of his shoulders and 
a glance of his merry blue eyes.
	"Oh, but as he is so good, you must not be too strict with 
him," said Mary.
	"But 'tis on'y the mercy uv God,' Miss," Honor exclaimed, 
as if her patience were tried beyond endurance, "that he don't make 
smithereens uv himself. An' besides, I can't "keep a stitch on him."
	She turned round to survey the culprit, whose bones and 
habiliments she considered in such constant jeopardy.
	"Oh, oh, what am I to do wud him at all, at all? Look at 
him," she cried, catching Tommy by the shoulders and spinning 
him round. "How did you tear that piece out uv your breeches? An' 
where is it?"
	Tommy looked considerably surprised; but guided by the 
spectators' eyes  --  and even Grace honoured him with a sidelong 
glance  --  he clapped his hand behind and discovered that a pretty 
large piece was missing out of his corduroys.
	It could be seen by his puzzled look that he was trying to 
remember where or how the accident occurred. His mind was 
divided between Tom Hogan's gate and Mat the Thrasher's 
whitethorn hedge, when casting his eyes upwards, as people will 
do under like circumstances (meaning no reference to Tommy's 
mutilated garment, but only to the operation of his mind), a ray of 
light seemed to break upon him from he beech tree. To Grace's 
profound astonishment he rushed suddenly to the tree, and, 
clasping his arms round it, began to ascend. Mary, too, seemed 
taken by surprise. But the proceeding was evidently nothing new to 
Ellie, who was indebted to Tommy's climbing propensities for an 
extensive collection of birds' eggs.
	His mother shook her head, as if she had just made up her 
mind that Tommy's case was quite hopeless, and that reclaiming 
him was an utter impossibility.
	Grace's eyebrows became more and more elevated as he 
mounted higher and higher.
	But on reaching one of the highest boughs he stretched out 
his hand and the object of his ascent was visible to them all; for 
there was the missing piece of corduroy fluttering in the breeze. 
Thrusting it into his pocket, he descended with a rapidity that 
caused Mary to put her hands before her eyes, as if she thought the 
catastrophe which his mother considered so imminent was at hand, 
and that Tommy was then and there determined to "make 
smithereens of himself." It was greatly to her relief, if a little to her 
surprise, that when she looked round, the cause of her anxiety was 
nowhere visible  --  he having scampered into the house the 
moment his foot touched terra firma, as if he were quite 
unconscious of the presence of the little group who had watched 
his performance with so much interest.
	Mary said good-bye again to Honor Lahy, and went a little 
further up the hill to pay a visit to Tom Hogan's handsome 
daughter Nancy, who she suspected was pining in thought in 
consequence of an approaching event in which it was conjectured 
that one Ned Brophy was to play an important part.
	Perhaps there was something in Mary's own heart, which. 
unknown to herself, made her sympathise with pretty Nancy 
Hogan.



CHAPTER XI.

FATHER HANNIGAN'S SERMON.

	IT is right that we should follow the two gentlemen with 
whom we parted some hours ago on their way back from the old 
castle. Mass was nearly over when they arrived at the cottage; and 
Richard quieted his conscience for losing it, by persuading himself 
that his absence was a case of necessity.
	A table in the hall, raised to sufficient height by means of 
two chairs, upon the backs of which it rested, served the purpose of 
an altar.
	Mr. Lowe was again struck by the fervour of the people, 
who filled the hall and kitchen, while not a few knelt on the frozen 
ground outside the hall-door. He was not a little surprised to see 
Hugh Kearney, officiously assisted by Phil Lahy, "serving Mass."
	Piloted by Richard, he got into the hall, the people making 
way for them as they went on, into the parlour, where Father 
O'Neill was still hearing confessions.
	Mr. Lowe sat in the window seat next the door, where he 
could see the altar and the officiating clergyman. He saw that he 
was too late for the sermon he was so anxious to hear, as Father 
Hannigan was in the act of taking off his vestments.
	But though Father Hannigan had delivered his regular 
discourse after the first gospel, it was his habit to address a few 
homely words to the people at the conclusion of the Mass, upon 
what we may call local and individual topics. He now turned round 
and began, in his deep big voice, with:
	"Now, what's this I was going to say to ye?"
	He pressed the fore-finger of his left hand against his 
temple, as if trying to recall something that had escaped his 
memory. Mr. Lowe thought he was about giving up the attempt in 
despair, when he suddenly jerked up his head, exclaiming  --   Ay! 
ay! ay! D'ye give up stealing the turf in the name o' God!"
	"Everyone," he continued after a pause, "must steal turf 
such weather as this that hasn't it of their own. But sure if ye didn't 
know it was wrong, ye wouldn't be telling it to the priest. And ye 
think it would be more disgraceful to beg than to steal it. That's a 
great mistake. No dacent man would refuse a neighbour a hamper 
of turf such weather as this. And a poor man is not a beggar for 
asking a hamper of turf such weather as this when he can't get a 
day's work, and the Easter water bottles bursting. Ye may laugh; 
but Judy Manogue stopped me on the road yesterday to know what 
she ought to do. Her bottle of Easter water that she had under her 
bed was in a lump of ice, and the bottle  --  a big, black bottle that 
often gave some of ye a headache  --  an' maybe twasn't without 
giving more of you a heartache  --   before Judy took my advice 
and gave up that branch of her business: well, the big, black bottle 
was split in two with the fair dint of the frost  --  under the poor 
woman's bed. And the Lord knows no Christian could stand 
without a spark of fire to keep the life in him  --  let alone looking 
at a houseful of children shivering and shaking, and he able and 
willing to work, and not a stroke of work to be got. But ye all 
know that stealing is bad, and ye ought fitter make your cases 
known to the priest, and maybe something might be done for ye. 
Pride is a good thing  --  dacent, manly pride  --  and 'twill often 
keep a man from doing a mane act even when he's sorely tempted. 
Sperit is a good thing. But, take my word for it, there's nothing like 
HONESTY. And poverty, so long as it is not brought on by any 
fault of his own, need never bring a blush to any man's cheek. So, 
in the name o' God, d'ye give up stealing the turf."
	Here he paused, and Phil Lahy, supposing the discourse 
ended, advanced with a bowl of holy water with a kind of brush 
laid across it, for the purpose of sprinkling the congregation before 
they dispersed. But Father Hannigan motioned him back and 
proceeded.
	"Father O'Neill is against the beagles. He says 'tis a shame 
to hear the horn sounding, and see ye scampering over ditches and 
hedges on the Lord's Day. Well, I don't know what to say to that. 
'Tis the only day ye have for diversion of any sort. And as long as 
ye are sure not to lose Mass, I won't say anything against the 
beagles. The farmers tell me they don't mind the loss to them to let 
their sons keep a dog or two. And if ye meet after Mass  --  mind, I 
say, after divine service  --  I don't see much harm in it. I'm told, 
too, the gentlemen of the neighbourhood  --  that is, such of them 
as are gentlemen  --  don't object to it, as ye are honourable 
sportsmen and spare the hares. But then there's the hurling. There's 
a deal of bad blood when ye hurl the two sides of the river. If 
there's any more of the work that was carried on at the last match, 
ye'll be the disgrace of the country, instead of being, as ye are, the 
pride of the barony. 'Tis given up to the Knocknagow boys to be as 
spirited and well-conducted as any in the county. Didn't I point ye 
out to the Liberator himself the day of the Meeting, and he said a 
finer body of men he never laid his eyes on. Such men, said be, are 
the bone and sinew of the country. Some of the best boys ye had 
are gone since that time, short as it is  -- "
	Here there was a murmur amongst the women; and a low, 
suppressed wail from two or three whose sons had but lately 
emigrated, made him pause for a moment.
	"Well," he continued, shaking his head as the low wail died 
away; "thank God the crowbar brigade didn't pay ye a visit like 
other places; and I hope there is no danger of it, as the landlords 
here are not exterminators like some I could mention. I was in 
Cloonbeg the other day at a funeral  --  I was curate there six years 
ago  --  'twas the first parish I was sent to after being ordained, and 
it broke my heart to see the change. I could hardly believe 'twas the 
same place. The people swept away out of a whole side of a 
country, just as if 'twas a flood that was after passing over it. I 
married some of 'em myself and christened their children, and left 
'em happy and comfortable. 'Tis little I thought I'd ever pass the 
same road and not find a human face to welcome me. Well, please 
God, there's no danger of ye that way, at any rate. And yet, sure, 
'tis little security ye have  --  but I won't say anything that might 
discourage ye."
	Father Hannigan turned toward the altar, and Phil Lahy was 
again advancing with the holy water; but after taking a pinch of 
snuff he resumed his address:--
	"I want ye to keep up the good name ye have. And talking 
of funerals reminds me of your conduct at the berrin' of that poor 
man ye brought to Kilree the week before last. 'Twas a charitable 
thing to carry him thirteen long miles through the teeming rain, and 
I know ye had pains in your shoulders next morning after him. 
'Twas a charitable thing to lay his poor old bones alongside of his 
wife and children, as it was his last wish  --  though he hadn't a 
chick or child living belonging to him. I say that was a charitable, 
Christian, Irish act  --  and may God reward ye for it. But that was 
no excuse for the way ye behaved. The parish priest of Kilree said 
such a set never came into his parish. And ould Peg Naughton, that 
keeps the shebeen house at the church, declared to myself that, 
though she is there goin' on fifty-two years, 'twas the drunkenest 
little funeral she ever laid her eyes on. Isn't that a nice cha-rac-ter 
ye're aiming for yourselves? But I hope now ye'll remember my 
words. And now I have one request to ask of you. I want ye to 
promise me that ye'll dig the Widow Keating's stubbles for her. 
She hasn't a sowl to do a hand's turn for hem since her boy lost his 
health. Will ye promise me now that as soon as the weather is 
fitting ye'll dig the Widow Keating's stubbles? 'Tis short 'twill take 
ye if ye all join together."
	"We'll do id, sir," "We will, sir, never fear," was answered 
all round.
	"That's might, boys. And now any of ye that's very badly 
off, come to Father M'Mahon or myself and tell your story, and 
don't be ashamed. There's a little money collected for cases of 
distress in the town. And as the Major has subscribed ten pounds, 
and we're writing to Sir Garrett Butler for a subscription  --  and 
'tisn't easy to know where to write to him"  --  glancing towards the 
parlour window -- 'tis only fair that cases of hardship on their own 
property should be looked after. I may as well tell ye, too, the 
Major sent Father M'Mahon a quarter of beef for Christmas. 
There's not a finer quarter of beef in Munster this minute. 'Twould 
do your heart good to look at it."
	And abruptly seizing the brush, he dipped it in the holy 
water, and swung his arm round so vigorously and dextrously in all 
directions that even the gentleman at the parlour window came in 
for a share.
	The people now dispersed, and Mr. Lowe was conducted to 
the breakfast room, and formally introduced to the three 
clergymen.



CHAPTER XII.

MATRIMONY AND "MARRIAGE MONEY."  --  THE 
WIDOW'S LAST WISH.

	IN the matter of breakfast, Mrs. Kearney came out in full 
force on the occasion of a Station. Even Mr. Lowe could not help 
taking notice of the display on the table. The antique silver coffee-
pot was particularly conspicuous, and it was quite affecting to see 
the reverential gentleness with which the good woman handled this 
relic of the O'Carrolls. Her fingers would sometimes play softly on 
the lid in a manner that caused her husband visible anxiety; for the 
coffee-pot had been her grandmother's, and was presented to 
herself at the time of her marriage by her Uncle Dan. A tall urn 
was equally an object of dread to honest Maurice; and when she 
was heard to ask Father M'Mahon did he remember the day long 
ago, when he was a young student, that the urn was upset by Annie 
Cleary's sleeve being caught by the deer's horns on the lid, a full 
and true history of Ballydunmore was looked upon as inevitable. 
But, fortunately, the housekeeper whispered into her ear that a 
certain cream-jug, which, by right, should have attended the 
coffee-pot, was forgotten; and the announcement so startled Mrs. 
Kearney as for the time to put Ballydunmore and the tea-urn 
completely out of her head.
	Father M'Mahon spoke little, and seemed to the stranger 
reserved, and even haughty.
	The reserve of the young curate was of a different sort and 
evidently arose from bashfulness.
	But Father Hannigan had something to say to every one, 
and Mr. Lowe was not long in discovering that, with all his 
peculiarities, Father Hannigan was a scholar and a gentleman.
	On finding that the stranger had taken his degree in one of 
the English universities, Father Hannigan engaged him upon some 
knotty points of classical learning, and the young A.B. soon began 
to feel not quite at his ease with so able an antagonist.
	Grace paid great attention to this learned encounter, and 
looked so exceedingly wise with her elbow on the table and her 
chin resting on the little finger of her left hand, that Mary was in 
doubt whether she did not really understand every word.
	"Really, Grace," said she, speaking so low as not to be 
heard by the gentleman, "one would think you are as familiar with 
Homer and Virgil and the rest of them as you are with Longfellow 
and Sidney Smyth, to say nothing of Robinson Crusoe."
	"Indeed, no," she replied, with a half-displeased look, and 
dropping her hand on the table; "but I was remarking that Mr. 
Lowe pronounces Latin like papa, and Father Hannigan like the 
'Brehon.'
	"He picked up that in Trinity College," said Father 
Hannigan, who sat next her, and heard part of her remark.
	"That's not the way he pronounced it when he and I read 
Virgil together in Larry O'Rourke's mud-wall seminary in 
Glounamuckadhee."
	"Oh, perhaps so," replied Grace, not at all pleased that her 
papa had read Virgil in a mud-wall seminary, and in a place with 
such a name as Glounamuckadhee.
	"Ay, then," continued the priest, with a twinkle in his eye, 
as if he took pleasure in teasing her; "and every one of us brought a 
sod of turf under his arm to school during the winter."
	Grace looked quite offended, and made no reply.
	"I am told," said Mr. Lowe, "that Doctor Kiely is at present 
writing a work on Irish antiquities."
	The eyes of the offended young lady sparkled with pleasure 
as she fixed them with a look of pleased surprise on the speaker.
	"Yes," said she, in a softened tone, "he devotes nearly all 
the time he can spare from his professional duties to it."  "It is a 
very interesting subject," he added. "I have heard Dr. Kiely's 
articles spoken highly of."
	Grace was so delighted, that Larry O'Rourke's mud-wall 
seminary and the sods of turf vanished from her mind and left not a 
trace behind.
	"Will you have many weddings this Shrove?" Maurice 
Kearney asked, turning to the parish priest, who was so absorbed 
in thought that this sudden address made him start.
	"Well," he replied, in his clear, silvery voice, "I fear not. 
All my boys seem bent upon going elsewhere for wives. I have 
already given half-a-dozen certificates while as yet I have heard of 
no one returning the compliment."
	"Ned Brophy is getting a fine fortune," said Mr. Kearney. 
"So I'm told," replied Father M'Mahon; and Mary thought she 
could see a look of displeasure in his face, which she could not 
help connecting with the tear she noticed on Nancy Hogan's pale 
cheek as she was leaving the drawing-room after confession an 
hour or two before.
	"Two hundred gold sovereigns," continued Mr. Kearney 
"out of an ould saucepan."
	This piece of information regarding Ned Brophy's good 
luck caused a general laugh; the more readily perhaps because it 
was given with a look of perfect gravity.
	"And you would not miss it out of it," he continued, 
seeming quite unconscious of their mirth.
	"Out of what, sir?" Richard asked.
	"The saucepan," replied his father; "Ned himself told me 
so."
	"Do you approve of this fortune-hunting, Miss Kearney?" 
Father M'Mahon asked, turning to Mary.
	"No, sir," she replied, blushing deeply, "I don't like it at 
all."
	"And what do you say, Miss Kiely?"
	"I really have not thought much on the subject," Grace 
replied. "But it is by no means unpleasant to be rich. And I'm 
rather inclined to think there is a good deal of truth in the proverb: 
'When poverty enters the door, love flies out at the window.'"
	Father M'Mahon leant back in his arm-chair, and laughed a 
low and somewhat satirical laugh.
	I fear," he said, "there is not much love in some of these 
cases. I am as much opposed as anybody to imprudent marriages. 
But this buying and selling is a bad business."
	"Sure you don't want them to be like the Protestants?" Mrs. 
Kearney observed reproachfully.
	"The Protestants!" Father M'Mahon replied with surprise. 
How is that?"
	"I never knew a Protestant," she replied, "that would not 
live with a husband on a lough of water."
	Father M'Mahon opened his eyes and seemed to want more 
enlightenment.
	"There are the three Miss Armstrongs," continued Mrs. 
Kearney; "the youngest, to be sure, made a very good match  --  
though she hadn't a penny  --  for they were after losing the 
property before her marriage. But the two eldest girls, with their 
fine fortunes, married poor men  --  though they were respectable, I 
know, and sensible, too. One of them, I'm told, is doing well in 
Dublin; and Mr. Armstrong tells me Fanny said in her last letter 
from Australia that they expected to come home and purchase an 
estate in Ireland yet, they are making a fortune so rapidly."
	"Mr. Lowe," said Mary, " you ought to make mamma a 
bow. She has complimented both the ladies and gentlemen of your 
religion at our expense."
	"And look at the Miss O'Dwyers," continued Mrs. Kearney, 
not heeding the interruption; "the fact is, I believe they'll never get 
married, as they can find no suitable matches."
	It might be better for them to be doing well in Dublin, or 
even making a fortune in Australia," said Father M'Mahon.
	"Is it a fact," Mr. Lowe asked, turning to Hugh, "that 
Protestants are less hard to be pleased in the choice of wives and 
husbands than Catholics in Ireland?"
	"It does really seem they take the plunge more 
courageously," replied Hugh. " I have noticed instances of it even 
among the humbler classes."
	"Yes," said his mother, "there is George Hardford, who I 
gave his daughter to Henry Johnson, the pensioner's son, though he 
hadn't a trade or anything. Took him into his house and kept him 
till he got a situation in the jail."
	"Ah, that throws some light upon the matter," said Father 
M'Mahon; "situations of all kinds, high and low, are reserved for 
the professors of the favoured creed; landlords, too, will give farms 
at lower rents to Protestants than to Catholics."
	"And leases," said Mr. Kearney. "I don't know a Protestant 
that hasn't a good lease."
	"Yes," Father M'Mahon rejoined, "and it would seem the 
rule will soon be that Catholics will have no leases. And it is this 
state of dependence, this uncertainty of being able to keep a roof 
over their heads, that has made marriages the mercenary bargains 
they often are among us."
	"It was not always so," Father Hannigan remarked. "I 
remember a time, myself, when the man looked more to the 
woman and less to the fortune than now."
	"That is true," said Father M'Mahon. "Leases were general 
then, and the people were consequently more independent. 
Emancipation has done us harm in this respect, The sacrifice of the 
Forty-shilling Freeholders was a great injury to the country."
	"Maybe," said Maurice Kearney, "the marriage money has 
something to do with keeping people from getting married. Ned 
Brophy tells me the priest will charge twenty pounds for marrying 
him."
	"Well," replied Father M'Mahon with a laugh, "that is not 
so much, bearing in mind that old saucepan you told us of. But 
another parishioner of mine tells me his match is broken off 
altogether on account of the exorbitant demand of the priest. The 
father of the girl had only fifteen acres of land, and the priest 
wanted fifteen pounds for marrying his daughter."
	"I know all about that case," said Father Hannigan. "He 
went against the priest at the election."
	"That makes the matter worse," rejoined Father M'Mahon. 
Such practices will have the effect of making the people look upon 
the priest as a tyrant. But in the parish to which refer, I am assured, 
as a rule, the farmer must pay half-a year's rent to the priest for 
marrying his daughter."
	"What do you think of the old system of public weddings?" 
asked Father Hannigan; "when friends and neighbours were 
invited, and the priest went round with a plate for his collection."
	I liked it," replied Father M'Mahon. "Indeed I was looked 
upon as singular because I did my best to encourage the people to 
keep up the old system. It made them more social and neighbourly. 
The priest, too, felt that what he got was given cheerfully. And 
besides," added Father M'Mahon laughing, "he went home with a 
heavier purse."
	"I remember what you said at the last public wedding we 
had in this parish," said Mr. Kearney. "'Twas at Tom Connelly's. 
The collection was larger than you expected, and when you were 
thanking them, you said no matter how small the sum might be, 
they could say, 'Go home now, sir you are paid'; but that if it was a 
private wedding you could charge what you liked."
	"I dare say some of the bridegroom's friends have often 
thought of my words since. But I fear we are becoming more 
genteel and more selfish every day; so perhaps it is as well to make 
people pay for their gentility."
	"I'm told," Maurice Kearney observed, "Tom Brien got the 
job done in Liverpool for two-and-sixpence. You were in 
Liverpool, Father O'Neill. How do they manage it there? "
	"What you say of Tom Brien is quite true, sir," the young 
priest replied. " It happened it was I myself performed the 
ceremony; for Tom said he'd like to have the knot tied by a 
Tipperary man."
	"Ah, then, Father O'Neill," said Mrs. Kearney, "did you 
ever meet any of the poor Skehans while you were in Liverpool?"
	"I did," he replied. "One of the children knew me in the 
street; and it was I prepared the old woman for death."
	"I knew she would not live long," Mrs. Kearney observed; 
"she was so heart-broken at leaving the 'ould sod,' as she said 
herself."
	"Indeed," Father O'Neill rejoined, "that love of the 'ould 
sod' evinced itself in what some might consider a ludicrous manner 
at her last moment."
	"How was that?" Father Hannigan asked, seeing the young 
priest had relapsed into silence.
	"Well," he replied, "when I had administered the 
Sacraments to her, and remained some time by her bedside, I 
thought I noticed that she wished to say something to me, but 
hesitated to speak. Whenever I moved, as if to go away, I saw her 
eyes were fixed anxiously on me; but still she said nothing. So 
when I was going I asked her was there anything on her mind that 
was troubling her.
	'There is then, sir,' said she; 'but maybe 'tisn't much, an' I 
oughtn't to be bothering you with it.'
	"I assured her it was no trouble, and desired her to tell me 
what it was she wished to say.
	"'Well, sir,' she said, looking anxiously into my face, 'I'd 
like to know will my soul pass through Ireland?'"
	Mr. Lowe looked surprised and amused; and Grace, who 
honoured him with a good deal of her attention, uttered an 
exclamation and laughed. But all the rest were silent.
	Mary stole a look at her brother Hugh, who covered his 
face with his brown hand, and seemed greatly moved. She knew he 
had special reason to be troubled, and regretted that her mother had 
introduced a subject which always pained him.
	The fact was the Skehans had been under-tenants of his 
father's, and, though not exactly ejected, were induced to give up 
their little holding on receiving a trifling sum for the good-will and 
being forgiven the arrears of rent. The mere suspicion that the 
landlord wished to get rid of them has driven many an Irish family 
far away from the "old sod," who loved that old sod even as did the 
widow Skehan whose last earthly wish was that "her soul might 
pass through Ireland" on its way to Heaven.
	"My God! " exclaimed Father M'Mahon, "how they must 
suffer!"
	He stood up and strode across the room to a window. where 
he stood gazing at the white hills, with his hands clasped behind 
his back, for some minutes, and then left the room without taking 
notice of any one.
	"Father M'Mahon," said Mary, "is pondering over some 
serious subject now."
	"How can you tell that?" her brother Richard asked. Is it 
because he has forgotten his politeness? 
	"Oh, we can all tell that," Grace exclaimed; "didn't you see 
the proud walk? That's proof positive that his brains are wool-
gathering."
	But though Father M'Mahon forgot his politeness, he did 
not forget poor Norah Lahy.



CHAPTER XIII.

THE DOCTOR IN A FIX.


	COME," said Richard to Mr. Lowe, "let us prepare for the 
shooting."
	As they passed the lobby window, Mr. Lowe glanced out to 
the yard, and was astonished to see Barney Brodherick in the act of 
rushing at Father M'Mahon's servant, evidently with the intention 
of doing him grievous bodily injury; for Barney was as pugnacious 
as the celebrated tailor who was "blue moulded for the want of a 
batin.'"
	Tom Maher, however, caught the wrathful Barney in his 
arms and held him fast. 
	"Let me at him!" exclaimed Barney imploringly after 
struggling and kicking to free himself. "Let me at him, an', be the 
livin', I'll put his two eyes into wan!"
	The tall servant regarded him with a scowl, in which scorn 
was largely mingled.
	"Tom, for the love uv heaven, take off uv me, an' I'll break 
every tooth in his head."
	Here Phil Lahy appeared with his prayer-book still in his 
left hand; and laying his right on Barney's shoulder, he addressed 
some words to him in a low voice.
	D--n well he knows that," replied Barney, almost tearfully, 
"D--n well the blagard knows I'm in the state of grace to-day. But," 
he continued, through his clenched teeth, and shaking his fist at the 
object of his enmity. "but, please God, I won't be in the state of 
grace always. You Kerry b -- d," he muttered, as he walked away, 
"from the County Limerick."
	That characteristic bull was received with a shout of 
laughter from the bystanders. But Mr. Lowe's acquaintance with 
the geography of Ireland was too limited to enable him to see at 
once anything ludicrous in calling a man a Kerry anything from the 
County Limerick.
	Owing to the frost the snipe were not as plenty in the bog 
as usual, except where there were springs.
	At one of these places half a dozen rose together, but so far 
off that Hugh didn't fire. Richard, however, whose practice was  --  
to use his own words  --  "to blaze away at everything," let fly, and 
down came a snipe. The successful marksman looked from one to 
the other of his companions with a stare of amazement, as if the 
result of his blazing away on this occasion were something 
altogether beyond his comprehension.
	"You really have winged him," said Hugh.
	"Yes, I think so," returned the doctor faintly.
	"But," said Hugh, laughing, "you were just pulling the 
trigger when that one got up ten yards nearer to you that those you 
fired at."
	But the doctor by this time had realized the fact that he had 
shot a snipe, and the trifling drawback alluded to by his brother did 
not abate his elation in the least.
	He rushed forward, bounding over several bog-holes, 
reckless of consequences. But just as he reached the stream from 
which the snipe had risen, the wounded bird sprang several times a 
few feet from the ground; and, finding these efforts to get upon the 
wing vain, it ran quickly, with a look of stealthy cunning, its long 
bill and neck stretched out horizontally, towards a clump of rushes 
some yards from the bank where it had fallen.
	In his eagerness to prevent the prize from escaping, the 
doctor, instead of leaping the stream as he had leaped the bog-
holes, rushed through it, sinking to the hips in the black mud. He 
managed to drag himself through the weeds and cresses to the 
opposite side. But when he attempted to climb up the bank, he 
found one of his legs caught in a bog stump at the bottom of the 
stream. He pulled and pulled, keeping his eves fixed on the snipe 
as it made for the rushes, till he had freed his leg, and then jumped 
upon the firm ground. And now, being sure of his quarry, the 
doctor waltzed several times round the wounded snipe in a very 
graceful manner, brandishing the long duck gun over his head. He 
was rather pleased than otherwise at the loud roar of laughter by 
which his friends, as he thought, meant to applaud his 
performance.
	He took up the bird and carefully examined the broken 
wing, as if he found in it an interesting study from a professional 
point of view. Then throwing off the professional air, and 
assuming that of the sportsman, he knocked the bird's head against 
his gun and put it into his pocket with a look of superhuman 
calmness, as if bagging snipe by dozens of braces were an 
everyday proceeding with him.
	And now it occurred to the doctor that Hugh was rather 
overdoing the laughing. He took out his powder-horn to load gain, 
feeling comfortably sure of "tumbling"  --  it is to feathered bipeds 
we apply the word  --  every bird he pointed his gun at during the 
rest of his life. But, on glancing at his companions, he paused, with 
his thumb on the spring of his powder-horn in real surprise, for he 
saw them still convulsed with laughter.
	"What the devil do they mean?" he thought, putting his 
hand in his pocket to make sure that he had a snipe.
	His stare of inquiry had such an effect on Hugh that he was 
obliged to have recourse to his pocket-handkerchief to wipe the 
tears from his eyes.
	Hang it," exclaimed the doctor, " what are ye laughing at? 
Is there anything wrong?"
	They pointed towards himself; but after looking all around. 
him he could see nothing unusual.
	At last he glanced at his feet; and to his utter bewilderment 
discovered that one of his limbs was as bare as a Highlander's.
	The fact was, when extricating himself from the bog stump, 
he left one of the legs of his trousers behind him.
	"I'd recommend you," Hugh called out, "to find the missing 
article, and draw it on as fast as you can. I see a car coming this 
way."
	"Do you want me to dive for it?" he asked, looking ruefully 
down among the weeds and cresses.
	"'Tis Hanly's phaeton," said Hugh.
	The doctor looked towards the road, well-nigh petrified 
with horror.
	Yes, there was the phaeton coming nearer and nearer. A 
bend in the road would bring it within forty yards of where he 
stood  --  and not as much as a bush to obstruct the view.
	He turned his back to the road; but the thought that the 
view thus presented would be, if possible, more ridiculous than any 
other, made him quickly "about face" again. He tried to hide the 
undraped limb with the single barrel duck gun; but the futility of 
the attempt became instantly apparent. Equally hopeless was the 
idea of wheeling slowly round so as to keep the presentable leg 
towards the carriage as it turned the bend of the road. The sun, too, 
at that moment burst through its covering of clouds, which had the 
effect of bringing him out in bolder relief before the eyes of the 
wondering spectators. He would have sworn he could see the 
bewitching Kathleen's dark orbs open till the white was visible all 
round. And then, what was still worse, the pearly teeth flashed 
from between the rosy lips, and the fair Kathleen's head was 
thrown back in a manner which placed it beyond all doubt that she 
was laughing at him.
	He thought of flinging himself upon his face or his back, 
but the bank on which he stood was just sufficiently elevated to 
render such a proceeding useless. The wild notion of divesting 
himself of what remained of the unlucky garment crossed his 
mind; it would be less excruciatingly ridiculous if his legs were 
matches. But there was no time for even this. There was the 
phaeton, there were the ladies, passing at the nearest point; and that 
mischief-loving Rose  --  "infernal," we regret to say, was the 
epithet he coupled with her name  --  bowing to him with fiendish 
politeness. And there was Doctor Richard Kearney with the nude 
limb stretched backwards as far and raised as high as possible  --  
like a gander with the cramp  --  returning the salute with the grace 
for which he was famous among the young ladies of his 
acquaintance. He actually forgot to drop his hat upon his head, or 
change his position till the phaeton was out of sight.
	And then he cursed his stupidity for never having thought 
of taking a "header" into a bog-hole, and remaining there with only 
his nose above water till they had passed.
	He might have escaped in that way if he had thought of it in 
time.
	He wiped the perspiration from his brow, and, as he 
glanced fiercely at his companions, he formed the dreadful wish 
that his gun were a double instead of a single barrel, that he might 
share the contents between them. They were still laughing at him.
	Becoming more calm, the doctor made his way back to 
them, and Hugh, in the most unfeeling manner, suggested the 
advisability of getting home as fast as he could,
	"Home!" exclaimed the doctor, "and perhaps meet the Lord 
knows who on the way. No, I'll run over to Bob Lloyd's and 
borrow a trousers. Come with me," he continued, turning to Mr. 
Lowe, "and we'll have pleasanter shooting than here."
	Pleasanter shooting," remarked Hugh, drily. "I hope so."
	Will you come? " the doctor asked.
	"No, I'll follow the stream,' said Hugh, who was a keen 
sportsman, and was glad to get rid of them for the rest of the day.



CHAPTER XIV.

MOUNT TEMPE AND ITS MASTER.

	BOB LLOYD'S domicile was close to the bog, and rejoiced 
in the name of Mount Tempe. Why Mount, it would be hard to tell, 
for it was in the middle of a flat, dreary tract of country; and why 
Tempe, was a still greater puzzle. Either taken singly might be 
accounted for on the "lucus a non" principle; but, joined together 
they are too much for us. We must content ourselves with the fact 
that Bob Lloyd's residence was known by the style and title of 
Mount Tempe.
	Bob Lloyd was a bachelor  --  we cannot add, "by no choice 
of his own." For if ever mortal man had the enviable privilege to 
pick and choose among the fair ladies of the neighbourhood, that 
man was Bob Lloyd, of Mount Tempe. Many and ingenious were 
the snares laid to catch him, and many and miraculous were his 
hair-breadth escapes. Mammas manoeuvred for him; papas 
palavered him; daughters exhausted all their arts and their patience 
to capture him. But there he was safe and sound, and free as the 
wind that seemed to recognise in him a congenial spirit, and took a 
peculiar delight in rushing down the chimneys of Mount Tempe 
House, or flinging the slates off the roof into the yard behind, and 
upon the gravel plot, and out on the green lawn in front  --  and 
particularly and especially through the roof of what was once a 
conservatory at the south side, to the terror and misery of an 
unhappy fox that dragged out a life of wretchedness chained 
among the empty flower pots. It was in keeping with the genius of 
incongruity which presided over Bob Lloyd's establishment that 
the fox should be domiciled, of all places in the world, among the 
flower-pots. And the odour that assailed the nostrils on 
approaching the conservatory was, to speak mildly, of a kind for 
which strangers were unprepared, and was usually greeted with an 
exclamation indicative of a surprise the reverse of agreeable.
	Mr. Lowe, on passing this delectable concern, stopped 
short and clapped his hand to his nose, as if he had received a 
violent blow on that feature; but Richard, being prepared for the 
assault, passed on to the hall-door without wincing.
	He knocked loudly, and while waiting for the door to be 
opened, occupied the time in rubbing his leg, which was fast 
becoming numbed. No one answered to his knock; and, knowing 
the ways of the place, instead of knocking a second time, he raised 
one of the windows and put in his head.
	"Morrow, Dick," said the gentleman of the house. "Come 
in."
	Richard laid his hand on the window-sill and vaulted into 
the parlour.
	"I have Mr. Lowe with me," he remarked, as he walked out 
to the hall to admit that gentleman by the door.
	Mr. Lowe looked at the owner of the house and around the 
large room; and then turned to his friend as if seeking instructions 
as to how he ought to act, or what was the custom of the country 
under such circumstances
	Mr. Lloyd was stretched on a sofa playing two jews-harps. 
Richard walked deliberately to a cupboard, and taking a tall, square 
bottle and a couple of glasses from it, laid them on the table  --  
having first swept a shot-belt, a bridle, a pair of horse girths, and 
two pairs of boxing gloves off the table to the floor. Having filled 
the glasses, he tossed off one, and beckoned Mr. Lowe to do 
likewise; which he did.
	The gentleman of the house at length wheeled slowly 
round, let his feet drop to the floor, and, sitting upright, 
contemplated his friend with a look of complacent admiration. 
"'Pon my soul, Dick," he said, very seriously, "you look well."
	He put the jews-harp in his left hand to his mouth, and 
twanged it with the little finger of the same hand. Then putting the 
jews-harp in his right hand to his mouth, he twanged that too. Mr. 
Lloyd then put both jews-harps to his mouth, and played a tune, 
always keeping his eyes fixed on Richard's leg, as if there were 
some extraordinary fascination about the cap of the knee.
	"'Tisn't the latest fashion? The newest style from the city, 
you know? Eh, Dick?"
	"No. I sank in a bog-hole and tore it off with a stump or 
something. I want to borrow one from you. Of course, I can get 
it?"
	"Ay, faith," said Mr. Lloyd.
	"And dry stockings?"
	"Call Jer."
	Richard desired Mr. Lowe to sit near the fire, and went in 
search of the last-named individual.
	The musician on the sofa applied himself to his 
instruments, and the listener began to wonder at the sweetness of 
the melody.
	"Know the name of that tune? " he asked.
	"No; I can't say I ever heard it before," was the reply.
	"Listen again." And he repeated the tune.
	Know it now?"
	"Well, I don't. But it seems a pleasing little air."
	Mr. Lloyd extended one hand, and swinging it gracefully in 
time to the air, sang:

Oh, my breeches full of stitches,
Oh, my breeches buckled on,
Oh, my breeches full of stitches,
Oh, my breeches buckled on."

	"This is a character," thought Mr. Lowe, "I suppose," he 
said aloud. "our friend's mishap has suggested it to you?"
	"Dick is a bloody clever fellow," was the not very relevant 
reply. "He has words at will."
	The subject of this flattering remark here came to the door 
and called to Mr. Lowe to come with him upstairs.
	The first thing that struck Mr. Lowe on entering Bob 
Lloyd's bedroom was, that a faded horse-rug did duty for a 
counterpane on the bed.
	Jer appeared with the dry stockings, with a half-dozen dogs 
of various kinds at his heels. Over the yellow-striped waistcoat 
usually worn by servants, he wore a cast-off green coat of his 
master's, which was sadly out of keeping with his tattered corduroy 
small clothes and heavy brogues. Jer was a person of importance, 
particularly in his own estimation, and looked upon himself as a 
sort of senior partner in the establishment. His influence over his 
master was such that his good word was deemed indispensable 
whenever it was sought to make Bob Lloyd a party to any 
transaction, whether it might be the buying or selling of a horse, 
the granting of a lease, the paying of a bill, or the bringing about of 
a matrimonial alliance between the owner of Mount Tempe and 
any one of the many fair damsels who sighed to make him happy. 
For it was well known  --  this in reference to the fair damsels  --  
that, though Bob Lloyd had a genius for never allowing both ends 
to meet by any chance, his rent-roll showed the receipt of a good 
eight hundred pounds a year; and it was remarked that there 
"wasn't a better lot of tenants in Ireland" than his.
	"Well, Jer," said Richard, "any chance of a wedding this 
time?
	"We're goin' on wud a couple, sir," replied Jer, "but I don't 
say they'll come to anything. Everything was settled wud Miss 
Jane; an', begor, there was no fear at all of the fortune they wor 
givin' her. She was tryin' on her weddin' dress on Saturday, when I 
went to tell her he couldn't marry her; an' she tuck on terrible 
intirely."
	Richard laughed, but evinced no surprise.
	"The ould mistress an' the young ladies is tryin' to bring it 
on again. But," added Jer, solemnly, and as if he himself were the 
principal party concerned, "'twon't do."
	Richard explained to his friend that Mrs. Lloyd and her 
daughters lived in Kilthubber. "Devilish nice girls they are," he 
added; "particularly the second."
	"They're anxious to have him settled," Jer continued with a 
sigh, as if the settling were a great weight on his mind. "An' sure 
God knows so is myself. But 'tis so hard to meet a shootable 
woman. I'm after promisin' Tom Otway," he continued, "that we'll 
run down to the County Carlow in the course of the week to see his 
cousin. Himself is for goin' by the coach; but I'm thinkin' 'twould 
look better to drive tandem. What do you think?" he asked, as if he 
found it hard to decide,
	"Oh, the tandem, by all means," said Richard.
	"That's what I think myself," rejoined Jer, as he left the 
room, followed by his dogs, except two that had got into the bed 
for a nap.
	"Is this all a joke? Mr. Lowe asked.
	"No. Bob's wooings are always carried on in this way, and 
Miss Jane can hardly have been taken by surprise, for she had 
examples enough to warn her."
	"And how does he escape the consequences?
	"Do you mean why is he not called out? The idea of such a 
good-natured fellow as Bob Lloyd shooting anybody or being shot 
at! But he will tell you 'the heaviest cloutin' match'  --  to use his 
own phrase  --  he ever had, was with young Allcock for refusing 
to marry his sister, who declared that he had popped the question 
and been accepted in the most formal manner."
	"But the law," said Mr. Lowe. "Have you no such thing as 
breaches of promise in Ireland?"
	"They are not quite unknown, though very rare, down here. 
But the immunity which Bob enjoys may in some measure be 
accounted for by the fact that the business is all done through Jer. 
Bob never writes letters; and, perhaps, as he would say himself, 
that saves his bacon."
	It must not be inferred that writing was not among Mr. 
Lloyd's accomplishments. He wrote a fair, round hand, and was 
fond of displaying his calligraphic skill whenever pen, ink and 
paper chanced to come in his way  --  particularly, and almost 
exclusively, in the execution of the words: --  

"Command you may your mind from play."

which he was wont to finish off with a flourish, and seemed to 
derive great pleasure from the performance.
	"Can we get a shot without going into that infernal bog 
again?" Richard asked when they had returned to the parlour.
	"Ay, faith," Mr. Lloyd replied. "If I went out to that well 
beyond ten times a day, I'd be sure to meet a snipe there."
	"Get your gun and come with us."
	Mr. Lloyd strapped a shot-belt over his shoulder, and was 
taking up his gun, when the door opened, and a stout, middle-sized 
man, with a round face, unceremoniously walked in.
	"'Morrow, Wat," said Mr. Lloyd.
	"'Morrow, kindly," Wat replied, offering him a slip of 
paper.
	"How much is it?
	"Fifteen pounds eleven and sevenpence."
	I'll see 'about it;" said Mr. Lloyd.
	"That'll never do for me," replied Wat.
	"There's not a penny under the roof of the house," said Mr. 
Lloyd.
	"The devil a foot I'll stir out of this till I get it," Wat 
rejoined.
	"Have a drop of this," Mr. Lloyd remarked, filling a glass 
from the square bottle.
	"No objection," replied Wat, sententiously.
	Mr. Lloyd went to the side-board, and returned, holding a 
large dish in one hand with as much ease as if it were a small plate, 
and grasping a loaf of bread with the other.
	"Come, Dick," said he, placing them on the table, "let's 
have a bite."
	He cut some slices of bread and meat which Richard 
converted into sandwiches for himself and Mr. Lowe.
	"Wat," said Bob Lloyd, with his mouth full, "I'll see about 
that,"
	"Pay me the money, and let me go for the cow; that's the 
seein' about I want."
	"What cow?" Mr. Lloyd asked.
	"A fat cow I'm afther buyin' from your father," said Wat, 
turning to Richard; "and he won't let me' take her wudout the 
money. So, shell out," he added, turning to Mr. Lloyd, with a sort 
of humorous sulkiness of voice and look.
	Mr. Lloyd, appearing to pay no attention to this speech, bit 
a semicircle out of his sandwich, and holding it between him and 
the light, seemed to admire its regularity.
	Wat, drawing an old arm-chair towards the window, 
thereby disturbing the repose of an old setter that had possession of 
it, deliberately sat down, and crossed his legs with the air of a man 
who was bent upon taking his ease, and had nothing on earth to 
trouble him. Mr. Lloyd advanced in silence, and presented a 
carving knife at him with a substantial slice of cold meat on the top 
of it.
	Wat took the meat between his finger and thumb, and 
acknowledged the civility by uncrossing his legs and sitting 
upright.
	Mr. Lloyd then presented a carving fork with the other 
hand, upon which was a chunk of bread. This Wat also accepted, if 
not graciously, at least without any show of reluctance. Having 
emulated his host in the biting line  --  with the difference that, the 
bread and meat being each in a different hand, he had to take two 
bites instead of one  --  Wat remarked oracularly:
	"A pig's head ates very handsome, cowld."
	"Kitty," he called out to a servant girl who was flinging her 
cloak over her shoulders as she passed the window.
	The girl stopped and looked at him. Whereupon Wat raised 
the window and asked was she going to town.
	I am," replied Kitty. " Why so
	"Tell my mother to send me out an ounce of tobaccy," said 
Wat, in the calmest and most self-satisfied manner imaginable.
	"Now, Wat, what are you up to?" Mr. Lloyd asked. "Don't 
you know if the money was in the house there wouldn't be a 
second word about it?"
	"Well, to do you nothin' but justice," Wat replied, "I do 
know that. But you see two quarters of that cow are bespoke, and I 
can't disappoint my customers. Moreover, when wan quarter is for 
a weddin'."
	"Come to-morrow."
	"'Twon't do."
	"Well, what do you want?"
	"D--n well you know what I want," replied Wat. "An order 
on Tom Ryan. That's money any day."
	"There's not a pen or a bit of clean paper in the house," said 
Mr. Lloyd.
	"Ketch me!" was Wat's comment upon this objection. "I'm 
provided against accidents." And he produced an ink bottle with a 
leather strap attached to the neck, and unfolded half a sheet of 
paper which was rolled round a well-worn quill pen.
	Mr. Lloyd, seeing no way of escape, sat down and wrote 
the letters I and C. The latter turned out such a model of a capital 
letter that Mr. Lloyd held it up for the inspection of his friends. He 
then slowly and carefully wrote out the order, which ran thus
	"I Command you to pay Wat Murphy fifteen pounds 
sterling Money, which I will allow you out of your rent.
"ROBERT ORMSBY LLOYD.
 "To Mr. Thomas Ryan."
	"All right," said Wat, as he held the document to the fire to 
dry. After putting it in his pocket, he pointed to the square bottle.
	"Would you have any objection?" he asked.
	Bob Lloyd held up the square bottle, and, laying his hand 
along it, carefully measured the depth of liquor remaining. 
Seeming satisfied that he could afford to act on the very broad hint 
which Wat's question implied, he filled a glass.
	"Healths apiece to ye," said Wat, tossing off the whiskey as 
he passed the table, without stopping. He was immediately heard 
whistling to his bull-dog, who, with his back against the wall 
outside the hall-door, was keeping at bay quite a pack of hounds of 
various descriptions  --  but among which there was not a single 
"mongrel" or "cur of low degree"  --  by the mere glare of his eye.



CHAPTER XV.

A DAY'S SHOOTING LOST.

	THE snipe was at the well, as Bob Lloyd had foretold, and 
the moment it rose, the doctor "blazed away," But greatly to his 
surprise, the snipe did not fall with its wing broken.
	"He's wounded," the doctor exclaimed, on seeing the snipe 
pitch in the next field. "I'll make sure of him the next time."
	All three blazed away the next time; and when the smoke 
cleared off they saw the snipe quietly dropping into its old quarters 
near the well.
	Re-loading their guns they retraced their steps, and another 
volley woke the echoes of Mount Tempe. The snipe  --  as jack-
snipes are wont to do  --  flew a couple of hundred yards, and 
dropped again among the rushes in the next field.
	The affair now became quite exciting, and volley after 
volley made the unhappy fox among the flower pots shiver and 
creep from one corner to the other of its prison for a full hour and 
more.
	"Hugh is doing business," said Bob Lloyd, on hearing the 
report of Hugh's gun from the bog.
	"Ay, faith," he added, on seeing him quietly walk forward 
and pick up his bird.
	"I'll do that fellow's job," exclaimed Richard, through his 
clenched teeth, as he rammed home the charge in the long duck 
gun with a very unnecessary expenditure of force. "Let me alone, if 
I don't polish him off."
	We trust we need not say he did not mean his brother, but 
the jack-snipe.
	But just as the doctor had put his gun on full cock, Bob 
Lloyd laid his hand on his shoulder.
	"Is it a duck? " Richard asked.
	"Ay, faith," replied Bob. "The ice is broken on the pond, 
and he's coming about it."
	The wild duck flew round and round in a circle, and so low 
that the chances of a shot seemed not improbable.
	Bob Lloyd hurried to the corner of the field and stooped 
behind the fence. Richard and Mr. Lowe took up a position at some 
distance, and all three watched the wild duck with breathless 
excitement as it came nearer and nearer in each round of its flight. 
The doctor had his long gun to his shoulder at one time, and would 
have blazed away if Mr. Lowe had not stopped him.
	"Why don't you let me tumble him?" the doctor asked, in a 
whisper "I had him covered just when he was passing the sally-
tree."
	"Don't you see," Mr. Lowe replied, "that that tree is fully 
three hundred yards from us?"
	The duck suddenly changed from its circular course, and 
shot slantwise like an arrow into the pond. This move took the 
sportsmen by surprise; but recovering themselves, all three hurried 
along the fence, with their heads on a level with their knees. On, on 
they crept till they reached the part of the fence nearest to the pond. 
There was the duck quietly swimming among the broken 
fragments of ice, but not within shot.
	"How are we to manage?" said the doctor.
	"We're at the end of our tether, Dick," replied Bob Lloyd.
	"I'll get over the ditch and take him by surprise," said the 
doctor.
	And suiting the action to the word he climbed over the 
fence, and walked quickly towards the pond. The wild duck 
seemed really taken by surprise, for it remained hid behind a 
fragment of ice till the doctor reached the brink of the pond. He 
stood panting for a few seconds, with his gun half raised to his 
shoulder, but the duck never stirred. He advanced a step or two on 
the ice, and was beginning to think that the duck had got off in 
some inexplicable manner, when a tremendous splash and clatter in 
the water made him start. The duck rose so close to him that his 
first impulse was to step back. In doing this his feet slipped from 
under him, and he came down with extraordinary celerity on the 
end of his spine. The shock caused a queer sensation in his throat, 
and, in fact, he was much in the same state as Mrs. Slattery when 
she implored Father Hannigan to inform her whether she was 
killed.
	"Why the blazes didn't he fire? "exclaimed Bob Lloyd.
	"And why doesn't he get up?" Mr. Lowe asked, as he stood 
on his toes and looked over the fence,
	"Faith, he's taking it easy," said Bob Lloyd. "Let us come 
down to him,"
	"What's the matter, Dick? " he asked, on reaching the pond.
	In reply Doctor Richard Kearney informed his friends in 
quiet, matter-of-fact manner, and in the fewest and shortest words, 
that the part of his person upon which he had fallen was "broke,"
	"Misfortunes never come alone, Dick," said Bob Lloyd Get 
up, and let us be at the jack again."
	"Yes, 'tis the pleasantest," replied the doctor. " Help me up. 
For, hang me if I'm quite sure whether I can stand."
	He found, however, that he had the use of his limbs; and 
then returned to the well in pursuit of the jack-snipe.
	But the jack-snipe was not to be found. In vain they 
tramped through the rushes, and along the drains and ditches, and 
everywhere that a snipe would be likely to he found. The 
invulnerable jack had disappeared from the scene altogether.
	"He's dead," said the doctor. "I knew I peppered him the 
last time."
	"But if he was dead," Mr. Lowe remarked, "wouldn't the 
dogs find him?"
	They took one more round through the rushes; and then, as 
if moved by a single impulse, the three sportsmen grounded arms.
	Bob Lloyd rested his elbow on the muzzle of his gun, and 
dropped his chin into the palm of his hand.
	"Bad luck to that duck," said Bob Lloyd solemnly. "We lost 
our day's shooting on account of it."
	"What is Hugh up to?" the doctor asked, pointing to his 
brother, who was standing on a little bridge on the bog road, and 
waving his handkerchief to them.
	"I think it is calling us he is," said Mr. Lowe. "Let's have 
another glass of grog," the doctor suggested. "Ay, faith," replied 
Mr. Lloyd. "Come over." They returned to the house; and after 
another application to the square bottle, retraced their steps to the 
bog road, where Hugh was waiting for them.
	"Ye had good sport it would seem," Hugh remarked, 
"Game must be plenty in Mr. Lloyd's preserves?"
	"Well, we didn't meet much," replied Mr. Lowe.
	"And we lost our day's shooting on account of that duck," 
said Richard, putting his hand under his coat-tails with a look 
suggestive of a disagreeable sensation.
	"If we cross over to the turf-ricks on the high bank," Hugh 
remarked, "we may get a shot or two at the plover coming into the 
bog. They are flying low."
	"I vote for going home," replied the doctor. "I have got 
enough of it for one day."
	"I dare say you will have a good appetite for your dinner."
	"Well, rather; but we had lunch at Bob's."
	"What do you say, Mr. Lowe?" Hugh asked. "Shall we 
cross the bog and try and add a few grey plover to our bag?"
	"Well, I confess, I'm inclined to vote with the doctor for 
home."
	"Home is the word," said the doctor. And on seem some 
country people approaching be managed to let the head and neck 
of his snipe hang out of his pocket, and, with the long gun on his 
shoulder, stepped out at a quick pace, looking as if he had done 
wonders during the day.



CHAPTER XVI.

AN UNINVITED VISITOR.

	GRACE had run to the window a dozen times in as many 
minutes, to see if the sportsmen were returning; and though Mary 
smiled at her impatience, she could not conceal from herself that 
she shared it in no small degree.
	"Here they are at last," Grace exclaimed, gleefully.
	Mary started from her chair, but sat down again quickly. 
She blushed, and was glad that no one had seen her.
	Grace ran to open the door; and there was a little 
affectation in Mary's manner as she said, while passing through the 
hall:
	"Grace, tell them dinner will be on the table in a few 
minutes."
	But, as if ashamed of this "acting," she turned back and met 
the young men on the door-steps.
	"I hope you enjoyed the shooting," she said to Mr. Lowe. 
"Oh, yes," he replied, devoutly hoping that her inquiries would 
extend no further.
	"Well, dinner will be ready immediately," said Mary. "And 
I need not remind you we are to have a few friends in the evening."
	"Who are they? " Richard asked.
	"I thought I told you. But I am glad to have an agreeable 
surprise for you. It is the Miss Hanlys."
	The doctor glanced at Bob Lloyd's unmentionables and 
dashed up the stairs like a man bent upon throwing himself out of a 
window.
	As Maurice Kearney took his place at the head of the table,
his first question, as he looked at the edge of the carving knife, as a 
matter of course, was  --  Did you shoot much?"
	"Only four or five brace, sir," replied Hugh.
	"Oh, only that much," Grace exclaimed, "after all the firing 
we heard, I thought at one time there was a brisk skirmish going 
on, if not a pitched battle."
	"Well, now," said Hugh, who sat next her, "how would you 
feel if there was really a pitched battle going on in the bog?"
	"Oh, I'd be delighted. The excitement must be so pleasant. "
	"And which side would you wish to win?"
	"The Irish of course. How I should like to bind up the 
wounds of some gallant young chief like Robert Emmet or Sir 
William Wallace."
	"That is the Sir William Wallace whose picture you have 
'drawing the fatal sword' in the 'Scottish Chiefs'?
	"Yes; I mean some young chief like that who

"Fought for the land his soul adored,
For happy homes and altars free,
His only talisman  --  the Sword,
His only spellword  --  Liberty."

	"Mr. Lowe says you are a rebel," said Mary.
	"Oh, I don't know that," she replied, looking a little 
frightened. But observing that Mr. Lowe's smile indicated anything 
but displeasure, she added: "But I do admire a hero. And who is so 
great a hero as the patriot who fights and bleeds for the land of his 
birth?"
	"Will ye go to the bull-bait?" Maurice Kearney inquired.
	This question caused considerable surprise and some 
amusement.
	Mary, who knew her father's talent for such surprises, could 
not be sure whether the bull was hauled in after his usual manner 
of introducing subjects that had not the remotest connection with 
that under discussion, or whether Irish patriots, fighting for their 
country, suggested to him the baiting of a bull.
	"A bull-bait, sir?" said Hugh "Why, the practice has been 
entirely done away with for years."
	"'Tis to be before the end of the week; but the place is not 
decided on. Wat Murphy that told me. He was here for a cow I sold 
him last Sunday. I gave her to him too cheap."
	And Mr. Kearney rubbed his bald head, and seemed sorry 
too late for the bad bargain he had made with Wat Murphy.
	"I wonder he told us nothing about it," Richard remarked. 
"We saw him over at Bob Lloyd's."
	"Was that the butcher?" Mr. Lowe asked. "I remarked that 
he had a very well-bred bull-dog."
	"Are you an admirer of those interesting animals?" Hugh 
asked, with a slight shade of sarcasm in his tone.
	"Well, not exactly. But some of my English friends set 
great value on them. That white dog of the butcher's would, I 
fancy, fetch as high a price as the cow you sold him."
	"I gave her to him for thirteen pounds ten," said Mr. 
Kearney. "'Twas too cheap. Wat sold four pups for two pounds 
apiece last year."
	"But what do they want them for," Mary asked, "now that 
there is no bull-baiting? Surely it cannot be for their beauty they 
are kept. A more ill-favoured animal it would be impossible to 
imagine than that dog of Wat Murphy's, with his crooked legs and 
frightful grin. I am always quite uneasy when I see him about the 
place."
	"Don't you see he is always muzzled?" said her father.
	"That only makes him look the more ferocious," she 
replied. "'Tis a shame to have such dogs kept by any one. There 
was a poor beggar woman here the other day, who had her leg torn 
in a frightful manner by Pender's dog."
	"I heard papa say," said Grace, "that such accidents are 
becoming very frequent. He says many farmers keep ferocious 
dogs now. He called to see one poor child that was attacked by a 
dog, and though the dog was muzzled, papa feared the child would 
die."
	"So many robbers," said Mr. Kearney, "are now prowling 
about the country, people don't know what to do. But it isn't 
robbers Pender is afraid of, but bailiffs. He was here to-day 
looking for you," he added, turning to Mr. Lowe.
	"For me! Oh yes," he added, recollecting himself, "he is my 
uncle's agent."
	"His son," Mr. Kearney replied. "And as cantankerous a 
cub as ever the Lord put breath in. He drove up to the door with a 
double-barrel gun at each side of him, and four pistols stuck in his 
belt. You'd be talking of bull-dogs," he added, turning to Mary, 
"But where will you find an uglier bull-dog than Beresford 
Pender?"
	"Beresford!" exclaimed Mr. Lowe. "Is he a connection of 
that family?"
	"His father," replied Mr. Kearney seriously, "was a dog boy 
to the old marquis."
	This curious sort of connection with aristocracy made the 
young gentleman laugh. But Hugh, feeling that it was scarcely 
prudent on his father's part to talk in this way of the agent and his 
son in presence of the landlord's nephew, changed the subject by 
remarking  --  "But you must not suppose from what my father has 
said about robbers prowling through the country, that theft is one 
of our national vices. On the contrary, the honesty of the people, 
under the circumstances, is most extraordinary."
	"I inferred as much," said Mr. Lowe, "from what the 
clergymen said the other day about stealing turf. It seems to me a 
very venial offence for a poor man to take a little turf in that way. 
And Mr. Hannigan alluded to no other acts of dishonesty."
	"He had a right to say something about the turnips," said 
Mr. Kearney. "Only for I got a cabin in every field and had a man 
minding them, they wouldn't leave me a turnip these two last years, 
whatever is coming over 'em. And there are gangs of blackguards 
from the towns, besides, that will take whatever they can lay hands 
on."
	"Unfortunately that is true," said Hugh. "Unprincipled 
characters go about plundering under cover of the general distress. 
But poor, honest people are driven to it, too, by necessity. When 
their houses are pulled down and they are forced to take refuge in 
the lanes of the next town, it is not surprising that many become 
dishonest. The man who would almost lie down and die of hunger 
in his own poor cabin, among his neighbours, rather than bring 
disgrace upon his family by turning thief, can easily be tempted 
when be finds himself in the midst of strangers in some wretched 
hole in the lanes or outskirts of the town."
	"I really believe what you say is true," said his mother. 
"Poor Molly Ryan was out here the other day, and it was heart-
breaking to listen to her. Her two boys, that she 'reared honest,' as 
she said, got into bad company, and were in jail for attempting to 
break into Murphy's store. If they had not been turned out of their 
little place at the Cross roads, the boys, I am sure, would grow up 
honest and industrious, like their poor father, who was a very 
decent man, and very civil and obliging; he used to do many little 
things for us."
	The cloth had been removed during the foregoing 
conversation; and Maurice Kearney had just mixed his second 
tumbler, and pushed the decanter to Hugh as his wife concluded.
	Richard, after waiting impatiently for a minute or two, and 
seeing that his brother had no intention of applying to the decanter, 
reached across the table and quietly filled his own glass.
	Mr. Lowe, we may observe, drank sherry.
 	"My goodness!" Grace exclaimed, in a whisper to Mary, 
"what can be the matter with Adonis? He has not opened his lips, 
except to imbibe whiskey-punch, the whole evening."
	"I really don't know," replied Mary.
	"His silence is positively miraculous," Grace continued. 
"particularly as Father M'Mahon is not present. And he has his 
dress-coat on. And," she added, opening her eyes with surprise as 
the doctor wheeled round his chair and stretched his legs towards 
the fire, "and his patent leather boots. I'm lost in amazement!"
	"Do you forget that the bewitching Kathleen is coming?"
	Grace frowned awfully; and got into a brown study 
immediately.
	"Are you jealous?" asked Mary, laughing. "What a dreadful 
coquette you must be. You had quite forgotten Adonis  --  had only 
ears and eyes for Apollo  --  and yet you are now up in arms 
against Kathleen."
	"Well, now, Mary don't talk so foolishly. Let us go to the 
drawing-room."
	Mr. Lowe opened the door for them, and they passed out, 
Grace looking almost too grand to acknowledge the civility by a 
slight inclination of the head. But before going to the drawing-
room she went upstairs, and returned wearing a necklace and other 
adornments, bent, no doubt, upon shining down Kathleen Hanly. 
	She first took up a book and, fixing herself in a becoming 
attitude, began to read. But her furtive glances towards the door led 
Mary to suspect that the book had not much interest for her.
	"What are you reading, Grace?" she asked; and Mary 
laughed on seeing her turn the book round to read the title on the 
back.
	"I guessed;" continued Mary, "that you were not quite 
absorbed in your studies."
	"You are bent upon teasing to-night. I suppose they will not 
favour us with their society till those ladies arrive."
	"Well, we shall not have long to wait," Mary replied; "for 
here they are."
	The sound of wheels on the gravel was quickly followed by 
a knock  --  an unusually loud and long knock, Mary thought  --  at 
the hall-door.
	The door was opened by Hugh before his sister reached the 
hall, and Miss Rose Hanly was explaining in a hurried and excited 
manner that they had brought Miss Lloyd with them.
	"She came out from town with mamma in the evening," 
said Miss Rose; "and, when she found we were coming to tea, she 
said she would come with us; as her brother, Robert, she said, 
knew you all very well."
	This was evidently a matter of tremendous importance in 
Miss Hanly's eyes; and, though Hugh took it coolly enough, Mary 
seemed considerably surprised. But before anything further could 
he said, the lady in question, accompanied by Kathleen, made her 
appearance.
	Mary welcomed all her visitors, and conducted them to her 
own room.



CHAPTER XVII.

LORY.

	WHEN Hugh was closing the door, he felt some slight 
resistance offered from the outside; but on looking out he could see 
nothing, the night was so intensely dark. On attempting to close the 
door a second time, the same gentle pressure Prevented him.
	"Who's there?" he asked.
	There was no reply: but a rather tall young lad advanced a 
step or two into the hall, and looked wildly about him.
	He was slight and somewhat raw-boned, and being at that 
moment almost blue with the cold, he presented the appearance of 
anything but a handsome youth.
	Hugh waited, expecting him to speak; and he waited, 
expecting Hugh would speak. And so they continued to stare at 
each other for a couple of minutes.
	"I came with my sisters," said the young lad, at last, in a 
voice so unexpectedly deep and loud that it made Hugh start.
	"Oh, Mr. Hanly," said Hugh, "I had quite forgotten you."
	"No wonder for you," was the reply in the same voice, and 
with the same wild opening of the eyes. "I had a petticoat on me 
the last time you saw me. Huh huh!"
	He laughed a deep, hollow laugh, in which Hugh joined  --  
not because the laugh was at all infectious, but because the allusion 
to the petticoat, in which his young neighbour had been kept far 
beyond the usual age, called up the very remarkable figure which a 
year or two before he occasionally saw starting from some grove 
or hedge, or mounted upon a gate pier, or paling, and looking, he 
used to think, like a young Indian in an early stage of the process 
of civilization.
	"Come in. This is young Mr. Hanly," he added, on entering 
the parlour.
	Young Mr. Hanly pulled off his cap, and looked round him 
as if he intended to bolt immediately, if he could only find an 
opening anywhere.
	Everyone looked at young Mr. Hanly except the doctor, 
who was so absorbed in his own reflections, or in the shine of his 
boots, as to seem unconscious of what was passing.
	"Good-night, Richard," said the new arrival. And the deep 
bass of his voice made them all start.
	"Oh, Lory!" Richard exclaimed, extending his hand to him. 
"How on earth did you manage to grow, so fast? "
	"You're a head over me yet," replied Lory.
	"Have a glass of punch?" said Mr. Kearney.
	Lory made no reply; but the expression of his face as he 
drew a chair to the table was more eloquent than words.
	He cast a look towards the door as if apprehending 
opposition from that quarter, and commenced operations in a rather 
hurried manner.
	Mr. Kearney, who had again introduced the bull-bait, was 
proceeding to give them some particulars he had learned from Wat 
Murphy, when Lory produced another sensation by the simple 
remark  --  "I know all about that."
	Lory gulped down a mouthful of his punch, which was so 
hot that it brought the tears to his eyes, and hastily pushed his 
tumbler towards Mr. Lowe, a proceeding which rather astonished 
that gentleman, who seemed to think that Mr. Hanly intended to 
share the beverage with him.
	But after looking towards the door, and finding that his 
sister, whose voice he had just heard in the hall, was not coming 
into the parlour, Lory took possession of his tumbler again, and 
looked at Mr. Lowe as if, on the whole, he rather thought himself 
in clover.
	"How is your father? " Mr. Kearney asked,
	"I couldn't tell you that," replied Lory. "He's in Dublin."
	Mr. Hanly the elder was an attorney; but the nature and 
extent of his professional business, was something of a mystery to 
his neighbours. He made periodical visits to the metropolis, during 
which he was in a manner lost to his family and friends in the 
country. Some inquisitive people attempted from time to time to 
find out his whereabouts in Dublin, but except that he was once 
seen dining at a tavern in the neighbourhood of Ormond Quay, 
these attempts invariably proved unsuccessful. Attorney Hanly 
came and went like the swallows  --  or rather the swifts  --  that 
took periodical possession of the crevices in the old castle near his 
house, and no one was the wiser of where he had been, save in a 
general way; for a letter to him, addressed "General Post Office, 
Dublin," usually reached his hands  --  when it suited him. He 
rented a not very large farm within a mile of Knocknagow, upon 
which he had built a handsome house, where his family always 
lived genteelly, though somewhat economically. Attorney Hanly 
was eccentric, and supposed to be rich  --  probably because he was 
eccentric.
	Come, let us have a few songs from the ladies," said Mr. 
Kearney. "That's Miss Hanly rattling at the piano, I think."
	The gentlemen followed him to the drawing-room, except 
the doctor, who sat with folded arms at the fire, and Lory,  who 
waited to finish his punch.
	"What's that I heard Rose and Kathleen talking about? Lory 
asked. "I couldn't get it out of them, they laughed so much. 
Something about you and the bog?"
	"Shut up, Lory," the doctor exclaimed, starting to his feet 
and filling out a glass of wine, which he swallowed with look of 
distraction.
	"Come," said he, after arranging his shirt-collar at the 
looking-glass, "finish that and let us go to them."
	"Faith, I'd rather stay where I am," said Lory, looking at the 
decanters.
	"On my honour, my dear fellow," replied the doctor, "you 
are not at all singular in that way of thinking. Rose and Kathleen 
are here?"
	"Yes, and Miss Lloyd."
	"Whew!" the doctor whistled and walked up and down the 
room. 	"What the devil brought her?"
	"Faith, I don't know. They were all surprised when she 
came out with my mother on the mail-car, and walked from  the 
cross."
	"I think I understand it," said the doctor. And it was some 
consolation to him to reflect that Miss Lloyd's thoughts were so 
concentrated upon Sir Garrett Butler's nephew, that she probably 
had given no attention to his humble self and the misadventure of 
the morning.
	The doctor stood irresolutely at the drawing-room door, till 
he heard his father say:
	"Come, Grace, give us 'Who Fears to Speak of 'Ninety-
Eight?'"
	And under cover of the song the doctor advanced and 
shook hands in silence with Miss Lloyd and the two Miss Hanlys.
	Grace sang with spirit, and received the compliments of the 
company with becoming dignity. She could not, how ever, conceal 
her delight when Mr. Lowe came to read the words of the song, 
and ask her who was its author.
	"I heard papa say," she replied, "that it was written by one 
of the scholars of Trinity College. All those songs appeared 
originally in the Nation. The airs are nearly all old Irish airs; but 
the music of that song is original."
	Mr. Lowe turned to other songs in the book, and it was with 
no small share of pride she told him that the writers of some of 
them were "friends of her papa's."
	"I should like to hear you sing this one," said he, pointing 
to a song, a stanza of which he had read.
	"Oh, yes; that is one of Davis's. He was a true poet. At first 
I did not admire his poetry so much. But I do now. 'Tis so full of 
heart. He was an irreparable loss to the country," she added 
solemnly. 
	"As a poet?" Mr. Lowe asked.
	"Well, yes; but more as a patriot. You can have no idea of 
how much he was beloved. I saw Mr. D -- , who, papa says, is a 
man of powerful intellect, burst into tears one evening at our 
house, when speaking of Davis. And O'Connell, when alluding to 
him after hearing of his death, said, 'I can write no more  --  my 
tears blind me.'"
	Mr. Lowe looked at her with surprise.
	"Yes," she continued, as if replying to his look; "these are 
O'Connell's words."
	But it was at herself he was wondering; and Hugh and 
Mary, who sat near the piano, exchanged looks and seemed to 
enjoy his astonishment.
	Miss Lloyd, however, was both astonished and chagrined to 
find that Mr. Lowe could feel interest in the prattle of a mere child.
	"I'm ashamed to acknowledge," said Mr. Lowe, still 
addressing himself to the little lady perched upon the stool, "that I 
know almost nothing about Mr. Davis. He was, I understand, a 
young barrister whose name seldom figured in the newspapers. But 
from what you tell me I must believe he was no common man."
	"Papa says," she rejoined, "that his influence on the mind of 
the country will be felt for ever. And, young as he died, his wish 
was granted."
	"What was his wish? "
	"His wish was  -- 

'Be my epitaph writ on my country's mind  -- 
He served his country and loved his kind!'"

	Mr. Lowe again looked at her with surprise. But when 
Mary glanced at her brother this time, her glance was not returned. 
She saw his broad chest heave; and a strange light, half fire, half 
softness, swam in his dark eyes.
	Mary shook her head as she thought to herself how little 
they understood him who thought him cold and unsusceptible. 
Behind that "down look," for which Hugh Kearney got credit, there 
was, she was sure, a heart and a soul of no common tenderness and 
enthusiasm.
	Miss Lloyd looked from one to the other of the group in 
amazement. She really could not understand what it all meant; but 
there were many things which Miss Lloyd could not understand.
	And besides, Miss Lloyd liked nothing half so well as the 
music of her own voice, which we must admit was musical; so 
much so that it took many persons a considerable time to discover 
that what seemed so pleasant had nothing in it. But she had a trick 
of talking to one person and at another; which was very trying to 
the latter  --  as Mr. Henry Lowe was destined to learn to his cost.



CHAPTER XVIII.

MISS LLOYD'S FOIBLES.

	As we have said so much of Miss Lloyd, we shall glance at 
one or two more of her peculiarities.
	The facility with which Miss Lloyd fell in love with every 
eligible young man  --  and occasionally with an eligible old one  --  
that came in her way, was something marvellous, and a source of 
great anxiety to her family and friends. Her being still in the land 
of the living was a matter of daily wonderment to her sympathizing 
sisters  --  " poor Henrietta" was so often on the point of dying of a 
broken heart. The defection of a young ensign of nineteen 
produced such an effect upon her, that she spent twenty-four hours 
"from one fainting fit into another"  --  we quote the words of her 
own mother; and she was known to have taken to her bed for three 
weeks because of the heartlessness of a widower of sixty-five who 
had been particular in his attentions on the occasion of his grand-
daughter's marriage, Miss Lloyd being one of the bridesmaids. But 
Miss Henrietta Lloyd's strong point was curiosity  --  an all-
absorbing inquisitiveness about other people and their affairs. The 
passion  --  for with her it amounted to a passion  --  bore down 
everything before it. All sense of propriety, all fear of 
consequences vanished like dew, in the intense heat of her desire to 
know what her neighbours were about. Listening at windows, 
dropping in uninvited at unseasonable times, stopping servants in 
the streets, and catechising butchers' boys, were everyday 
occurrences with Miss Lloyd. She had been known to rush across 
the street at eleven at night, and knock at Doctor Cusack's door, 
merely because her maid had remarked that a car had stopped there 
from which a man with a travelling bag had alighted. The doctor  --  
thinking it was his assistant, whom he had sent with two bread pills 
to the parson's mother-in-law, who had taken suddenly ill  --  
opened the door; and Miss Lloyd found herself face to face with an 
elderly gentleman in his night shirt, and was greeted at the same 
moment with a cheer from three young gentlemen of the Rev. Mr. 
Labart's academy, who had been making a night of it at the hotel 
before resuming their studies after vacation.
	Miss Lloyd would slip into the kitchen for a confab with 
the cook during the progress of a dinner-party upstairs, her not 
being invited to which was meant as a deliberate slight. And we 
blush to say that even the apartments of single young men had no 
terrors for Miss Lloyd when her inquisitiveness was aroused, and 
could only be gratified by bearding the bachelor in his hall.
	Yet, strange to say, the lady's fair fame never suffered from 
these peccadilloes. Her immunity in this respect, however, was 
partly owing to the fact that she belonged to that class of fair ones 
into whose "lug" the Scottish poet begged leave to whisper  --  

"Ye're aiblins nae temptation,"

and partly because she was a very rhinoceros to those shafts which 
usually wound so deeply, but which are so seldom discharged 
except when they can wound.
	From these glimpses of Miss Lloyd's character the reader 
must have anticipated that two of her foibles combined to bring her 
this evening to Ballinaclash.
	She had been on thorns during the week to get a look at Mr. 
Lowe; and when Mrs. Hanly met her in the main street of 
Kilthubber, and casually remarked that her girls were going to tea 
to Mr. Kearney's in the evening, Miss Lloyd eagerly offered to 
accompany her home: This Mrs. Hanly really looked upon as an 
honour, and thought it a most unfortunate circumstance that she 
had come to town on the public car and was to return by the same 
conveyance.
	The girls," she remarked, "were returning one or two visits 
in the morning, and I thought it would be too late to wait for the 
carriage. So I took a seat on the mail car."
	"Oh, no matter, my dear Mrs. Hanly," returned Miss Lloyd, 
"it will be quite pleasant. I know the driver of the mail car very 
well. That was Mr. Labart's new servant from Dublin that was on 
the car with you. I have not seen her yet; but I'm told she has 
excellent discharges from her two last places. So, my dear Mrs. 
Hanly, come up and I'll be ready in a minute."
	Mrs. Hanly, in the innocence of her heart, thought it would 
be necessary to send an apology to Miss Kearney; as, of course, 
her daughters could not think of leaving so distinguished a visitor 
as Miss Lloyd alone with herself during the evening. But Miss 
Lloyd at once removed that difficulty by announcing her intention 
of going with them.
	"To be sure," said she, "I'm not personally acquainted with 
them, but that makes no difference. I know their brother, the 
doctor, who is a great friend of Robert's: but I believe he is in 
Dublin."
	"Oh, he is at home," replied Rose Hanly. "We passed him a 
few hours ago in the bog. I wish you saw him."
	And Rose glanced at her sister, who, so far from joining in 
the laugh, looked quite huffed that her admirer should be made 
sport of in such a manner.
	"He is an elegant young man," Miss Lloyd observed, 
gravely; "and waltzes admirably. He was at the last race ball. I'll be 
delighted to meet him."
	Miss Lloyd was fastening a bracelet on her wrist in a 
nervous, fidgety manner, and had several pins in her mouth while 
she was speaking.
	"Oh, I am most unfortunate," she exclaimed, tumbling 
various small articles out of her bag on the floor. " I fear I have lost 
my charms."
	"'Pon my word, Miss Lloyd, that is a misfortune; and one 
that few would suspect you in danger of  --  

"'Vacuus cantat coram latrone viator.'"

	The young lady started, and with a terrified look towards 
the door, whence the sound proceeded, ran for protection to 
Kathleen, and grasped her convulsively by the arm.
	"Why do you come up here, sir? What business have you in 
our room?" exclaimed Rose, quite in a shrewish tone.
	"To tell you that the car is at the door, and not to keep the 
pony standing in the cold."
 "Oh!" gasped Miss Lloyd, with her hand pressed against her left 
side, "what a dreadful voice he has!"
	"I'm always at him about it," said Rose, "but I can get no 
good of him. And somehow you never know he's there till he 
speaks. He startles ourselves now as much as anybody else, as he 
has been at school for two years without coming home. But he's 
very clever," she added, evidently proud of the fact. "He took first 
prizes in classics. I believe that's Greek he's after talking now."
	"Oh, I hope he won't talk any more Greek to me," said Miss 
Lloyd, drawing a long breath. "A few more such shocks would 
knock me up completely."
	"You'll get used to it," said Rose. "In fact, it wouldn't be 
half so bad if you were prepared for it. But let us hurry, and not 
leave the poor pony to be frozen to death."
	"I can't get any good of it," said Miss Lloyd despairingly.
	One side of her hair was so obstinately in curl that she 
couldn't brush it out, and the other side was so hopelessly out of 
curl that she couldn't twist it in. With Kathleen's assistance, 
however, she fixed it somehow, and on hearing Lory rushing up 
the stairs again, they hurried out of the room.
	"We're ready," exclaimed Rose, putting her hand on her 
brother's mouth, to save Miss Lloyd's nerves from another shock.
	And now we find the last-mentioned lady with her elbow 
resting upon Mary Kearney's piano, and feeling her hair with the 
tips of her fingers, for the double purpose of displaying her 
bracelet to the best advantage, and satisfying herself as to how the 
refractory curl was behaving itself.
	She was losing all patience at seeing Mr. Lowe throwing 
away so much of his time talking to "that pert little thing," while 
she, Henrietta Lloyd, was there for the express purpose of talking 
to him.
	But when Rose Hanly was asked to sing, and Grace made 
way for her, Miss Lloyd could no longer conceal her ineffable 
disgust.
	"Oh, really," she exclaimed, "ye are all musically mad." To 
her great relief, however, the tea-tray appeared just as the song had 
concluded. And her good humour was quite restored when she saw 
they were to have tea sitting sociably round the table. Miss Lloyd 
shone with peculiar brilliancy at the tea table; and she now 
hastened to take up a position from which she could direct her fire 
on Mr. Lowe through Mrs. Kearney.
	"Where do you get your tea, Mrs. Kearney? " she began. 
"We get ours at Phelin's," she continued, without waiting for a 
reply. "Mr. Hemphill recommended us to get it there."
	Poor Mr. Lowe was already beginning to feel quite 
uncomfortable, for the lady never turned her eyes from his face for 
a moment.
	"What strange things people will say, Mrs. Kearney?"
	 Mr. Lowe looked at her inquiringly, for, from the direct 
stare with which she regarded him, he expected she was about 
accusing him of saying strange things. To his great relief, however, 
she continued:
	"It was said in Phelin's shop that we had no fortunes."
	Mr. Lowe sought relief in the bottom of his tea-cup, but 
failed to find it, for he felt the eyes were upon him.
	"But, Mrs. Kearney, you may tell any one that asks that we 
have fortunes. I have two thousand, and my sisters a thousand 
each."
	Mr. Lowe tried balancing his spoon on his finger, but the 
relief it afforded was only partial and temporary.
	"Mr. Hemphill's son is after coming home. I have not seen 
him yet; but I'm told he is an elegant young man."
	Look sharp, Mr. Lowe! Make your hay while the sun 
shines!
	He meditated bolting from the room, but felt as if be 
couldn't  --  as if she "held him with her glittering eye," like the 
Ancient Mariner.
	 "And Robert tells me," continued Miss Lloyd, "that Mr. 
Hemphill is extremely intellectual."
	The idea that Bob Lloyd had ever used such a phrase as 
"extremely intellectual" was so good a joke that both Hugh and 
Richard found it difficult to refrain from laughing.
	But it must not be suspected that Miss Lloyd was drawing 
upon her imagination. She merely had recourse to a euphemism, 
which was her practice when quoting her brother's observations. In 
this instance Bob did say, in reply to a question of hers, that young 
Hemphill was a "bloody clever fellow," and this expression Miss 
Lloyd merely translated into "extremely intellectual."
	"I know his brother," said Lory, from the opposite end of 
the table.
	Miss Lloyd was in the act of putting her cup to her lips, and 
staring at Mr. Lowe over the brim, when Lory's remark, innocent 
as it may seem in print, knocked the cup out of her hand as 
effectually as if he had flung a projectile at it with unerring aim.
	The shock was felt more or less by all present; but when 
they saw Miss Lloyd with her hand in the same position as when 
the cup flew from it, apparently unable to move, and staring at 
Lory as if he had knocked the wits out of her too, a laugh that 
could not be suppressed went round the table. And when the 
nervous lady at length leant back in her chair and said faintly, 
"That boy is dreadful," Mr. Lowe blessed Lory in his heart for 
drawing her eyes upon himself.
	Mrs. Kearney took the broken tea-cup in her hand; and the 
good woman was inconsolable. She had not even the melancholy 
consolation of telling how her uncle Dan admired the pattern of 
this particular set; for Richard suggested a dance at the moment, 
which caused a general movement among the company, and Mrs. 
Kearney gently laid the broken cup on the tray with a sigh.



CHAPTER XIX.

WILL SIR GARRETT RENEW THE LEASE?

	GRACE was taking her place at the piano, when Mary 
whispered to her that she herself would play for the dancers  --  an 
arrangement which Grace liked very well. But she looked quite 
offended when she saw that Mr. Lowe and the doctor had already 
engaged the two Miss Hanlys; and Hugh was compelled by the 
exigencies of the case to offer his arm to the formidable Miss 
Lloyd. 
	"Stand up, sir," said Rose Hanly to her brother. And Lory 
and Grace completed the set.
	"Are you long here?" Lory asked.
	"Some weeks," she replied, after involuntarily moving half-
a-yard away from him.
	"Will you stay much longer?
	"I can't say."
	"Come with me," said Lory confidentially, "and I'll show 
you places you never saw before."
	She stared at him with unfeigned astonishment.
	"I'll show you a cave," he continued, "that very few know 
about."
	"Oh!" was her only reply. And the idea of a cave, taken in 
connection with her partner's voice, gave her a vague sort of 
impression that he lived under ground, and only visited his friends 
during the holidays. She looked at him more curiously than she had 
yet done, and thought his costume rather strengthened this notion. 
His coat, for instance, was evidently made for him when he was 
about half his present size. It was much too narrow in the 
shoulders; the sleeves did not reach far below the elbows; the 
buttons behind were half-way up his back; and the skirts fell 
considerably short of the extremity of the spine. On the other hand, 
his trousers, of grey cotton tweed, was distressingly new and shiny, 
and very much too large; the tailor, warned no doubt by the 
example of the coat, seeming to have left him "ample room and 
verge enough" to expand into a colossus, if he were so minded  -- 
particularly about that portion of his person which the coat-skirts 
seemed to be straining every thread to cover, but only partially 
succeeded. So that Grace fancied she saw in her partner the upper 
half of a small boy joined to the lower half of a stout man.
	She was soon struck by another peculiarity, which both 
surprised and distressed her. When it came near their turn to begin 
the figure, Lory's legs began bending and straightening at the 
knees. With his neck stretched forward, and staring wildly at the 
opposite wall, he worked up and down spasmodically to the time 
of the music.
	Grace thought at first that the soles of his boots had, by 
some unaccountable means, been glued to the floor, and that he 
was exciting all his strength to get them free. In fact, it seemed 
absolutely necessary that Lory should pump himself for a minute 
or two before he could set off. And this getting up of steam was 
more frequent than usual in consequence of Hugh's ignorance of 
quadrilles  --  and Miss Lloyd was not the sort of partner to set him 
right.
	The doctor, who was opposite to his brother and Miss 
Lloyd, was greatly annoyed by these blunders; and as he seldom 
thought of consulting other people's wishes when his own were to 
be gratified, he coolly took Grace by the hand and transferred her 
to Hugh, handing back Miss Lloyd to Lory, who, by merely asking 
"did she like quadrilles?" almost precipitated her into Maurice 
Kearney's lap.
	This exchange of partners so bewildered Miss Lloyd, that 
the dance was over before she could fully realize her position.
	Grace hung upon Hugh's arm, glad to escape from her late 
partner; and her quick eye did not fail to observe that the exchange 
was very welcome to Hugh too. He drew her out about Davis and 
other kindred subjects; but she never lost sight of the business in 
hand, and piloted him SO deftly that there were no more mistakes 
till the dance was concluded.
	"Wonders will never cease," said she to Mary, as she 
fanned herself with her handkerchief. "Fionn Macool can make 
himself agreeable."
	"It would be strange if he could not," Mary replied, with a 
thoughtful smile.
	The evening passed very pleasantly. Everyone who could 
sing, did sing  --  including Maurice Kearney himself, who gave 
them the "Cruiskeen Lawn," in excellent style. Other dances 
followed the first; and a polka with Sir Garrett Butler's nephew 
made even Miss Lloyd supremely happy.
	When they reached home, the Miss Hanlys and their visitor  
--  according to universal custom  --  discussed the merits of the 
people with whom they had spent the evening.
	Kathleen was outspoken in praise of the doctor; and Miss 
Lloyd agreed in all she said in his praise. And Kathleen as fully 
shared Miss Lloyd's ecstasies on the subject of Mr. Lowe.
	"Even if you separate his features," said Miss Lloyd, "he is 
a singularly handsome man. And what lovely hair he has!"
	"Yes," replied Kathleen, "his hair is very nice."
	"And," exclaimed Miss Lloyd, clasping her hands together 
and turning up her eyes fervently, "did you ever see such feet with 
mortal?"
	"Ye may talk," said Rose, who leant on the table with her 
hand pressed against her forehead, as if she were suffering from 
headache  --  "ye may talk, but I'd rather have one honest smile 
from Hugh Kearney than all the blandishments of your elegant 
young man."
	'Pon my word," replied Kathleen, opening her eyes very 
wide, "whatever may be thought of your taste, I cannot help 
admiring your candour."
	"Yes, I am candid," Rose rejoined, rather crossly; "and 
that's more than other people are." 
	The bewitching Kathleen got very red, and an angry look 
flashed from her eyes; but she only stooped down, and, snatching 
up her lap-dog from the hearth-rug, began to fondle it assiduously.
	"It really surprises me," said Miss Lloyd, "how some ladies 
will openly express their preferences for young men."
	"I always do," retorted Rose. "Don't you?"
	"Well, Miss Hanly, I never forget that I am a 
gentlewoman." And Miss Lloyd laid great stress on the word 
gentlewoman; which was not very ladylike, however 
gentlewomanly, seeing that she meant to remind her friends that 
their claims to gentility  --  in her sense of the word  --  were not 
quite as strong as her own.
	"Well," rejoined Rose, who did not want pluck. "I can't 
boast of much of your acquaintance. But from all I have heard of 
you, I am under the impression that you are in the habit of coming 
out pretty strong with regard to your preferences for young men  --  
and old ones too," added Rose  --  we fear in allusion to the 
widower. 
	Miss Lloyd turned away in disdain, and resumed her 
conversation with Kathleen, who became quite tender and 
sentimental about "Poor Richard," as she affectionately called the 
doctor.
	And Miss Lloyd certainly did not practise what she 
preached , for she did come out very strong indeed in praise of Mr. 
Lowe.
	The next day, when her sisters inquired how she liked her 
new acquaintance, Miss Lloyd put her handkerchief to her eyes, 
and bursting into a flood of tears, declared that she was "as fond of 
him as she was of her life."
	Before going to bed, Maurice Kearney insisted upon having 
a comfortable glass by the fire with his guest.
	"Pender is to come again to see you to-morrow," said he. 
"He had a letter from your uncle."
	"Indeed! "exclaimed the young gentleman, looking rather 
blank. It flashed upon him that he had already spent  --  he could 
not, at the moment, remember how many days  --  on his uncle's 
Tipperary estate, and knew as much about it as the man in the 
moon.
	"I wonder," continued Maurice Kearney, "did he say 
anything about the lease?"
	"I really cannot imagine," replied his guest, absently. And, 
at that moment, Mr. Lowe could imagine nothing except that Mary 
Kearney was the most angelic being in creation.
	"Times are changed," added the host, thoughtfully. "I 
expect he will allow me for the drainage. I wish he'd come to see 
the place himself. I could show him forty acres of nice land where 
I found him the day he sprained his knee, with his horse sunk up to 
the girths in a shaky bog. I lost a hatful of money by it."
	"You lost more than the fee-simple is worth," said Hugh.
	"I don't know how much I lost by it," replied his father, 
rubbing his head uneasily; "but when I began, I didn't like to stop 
and throw the men out of employment."
	"I can tell you what you lost by it," said Hugh.
	"Poor Mr. Butler," Mrs. Kearney observed, "suffered a 
great deal from that accident. We had him here for six weeks. But 
he was as gentle as a child, and when he began to get ease from the 
pain he desired me to write for my Uncle Dan; and sure so I did, 
and he brought his violin, and Mr. Butler sent for his flute; and 
'twas beautiful to listen to them. 'Twas the year after he was 
shipwrecked coming from abroad. And when the poor dear 
gentleman went away, the house was quite lonesome after him. 
Richard was born in the month of March after. And sure, I 
suppose," added Mrs. Kearney, contemplatively, "that's the reason 
he has such a taste for music."
	Hugh had left the room unobserved, and now appeared with 
his ledger, and, laying it on the table, he began turning over the 
leaves.
	"For God's sake shut that book  --  I hate the sight of it," 
exclaimed his father, with a gesture of impatience.
	"I thought you wanted to know what the drainage cost," 
said Hugh.
	"I don't want to know it. What good would it do me to 
know it? And sure a man couldn't do anything if he was to keep an 
account of every penny that way."
	Hugh smiled, and put the obnoxious book out of sight. 
"Good night, Mr. Lowe!" exclaimed Maurice Kearney, jumping 
suddenly from his chair in quite a lively manner. "I'm going to the 
fair to-morrow, and must be half-way to C --  before daybreak."
	"Ah, then," said his wife, "will you try and get a match for 
that cup Miss Lloyd broke? And I'm afraid you can't. I wouldn't 
wish it for anything."
	I will  --  I will," he replied. "Tell Norry to give it to Tom 
Maher, and let him remind me of it."
	"I'm surprised she should be so awkward," continued Mrs. 
Kearney, returning to her grievance. "But it was all that young 
Hanly's fault. I declare he frightened the life out of me."
	Mrs. Kearney remained buried in thought for a minute, and 
then added, solemnly:
	"Don't be talking; but he has a terrible throat!" This allusion 
to Lory elicited so loud a laugh from Hugh, that the doctor, who 
had been asleep in an arm-chair, started up and rubbed his eyes.
	"There's eleven striking, Richard," said his mother, "and 
you are tired, and ought to go to bed."
	"It is time for us all to go," Hugh remarked.
	And he and Mr. Lowe and the doctor retired each to his 
own room.
	But Hugh hurried on before the doctor, and thrust the 
second-hand clarionet under the bed, lest the idea of the fair 
Kathleen operating upon that taste for music which his mother had 
so satisfactorily accounted for, should interfere with the slumbers 
of the household.
'And the clarionet not being in the doctor's way, every soul under 
Maurice Kearney's roof was resting in peace and quietness when 
the clock struck twelve. 



CHAPTER XX.

MR. LOWE GETS A LETTER OF WARNING.

	NEXT day, as the doctor was proposing another walk to the 
Castle, Barney Brodherick was seen cantering from the avenue 
gate, mounted upon the little black donkey, Bobby, which he 
regarded as his own peculiar property.
	"Let us wait," said Hugh, "he may have some letters."
	Barney rode up to the window, and handed in the letters 
and newspapers he had brought from the crossroads, where, as 
usual, he had met the mail-car.
	There was a letter for Mr. Lowe.
	"I think," Hugh suggested, as he tore off the cover of a 
newspaper, "you had better read your letter before going out. You 
may want to reply to it."
	The letter was from Mr. Lowe's mother, and as the contents 
may help us on with our story, we give a few extracts:
	"I am very uneasy, my dearest Henry," the lady began, 
"since I have received a letter from young Mr. Pender, in which he 
speaks of the dreadful state of the country in that locality. He has 
been fired at three times during the last fortnight, and would have 
captured one of the assassins on the last occasion only that his 
horse took fright and ran away with him. The horse, unfortunately, 
was a borrowed one, and not accustomed to stand fire. But if he 
had had his own horse, there can scarcely be a doubt but that he 
would have made prisoners of at least two of the gang. He could 
not use his pistols, they set upon him so suddenly, but he felled one 
of the miscreants to the earth, and the other two took to flight after 
discharging their blunderbusses at him, but fortunately without 
effect, except that a slug from one of them lodged in his nose. It 
has been extracted, and the doctors do not think the wound 
dangerous. But why do I go on telling you those things when, of 
course, you know all the particulars of the dreadful affair. He is a 
very brave young man, but generous to a fault. He begs me not to 
tell Sir Garrett, lest he should eject all the tenants from the 
townland where this shocking outrage occurred. For the same 
reason he has only given a very guarded account of it to the local 
papers. But of course the whole truth must come out at the trial, 
when the assassins are arrested, which I think they will be, as Mr. 
Pender has described them minutely to the police. He thinks it a 
duty he owes to society to prosecute them to conviction . . . .
	Oh, my dear Henry, I have quite changed my mind about 
the agency. Bad as India is, it is not so bad as a place where such 
dreadful occurrences could take place in the middle of the noon-
day  --  or what is all the same, for it was not long after sunset in 
the evening. I will never consent to your exposing your life in such 
a manner . . . 
	"Mr. P. speaks of other things which I do not like to allude 
to in this letter. What sort of people are the Kearneys? I mean the 
younger members of the family. The old man seems good-natured 
and harmless, and your uncle thinks highly of his wife, at whose 
hands he says he experienced much kindness long ago; but then he 
was always so unsuspicious and unworldly, he is apt to view things 
in the most favourable light. Have you noticed anything peculiar 
about his eldest son? My dearest Henry, be careful . . . .  I 
understand his daughter is good-looking and has got some 
education. Well, I know something of the world, and, take my 
word for it, girls of this kind, particularly when they are educated 
above their rank, are the most designing creatures in existence. 
Your poor uncle should be a warning to you. But I ought to beg 
your pardon for supposing you so simple as to require any warning             
Your cousin has not yet returned  --  I trust you have written to her 
from the country. I have discovered that there is nothing she 
admires so much as daring. So, if you want to interest her, give her 
an account of the perils by which you are surrounded. She is most 
anxious that her father should settle in that part of the country; and 
as he humours her in everything, it will not surprise me if he gets 
possession of Woodlands again, after old Mr. Somerfield's death, 
as his is the last life in the lease.
	You ought to call and see if the place is in good repair. It 
was a lovely place when I was a girl, and it was there that I spent 
the happiest days of my life. And if those outrages could be put 
down  --  a Coercion Act is talked of  --  it would be a great 
pleasure to me to revisit the scenes of my youth. Let me know if 
Mrs. Lloyd, of Mount Tempe, be alive."
	The young gentleman was considerably bewildered by this 
production. He did not know what to think of it. He seldom gave 
himself the trouble of thinking about anything. But the allusion to 
his host's daughter made his cheek flush; and between Mr. 
Beresford Pender's nose and Mary Kearney's eyes, things were 
becoming mixed in the mind of Mr. Henry Lowe.
	"Unpleasant news," said Grace in a whisper to Mary.
	"What is it?" Mary asked, looking at her anxiously.
	"I'm sure I can't tell you; but look at him."
	"Oh, is it Mr. Lowe you mean? Well, I can see nothing 
unusual in his look."
	"Well," Hugh asked, "does your letter require an immediate 
answer?
	"No, no," he replied with affected carelessness. "'Tis from 
my mother; and she wants to know," he added, glancing through 
the letter to hide his embarrassment, "if Mrs.  --  Mrs. Lloyd, of 
Mount Temple, is alive."
	"It is Mount Tempe," said Mary, "She is mother of the lady 
you saw here last night."
	"I ought to have remembered; we were at Mount Tempe 
yesterday."
	"And did you meet Mr. Lloyd?"
	"Yes, we spent some time with him, and he joined us at the 
snipe shooting."
	"Oh, I said you must have been reinforced," said Grace, the 
volleys increased so much towards evening."
	He was a little afraid of Grace's ridicule, and thought it 
wise to turn the conversation from the shooting as quickly as 
possible.
	"My mother also wants to know," he observed, again 
glancing at the letter, "whether Woodlands is kept in good repair, 
and she says something about old Mr. Somerfield."
	"The old fellow is alive," said Hugh, "and wonderfully 
strong and active for his age. He cannot be far short of ninety, and 
yet he is never missed from the hunt."
	"And how does he keep the place? I mean the house and 
grounds."
	"Oh! in excellent order -- nothing could be better. In fact, 
he has expended a large sum of money on improvements."
	"Does he not pay a considerable rent for it?"
	"Well, my father could tell you all about it. Your late uncle 
was, I think, in want of money, and set the place to Somerfield. I 
suspect the rent cannot be very high, as I heard my father say there 
was a large fine given."
	"By the way," said Mr. Lowe, somewhat hesitatingly, "have 
there been any outrages of a remarkable character lately in this 
neighbourhood? I find some allusion to some thing of the kind in 
this letter."
	"No," replied Hugh, "there has been nothing of the kind 
about here. But I find a paragraph in this paper referring to a 
threatening notice which was found nailed to a door seven or eight 
miles from here."
	"No one has been fired at?"
	"Not that I know of. There is an unusually large number of 
ejectments served this year; and when that is the case, rumours of 
outrages are always flying about."
	"Are any of my uncle's tenants served with ejectments?"
	"Yes," Hugh replied, gravely, "two very honest and 
industrious men. I believe they owe some arrears. There is a good 
deal of anxiety among the other tenants. But," he added, as if he 
wished to change the subject, "I don't know all the particulars. 
Perhaps it would be well if you inquired into them. Indeed, I think, 
the landlord ought to come and see for himself how things are 
going on here."
	"I believe he places great confidence in the agent," said Mr. 
Lowe.
	"It would appear so," Hugh replied. "But as he has come to 
Ireland, it might be no harm for him to see personally how his 
estate is managed. Things have gone on smoothly enough up to 
this; but since the leases given by Sir Thomas have begun to drop, 
there is considerable uneasiness. My father will tell you that before 
now leases were renewed as a matter of course: but latterly there is 
a remarkable reluctance on the part of landlords to give leases, and 
your uncle's tenants are uneasy lest he should follow the example 
set by others in this respect."
	"I don't know much about the matter," said Mr. Lowe; "but 
I should think it very unlikely that my uncle would act unjustly 
towards any one."
	"That's just what I say," replied Hugh; "and that is why I'd 
like to see him using his own eyes."
	"I should say this is Mr. Pender," said Mr. Lowe, who sat 
near the window. "At least he answers in some respects to Mr. 
Kearney's description of him last night. He has a gun on each side 
of him. Yes," he added, as the person in question alighted from his 
gig, "and pistols in his belt."
	"It is he," replied Hugh, coming to the window.
	Mr. Beresford Pender, observing that the gentleman he 
wanted to see had a full view of him from the window, took off his 
belt and handed it, with the pistols in it, to his servant. Then 
walking to the hall door, he knocked loudly.
	"Is Mr. Lowe within?" Mr. Pender asked in a mighty voice 
that seemed to come up from his chest.
	"I'll see, sir," said the servant.
	Mr. Pender faced round, and with folded arms glared up at 
the tall trees on either side of the cottage, and then looked 
scowlingly at the top of the mountain in front.
	"This is a nice place Kearney has here," muttered Mr. 
Beresford Pender to himself. "A nice thing it is to see fellows of 
this kind in a place like this, and gentlemen in thatched houses 
without as much as a tree to shelter them. He has a good deal of 
planting done here. Nice work for farmers. By  -- ," exclaimed Mr. 
Pender, swearing almost loud enough to be heard within, "if I had 
to deal with them they'd have something else to mind besides 
plantations."
	"Yes, sir," said the servant girl, opening the drawing-room 
door; and Mr. Pender strode in, glancing round him with a look in 
which sheepishness and something like timidity were curiously 
blended.
	In fact, Mr. Pender looked as if he thought it possible that 
he might be kicked out. But finding there was no one in the room, 
he got up his fierce look, and brought it to bear on the mountain-
top again.
	Mr. Lowe came in, and, as he closed the door behind him, 
the runaway look came back into Mr. Pender's eyes. Reassured, 
however, by the polite bow of the gentleman, Mr. Pender said:
	"I called to see you because I wanted to spake to you."
	"Yes," replied Mr. Lowe. "I was told you called yesterday."
	"I suppose you know my father is agent over the property 
for the last thirty years?" said Mr. Pender.
	"I'm aware he is the agent, and I intended calling on him, 
but have put it off from day to day."
	Mr. Beresford Pender commenced patting the bridge of his 
nose with his fingers, and Mr. Lowe observed that there was a bit 
of sticking-plaster adhering to the organ, which, we may remark, 
was of the flexible order, as if nature in tended it to be tweaked; or 
it may be that it was tweaking made it flexible.
	"Do you think," he asked, dropping his big voice to a 
sepulchral whisper, "that you are safe here?"
	"Why? What danger do you suppose I have, to apprehend?"
	"I don't like to say much," said Mr. Beresford Pender. "But, 
as a friend, I came to see you."
	There was something so mysterious in his look, that, 
between it and the sepulchral whisper, Mr. Lowe began to feel 
impressed with the notion that Mr. Beresford Pender was a person 
of consequence.
	"You'll see my father," continued Mr. Pender, resuming his 
big voice, which still further impressed Mr. Lowe with the idea 
that he was talking to a great man, "and spend a few days with 
him."
	"It is my intention to see him."
	"There's to be a meeting one of those days," said Mr. 
Pender.
	"What sort of meeting?
	Mr. Beresford Pender hesitated, as if in doubt whether Mr. 
Lowe was a proper person to communicate with on the subject of 
the meeting.
	"I'll tell you about it another time; I'll be speaking to some 
of the gentlemen at the road-sessions to-day."
	Mr. Lowe looked at him and really began to feel uneasy.
	"They're quare times," said Mr. Beresford Pender. "Good 
morning. I'll tell my father you'll call to see him."
	Mr. Beresford Pender walked out; and it was not till he had 
watched him for some time as he carefully examined his pistols 
and buckled the belt around him, that Mr. Lowe discovered that 
Mr. Beresford Pender was not a very large, stout man. In fact, he 
was under the middle height, and rather lank than otherwise. But, 
between the big voice and the big look, he really often impressed 
people with the idea that he was a big man.
	"Good gracious, Mary! " exclaimed Grace, who was 
observing Mr. Pender's movements from behind the window 
curtain, "he is like an alderman in front. But look at him behind, 
and he's like a pump. He'd want to wear a bustle."
	"Oh, fie," said Mary, "what would Mr. Lowe say if he 
heard you make such a remark?"
	"I suppose it would be quite unpardonable if I remarked 
also that the servant's coat, with the distressingly large and bright 
livery buttons, is an old frock-coat of his master's."
	"Nothing can escape you," said Mary, laughing; "I'd never 
have noticed it if you had not pointed it out."
	It occurred to Mr. Lowe that Mr. Pender had made no 
allusion to the several attempts upon his life; and he stepped 
outside the door to satisfy his curiosity before Mr. Pender had got 
into his gig.
	"You wrote to my mother lately," observed Mr. Lowe.
	"Yes," replied Mr. Pender. "You know she has a rent-
charge on Cahirdeheen, and I see to it myself. 'Tisn't aisy to 
manage them fellows."
	"But you spoke of being attacked by five men?"
	"They were hired," replied Mr. Beresford Pender. "But I 
don't like to transport him." And as he spoke he looked at the 
parlour window, from which Mary quickly retreated, a little vexed 
at being seen by him.
	I'll tell you all about it another time," he added, "but keep 
what I'm after telling you to yourself."
	Mr. Lowe did not know what to think, and was about 
shaking hands with his new acquaintance, when the latter said  --  
"Nice girl!"
	Very inoffensive and harmless words in themselves; but 
there was something in Mr. Beresford Pender's manner of uttering 
them, as he glanced at the parlour window, that made Mr. Henry 
Lowe feel an almost uncontrollable impulse to kick Mr. Beresford 
Pender then and there.
	"Good morning," said he, turning upon his heel and 
drawing back his hand before Mr. Beresford Pender had touched it.



CHAPTER XXI.

FIVE SHILLINGS WORTH OF DANCE.

	"WELL, what a contrast!" Grace exclaimed. "Do come 
here, Mary, and look on this picture and on this. Apollo is really a 
divinity near that satyr."
	Mary could see Mr. Lowe and Mr. Beresford Pender from 
where she sat at the table writing.
	"You are right," said she, with an emphasis that made 
Grace open her eyes.
	"'Pon my honour, Mary, you can be energetic 
occasionally."
	Mary was so absorbed in her own reflections, she took no 
notice of this observation. She thought to herself that Mr. Lowe 
was a person to be liked; and the more she saw of him, the better 
she liked him. The thought even occurred to her that, if there was 
no difference of rank or religion between them, she could like him 
sufficiently well to be happy with him as his wife. There was not 
one among the young men who honoured her with their attentions 
whose character she could admire so much  --  that is, assuming 
her estimate of Mr. Lowe's character to be correct.
	But Mary Kearney felt her heart sinking within her at the 
thought that there was a hard struggle before her  --  that a victory 
should be gained over herself before she could think of any one as 
a husband.
	She took the note Barney had thrown up to Grace in the 
window, and read it over.
	"I fear," she murmured  --  and the tears welled into her 
eyes  --  "I fear he thinks I refused to see him."
	She moved away the letter she had been writing, and placed 
a clean sheet of notepaper in its stead. She wrote the date at the top 
of the sheet, and then stopped irresolutely.
	There was a careworn look in her face as she leant back in 
her chair, pressing her left hand against her bosom.
	"May God direct me what to do!" she murmured.
	"Did you speak?" Grace asked.
	"No," she replied, recovering herself, "or if I did it was to 
myself."
	"To whom are you writing?"
	"To Anna."
	"Oh, really that young lady's head is very full of romance. 
'Tis to be hoped she'll find the beau monde all her fancy painted it. 
How long is she in Belgium now? I can't remember."
	"Nearly two years," Mary replied.
	"And all that time in the convent! 'Tis dreadful," returned 
Grace, shuddering.
	"Do you feel it so dreadful yourself? " Mary asked. "Oh, I 
have a visit from my friends sometimes, and can come home at 
vacation. But even that is hard enough," she added, with a sigh.
	"I thought you always liked being at school. At least you 
told me so when I went to see you."
	Grace shrugged her shoulders, but made no reply.
	"Am I to suppose that you only said it to please Mrs. Clare? 
Is that your sincerity?"
	"No; I really was sincere," replied Grace. "I did like being 
at school then. But, my dear Mary," she added, with a pensive 
shake of the head, "'tis quite different since I got notions."
	Though Mary was just then in anything but a laughing 
mood, she could not help laughing at this; and the laugh, she felt, 
did her good.
	"If you got your choice," she asked, "would you remain at 
home and never go back to school again?"
	Grace remained silent for a moment, and then said, in a 
low, firm voice:
	"I would go back."
	"And why would you go back if you think it so dreadful?"
	"Because it would be right."
	"Yes," said Mary, looking at her with surprise, "we ought 
all to do what is right. Duty before all things."
	"When I am sure it is right to do anything," said Grace "I 
try to do it, no matter how hard it is."
	"You are a little heroine," rejoined Mary. "But, she added 
to herself, glancing at the sheet of paper before her, "it is not 
always easy to know what is right."
	"I think," said Grace, coming to the table, "I'll write a few 
lines to Anna."
	"Oh, do; she will be delighted; she was very fond of you."
	"Why do people say that you will be a nun?" Grace asked. 
"I suspect it is Anna will be the nun, in spite of her fine talk about 
the beau monde. But why do they say that you will be a nun? Mrs. 
Xavier is quite sure that you will."
	"I really don't know," replied Mary, blushing.
	"Oh, 'tis because you are such a mild Madonna, I suppose," 
said Grace, dipping her pen in the ink. "But on second thoughts," 
she added, "I won't write till to morrow. I must turn it in my head, 
as I want to let her see that one can do something in the way of 
rounded periods without going to Belgium. And, besides, I must 
have a few French phrases. So finish your letter, and I'll just run 
out to see what Apollo is going to do with himself."
	"I think you ought to go to Ellie  --  she is all alone."
	"Ellie! She doesn't want me. Her whole soul is wrapped in 
her goldfinch."
	"Oh, that reminds me," said Mary, "that we must go to see 
poor Norah Lahy to-day."
	"I would like to go," said Grace, thoughtfully. "That is," 
she added, correcting herself, "I know I ought to like to go. But oh! 
'tis saddening to look at her. It so reminds one of dying young. 
And, besides, I fear I hurt her mother's feelings the other day."
	"You did not do it intentionally."
	"Oh, indeed, no. But you know  -- 

'Evil is wrought by want of thought,
As well as by want of heart.'"

	"You do not want either heart or thought, Grace, The 
remark you made was natural enough under the circumstances; and 
you did not know Mrs. Lahy was listening to you. Now, would you 
not do almost anything for that poor sick girl?"
	"I would," Grace replied; "but I'm ashamed to confess I feel 
a strong wish to keep away from her, and not even think of her."
	"But if it be right?"
	"I will go," said Grace in the same tone as when she said 
she would go back to school.
	Grace went to a cupboard, and, getting upon a chair, took 
something from the upper shelf, and was leaving the room hastily.
	"And where are you going now?" Mary asked, with some 
surprise.
	"To Ellie," she replied, "I have some sugar for her 
goldfinch."
	Mary smiled approvingly, and then, resting her forehead 
upon the back of her open hand, with which she covered the few 
words she had written on the sheet of notepaper, as if she wished to 
hide them from herself, she fell into deep thought.
	"Oh, yes," she said, raising her head, "if we could be sure 
what is right to be done! But how can there be any thing wrong in 
it? I think it is because I so much wish to write that I am afraid to 
do it. But, though my heart says 'Yes,' the 'still small voice'  says 
'No.' I would consult Hugh only it would add to his trouble. I 
wonder might Anna meet him before she comes home. But that is a 
foolish idea; she is as far out of his way as I am myself."
	The idea, however, reminded her of the letter she had been 
writing to her sister, and she took up the pen and resolved to finish 
it.
	"Is Mr. Pender gone?" Hugh asked, as he came round to the 
front of the house, from the yard, where he had been giving some 
directions to his workmen; "I thought his visit would not be so 
short."
	"Yes, he is gone," replied Mr. Lowe, who was trying to 
open the gate of the little garden under Mary's window, and 
thinking of those mysterious tracks in the snow; which somehow 
he found himself often thinking of, though the tracks were no 
longer there, for the snow itself had disappeared.
	"There is already," he remarked, "a look of spring in the 
sky."
	"Yes," Hugh replied, "and the snow is nearly gone from the 
hills."
	"I am always glad," said Richard, who had joined them, 
"when winter is past. The bright summer-time for me!"
	"Why, every one is glad at the approach of spring," replied 
Mr. Lowe.
	"I never see the snow fading from those hills," said Hugh, 
without a feeling of sadness."
	"That's an odd feeling," returned the doctor, "particularly 
for a farmer."
	"Oh, of course, I see reason to rejoice at the coming of 
spring. But what I speak of is an involuntary feeling of sadness. 
'Tis like parting with an old friend. In fact, I believe there is 
sadness in all partings. I can fancy a prisoner looking round his 
dungeon for the last time with a sigh."
	"Who is this coming down the hill?" the doctor asked, 
pointing to a horseman on the road.
	"I think it is your friend, Mr. Lloyd," replied Hugh.
	"'Tis his horse, at all events."
	"Yes, 'tis Bob  --  I know him now." And Richard vaulted 
over the little gate and got out on the road by the stile in the corner 
of the garden with the intention of intercepting Mr. Lloyd, and 
having a talk with him.
	"The harriers are to meet at Somerfield's," said the doctor, 
after vaulting back again over the gate. "We ought to go."
	"By-the-by, 'twill be a good opportunity for you to see the 
place," said Hugh. "You can have my horse; and I think you will 
like him."
	"And yourself?" said Mr. Lowe.
	"Well, I find I have some business to attend to, which I 
cannot put off. You can ride the old mare," he added, turning to his 
brother. "And you need not fear but she'll be able to carry you  --  
but give her head and let her have her own way."
	"All right," said the doctor, "let us go fit ourselves out."
	Mr. Lowe readily assented, glad of the opportunity to 
display his horsemanship and his new breeches and boots.
	The horses were led round by Barney, and while Hugh was 
examining the girths and stirrup-leathers, the two young men 
appeared booted and spurred, and were in the saddles before 
Barney had time to render them any assistance.
	"O Mary!" Grace exclaimed, bursting into the parlour, "do 
come and see Apollo. He looks splendid."
	Mary came to the window and said, with a quiet smile:
	"He really does."
	The horse was a fine one, and the rider seemed to linger 
longer than was necessary arranging his bridle rein.
	"Do come out," said Grace; "he expects it." Mary followed 
her out, and dropping her arm round Grace's shoulder, she said 
gaily:
	"She says, Mr. Lowe, that you look splendid."
	He raised his hat and smiled, as he rode slowly after the 
doctor, who had set off at a gallop, and was impatiently waiting for 
him at the gate.
	"Mr. Hugh," said Barney, "how much do you think is 
comin' to me?"
	"Why so?" Hugh asked, as he watched the paces of his 
horse up the hill.
	"Begob, I want five shillings," replied Barney.
	"For what?
	"I'm afther gettin' two an' sixpence worth of dance from 
Mr. Callaghan," returned Barney, looking as if, on the whole, he 
was not pleased with his bargain.
	"Two-and-sixpence worth of dance," Grace exclaimed, 
laughing. "How is it sold, Barney?"
	"Tuppence-ha'penny a lesson for plain dance, Miss," 
replied Barney, seriously, "and thruppence for figures."
	"Well, and you want five shillings' worth?" said Hugh. 
"Well, you see, sir," rejoined Barney, scratching his head, 'I was 
purty good at the plain dance; but Callaghan had such fine steps, I 
said to myself I'd get a few new wans. An' then they persuaded me 
to learn the figures; but begob I couldn't keep 'em in my head. And 
now, you know, I don't like to see my money goin' for nothin'," 
Barney added with the air of a man of business.
	"Will you let us see one of Callaghan's steps, Barney? said 
Grace.
	"An' welcome, Miss," replied Barney, throwing care to the 
winds  --  for the idea of his money going for nothing seemed to 
have quite a crushing effect upon his spirits  --  "I'll do a step or 
two in a double for you."
	And Barney, after going round gracefully in a circle to his 
own music, commenced battering the gravel with those remarkable 
feet which procured for him the soubriquet of "Wattletoes," in a 
style which we are not mad enough to attempt a description of.
	"O Hugh," said Grace, who could hardly speak for 
laughing, "you must give him the five shillings."
	"Would I doubt you, Miss Grace?" exclaimed Barney, 
twisting his features in a most extraordinary manner, but ultimately 
allowing them to settle into a grin of delight.
	"Sound man, Mr. Hugh," he added, as Hugh presented him 
with two half-crowns. "An' now give me lave to run over to the 
Cross."
	"What do you want there?" Hugh asked. "Callaghan is goin' 
away to-day," replied Barney. "Then he gave you credit, and you 
want to pay your debts?
	"Oh, the devil a credit," returned Barney. "What a fool he 
is!"
	"I can't make out what he means," said Hugh.
	"Is not that Callaghan himself passing the gate? " said 
Mary, pointing to a little man with a bundle in his hand walking at 
a brisk pace from the direction of the hamlet.
	"Oh, the rascal," cried Barney, "an' all my dance in his 
pocket!"
	He set off in pursuit of the dancing-master as if his very life 
depended upon catching him.
	"Can you solve this mystery, Grace?" said Mary.
	"Really, no," she replied, shaking her head. " 'Tis too much 
for me. We must wait till he comes back."
	But the dancing-master was too far off to hear Barney 
shouting after him, and Barney was soon too much out of breath to 
continue the shouting, so that both were lost to view at the turn of 
the road.
	"He was gaining upon him," said Grace, "I think he will 
catch him before they reach the fort. But what does he mean?"
	About an hour later, as they were setting out to visit Norah 
Lahy, Grace said:
	"Wait a moment till I ask Barney what he wanted with the 
dancing-master. I can't make head or tail of it."
	"I'm glad to hear it," returned Mary. "I was beginning to 
fear you had some connection with the 'good people.'"
	"I must repress my curiosity," said Grace, after inquiring 
for Barney. "He is gone to drive home the cows."
	The cows referred to were at a farm some two miles from 
the house, and it was near sunset when Barney returned After 
"bailing" them in, he hastened to the barn, where Mat Donovan 
and Tom Maher had been at work. Their day's work was over, and 
Tom was just hanging the door on its hinges. Barney began at once 
to practise his steps on the well-swept floor.
	"Blood-an-ounkers, Mat," he exclaimed, stopping 
suddenly, as if a happy thought had struck him, "I believe you are 
able to read writin'."
	"Well, I believe I could," Mat replied, as he shook the chaff 
from his coat before putting it on. "Why so?"
	Barney pulled off his caubeen, and pulled a large crumpled 
document from the crown.
	"Read that," said he.
	Mat went to the door, and unfolding the paper, held it to the 
light, which was beginning to fade.
	Barney watched him as if he entertained doubts of Mat's 
ability to read writing. After a little delay, however, Mat read the 
words "Haste to the Wedding," which had the effect of sending 
Barney with a bound to the middle of the floor.
	"Go on," he shouted excitedly, crushing his hat tight upon 
his head. And with his arms extended, as if he were going to fly, 
Barney commenced whistling "Haste to the Wedding."
	"What the divil do you mane?" Mat asked in astonishment.
 "Read on; read, read," said Barney, breathlessly, trying to whistle 
and talk at the same time.
	"Oh, I see what you're at now," said Mat the Thrasher, as if 
a new light had dawned upon him. "I see what you're up to," he 
repeated seriously. "But faith I don't know that I could read print in 
'double' time, let alone writin'."
	"Oh, if you couldn't!" And Barney took the paper and 
replaced it in the crown of his hat, with a look of a man who had 
been made a disgustingly inadequate offer for some article he 
wanted to sell.



CHAPTER XXII.

THE BLUE BODY-COAT WITH GILT BUTTONS -- ABSENCE 
OF MIND. "AULD LANG SYNE."

	MAT," exclaimed Barney, brightening up suddenly, "ye'll 
have a great night uv id at Ned Brophy's weddin'. Is id at the young 
woman's house the weddin' is to be?"
	"No," Mat replied, putting on his coat; "they're on'y going 
to be married there. The weddin' is to be at Ned's."
	"'Twas said there was to be no weddin'," observed Tom 
Maher; "how was that?"
	"Well, the girl's father is hard," replied Mat, "an' the priest 
is chargin' a show of money for marryin' 'em, and so the ould 
fellow wouldn't agree to the weddin'."
	"Some people do be very cute," said Tom Maher. "And," 
Mat continued, "Ned's mother stood out agin him till I brought her 
round, and she gev into id at last." 
	"She'd skin a flint," returned Tom Maher. 
	"The divil a lie in that," replied Mat, shaking his head. 
	"Sure the divil a bone in her body I don't know," continued 
Tom; "an' good raison I had, livin' in one house wud her for two 
years an' three months."
	"I won't contradict you," said Mat, "though she's my own 
fust and second cousin."
	"Do you remember what you tould her about the 
stirabout?" Tom asked, eyeing the Thrasher with a smile.
	"What was that?" said Mat.
	"You told her to bring out the pot an' empty it on the top of 
Corrigeen Hill, an' the divil a greyhound in the barony would be 
able to ketch id afore id got to the bottom. We got betther stirabout 
ever afther."
	"Well, to give her her due," returned Mat, "she always 
minded anything I'd say. Ned himself could get no good uv her 
about the weddin' till I persuaded her. Not that I cared about it 
myself, only I didn't like to have Ned get the name of bein' a 
screw."
	"A bad right any wan would have to call Ned a screw," said 
Tom Maher. "There's not a dacenter man from this to himself for 
his manes."
	"He is that," replied Mat.
	"No sign of anything here this turn," Tom observed, with a 
motion of his thumb towards the house. "Though they say there's 
many an eye after her. Faith, Kitty tells me," he added, dropping 
his voice, "that she has the heart across in this young fellow from 
England. An', begor, a nice fellow he is, although he has no 
property, on'y what'll buy a commission for him."
	"I don't say Miss Mary 'd think uv him," replied Mat, "no 
matther what he had."
	"I don't know that," returned Tom with a wink. "She's 
mighty sweet on him. But Kitty tells me," he added, "she'll never 
think of any man but the wan."
	"Who is that?"
	"Begor, that's what I can't make out. What are you delayin' 
for?"
	"I "was thinkin' of waitin' till the master 'd be home to 
know how is pigs. If there was a stir I'd sell them two I have, male 
is so dear."
	"I'd' like to see you in a farm of your own," said Tom, like 
every wan belongin' to you."
"	I don't know that, Tom," Mat rejoined. "A man ought to be 
continted; an', thanks be to God, I was never in the want uv a 
shillin'. An' maybe if I had what you say, I wouldn't lie down to-
night wud as aisy a mind as I have now." 
	"Here is the masther," exclaimed Barney, running out to 
take the horse.
	Mat followed, to inquire about the price of pigs; and after 
being satisfied on that head, he turned to Tom Maher, who was 
locking the barn-door, and asked him to "take a walk over."
	"I can't stir till Mr. Richard and Mr. Lowe comes home," 
Tom replied. "I must put up the horses. An' a d--d hard job I'll have 
uv id, for I must have 'em like a new pin."
	Mat Donovan went on his way alone. There was a feeling 
of melancholy upon him which he could not shake off; and instead 
of "shortening the road" with snatches of old songs he fell into 
deep thought.
	For the first time in his life he began to feel discontented 
with his lot. It was quite true, as he had just said to Tom Maher, 
that he never wanted for a shilling. He had constant employment, 
and as he was never a "spender," he found his earnings sufficient 
for his wants. His mother and sister were "good managers," and 
their poultry and eggs went far to keep them decently clothed  --  
with the addition of even a little inexpensive finery for Nelly, who 
was a belle in her way  --  and a couple of fat pigs paid the rent. 
The little "garden" he held  --  by which we do not mean the 
"haggart" where Tommy Lahy had his crib set among the "curly"  -
-  gave him potatoes every second year, and a crop of wheat or 
barley in the intervals. The year he had the wheat or barley on his 
own "little spot," the potatoes were supplied by a half-acre of 
"dairy ground" or "dung ground." The dung ground, we may 
inform the uninitiated reader, is ground upon which the peasant 
puts his own manure, in return for which he has the potato crop  --  
the farmer being repaid for the use of his land for one season by 
the corn crop of the next, for which the land, owing to the peasant's 
manure, is in proper condition. For the dairy ground the peasant 
pays a rent  --  and often an unconscionably high rent  --  the land 
in this case either being manured by the farmer, or capable of 
yielding potatoes without manure  --  generally a "bawn" or newly-
ploughed pasture field.
	Mat Donovan laboured cheerfully during the six days of the 
week, returning generally at night to his own house, where he sat 
by the bright little hearth as happy as a king. But this evening we 
find him returning to that happy fire side with something very like 
a heavy heart. Let us listen to him, and we may be able to divine 
the cause of this:
	"I know," said Mat Donovan, looking towards a hill on the 
left-hand side of the road  --  "I know she has a respect for me, an' 
always had; an' she was never a-shy or ashamed to show id either, 
She kem and sot next to me the night at Mrs. Murphy's, an' her 
grandfather an' a lot uv farmers and dacent people there." And here 
Mat raised his head with a decidedly consequential look; for he 
remembered when the reckoning was called after "the night at Mrs. 
Murphy's," he, Mat Donovan, flung down a half-crown, while 
many of the farmers gave only a shilling, and it required some 
screwing to get an additional sixpence out of them when it was 
found the collection fell short of the sum required. "She did then," 
continued Mat, "an' didn't mind 'em wan taste; but talked to myself 
so pleasant and friendly; and reminded me uv the time, long ago, 
when she was a little thing goin' to school, when I used to throw 
the churries over the hedge to her. An' faith," he added, "I b'lieve 
'tis lookin' at her copy paper, when I'd meet her on the road in the 
evenin', that made me able to read writin', as Barney said I was  --  
for 'tis little I minded id whin I was goin' to school myself. My 
heart warmed to her when she kem up to me at Mrs. Murphy's, 
wud such a smile, and shook hands wud me, after not seem' a sight 
uv her for goin' an two years, while she was at her aunt's, in 
Dublin. But, sure, I know a poor man like me have no right to 
think uv her. An' for all, her smile is before me every hour uv the 
day; an' bad cess to me but I think, this blessed minit, 'tis her hand 
I have a hoult uv instead uv this flail that I am bringin' home to put 
a new gad on id. 'Tis droll," he continued, shaking his head. "I, that 
had my fling among 'em all, an' never lost a wink uv sleep on 
account uv any girl that ever was born, to be this way! Sally 
Mockler called me a rag on every bush, no later than last night. 
Faith, I wish it was thrue for her  --  but for all that," he added, 
with another shake of the head and a sorrowful smile, "I b'lieve if I 
could dhrive her from my mind in the mornin' I wouldn't thry."
	"God save you, Mat!" exclaimed two or three young men 
who came up with him. "Faith, you're takin' your time."
	"God save you kindly, b'ys. I am takin' the world aisy."
	"Any strange news?"
	"No, then," Mat replied; "nothin' worth relatin'." 
	"Is Ned Brophy's match settled for certain?"
	"Well, I b'lieve so."
	"Sure, you ought to know. But there was talks uv id bein' 
broke."
	"Well, no; 'tis all settled. They're to be married next 
Wednesday."
	"People wor sayin' he was thinkin' uv Nancy Hogan  --  but 
she hadn't the shiners."
	"People say many things," replied Mat, as if he wished to 
dismiss the subject.
	"Begor, Nancy 'd be good enough for him; she's the purtiest 
girl in the parish. Was he long afther this wan he's gettin'?"
 	"I don't say there was much coortship between 'em," said 
Mat. "But as you're afther remindin' me uv id I'll run into Phil 
Lahy's to see have he my coat made  --  as I'm to be Ned's 
sidesman."
	"Wisha, now!" exclaimed one of the young men, looking at 
Mat with evident surprise; for it was somewhat unusual for a snug 
farmer, like Ned Brophy, to pay such a compliment to a "labouring 
man."
	"Good night, b'ys," said Mat, on coming to the beech-tree 
opposite Phil Lahy's door.
	"Good night, Mat  --  good night," they responded, cheerily, 
as they quickened their pace and passed on through the hamlet 
without stopping.
	"Now, I wondher what are they up to?" said Mat to himself. 
"I thought 'twas goin' to play for the pig's head they wor, but there 
they're off be the bog road. A wondher they never said where they 
wor goin'. Might id be for the lend uv long John's greyhound?"
	Guessing was no use, however; so putting his arm over 
Honor Lahy's half-door, and pushing back the bolt, he passed  
through the shop into the kitchen, which was also the tailor's 
workshop.
	Mat was gratified to find Phil Lahy sitting cross-legged on 
his shop-board. But his smile gave way to a rather blank look of 
inquiry when he saw that Phil, instead of plying his needle, was 
poring over a soiled and dog-eared volume which rested on his 
knee.
	"God save all here!" said Mat, looking around him as if he 
didn't know well what to think,
	"God save you kindly, Mat," replied Honor Lahy, placing a 
chair for him near the well-swept hearth. "Sit down an' rest." 
	But Phil was too deeply absorbed in his book to take any 
notice whatever of the visitor.
	"Phil," said Mat, after a moment's silence, "are you goin' to 
disappoint me?"
	"Is that iron hot?" Phil asked, without raising his eyes from 
his book.
	Tommy, who was reading too  --  crouching upon his 
elbows and knees on the shop-board  --  jumped down, and seizing 
the padding of an old coat-collar, which served the purpose of 
"holder," snatched the iron from the fire. Testing whether it was 
heated in a manner which we do not deem it necessary to describe  
--  though we grieve to say we have seen the same test applied 
when the smoothing-iron was of smaller dimensions than the 
tailor's goose, and when the hand that held it was very much fairer 
than Tommy Lahy's  --  he brought it to his father, who attempted 
to take hold of the handle with its woollen cover without raising 
his eyes from the dog-eared volume. But his finger coming in 
contact with the hot iron, Phil Lahy said "hop," and commenced 
slapping his thigh in a rather frantic fashion. After rubbing the 
burned finger in the hair of his head, Phil reached to the further end 
of the shop-board, and to Mat Donovan's great relief and comfort 
pulled from under some other articles, by which it had been 
accidentally concealed from view, a new blue body-coat with gilt 
buttons. Seizing his lap-board he commenced "pressing" the coat 
with great energy and briskness of action.
	Mat Donovan left his chair and stood close to the shop-
board, trying to look unconcerned and perfectly indifferent.
	We'd like to see the individual who ever was indifferent 
under such circumstances.
	Mat took up the dog-eared book and made believe to be 
reading it  --  while not a twinkle of the gilt buttons escaped him, 
as Phil turned the blue coat over and over, smoothing every seam, 
and plucking out the basting threads with his teeth.
	Mat at last did read a line or two of the book, and 
remarked:
	"This is the Prophecies."
	"Yes, Mat," replied Phil  --  and the words seemed to have 
been jerked out of him, as the iron came down with a thump upon 
the sleeve of the blue body-coat. "But," he continued  --  leaning 
his whole weight upon the iron and working with his wrist as if he 
were grinding something  --  "but 'tisn't the genuine wan afther all. 
I got id from Andrew Dwyer, an' as id belonged to his grandfather 
I thought id might be genuine. But," added Phil Lahy as he drew 
the lap-board out of the sleeve, "I was disappointed."
	"Do you think there's any truth in 'em?" Mat asked.
	"Mat," replied Phil, solemnly, "there's a great dale,"  --  
here he snapped viciously at a basting thread which held its ground 
so tenaciously that when one end was plucked from the sleeve of 
the blue coat, the other was stuck fast between Phil Lahy's front 
teeth  --  "there's a great dale in 'em comin' to pass; Mat."
	"Now, what sinse could you pick out uv this?" And Mat 
read a sentence which it would, indeed, be hard to pick sense out 
of.
	"That's James the Second's time," replied Phil, as if it were 
all as plain as that two and two make four. "Come," he added, 
pushing away his goose and lap-board, and blowing away the 
yellow basting threads from the coat, which he held up by the 
collar as high as his hand could reach  --  "Come, throw off that 
ould coat."
	Mat Donovan proceeded to divest himself of his old frieze  
-- making desperate efforts to look grave and even sorrowful.
	He got himself into the blue body-coat, and Phil Lahy, 
standing behind him, wrapped his arms round the Thrasher, as if he 
were trying to span the "big tree " at Gloonavon, and buttoned the 
coat in front.
	Then feeling him all over, and rubbing him down the arms 
and back, Phil Lahy, slapping the Thrasher on the shoulder, said  -- 
	"Well wear!"
	"'Tis a grand fit," exclaimed Honor, moving the candle all 
round Mat to the imminent danger of the new coat.
	Norah, turned round her head and said, too, while there was 
something almost like humour in the sad, black eyes:
	"Well wear, Mat."
	"Thank'ee, Norah, thank'ee," replied Mat, as he unbuttoned 
the new coat.
	"What way is she comin' on?" he asked, turning to her 
mother.
	"Elegant," was her reply, as she looked into Norah's face. 
And what a look that was!
	"The divil a dacenter man'll be there," said Billy Heffernan, 
who sat, silently as usual, in the corner, with his flute across his 
knees.
	"'Tis thrue for you," replied Honor Lahy; "an' if some 
farmer's daughter takes a fancy to him, 'twould be no wondher in 
life."
	After putting on his old frieze again, Mat pulled a purse 
from the breast pocket of his waistcoat, and commenced 
unwinding the long string with which it was tied.
	Phil Lahy began carefully folding the new coat, seemingly 
unconscious of the unwinding of the string.
	Mat Donovan counted some pieces of silver and dropped 
them into Phil Lahy's hand. His wife fixed her eyes upon him, but 
Phil was so pre-occupied putting his spectacles in his waistcoat 
pocket, that in a moment of absence of mind he put the silver in 
with them.
	"Mat," said Phil Lahy, "I'll want you to do a little job for 
me."
	"What is id?" Mat asked.
	Phil looked straight in his face, but remained so long silent 
that Mat's face indicated considerable surprise.
	"We'll talk about id another time," said Phil, at length. "Did 
you hear the news?"
	"No," replied Mat, bluntly. "What is id?" 
	"I'm tould"  --  and here Phil looked so hard at his 
questioner that Mat began to feel alarmed, and somehow the image 
of "somebody" flashed across his mind, though there was no 
earthly reason why it should  --  "I'm tould," said Phil, "that  --  
there's likely to be a change in the Ministry."
	"Oh, is that all!" returned Mat with a sigh of relief. "There's 
talk uv that in the papers these three weeks."
	Now, the fact was, that Phil Lahy having  --  in a fit of 
absence of mind  --  put the money in his pocket, wanted to turn 
away his wife's attention from it, by saying something; and so he 
began with the "little job" that he wanted Mat to do for him. But 
being abruptly asked what the little job was, Phil's invention failed 
him; and not being able to name any job, big or little, be put the 
subject off to "another time," and took refuge in the "news." And 
being abruptly asked for particulars again, Phil grasped at "the 
Ministry" as a drowning man will grasp at a straw. But scarcely 
were the words out of his mouth, when he reproached himself for 
his stupidity for never once having thought of the bull-bait, which 
was comparatively a fresh subject. However, the Ministry did very 
well, and Phil felt greatly relieved when he heard his wife say, 
without having alluded in any way to his forgetfulness in reference 
to the silver:
	"What hurry are you in, Mat? Can't you rest a start?"
	"I must be goin'," Mat replied; "I on'y called in on my way 
over from Mr. Kearney's."
	"Miss Mary was here to-day, and stopped a whole hour 
wud Norah."
	"I partly guessed," he replied, "'twas to see Norah they wor 
goin' when I see 'em comin' in this way instead of turnin' up to the 
forth."
	Mat Donovan said, "Good night to ye," and walked out 
with his new blue body-coat under his arm. And Phil Lahy 
suddenly became very busy folding and putting away the things on 
his shop-board.
	"Come, Billy," said he, as he drew a chair to the fire, "can't 
you give us a tune to put a stir in us these dull times?"
	He spoke in an unusually cheerful tone, and holding his 
hands over the fire, seemed disposed to be sociable, and, in fact, 
mildly jolly.
	Billy Heffernan immediately struck up "The Priest in his 
Boots."
	"A mighty purty tune that is, Billy; but I think it goes better 
on the pipes."
	Taking the tongs in his hand, he built up the fire very
carefully, and seemed anxious to make himself both agreeable and 
generally useful. But some thought struck him, and putting his 
hand to his forehead, he said:
	"See how I should forget telling Mat that message!"
	"What message?" his wife asked.
	"About goin' to throw the sledge wud the captain," replied 
Phil.
	"There wasn't anything said about a message," returned his 
wife.
	"Didn't he say that out of eight hundred men in the 
regiment he couldn't get one he wasn't able to bate; an' that 'd like 
to have a throw wud Mat the Thrasher?"
	"He did," rejoined Honor; "but not be way uv a message.
	You don't understand these things. I'll take a walk up and 
tell him about id. Maybe he's out uv practice; and 'twould be a bad 
job if he was called on too sudden."
	Honor Lahy shook her head as if there were no help for it. " 
Wisha, Billy," said she, after plying her knitting needles in silence 
for five minutes, "why don't you talk?"
	Billy looked into the fire, and blew C natural by way of 
reply. He might have said, with the poet:

"Why should feeling ever speak,
When thou canst breathe her soul so well?"

	Norah raised her eyes and smiled.
	She looked much less sickly by the firelight than on the 
cold, frosty day, when her pale face so shocked Mr. Lowe and 
Grace Kiely.
	"Play 'Auld Lang Syne,' Billy!"
Billy snatches up his old flute to comply; but something had got 
into his throat which he was obliged to gulp down before he could 
get out a single note.
	Was it the melancholy music of her voice or her look?
	Or did he know the words of the Scotch song, and 
remember that they had

 -- "paidled i' the burn
Frae morning's dawn till dine?"

	Whatever the cause was, Billy Heffernan had a struggle 
with the knob in his throat before he could play "Auld Lang Syne" 
for Norah Lahy.
	Scotch tunes were very popular at Knocknagow, but we 
have heard none played and sung so often as "Auld Lang Syne," 
not the words, but the air; for the words usually sung to the tune 
were something about

The river Suir that runs so pure
Through charming, rare Clonmel."

	Billy Heffernan played on with his eyes shut, for a few 
minutes: and then, affecting to think there was something wrong 
with his flute, screwed off one of the joints and converted it into a 
telescope, through which he endeavoured to make out some object 
in the fire.
	"How do you like the book Miss Grace lent you, Tommy?" 
Norah asked, while Billy prosecuted his researches in the fire.
	"'Tis grand," was Tommy's reply.
	"I think she's nicer than you said she was," continued 
Norah.
	"Well, she is," he replied reluctantly, as if unwilling to give 
up his first impression. "An' a dale handsomer," he added, as if a 
sense of justice extorted the admission from him.
	"I think she's very nice," returned Norah.
	She is, then, nice," said her mother, "an' a darlin' little 
thing."
	"She wants me to write down the 'Frolic' for her," Billy 
observed, meaning, of course, "Heffernan's Frolic," that he 
composed in a dream. "But I don't know how to write music, 
though I could tell her the names uv the notes wan by wan."
	"Wisha, Billy," said Mrs. Lahy, on seeing him about to 
leave, "would you take a walk up as far as Mat's, an' see is Phil 
there, an' be home wud him?  --  An' sure I know 'tisn't there Phil 
is," she thought to herself.
	Billy promised to do as she required; and, after leaving his 
flute at his own house, he walked up the hill to Mat Donovan's.



CHAPTER XXIII.

MAT DONOVAN AT HOME.

	GOD save all here," said Billy Heffernan, as he closed the 
door behind him.
	"God save you kindly," replied Mrs. Donovan, raising her 
spectacles to look at him. She was about adding the usual "sit 
down an' rest," but Billy had already taken possession of the bench 
against the partition by the fireside. So Mrs. Donovan pulled down 
her spectacles over her eyes and went on with her darning.
	"What news?" she asked as she opened the wick of the 
candle with the darning needle, to give herself more light.
	"Nothing strange," replied Billy, looking round the house, 
"I thought Phil Lahy was here."
	"He wasn't here since I was below," replied Mat, who was 
cutting a strip from a piece of horse-skin to make a gad for his 
flail.
	"Faith, Billy," said Mat's sister, Nelly, " 'tis a cure for sore 
eyes to see you in this direction. Here, card a few rowls uv this for 
me."
	She laid a handful of wool on the end of the bench upon 
which Billy sat, and then presented him with a pair of cards.
	"'Twould be time for you to stop," said her mother. "Where 
is the use of killing yourself that way?"
	"As soon as I have this cuppeen filled I'll stop," she replied.
	And Nelly returned to her wheel  --  to the hum of which 
the grating of the wire-toothed cards was added, as Billy Heffernan 
went on converting the wool into rolls so soft and light that the 
sudden opening of the door blew some of them from the bench 
down upon the hearth.
	The door was opened by a slatternly woman, smelling of 
soap-suds and snuff. After thrusting her dishevelled hair under a 
very dirty cap with borders that flapped backwards and forwards 
without any visible cause, and pulling up the heel of a man's 
brogue, which she wore as a slipper upon her stockingless foot, she 
announced the object of her visit to be "a squeeze of the blue bag."
	"'Tis there in the drawer of the dresser," said Mrs. 
Donovan, coldly.
	She got the article she wanted, which was a small piece of 
flannel tied with a string into something like a rude purse.
	"'Tis button blue," she remarked, feeling what was tied up 
in the piece of flannel.
	"No, 'tis slate blue," rejoined Mrs. Donovan, in no civil 
tone.
	The slatternly woman took a black bottle from her pocket, 
and, after holding it between her and the light, and turning it in 
various directions, extracted the cork with her teeth. Then throwing 
back her head, she held the bottle, bottom-upwards, over her open 
mouth for several seconds.
	"The divil a duge," she exclaimed, replacing the cork, and 
striking it with the palm of her hand. "This is the second three half-
pints I'm goin' for for 'em," she added; "though they never as much 
as axed me had I a mouth on me."
	"Who are they?" Mrs. Donovan asked.
	"Dick and Paddy Casey, Andy Dooley, and Phil Lahy," she 
replied. "Single-hand. Wheel out for a half-pint."
	"Faith, if I'm to wait for Phil," thought Billy Heffernan, as 
he presented the last roll of the wool on the back of the card to 
Nelly, "'tis a long wait I'll have, I'm afraid. An' if I don't wait, 
Honor'll think I didn't mind what she said to me. An' maybe 
Norah'd think it bad uv me." This last reflection decided Billy 
Heffernan to wait for Phil Lahy; and he knew his man sufficiently 
well to be pretty sure that he would call to Mat Donovan's on his 
way home, and try to make his wife believe that it was at Mat 
Donovan's he had been all the time.
	"Look at them"  --  here a difficulty presents itself: we are 
not sure whether it be possible to convey by means of the English 
alphabet the only name ever given to potatoes in Knocknagow.  
"Praties" would be laughed at as a vulgarism - only worthy of a 
spalpeen from Kerry, while "potatoes" was considered too genteel 
except for ladies and gentlemen and schoolmasters. The nearest 
approach we can make to the word we were about writing is 
"puetas" or "p'yehtes.
	"See if them puetas is goin' to bile," said Mat Donovan; 
"'twould be time for 'em."
	Billy Heffernan anticipated Nelly before she could stop her 
wheel, and raised the wooden lid from the pot.
	"The white horse is on 'em," said he.
	Nelly now having "filled the cuppeen"  --  that is, spun as 
much thread as the spindle could carry  --  placed her wheel against 
the wall, and drew a very white deal table to the middle of the 
floor. Upon the table she spread a cloth as clean, but scarcely so 
white as itself  --  for it was of homespun unbleached canvas  --  
and upon the cloth she laid a single white plate with a blue rim, 
and three very old black-handled knives, with the blades worn to a 
point and very short. Taking a small saucepan or porringer from a 
nail in the wall, she half filled it with spring water and put it down 
to boil on a red sod of turf which she took from the centre of the 
fire with the tongs, and broke upon the hearthstone. Thrusting the 
tongs into the pot, she took a potato and felt it in her left hand, 
which was covered with the corner of her apron, and then laid it 
smoking on the table-cloth. The pressure of her hand did not break 
the potato, but she knew by the feel it was boiled to the "heart." 
Whipping the pot from the fire she emptied its contents into a boat-
shaped basket placed over a tub, to drain off the water. Nelly 
Donovan then "threw out" the potatoes on the table, adroitly 
catching one or two that were rolling away and placing them on the 
top of the pile.
	Her mother now took off her spectacles, making many wry 
faces as she did so, for they had got entangled in her white hair, or 
she imagined they had  --  which came to the same thing  --  and 
placed them on the upper shelf of the dresser. The dresser was of 
deal like the table, and scoured, if possible, into a more snowy 
whiteness. It was pretty well furnished with plates with blue rims, 
and some cups and saucers in which red and green predominated, a 
sturdy little black earthenware teapot, half-a-dozen iron spoons 
fixed in slits in the edge of the top shelf, which top shelf was 
crowned with a row of shining pewter-plates, and two large 
circular dishes of the same metal  --  relics of the good old times 
when "a pig's head and a bolster of cabbage" used to be no rarity to 
them.
	Having placed her spectacles upon the upper shelf, and her 
darning needle and the half-mended stocking in one of the two 
drawers under the lower shelf of this imposing article of furniture, 
Mrs. Donovan smoothed down her apron, and took her accustomed 
place at the table. She was a quiet, decent-looking woman, with a 
sad, careworn face, but tranquil and contented at the same time. 
Her well-starched cap was scrupulously clean, and her grey hair 
carefully smoothed over her temples. She wore a small, yellowish 
shawl pinned over her dark brown stuff gown, and a white cotton 
kerchief under it, which was visible at the throat and round her 
neck. Her hand, as she rested it on the table, appeared bony and 
shrivelled, and it could be seen that the gold wedding ring was now 
too large for the finger it once fitted tightly enough  --  which made 
it necessary for her to wear a smaller ring of brass, as a guard.
	"Put up that flail, Mat," she said, somewhat reproach fully, 
"and sit down to your supper."
	Mat tucked up his cuffs; and, after washing his hands in a 
wooden basin  --  always called a "cup"  --  and drying then on a 
strip of canvas that hung from a peg in the wall, he, too, sat at the 
table, exclaiming, as he pushed some of the potatoes out of the 
way, and laid the small iron candlestick on the middle of the table:
	"Put the priest in the middle of the parish."
	Then seizing a good-sized potato, he looked admiringly 
first at one side and then at the other. It was white and floury, and 
altogether a tempting object for a hungry man to look at. There 
was even something appetising in the steam that curled up from it. 
In fact, the potatoes were remarkably good potatoes, 
notwithstanding the bad name Mat had given them to Miss Mary 
Kearney when he pronounced them "desavers."
	During this time Nelly Donovan was engaged in cooking a 
salt herring on a small gridiron, which was constructed by simply 
bending a piece of thin rod iron, zig-zag, into something like the 
outline of a hand with the fingers extended, traced with a burnt 
stick upon the wall, and bringing the ends of the iron together and 
twisting them into a handle, which might represent a very 
attenuated arm to the hand aforesaid. When the herring was done, 
she tossed it on the plate, and poured some of the boiling water out 
of the porringer upon it for sauce.
	And now the repast being prepared, Nelly sat down to 
partake of her share.
	"Won't you come an' ate, Billy," she said, turning to their 
silent visitor.
	"No, thankee," he replied, "I'm afther my supper."
	"Oh, wisha! wisha!" Nelly exclaimed, discontentedly, as 
she glanced at the table, "how well I should forget." She stood up 
and opened the door; but seeing that the night was dark and the 
wind rising, she turned to Billy Heffernan and said, "Come out 
wud me, Billy."
	He left his bench in the chimney corner, and followed her 
out. They returned in a minute or two, and after washing 
something in a black, glazed earthenware pan, and drying her 
hands, Nelly laid two small leeks on the table near her mother.
	The meal then commenced, but Nelly started up again, 
exclaiming:
	"Bad cess to me, but there's somethin' comin' over me."
	She selected half-a-dozen of the best potatoes and laid them 
in a semi-circle round the fire to roast, and again took her place at 
the table.
	The worn knives were used to peel the potatoes  --  though 
towards the conclusion of the meal, Nelly sometimes fell into a 
contemplative mood and did the peeling with the nail of her thumb  
--  but all three helped themselves with their fingers to the herring, 
which they took in minute pinches, as if they were merely trying 
how it tasted.
	Billy Heffernan left his bench and sat upon a straw-bottom 
chair in front of the fire, so that his back was towards the table  --  
the Irish peasant always considering it rude to flare at people while 
eating. And as he was turning the "roasters" with the tongs, a laugh 
from Nelly, clear and musical as ever rang through festal hall, 
made him look round. Mat, it appeared, was making great inroads 
upon the herring, the backbone of which was well nigh laid bare 
from the head to the tail, He had his hand stretched out to help 
himself to a second pinch, by way of supplement to an 
unconscionably large pinch he had just taken, when his sister 
snatched away the plate. Mat, finding his finger and thumb close 
upon vacancy, opened his mouth, not to add the supplemental 
pinch to its contents, but in blank amazement; and as he stared at 
his sister, she laughed till she was obliged to wipe the tears from 
her eyes with the corner of her apron. Even her mother's sad face 
relaxed into a smile; which, however, was followed by a forced 
look of reproach, as she requested Nelly to "behave herself." Mat 
now rested the handle of his knife on the table with the air of a 
man who had made a good meal, and was pretty well satisfied. All 
three, in fact, paused as if the work in hand were completed. But 
Nelly, going to the fire, took up the "roasters," which served the 
purpose of a second course, and placed three of them before Mat 
and two before her mother, reserving one for herself. These being 
disposed of after the manner of tarts or some such delicacies, Mat 
Donovan leant back luxuriously in his straw-bottom chair for a 
minute or two. Then hastily making the Sign of the Cross, he stood 
up, and, dipping a cup in a pail of spring water which rested on a 
stone slab under the little window, Mat Donovan took a draught 
with a relish that drinkers of champagne dream not of. He then 
placed the little iron candlestick on the window, while his sister set 
about clearing away the table, and joined Billy Heffernan at the 
fire.
	Mat Donovan's house was on the top of a hill where two 
roads met; and the candle in the little window was a beacon-light 
to many a splashed and weary wayfarer during the dark winter 
nights. In fact, his latch was often raised not only by the 
neighbours who came in for a "shanahus" of an evening, but 
travellers who were accustomed to pass the way made it a point to 
light their pipes at the bright turf fire, or in the hot summer days to 
take a draught from the pail under the little window, which was 
sure to be found at all hours and seasons as fresh as in the well 
under the whitethorn in the "rushy field" near the bridge.
	Have you the flute, Billy?" Mat asked, as he sat in the chair 
which Billy had again left for the bench in the corner.
	"No," was the reply; "I left id at home."
	"I'll engage he hasn't," said Nelly. "'Tis seldom he has a 
tune for us."
	"Begor, you cant say that, Nelly. Whin did I ever 
disappoint ye whin ye wanted a tune?"
	"Well, that's thrue enough, Billy," returned Nelly.
	You're a good warrant to play for us whenever we ax you. 
'Tis jokin' I was."
	"That's what you're always doin'," said her mother, shaking 
her head.
	"'Tis better be merry than sad," she replied, with a laugh.
	The latch was here raised and the door pushed open; but as 
no one came in, Mat leant backwards and peered out into the 
darkness. By shading his eyes from the fire-light he was able to see 
that some one was fastening a horse to the back-stick iron in the 
door-post; and after a little delay  --  more perhaps than a perfectly 
sober man would require  --  a tall, broad-shouldered man turned 
round and advanced a step or two into the house.
	"Is that Ned?" Mat asked.
	"'Tis," was the reply, as he took off his hat and swung it 
downwards to shake off the wet with which the fur  --  for it was a 
beaver or "Caroline"  --  was dabbled.
	"Is it rainin' it is?" Mat inquired, in some surprise.
	"No, but the wind whipped id off uv my head as I was 
passin' the quarry."
	At this Mrs. Donovan made the Sign of the Cross on her 
forehead; for it was generally believed that the " Good People" 
were wont to take their nightly journeys through the air to and 
from Maurice Kearney's fort over the quarry.
	Nelly took the hat, and, bringing it close to the candle, gave 
it as her opinion that it was "spiled"; and immediately set to work 
to dry the inside.
	"A fine, new Car'line," said she, as she gave it back to the 
owner; "take care an' don't rub the outside till 'tis dhry."
	"Faith, Ned," she added, taking up the candle and viewing 
him all over, "I'm thinkin' I could make a good guess where you're 
comin' from."
	Ned smiled and looked rather sheepish, as she held the 
candle down almost to his shoes, and then slowly raised it till she 
came to the "fine new Car'line," and then dropping the light on a 
level with his waistcoat, moved her hand as if she were describing 
a circle in the air, till the little glass buttons on the waistcoat 
twinkled like so many little bright black eyes winking at her. 
	Ned's riding-coat was that which he usually wore, but 
everything else about him was brand new, even to the black silk 
cravat with a scarlet border, the bow knot of which happened to be 
under his left ear, till Nelly pulled it back to its proper position.
	"Tell us something about her, Ned," she began, laughingly. 
"What sourt is she? Shawn-na-match says you're bringin' a 
patthern to the parish. But far away cows wear long horns, you 
know."
	"Go about your business, and thry an' have a little sense," 
said her mother, rising from her place in the chimney-corner. "Sit 
down, Ned, an' never mind her."
	"No, Nell, no; 'tis too late, and I'm in a hurry. Take a walk 
down as far as the bridge," he added, turning to Mat, "I want to 
spake to you."
	There was something in his voice and manner that made 
Mat apprehend that he had unpleasant news to communicate, so he 
at once stood up, and taking the bridle from the jamb of the door, 
set back the horse and desired the owner to mount.
	"No, I'd rather walk," said he, taking hold of the bridle and 
leading the horse out upon the road.
	They walked on in silence for some time, and at last Ned 
Brophy  --  for it was the same Ned Brophy of whom mention has 
been made more than once  --  said:
	"I believe this business is settled,"
	"Is the day appointed an' all?"
	"All is settled," was the reply.
	"Well, you're gettin' a fine fortune any way," said Mat 
Donovan.
	Ned Brophy made no reply, but walked on in silence till 
they came to the bridge; and then he stooped and looked down at 
the little stream as it rushed under the ivy-covered arch.
	"Mat," said he, covering his face with his hands. "my heart 
is broke."
	"I don't see the use of talkin' that way now," Mat replied, a 
little angrily. "I tould you to look before you. An', begor, Ned, 
'tisn't for you I have the compassion."
	"Don't be too hard on me, Mat. You don't know the way 
they wor at me. Judy said she'd dhrag the red head off uv her."
	"More shame for Judy to talk that way uv as dacent a girl as 
ever she was. But, like that, you know, she had no great harm in id. 
An' sure 'tis no wondher she'd be agin a match that'd lave herself 
wudout a fortune. But as I often said to you, you had a right to 
think uv all this long ago, an' not to be the manes uv setting any 
girl astray. But 'tis too late to talk about id now; so dhrop id in the 
name o' God."
	"You don't know the way I do be," said Ned Brophy, 
"whinever I pass over this bridge. Two hundred pounds is a fine 
fortune, moreover, whin a man'd want id. But that bush beyand an' 
the bridge here that kills me."
	Mat took up a stone from the road and jerked it into the 
stream, but made no reply.
	"There now," continued Ned Brophy, with a groan, "I think 
I'm lookin' at her peltin' the little pebbles into the wather. Och! I do 
be all right till I stand on this bridge."
	"Well, don't stand on id," rejoined Mat. "But you're not fit 
to talk to now; and if you wor itself, there's no use in talkin'."
	Mat turned his back and then his shoulder to the wind, 
which was blowing in strong, fitful gusts over the unsheltered 
bridge.
	"Come, come," he continued, pulling up his coat collar over 
his ears, "there's no use in perishin' here."
	He held the horse while Ned put his foot in the stirrup and 
mounted; and after saying "safe home," was starting off up the hill, 
when Ned Brophy suddenly wheeled round his horse and laid his 
hand on Mat's shoulder,
	"Mat, what way is she?" he asked.
	"I didn't see her since the day uv the Station," he replied. 
"She wasn't at the dance o' Sunday."
	"Wasn't she, Mat?" he asked in a tone of such real feeling 
that Mat was moved, and added:
	"Nelly goes in to see her now an' then; an' she says she is 
purty well, on'y she can't stir herself to go among the b'ys an' girls 
like she used."
	"I'm tould," Ned continued, "the mother is very bitther agin 
me. But Tom or herse'f says nothin'."
	"Nancy Hogan couldn't say a hard word uv any wan," 
returned Mat Donovan. "But I'd rather you wouldn't meet Jemmy 
till his passion cools. Good night, an' safe home. An' mind your hat 
goin' through the bog, if you don't want to have id swep' where 
'twon't be as aisy for you to find it as in the quarry."
	Ned Brophy rode away at a brisk trot, and Mat the Thrasher 
turned toward home, remarking, as he did so, that the light had 
disappeared from the little window.



CHAPTER XXIV.

"GOD BE WITH YE!"

THE disappearance of the light was accounted for when, after 
shutting the door behind him, he saw Phil Lahy sitting at the fire 
reading a newspaper, and Billy Heffernan holding the candle for 
him.
	"What's the news, Phil?" he asked.
	"'Tis an American paper I'm afther gettin' the lend of," 
replied Phil Lahy. "But I can't see much in id that we hadn't before, 
except that speech of Bishop Hughes's. That's a great man," said 
Phil, solemnly. "But I won't mind readin' the spee -- spee -- 
speech," he added, pronouncing the word with considerable 
difficulty, "till to-morrow."
	"Wouldn't id be time to be goin' home?" Billy Heffernan 
ventured to suggest.
	"Yes, Billy. 'Home sweet home, there's no place like home.' 
I have a poor wife," continued Phil Lahy, turning round and 
looking straight in Mat Donovan's face, "that wouldn't say a word 
to me -- no matter what I'd do."
	"She is a good wife, sure enough," replied Mat, as he gently 
touched Phil's shin with the tongs, with the view of inducing him 
to draw his foot out of the fire, into which he had just thrust it.
	"Billy," said Phil, after staring at him for a minute,
"you're lookin' very bad."
	This was said with a solemnity that quite frightened Billy 
Heffernan.
	"You ought," Phil Lahy continued in a fatherly way, "you 
ought to take a little nourishment. You'd want it."
	"The divil cut the hand uv me," returned Billy Heffernan, 
recovering from his fright, "if ever I take a dhrop uv any thing 
stronger than wather. 'Tis little good id ever done me while I was 
takin' id."
	"That is, Billy, because you didn't take it in raison. I'm not 
takin' anything myself now in a public-house, on account uv a little 
promise I made. You'd say now," he added, turning suddenly to 
Mat, "that I was fond uv the dhrop?"
	He waited for a reply, but Mat only looked into the fire.
	"No; I wouldn't give you that for a pun-puncheon of it." 
And Phil laid the top of his finger on his tongue, and after looking 
at it steadily as if there were a thorn in it, performed the action 
known as snapping the finger. "Not that would I give for it," he 
repeated, "on'y for the company."
	"An' why couldn't you have the company wudout the 
whiskey?" Nelly asked. "Many's the pleasant company I see where 
there wasn't either a pint or a glass."
	"Nelly," said Phil, looking very seriously at her, but 
answering her rather wide of the mark, "I forgot thankin' you for 
the fresh eggs you sent to my poor sick daughter; an' our own hens 
stopped layin' this I don't know how long."
	"Faix an' 'tis the same story we'd have ourselves," replied 
Nelly, "if Mat could have his own way, an' keep the hens out on 
the roost he made for 'em in the pig-house. We're gettin' --." Here 
Nelly stopped short. She was about telling him she was getting 
three-halfpence a couple for her eggs, when it occurred to her it 
would look as if she wished to let him see the extent of the favour 
he was thanking her for.
	"Nelly," said Phil Lahy, with a politeness that was quite 
affecting, "I'll thank you for wan of them knittin'-needles to ready 
this pipe."
	She plied her needles with increased nimbleness for a few 
seconds, and then handed him one of them.
	Phil thrust the knitting-needle into the wooden stem of his 
pipe, but forgot to draw it out, till it came in contact with his nose, 
as he was putting the pipe to his mouth, which made him start and 
look very much astonished.
	"It never could be said of me, Mrs. Donovan," he 
proceeded  -- as he drew out the knitting-needle, which slipped 
through his fingers several times --  "it never could be said that I" -
-  here he paused and looked into her face as if something had 
struck him in the outline of her nose that he had never noticed 
before -- " that I," he repeated, "ever went to bed wudout sprinklin' 
the holy wather on myself. An', as long as a man has that to say, he 
can't be called a drunkard at any rate, Mrs. Donovan."
	"Let us be goin'," Billy Heffernan suggested. But before the 
hint could be acted upon --  supposing that Phil Lahy was disposed 
to act upon it --  the latch was again raised.
	"I ran in to take my lave of ye, for fear I mightn't see ye 
again," said a young girl, who stepped lightly into the kitchen, 
forgetting to close the door behind her.
	A gust of wind rushed in after her, and was met by another 
gust that rushed down the chimney; and both gusts joining 
together, whirled round and round Mat Donovan's kitchen, 
extinguishing the candle which Billy Heffernan had laid on the end 
of the bench upon which he sat, and blowing the ashes and some 
sparks of fire into Mrs. Donovan's lap, causing the good woman to 
start to her feet and beat her apron as if it were in a blaze about her; 
and, not content with this mischief, the two gusts of wind whirled 
up to the thatched roof, and so jostled Nelly Donovan's hens about, 
on the roost over the door, that their querulous screams at being 
thus rudely and unseasonably awakened from their repose were 
piteous to listen to; and then, by way of finishing their frolic, the 
intruders swept the old red cock himself from the collar-beam, 
where he re posed in solitary dignity, bringing him down straight 
upon Phil Lahy's head, who had just risen to his feet and was 
making an ineffectual effort to comprehend the state of affairs, and 
upon whom the sudden assault had such an effect that he staggered 
backward and was coming down in a sitting posture upon the fire, 
when Billy Heffernan caught him in his arms in time to prevent the 
unpleasant catastrophe. And the two gusts of wind, having fulfilled 
their mission, went out of existence as suddenly as they came into 
Mat the Thrasher's kitchen by the door and by the chimney.
	Mrs. Donovan blessed herself several times. She had her 
own private opinion as to the nature of the two gusts of wind; and 
had not a doubt that the denizens of Maurice Kearney's fort were 
unusually frolicsome that night --  witness Ned Brophy's hat and 
the old red cock, who stood upon the hearth-stone looking quite 
dazed and foolish, as if he were just after receiving a box on the 
ear, which bothered him to that degree that he was deliberately 
walking into the fire till Nelly snatched him up in her arms.
	"Faith, you wor never in Dublin, whoever you are," said 
Billy Heffernan, as with a vigorous swing he placed Phil Lahy in 
his chair.
	"Oh, wisha!" exclaimed the innocent cause of the 
commotion, "see how I should forget to shut the door."
	"Light the candle, Billy," said Nelly Donovan, "I wondher 
who have we at all? Maybe 'tis Judy Connell,"
	"'Tis, Nelly," was the reply. "I'm comin' out from town, an' 
I didn't like to pass by wudout comin' in to see ye, as I don't know 
the minute or hour the captain's letter might 'come, an' maybe I 
mightn't have time to take my lave uv ye."
	"Sit down, Judy," said Mrs. Donovan sadly.
	"No, ma'am, thank you," she replied: "Mary is wud me, an' 
we're in a hurry home, as there's a few friends comin' to see me."
	"An' is id walkin' ye are?"
	"No, Nelly; Joe Burke came wud us, an' brought his horse 
an' car."
	As she spoke she ran to Nelly, and, flinging her arms round 
her neck, kissed her, we might say, passionately.
	She also kissed the old woman, but more calmly. They 
were all now standing around her, and as she gave her hand to Mat 
she tried to smile.
	"God be wud you, Mat," said she, "'tis many's the time we 
danced together at the Bush."
	The recollection of those happy times was too much for 
her, and the tears gushed from her eyes.
	"God Almighty be wud ye all," she exclaimed in a choking 
voice, as she hurriedly shook hands with Billy Heffernan and Phil 
Lahy.
	And as she turned towards the door, which Nelly ran to 
open for her, she pressed one hand on her bosom and the other 
over her eyes, and a cry so full of sorrow burst front her that the 
tears came rolling down Mat Donovan's cheeks before he could 
turn away to hide them under the pretext of placing the candle in 
its usual place on the little window. And a presentiment seized 
upon him at that moment that his own heart would one day feel the 
pang that wrung that cry from the heart of Judy Connell.
	"I never thought," Nelly remarked, when the emigrant girl 
had left, "that herself an' Joe'd ever be parted."
	'Tisn't Joe's fault," Mat returned; " his lase is out, an' he's 
expectin' the notice every day like the rest of the tinants on the 
property. As fast as their lases dhrop, out they must go."
	"An' she tould me last Sunday," continued Nelly, "that on'y 
for her sisters sendin' for her, she'd never go. She has a sore heart 
to-night any way," added Nelly with a sigh.
	"Short she'll think uv Joe, once the say is betune 'em," Billy 
Heffernan observed, somewhat cynically.
	"'Tis more likely 'tis short Joe'll think uv her," retorted 
Nelly, apparently nettled by the insinuation of female inconstancy 
which Billy's remark implied.
	"Maybe 'twould be out uv sight out uv mind wud the two 
uv 'em," Mrs. Donovan observed. "An' may be not," she added 
more seriously, after a pause.
	"That," said Mat, who was gazing thoughtfully into the fire, 
"that depends on the soart they are. The round uv the world 
wouldn't put some people out uv wan another's mind. But there's 
more uv 'em," he added, with a shake of the head, "an' the cross uv 
a stubble garden would do id."
	"Wisha, would I doubt you for sayin' a quare thing," Nelly 
replied, with a mixture of surprise and contempt in her tone; "I 
wondher what put a stubble garden into your head? An' 'tis you're 
the lad that'd forget a girl before you'd be the cross uv a bosheen, 
not to say a stubble garden."
	"The world is only a blue rag, Billy. Have your squeeze out 
of id," said Mat, shaking off the gloom that seemed to oppress him 
during the evening, and resuming his usual cheerful look.
	"There's more of id," returned Nelly. "Whoever called the 
world a blue rag before? I suppose 'tis because Kit Cummins came 
in for a squeeze of id a while ago, that put the blue rag into your 
head. I'd rather a man like yourself, Billy, that wouldn't mind any 
wan, than a fellow that'd be goin' about palaverin' every girl he'd 
meet."
	"I don't know," retorted Mat, with a shrug of his shoulders, 
"I had my fling among 'em, sure enough; but where's the wan uv 
'em that ever had to say a bad word uv me?"
	Mat gazed into the fire again, with that look of his which 
had in it such a strange blending of humour and sadness, like the 
music of his country. The smile was on his lip, and the smile was 
in his eye. But for all that there was a melting something in big 
Mat Donovan's face, as he gazed into the turf fire, that made Billy 
Heffernan expect every moment to see the humourful eye swim in 
tears and the smiling lips give passage to a sigh. The sigh did 
come; but not the tears. And Mat Donovan, leaning back in his 
chair, and with a sidelong glance up at the collar-beams, relieved 
his feelings, as was his wont on such occasions, by chanting one of 
his favourite songs.
	Now, if we were drawing upon our imagination we would 
give Mat the Thrasher a more suitable song titan he chose to sing 
on this not eventful night -- so far as our (perhaps) not eventful 
history is concerned -- even if we were obliged to compose one 
specially for him. But being simply the faithful chronicler of the 
sayings and doings, joys and sorrows of Knocknagow, a regard for 
truth compels us to record that Mat the Thrasher's song was no 
other than that sentimentalest of sentimental lyrics, "Oh, no, we 
never mention her."
	And furthermore, we feel bound to state that this song was 
second to none in popularity among the music-loving people of 
Knocknagow. How is this fact to be accounted for? Is there some 
innate good hid under the lackadaisical in this renowned effort of 
Mr. Haynes Bailey's muse? Or might it be that "the hawthorn tree" 
brought the bush near Maurice Kearney's back gate, with its host 
of tender associations, to the minds of the singers and listeners? 
Or, to make another, and, probably, the best guess, perhaps the 
words --

"Were I in a foreign land
They'd find no change in me."

came home to many a loving heart in Knocknagow? For some or 
all of these reasons, or for some reason unknown to us, this song, 
as we have said, was popular in a high degree, from the cross-roads 
at the foot of the hill to the cross-roads at the top of the hill; and 
indeed we might say as far as the eye of a spectator standing on 
Maurice Kearney's fort could reach all around.

"'Tis true that I behold no more
The valley where we met,
I do not see the hawthorn tree,
But how can I forget?"

So sang Mat the Thrasher. And Nelly, who at first seemed 
disposed to be scornful, when he came to these words began to 
accompany him unconsciously, but in an almost inaudible voice. 
Billy Heffernan bent down with his elbows on his knees and his 
hands covering his face. Mrs. Donovan's arms dropped by her side, 
and a dreamy look came into her sad face, as if her thoughts went 
back to the far past. Yes! there was "a valley where we met" in her 
memory, and as she smoothed her grey hair over her temples, Mrs. 
Donovan stealthily wiped a tear from her cheek with the back of 
her hand.
	And Mat the Thrasher's song reminds us that at the very 
last wedding we had the honour of being invited to in the 
neighbourhood of Knocknagow, the two musicians, standing in the 
corner appropriated to them, commenced to play a "slow tune" 
during the interval between two dances; which slow tune so 
fascinated our good friend, Father Hannigan, who was a bigoted 
admirer of Irish music, that he left his place behind the mahogany 
table at the opposite side of the room, and, after pushing his way 
through the dancers, stood with folded arms close to the musicians, 
who, flattered by the compliment, put their whole souls into their 
fiddles. And when we, at the suggestion of the bride's father, went 
to escort Father Hannigan back to his place at the mahogany table, 
and to the little comforts "smiling" thereon --  we borrow the 
expression from a well-known song beginning --  

"Let the farmer praise his grounds,
Let the huntsman praise his hounds," etc.

-- he laid his hand impressively on our shoulder and said in a 
whisper:
	"That's a fine thing!"
	"Why, that," we replied, "is the English sentimental song -- 
'Oh, no, we never mention her.'" To which Father Hannigan 
frowned a scornful contradiction.
	But we having reiterated the assertion, Father Hannigan 
listened again, and, suddenly turning to us a with a look of 
profound amazement, said:
	"Begor, you're right!"
	And then Father Hannigan made his way back to the 
mahogany table, rubbing the side of his head, and evincing all the 
symptoms of a man conscious of having been "sold."
	So the music as well as the words of this much-abused lyric 
has been a puzzle to us.
	And before dismissing Mr. Haynes Bailey, we must further 
record that another song of his, though "caviare to the general," 
was a decided favourite with Mat the Thrasher. He was wont to 
chant with great feeling how "She wore a wreath of roses the time 
when first we met," and a "wreath of orange blossoms" on the 
second occasion. And when once again they met, the widow's cap 
had taken the place of roses and blossoms. Mat's rendering of this 
last stanza was quite heart-breaking. But the great triumph was a 
new reading of the last line but one. In the original it is, we 
believe,

"And there is no one near
To press her hand within his own,
And wipe away the tear."

which Mat altered, whether intentionally or not we never could 
discover, to

"But there was no one near
To roll her in his arms,
And wipe away a tear."

	Mat Donovan sang on, with his eyes fixed on the collar-
beams, and with a continuous wavy motion of the head, which had 
a softness in it in harmony with the humorously pathetic look 
which was peculiar to him when the theme of his song, or his 
discourse, or his thoughts happened to be that which we are 
assured rules the court, the camp, the grove, and even "makes the 
world go round."
	"As long as the fox runs, he's caught at last," said Mrs. 
Donovan, looking at Mat, as if she suspected he was in the toils, as 
long as he seemed to have kept clear of danger.
	Phil Lahy had been taking a comfortable nap, with his head 
hanging over the back of his chair, unnoticed by every body except 
Billy Heffernan, who gave him an occasional push when he 
showed symptoms of tumbling off.
	"We must stir him up," said Billy. "Give him a shake, Mat, 
and tell him to come home."
	Come, Phil," said Mat, shaking him, "get up and pay for 
your bed."
	Phil opened his eyes and stared about him as if the whole 
place were quite strange to him. But, on recognising Mat, who was 
shaking him by the collar, Phil Lahy commenced to laugh, as if he 
thought the proceeding the funniest and most side-splitting of 
practical jokes.
	"Mat," said he, "you wor always a play-boy."
	"The divil a much of a play-boy in id," returned Mat I'm 
on'y tellin' you to keep your eyes open."
	No doubt, no doubt," Phil replied, with the look of a man 
that couldn't laugh if it were to save his life. "No doubt, Mat"; and 
he nodded so far forward that Billy Heffernan stretched out his 
hands with a start, imagining that he had taken a sudden fancy to 
dive head foremost into the fire.
	Let us be movin', Phil," said Billy Heffernan. " 'Tis gettin' 
late an' I must be off, an' we may as well go home together."
	You know, Billy, I have a poor wife that wouldn't say a 
word to me, no matter what I'd do."
	I know that," Billy replied, as if 'twas the most sorrowful 
thing he ever heard in his life.
	Poor Norah is comin' on finely," Nelly observed. " 'Tis long 
since I see her lookin' so well as she did to-day.
	The mention of Norah's name had an instantaneous effect 
upon her father, who seemed to become almost sober in a moment.
	Billy Heffernan expected this result, and yet he could not 
mention Norah's name himself.
	Billy," said Phil Lahy, looking at him as if it were he and 
not Nelly who had spoken, or rather as if no one had spoken at all -
- "Billy, I have a daughter an' the like uv her is not in the world." 
He said this confidentially, leaning forward as if he were imparting 
a secret to him.
	That affection of the throat which had prevented Billy 
Heffernan from at once complying with Norah's request that he 
would play "Auld Lang Syne," was now observed by Nelly 
Donovan, who was watching him very closely.
	 Perhaps Nelly Donovan had her own reasons for watching 
Billy Heffernan; and possibly his presence had something to do 
with her forgetfulness a while ago, in reference to the leeks and 
"roasters" And when she said that she'd rather a man like him that 
"wouldn't mind anyone" than a "rag on every bush" like Mat, she 
had certain misgivings that her words did not exactly apply to 
Billy's case; and now as she looked at him she felt sure that they 
did not. But though her first feeling, on making this discovery, was 
one of disappointment, if not of pain, it soon gave place to 
admiration and sympathy at the recollection of Norah's pale face. 
And Nelly Donovan never cared so much for Billy Heffernan as 
now that she believed he cared for another.
	"Billy," said Phil Lahy rising from his chair, "you ought to 
be in your own house. A young man ought to keep regular hours."
	"Well, I b'lieve so,' replied Billy, getting up from the bench 
in the corner and stretching his arms. "Good-night to ye."
	Mat, I have somethin' to be talkin' to you about," Phil 
observed before he reached the door, "but it will do another time. 
Good-night, Mrs. Donovan."
	"Good-night, Phil. Nelly, hold the candle for 'em till they 
get a-past the turn; I b'lieve the night is very dark."
	"There's great fear of 'em," returned Nelly in her good 
humoured way. " Here, take this in your hand," she continued, 
presenting a blackthorn stick to Billy Heffernan; "maybe you 
might meet the night-walkers. And 'tis the stick you ought to get," 
she added, giving him a blow of her open hand as he stepped over 
the threshold.
	"'Tis a shame for you," said her mother. "You'll never have 
a stim uv sinse." At which Nelly Donovan laughed her ringing 
laugh as she closed the door and fastened it with the back-stick.
	"Heigho! heart -- wan here an' another in Cork," she 
exclaimed, as she took the broom from behind the door and tucked 
up her apron, putting the corner under the string behind her back.
	Wisha, Mat," she continued, "how long you're about makin' 
thim couple uv brooms. These sally brooms don't hold a minute. 
Wan birch broom'd be worth a dozen uv em.
	"I'll desire Barney to cut the makin's uv 'em," replied Mat, 
"the next time he's goin' over to Ardboher. I haven't time myself, if 
you don't want me to go in the night --  or lose a Sunday for 'em."
	Mat Donovan, we are bound to confess, would not have 
thought it a mortal sin to cut the makings of a broom on the 
Sabbath, and by "losing a Sunday" he meant losing a dance, or the 
hurling, or the hunt, which he could only enjoy on the day of rest. 
As he spoke to his sister, he unfolded a crumpled ballad, and was 
just beginning to hum the chorus, when his mother reminded him 
that it was time to go to bed.
	Well, I b'lieve so," he replied, rolling the ballad between his 
hands, like a ball, and replacing it in his waistcoat pocket.
	"What raison do you rowl id up that way instead of foldin' 
id right?" Nelly asked, "I thought 'twas goin' to play scut wud id 
you wor."
	"You know nothin'," returned Mat; "if I folded Id right, as 
you say, 'twould cut in my pocket; an' now id won't."
	He was on his knees by his bedside without requiring 
another hint. And by the time his mother and Nelly had their 
prayers said, and the house swept, and the fire raked, Mat the 
Thrasher was sound asleep.
	And so, for the present, we wish good-night to the 
occupants of this humble little Tipperary home.



CHAPTER XXV.

PHIL LAHY IN THE BOSOM OF HIS FAMILY.

	BILLY Heffernan, on reaching his own door, was about 
bidding his companion good-night, when it occurred to him that 
Phil might take it into his head to pay a visit to Jack Delaney's 
forge, from the door of which, late as it was, a gleam of light shone 
out at intervals, indicating that the blacksmith had some work in 
hand which it was necessary to finish before morning.
	Billy Heffernan's suspicion proved well founded; for, after 
reflecting for a minute or two, Phil said:
	"Billy, I'll wish you good-night. I'll take a walk down to the 
forge. I want to talk to Jack Delaney about -- about a little 
business."
	"Sure you can see him to-morrow, or any time," replied 
Billy.
	Phil put his finger and thumb into his waistcoat-pocket, and 
taking out the last shilling of what Mat the Thrasher had given 
him, he fell into a deep reverie.
	Faith, I b'lieve 'tis burnin' you," said Billy Heffernan to 
himself. "'Tis gettin' late," he observed aloud; "an' maybe if you 
stopped out any longer Norah might be frettin'."
	This decided Phil, who walked off so quickly that Billy 
found himself standing alone in the middle of the road.
	He was about turning towards his own door -- a little 
disappointed, perhaps -- when Phil was at his side again as 
suddenly as he had left it.
	"Billy," said he, "you may as well come in for a minute."
	This invitation was not prompted by politeness on Phil 
Lahy's part. Perhaps if it were, Billy Heffernan would have 
declined it. But he knew Phil shrank from meeting his wife alone -- 
which may appear strange, for it was quite true that she "wouldn't 
say a word to him no matter what he'd do," as he said at Mat 
Donovan's But perhaps this forbearance was the secret of her 
influence.
	"Norah, you ought to be in bed," said Phil Lahy in a mild, 
parental tone, as he laid his hat on the top of the press near his 
shop-board, with the air of a man who had been labouring hard 
since daybreak to maintain his family respectably.
	For Phil Lahy really seemed to be quite satisfied that he 
was the prop of the household. And when he did happen to do 
anything useful -- such, for instance, as transferring a customer's 
account from his wife's board, where it was chalked in the shape of 
"strokes and O's," to the account book, or buying a couple of 
"slips" at the fair -- Phi Lahy had the look of a martyr who was 
slaving from year's end to year's end to keep a roof over the heads 
of his wife and children. He was apt to get those "weaknesses," 
too, to which he was subject on these occasions, and his hints as to 
the necessity of a little" nourishment" were both strong and 
frequent.
	At certain seasons, too, he was wont to take sudden fits of 
industry, which usually lasted half-an-hour at a time, and evinced 
themselves in "digging the haggart"; and 'twas wonderful how 
often the handle of his spade would get loose, and how every one 
would be in his way while he searched for the hammer, or 
sharpened a knife, to make a wedge, on the brown flag at the shop 
door. In reference to this peculiarity Mat the Thrasher was heard to 
declare that if Phil Lahy "on'y turned a dog up from the fire you'd 
think the whole house was dependin' on him."
	"You know, Norah," he continued, in a tone of mild 
reproach, "it doesn't answer you to be up late."
	"An' sure you know," replied his wife, "that she wouldn't 
go to bed till you'd come home; and if she did itself she couldn't 
sleep."
	"I was readin' an American paper over at Mat's," said he. 
"Billy Heffernan and myself happened to be there, an' we didn't 
feel the time passin'. I told Nelly how much obliged to her you 
were for the fresh eggs."
	This was a deep stroke of Phil's; and he began to feel that 
he had been discharging an important duty during the evening 
which placed them all under an obligation to him.
	"I think," he continued, as if he thought he might law fully 
allow himself a little relaxation at last, " I think I'll look over the 
bishop's speech."
	He sat down by the end of the table next the fire, and 
snuffed the candle with his fingers.
	There were cups and saucers and a loaf of bread cut into 
substantial slices on the table; and as soon as Billy Heffernan 
observed them he was moving silently towards the door. No one 
noticed him but Norah, who turned round in her chair and followed 
him with her eyes. Such an effort was so unusual with her, that her 
mother looked up in surprise to see what had happened. But 
observing nothing but Billy Heffernan's retreating figure, she 
turned to Norah for, an explanation; and her look of inquiry was 
met by one of mild reproach from Norah's dark eyes.
	Mrs. Lahy was for a moment quite at a loss to understand 
what had gone wrong; but the real state of affairs suddenly flashed 
upon her, and starting up she seized Billy Heffernan by the 
shoulder before he had reached the door.
	"Wisha, Billy," said she, "what did we do to you?"
"Nothin'," he replied," quite taken by surprise. "Who said ye did 
anything to me?"
	Here, go over there to the corner and sit down, an' have cup 
uv tay wud us."
	Billy hesitated; but Mrs. Lahy pushed him by main force to 
the seat in the corner; and a glance from Norah decided him.
	"I'll first run up," said Billy, "to throw a sop uv hay to he 
mule, and I'll be back in a minute."
	"How bad she is!" returned Honor Lahy. "She can wait till 
you go home."
	"Well," said Billy Heffernan, scratching his head uneasily, 
I haven't the flute.'
	This remark made Norah smile; and she gave him one of 
those looks -- those melancholy, grateful looks -- that always 
brought something into Billy Heffernan's throat.
	"You're sure you'll come back now?" said Honor Lahy, 
keeping her position between him and the door.
	"Well, I will," he replied. And she let him pass, and 
returned to her stool to finish the toasting and buttering of a thin 
piece of bread which she had left on a plate on the hearth when she 
started up to prevent Billy Heffernan's exit. Billy was soon back 
with his flute; but before he had time to screw the joints together, 
Mrs. Lahy snatched them from him, and laid them aside with Phil's 
American paper. And taking the sturdy little black tea-pot from the 
hearth, having first placed the table in front of the fire, she poured 
out the tea.
	Billy Heffernan reached for his cup without leaving his seat 
in the chimney-corner. Norah's was laid with her toast on a chair 
near her, and Honor and Phil sat at the table, having the full benefit 
of the turf fire. Altogether it was a pleasant little party.
	Phil Lahy was not insensible to the comforts by which he 
as surrounded and their influence lost nothing by the reflection that 
he himself was the source and creator of them all. He was more 
than half sober by the time the first cup of tea was discussed, and 
talked so wisely, and learnedly, and feelingly upon various 
subjects that his wife's admiration actually shone in her face till it 
rivalled the turf fire in brightness; and poor Norah, as she looked at 
him with a kind of wondering fondness, said to herself:
	"Ah! if he never came home any worse than he is now, how 
happy we'd all be!"
	Supper over, Mrs. Lahy handed Phil his newspaper, and 
Billy Heffernan his flute; but just as Phil had adjusted his 
spectacles on his nose, and as Billy was in the act of blowing the 
first note of the" Humours of Glyn," the half-door opened and Mr. 
Beresford Pender's servant came in with one of the lamps of his 
master's tax-cart in his hand.
	"The wind is afther quenchin' the lamp on us," said he, "as 
we wor passin' the quarry, and I came in for a light."
	Honor Lahy made 'the Sign of the Cross on her forehead. 
She and Mrs. Donovan had more than once compared notes in 
reference to that same quarry, and the conclusion arrived at was 
that certain folk who need not be mentioned had "a passage" 
through it.
	Honor Lahy handed the candle to the man, but as he found 
some difficulty in lighting the lamp, Mr. Beresford Pender himself 
made his appearance.
	"What's delaying you?" he asked in his tremendous voice.
	The delay was not much; but minutes seemed hours to Mr. 
Beresford Pender when he happened to be left alone at night, 
particularly in the neighbourhood of those properties with which 
his father had any connection as agent or assist ant agent. He began 
at once to bluster as he examined his pistols, and muttered of 
murderers, and robbers, and Papists and rebels, till poor Norah 
became quite frightened. But the oaths with which he interlarded 
his blustering were so shocking that the poor girl shuddered to 
listen to them. One was so horribly impious that she put her hands 
to her ears with a low cry, which she was unable to suppress.
	He turned round and glared at her, but swore no more till 
the servant came in to say the lamps were lighted.
	After looking again at Norah, Mr. Beresford Pender said, 
almost in a kind voice:
	"Good-night, Mrs: Lahy, I'm obliged to you. I hope I didn't 
disturb your daughter."
	"Oh, no, sir," Honor replied in a low tone, not at all like her 
usual hearty good-natured way of addressing people.
	And Norah looked up in surprise, as if she could scarcely 
believe he was the same man whose language had so shocked her.
	Perhaps he was not the same man. Who knows? Be sure, 
however, that Norah Lahys are not sent into this busy world for 
nothing.
	This unlooked-for intrusion cast a gloom over the little 
party.
	Honor Lahy could not shake off the feeling that Mr. 
Beresford Pender's appearance was a "sign of bad luck." But, 
notwithstanding, Billy Heffernan played the "Humours of Glyn," 
with variations, and several other melodies, grave and gay, before 
he bade them good-night.
	"Oh, wisha!" exclaimed Honor Lahy, "he put Tommy's cup 
out uv my head. And now," she added, after tasting it, "'tis cowld."
	But, though not as hot as might be wished, Tommy relished 
the cup of tea very much, and smacked his lips as he despatched it, 
with the heel of the loaf, sitting up in bed; for Tommy had been 
sound asleep for a couple of hours, when he opened his eyes and 
commenced whistling the "Humours of Glyn" in excellent accord 
with Billy Heffernan's flute -- till Billy came to the variations, 
which so aggravated Tommy Lahy that he pulled the blankets over 
his head, and turned round with his face against the bolster, in 
order to shut out the tantalizing vagaries of the musician 
altogether. And in this position his mother found him when she 
brought him his share of the feast.
	I'm afeard you'll be tired after stayin' up so late."
	"Oh, no, mother, I was never so happy."
	"Well, come, alanna."
	She took Norah in her arms and carried her to her bedroom.
	"Put up that newspaper now, Phil. You know 'tis all hours."
	"Five minutes," returned Phil. "I have the speech finished 
all but a quarter of a column."
	"What's that?" Honor exclaimed in a whisper, with a 
frightened look.
	Don't mind," replied Phil as he read on. "'Tis on'y a slate 
that's after bein' blown off the house.'!
	'Tis a terribly stormy night," said Honor. "Listen." 
	"I hear it," said Phil, as he folded his newspaper. "The 
almanac mentioned that we were likely to have either storms or 
heavy rain this month, or frost and snow, unless the wind happened 
to be from the south, or east, or north-west, and then tolerably fine 
weather was to be expected, with occasional showers."
	"Wisha, now," said Honor, as if her fears were quite 
dissipated by this explanation. "Go to bed now, Phil, an' let me 
ready-up the place."
	"I'll kneel down here," replied Phil, "and read my penance. 
Hand me the prayer-book."
	"Remind me to-morrow," said he, as he closed the door 
behind him, "of Tom Donnelly's breeches."
	"I will," replied Honor; "an' I hope you'll finish id at wance. 
His wife was complainin' to-day that he hadn't a stitch uv 
dacency."
	"Well, he won't have that to say much longer," replied Phil, 
"so far as the breeches goes." And Phil sprinkled himself with the 
holy water, and lay down to sleep with a mind at peace with 
himself and the world.
	"I tell you what," he muttered to himself, as he wrapped the 
blanket tightly over his shoulders, "Phil Lahy is -- is -- is -- a fine 
fellow!" With which comfortable reflection Phil Lahy began to 
snore.



CHAPTER XXVI.

A BRIDEGROOM WHO COULDN'T DESCRIBE HIS BRIDE.

	"I HOPE you enjoyed the hunt yesterday, Mr. Lowe," said 
Mary.
	"Oh, very much," he replied. "The harriers are an excellent 
little pack. But I must confess I thought the country rather stiff; 
particularly beyond the hill."
	"But how did you get through the bog? Grace and I could 
see you all in a cluster in the wood; and Grace said she could see 
the hounds going through the heath over the high part of the bog; 
but I could not see them."
	"Did they not go through the place where the heath is?" 
Grace asked, turning to Richard.
	"Yes; and into the wood at the other side; and we don't 
know what became of them after that;"
	"I knew I could not be mistaken," said Grace. "Though 
Mary wanted to persuade me it was a flock of geese I mistook for 
the hounds."
	"We thought ye'd be back to dinner," said Mrs. Kearney. 
"We were an hour later than usual. But Hugh said if ye had not 
gone somewhere ye'd be home before then, and there was no use 
waiting."
	Mr. Lowe apologised; and justly threw all the blame on the 
doctor.
	"The fact is," said the doctor, "Bob Lloyd insisted that we 
should dine with him. He had young Hemphill and a few more 
friends."
	"Mr. Beresford Pender among the number I suppose," said 
Mary.
	"No, he didn't ask him; though he was with us at the time. 
Lloyd doesn't care about him. I think he told me his father 
overreached him in some money transaction."
	"Depend your life on old Isaac for that," said Mr. Kearney.
	"By-the-by," said Mr. Lowe, turning to Grace, "your friend 
young Mr. Hanly was there -- I mean at the hunt. And he is really 
one of the boldest riders I ever saw. He had an unbroken colt with 
his tail down to the ground and all covered over with mud -- as 
indeed was the rider, for they both rolled over in a muddy ditch."
	Grace laughed at this description of her admirer. It was 
agreed on all hands that she had made a conquest during the short 
time she had been Lory's partner in the dance.
	He had come back several times to shake hands with her 
and bid her good-night; renewing his offer to show her the cave 
each time; besides telling her he could lend her Pope's Homer, or 
the Rambler, or Thomson's Seasons, or Goldsmith's Poetical 
Works. 
	"I'll bring them all to you," said Lory.
	But Grace assured him all those books were in her papa's 
library; and Lory, shaking hands with her for the fifth time, 
mounted to his place in the phaeton; but tumbled out again 
immediately, and thrusting his long neck inside the drawing-room 
door, startled Mrs. Kearney with the announcement that he had 
"The Devil on Two Sticks."
	"And four volumes of the 'Spectator,'" added Lory, "and the 
second volume of 'Tom Jones.'"
	So that it was agreed on all hands that she had made a 
conquest. And the moment Lory was mentioned, Mary looked at 
her, but Grace frowned scornfully -- till the picture called up by 
Mr. Lowe of Lory mounted upon an untrained colt with a long tail 
and covered with mud, forced her to laugh whether she would or 
not.
	"He certainly has pluck," said Mr. Lowe; "and rides 
remarkably well."
	An almost imperceptible motion of the head -- something 
between a nod and a toss -- and a certain thoughtfulness in her 
look, led Mary to suspect that Miss Grace was just saying to 
herself that a young gentleman who had pluck was not to be 
despised.
	And in fact Grace resolved that her reception of him the 
next time should be more gracious than it had been on previous 
occasions when he came to pay his respects. She remembered his 
love of books, and that some of his remarks were very striking. She 
even began to think that there was something manly in what Mrs. 
Kearney called his "terrible throat." So that it was quite lucky for 
Lory that Mr. Lowe gave him credit for pluck.
	To be sure it could be wished, Grace thought, that his coat 
were wider in the shoulders and longer in the skirts, and the other 
garment less suggestive of carrying several stones of potatoes in 
the rear. It was to be regretted, too, that his hair stuck out straight 
from his head, and that there were so many pimples on his face. 
But that one virtue of pluck covered a multitude of defects, and 
Lory was gaining ground rapidly. She recalled, too -- what she did 
not before consider worth attending to -- that Lory had insinuated 
that he would exert all his eloquence to induce his sister to give 
him her jay, which was both a pretty and an intelligent bird, and in 
case of success that he, Lory, would be most happy to present the 
jay to Miss Kiely. Grace remembered all this now, and hoped Lory 
would keep his word; and if he appeared mounted upon the long-
tailed colt, so much the better. Her cogitations were broken in upon 
by Mr. Kearney asking Mr. Lowe abruptly, how did he like the 
Hall.
	"'Tis a very fine place," Mr. Lowe replied. " I wonder how 
my grandfather parted with it."
	"He could not help it," returned Mr. Kearney bluntly, " the 
property was going to be put into Chancery at that time, and 
Somerfield gave him a large fine. We all made money for him. I 
lent him eight hundred pounds myself."
	Mrs. Kearney started as if from a reverie, and was on the 
point of announcing that the eight hundred pounds were given to 
her by her Uncle Dan; but Mary suggested at the moment that Mr. 
Lowe would have another cup of tea, which caused Mrs. Kearney 
to start again. The cup of tea knocked the eight hundred pounds out 
of her head, and her Uncle Dan was left to rest in peace for the 
present.
	"Has Mr. Somerfield any landed property of his own?" 
Lowe asked.
	"Yes, he has a nice little property near the old church you 
were looking at the other day. And his son has two or three farms 
very cheap."
	"How can he afford to keep a pack of hounds?"
	Oh, that's not much; they're billeted among the tenants, and 
the son is a good judge of horses, and makes money by them. He 
has several agencies, too, and a d--n bad agent he is. There is not a 
lease on any of the properties he is over.
	He pretends 'tis the landlords refuse to give leases; but 'tis 
ell known 'tis himself puts 'em up to it. He's a magistrate now. The 
father was a good sort of an old fellow, nothing troubling him but 
hunting. But the son is a rogue. He's after turning more people out 
than any man in the county, and giving the land to Scotch and 
English tenants at a lower rent, and leases."
	"I thought you said there were no leases?"
	I mean to the old tenants. But the Englishmen and 
Scotchmen are sure of leases."
	"I had no idea such a system was being carried out."
	'You'll probably learn more about it when you see Mr. 
Pender," said Hugh.
	"Sir Garrett said nothing about it," replied Mr. Lowe.
	"I suspect," said Hugh, "he knows nothing about it."
	This was all very uninteresting to Grace and the doctor, and 
they were both leaving the room, after yawning several times, 
when the door opened, and a servant informed Mr. Kearney that 
Ned Brophy wanted to speak to him.
	"Tell him to come in," said Mr. Kearney. "I suppose he is 
coming to remind us of the wedding."
	Ned Brophy soon appeared with his "clothes spic-and-span 
new," as the song says; but we cannot add, "without e'er a speck," 
for Ned's clothes were pretty well speckled with mud -- and not his 
clothes only, for a pellet of the mud had hardened and dried on his 
right cheek under the eye, and two or three smaller spots were 
visible about his temples.
	Ned was accompanied by his "best man," Mat Donovan.
	"Sit down, Ned; come, Mat, sit down here," said Maurice 
Kearney, placing two chairs near the window.
	"Well, Ned, what's the news?"
	"A fine wet day, sir," replied Ned, who felt and looked 
somewhat embarrassed as he glanced at Mat to help him on.
	"Ned that's afther comin' over, sir, for the lend uv the ould 
mare to carry home the wife," said Mat Donovan.
	This request seemed to surprise Mr. Kearney, who looked 
at Ned as if he expected some explanation of it.
	"I have Tom Bolen's side-car," said Ned, rousing himself, 
"an' this coult uv mine is in the habit of runnin' away, an' I don't 
like to venture to drive him in harness, as if he made off on the 
way home, 'twouldn't look well."
	"An' he says I can ride the coult," Mat added, "an' as the 
mare was idle 'tis I put id into his head to ax the lend uv her. He 
was goin' to hire a car, but I tould him he needn't, an' 'twould be 
dacenter not, as people'd say he hadn't a horse uv his own to bring 
home the wife."
	Mat Donovan was quite sincere in recommending this 
arrangement to Ned Brophy. But he might not have been so 
positive in urging it if the opportunity of figuring in the blue body-
coat on the colt were out of the question. Yet Mat Donovan had no 
thought of captivating some farmer's daughter with a good fortune, 
as Honor Lahy prophesied he would be sure to do.
	"Oh! very well," said Mr. Kearney, "you can get the mare, 
Ned." 
	"Thank'ee, sir. You needn't fear but I'll be careful uv her."
	"Don't stir," continued Mr. Kearney, as they were rising to 
go. "Wait till the mare is ready. -- Go out to Wattletoes," he added, 
turning to his youngest son, "and tell him to get the mare for Ned 
Brophy."
	"And will you tell him to show me my thrush's nest?"
	"You were a fool," replied his father, "to give him the cake 
till he showed you the nest. That was buying a pig in a bag."
	"He says now," returned Willie, "that the old one was in the 
ivy and was listening when be promised to show me the nest, and 
that she took the young ones all off to Ballydaheen wood; but that 
he'll go after them the next day he has time; and if he can't find 
them he says he'll pull a grand stick for me -- a holly oak stick with 
blackthorn knobs on it, he says."
	"A holly oak stick with blackthorn knobs on it!" repeated 
his father. "Would I doubt Wattletoes?"
	There was a silence of some minutes after Willie had gone 
to order the mare, which Mat the Thrasher felt a little 
embarrassing, particularly as he saw Grace pulling Mary by the 
sleeve and calling her attention to himself.
	"I never see this girl yet, Ned is gettin', sir," said Mat.
	"Well, maybe Ned would describe her for us now."
	"Wisha, begor I couldn't, sir," replied Ned, scratching his. 
poll and looking puzzled. "I never see her but twice, an' I was 
dhrunk the two turns."
	All eyes were turned with laughing surprise on the speaker, 
who, at the moment, was anything but a picture of happiness.
	"I'm tould, sir," said Mat indignantly, "she's wan uv the 
finest girls in the parish. How d--n well you wor able to see the 
two hundhred sovereigns."
	"And the old saucepan," said Mr. Kearney. "Did you get 
the money, Ned?"
	"No, sir," he replied solemnly, "but it was counted out on 
the table the first day I was at the house, an' put back again."
	"An' you wouldn't miss it out of it?" said Mr. Kearney, who 
seemed to enjoy the matter immensely.
	"Hardly," replied Ned. "I never see such a show uv money 
together before. It reminded me uv California or the Bank uv 
Ireland."
	"You'd betther not lose any more time," Mat observed. " 
'Tis gettin' late."
	"That's a fine new coat you have, Mat," said Mr. Kearney, 
looking at him admiringly as the Thrasher drew himself up to his 
full height.
	"'Tis in compliment to Ned I got it, sir," returned Mat. 
"You ought to do something for yourself. Make your harvest at the 
wedding -- maybe you could get a haul at the old saucepan."
	"Thim times is gone, sir," replied Mat. "No chance now of 
farmers' daughters an' 'five hundred pounds in goold,' as the song 
says." And Mat glanced at Miss Kearney in a manner that quite 
annoyed Mr. Lowe.
	"He's an impertinent fellow, after all," he thought. But so 
far from being offended, Mary returned Mat's smile in a manner 
that made the young gentleman quite angry.
	"I don't know that," returned Mr. Kearney. "Try your luck 
with one of the other sisters, an' Ned will put in a good word for 
you."
	"Well, I b'lieve he would, sir," replied Mat, "if there was 
any use."
	"I hope you'll be over wud us to-night, sir," said Ned, as he 
was going. "And if Miss Kearney or Miss Kiely would like to have 
a dance they'd be heartily welcome."
	"I'm getting old now, Ned," Maurice Kearney replied. "But 
Hugh will go. I must take care of myself or this woman might be 
on the look-out one of those days."
	"Indeed," said Mrs. Kearney, indignantly, taking the matter 
in downright earnest, "that's what one of the name never did. No 
one could ever say that one of the Ballydunmore family ever 
married a second time."
	"Maybe 'twasn't their fault," exclaimed her husband, who 
was evidently enjoying the fun.
	"You're quite mistaken," returned Mrs. Kearney. "My Aunt 
Judith had more proposals than all the young girls of the county, 
and she never accepted one of them -- though my Uncle Dan said 
she ought to marry. But she never did." 
	And Mrs. Kearney left the room quite offended.
	"Mat looks much more like the happy man than Ned," 
Grace observed, when they had left. "And, indeed, it would not 
surprise me if it was he got the two hundred pounds out of the old 
saucepan, and not Ned."
	"If poverty enters the door," said Mary; "you know what 
you said to Father M'Mahon." 
	"Well, that's true," replied Grace, with a shake of the head. 
"'Twould be all very well if that view of the case could be kept out 
of sight."
	"I fear, Mr. Lowe," said Mary as she took up her work at a 
little table near one of the windows, "I fear this will be a wet day."
	"Yes, I fear it will continue wet," he replied, after walking 
to the window, and looking up to the drifting clouds. Mr. Lowe 
said "feared," but he meant "hoped."
	"A wet day in the country is an awful bore," said the 
doctor, who was just then thinking how certain chums of his in 
Dublin would spend the day, and wondering why Keating didn't 
answer his last letter.
	Mr. Lowe, on the contrary, thought a wet day in the country 
anything but a bore under certain circumstances, though he did not 
say so.
	To the surprise of all present the door opened, and Mat 
Donovan advanced a step or two into the room, and stood rubbing 
his chin as if he had something to say, but did not know how to 
begin.
	Mary looked round the room, supposing that he had 
forgotten something, and seeing a walking-stick standing in one of 
the corners, she took it in her hand, and said: "Perhaps this is your 
stick, Mat."
	"No, Miss," replied Mat, whose eyes were fixed on Grace. 
"But I'm comin' to ax a favour of Miss Grace, if she'd have no' 
objection."
	"Oh, what is it?" Grace asked with quite a coquettish air. 
	"Well, Miss, there's a little delay about the harness, an' I 
said to myself I'd run in an' ax you to play that tune for me you 
were playin' th' other evening for the masther. 'Tisn't but that I 
know it uv ould," Mat added, "but someway I'm running into 
another tune in the middle uv the succond part, an' I have a raison 
for wishin' to hear id agin."
	"What's the name of it?" she asked.
	"It goes by the name uv 'Nach m-baineaun sin do,' Miss," 
replied Mat, "but 'tis many's the name id is called."
	"It must be one of the Melodies," Grace observed, turning 
to Mary. " But the question is, which of them is it?"
	I can't remember," Mary replied, "but I suppose it must be 
one of those you always play for my father."
	Grace pressed her finger on her lip, and seemed to be 
seeking the solution of a mystery.
	"Is the tune you want," she asked, "ever called 'Langolee'?"
	"No, Miss, I know that; an' you played it beautiful, too. But 
'twas in the same book -- the large wan wud the goold harp on the 
cover."
	"Come and we'll look for it," exclaimed Grace, jumping 
from her seat, and running out of the room.



CHAPTER XXVII.

THE JAY.

	MARY stood up and asked Mat to come to the drawing-
room, where they found Grace already sitting at the piano.
	"Oh, my goodness!" she exclaimed, looking round, "what 
sort of gentlemen are those?"
	But before she could proceed further with her censure, Mr. 
Lowe was at his post and placed the music before her.
	"Well, now, let me think of all Mr. Kearney's tunes," said 
she, turning over the leaves. "Listen to this one, Mat."
	"No, Miss," replied Mat, shaking his head, "that's 'Moll 
Row in the Morning.'"
	"Well, this,", and she played a few bars of another.
	Mat shook his head again.
	"Oh, I think I know it now," she exclaimed,, as she turned 
rapidly over the leaves. "Why, here it is, with the very same name 
he has mentioned. Mr. Kearney has some words to it about --  

"I'll go to the fair, and I'll sell my old cow,
For twenty-five shillings, one pound and one 
crown,
I'll drink what I earn, and pay what I owe,
And what's that to any man whether or no?"

	"That's id, Miss!" Mat exclaimed, in quite an excited way.
	"'Tis 'They may Rail at this Life,'" said Grace, turning to 
Mary. "Sit down, Mat."
	Mat's spirit was attentive as she played; and after a little 
while he began to move his head from side to side and turned his 
eyes to the ceiling.
	Mary watched him with a smile; for it seemed quite evident 
he was mentally going through his song with all possible care. Her 
suspicion in this respect was confirmed beyond all doubt when Mat 
thrust his hand into his pocket and pulled out a sheet of paper 
which he hastily unfolded, and, after glancing at it for a moment, 
turned his eyes again to the ceiling and commenced what he would 
himself call "humouring" the tune.
	"Good luck to you, Miss," he exclaimed, when she had 
stopped playing. "I think I have id purty well now."
	"I think, Mat," said Mary, "you ought to sing the song for 
us."
	"Begor, I couldn't, Miss," he replied, after some hesitation. 
"I'll thry an' sing id to-night for 'em. 'Tis a new song I got from the 
young schoolmaster over at Loughneen; an' I said I'd get id be 
heart an' sing id at the fust weddin' I'd be at; an' Ned's happens to 
be the fust. Though, faith, Miss Mary, I was thinkin' I might be 
singin' id at your own this turn."
	Though the look which accompanied this last observation 
was precisely the same as that which so annoyed Mr. Lowe in the 
parlour, he now laughed and saw nothing at all impertinent in it.
	"Mat is surely a deluder," said Grace, when he had left. 
	I'm quite vexed that he never favours me with any of his 
admiring glances."
	"You like to be admired, Miss Grace," said Mr. Lowe.
	"Who does not, I'd like to know? Though some people may 
pretend not to care about it." And she glanced at Mary.
	"Take care," said Mary, "or I'll tell Mr. Lowe what you said 
about him the other day."
	"And will you tell him that somebody else said I was 
right?"
	Mary got a little frightened; and, lest she should have the 
worst of it in such an encounter, she hurried back to the parlour 
and took up her work.
	Hugh was sitting at the little table near the window, he had 
gone out with the intention of walking over the farm, but turned 
back on finding the rain was heavier than he expected.
	Mr. Lowe and Grace immediately followed Mary, and there 
was much lively chat on the subject of the manners and customs of 
the peasantry, suggested by Mat Donovan's visit. Grace had quite a 
fund of anecdotes, picked up at those "literary dinners" she alluded 
to when trying to find the "solution of the mystery" connected with 
the tracks in the snow.
	Hugh was silent; but to the watchful eye of his sister, it was 
plain he was enjoying Grace's lively sallies and merry laughter. He 
leant over the back of his chair and during a lull in the 
conversation seemed to have fallen asleep. Mary called Grace's 
attention to him, in order that she might do something to rouse 
him. His long black hair hung over the table, and Grace happened 
to have the scissors in her hand, clipped off a lock.
	Hugh started up, and seeing what she had done, snatched 
the scissors from her; and twisting a tress of her hair round and 
round his finger, cut it off, to her consternation.
	"Oh, you wretch!" she exclaimed, pulling down her hair to 
see what amount of damage he had done. But finding the tress 
would not be missed, she resumed her good humour.
	"Could you invent anything for us to do?" the doctor asked 
piteously, from the sofa.
	"'Tis too wet to go out," replied Hugh.
	"It is too bad," said Mary, "that Mr. Lowe must remain a 
prisoner."
	"I assure you," he replied, "I can be resigned to my fate."
	"Will you go to the wedding?" she asked, turning to Hugh.
	"I suppose I must. There is no getting out of it, as my father 
won't go."
	"He is a great stay-at-home, Mr. Lowe. He will not go 
anywhere but when he can't help it. And you saw he does not even 
dance quadrilles."
	"Except when he has someone to lead him like a bear," said 
Grace.
	"Was it not customary," Hugh asked with solemnity, "when 
dancing bears used to be exhibited, to have the bear led by a 
monkey? I think I read about such a thing somewhere."
	"I see what you mean, sir," said Grace. "Perhaps it is all 
fair."
	"A hit," said the doctor, "a palpable hit. But I'd sooner have 
expected it from Lory. He's devilish clever at that sort of thing."
	"Is he, indeed? Then I was peculiarly fortunate in getting 
two such clever partners."
	"You are a match for them," said Mary laughing.
	"A match -- you are certainly complimentary."
	"I mean you are able for them all -- to give them tit for tat."
	"Quid pro quo," replied Grace. "I should hope so." It would 
be diamond cut diamond," said Mary.
	"Diamond!" repeated Grace. "Do you call him a diamond?" 
And she nodded her head towards Hugh, in a way that made the 
doctor break into a horse-laugh, and kick up his heels on the sofa.
	"Or," she continued, opening her eyes, in which there vas a 
curious blending of astonishment and fun, "is that the gem?"
	She pointed out into the lawn; and there was Mr. Lory 
Hanly doing his best to shelter himself from the rain with the collar 
of his scanty coat, running towards the house with his head down -
- the wind being in his face -- as if he intended making a battering 
ram of himself to drive in the hall-door. He was covered with mud 
from head to foot, and it was astonishing how high up and far 
behind him be managed to fling his heels.
	Grace hurried out to open the door. She stood back behind 
it, as if she expected to see Lory shoot past her, and involuntarily 
held her breath in anticipation of a frightful crash among Mrs. 
Kearney's crockery; for a vague notion crossed her mind that Lory 
would be picked up insensible in the pantry at the end of the hall 
after splitting the door of that sanctum in two with his skull.
	Lory, however, had stopped himself on the door-step, and 
Grace stared at him in speechless amazement.
	The rain was running down in little rivers all over him -- 
particularly over his eyes; which made it necessary for him to cut 
off the streams at the eyebrows with the knuckles of his thumbs 
before he could see distinctly. Lory, too, looked surprised when he 
found who had opened the door for him. But recovering himself 
before she could ask him in, he fumbled with one hand under his 
coat, and then thrust out both arms at full length towards her.
	"Here he's for you now," said Lory, breathlessly.
	Grace took what he presented to her mechanically, without 
having the least notion what it was, and Lory instantly wheeled 
round -- his hob-nailed boots making as much noise as if a horse 
had stumbled on the door-step-- and set off for home, forgetting 
that the wind would be now in his back; the consequence of which 
was that Lory was precipitated head-foremost, and had to run on 
all-fours for good ten yards before he could recover himself. Once 
in an upright position, however, he was blown back to the avenue 
gate without further exertion from himself than lifting his feet and 
keeping one hand clapped against his poll to prevent his cap from 
being swept across the bog, and, peradventure, stuck into a crevice 
of the old castle, like the piece of an old petticoat --  to which it 
bore a striking resemblance -- in the broken window of Jack 
Delaney's sleeping apartment behind the forge. It was observed, 
too, that the wind kept Lory's diminutive skirts stuck against his 
back, as if they had been pinned up under the shoulder-blades. He 
had actually reached the gate before Grace recovered from her 
surprise, even so far as to think of shutting the door. But then she 
could not use her hands for that purpose, and as she was collecting 
her senses to think what was to be done, Hugh came out to know 
what had happened to make Lory beat so precipitate a retreat.
	"What is it all about, Grace?" he asked, as he closed the 
hall-door. "What have you done, to frighten Lory? Has he popped 
the question and been rejected? The effect was dreadful. I very 
much fear the young gentleman's body may be found, nine days 
hence, floating in the Poulnamuck."
	But Grace returned to the parlour without noticing his 
banter, and was holding out Lory's gift to satisfy her own and her 
friends' curiosity, when a sharp pinch on the wrist made her let it 
go with a scream. And "with many a flirt and flutter," like the 
celebrated raven, Lory's jay perched upon Miss Kearney's work-
box. He looked about him with the utmost nonchalance and then 
winked his eyes several times and moved his neck as if he had 
been sleeping in an uneasy position; and then the jay opened his 
beak and yawned, as if he were very drowsy, and meant to go to 
sleep again: But just as he was burying his head cosily between his 
shoulders, he caught a glimpse of himself in the lid of the work-
box, and the sight so far awakened his curiosity that he pecked at 
the rosewood, and in doing so his feet began to slip upon its 
polished surface: whereupon the jay extended his wings' a little, 
and jerked up his tail. What followed we shall not venture to 
describe; but Mary jumped from her place near the table with a 
scream almost as loud as Grace's when she got the pinch on the 
wrist. The doctor turned round to see what had happened; and 
seeing it, flung himself on his back, and commenced cutting capers 
with his feet in the air.
	"That Lory is a genius," said the doctor. "He has cured me 
of a severe fit of the blues. I'm eternally indebted to him."
	Grace got into good humour, too, and after carefully 
pulling down her cuffs, she ventured to take the jay between her 
hands again. "I'll go and make Ellie happy," she said, running 
away, holding the jay at arm's-length above her head.
	The sky began to brighten over the hills, and Hugh 
predicted that the remainder of the day would be fine. The wind 
continued to blow; but before evening the sun flashed through the 
broken clouds, and it was agreed on all hands, that Ned Brophy's 
"hauling home" would be more propitious than could have been 
anticipated a few hours earlier.
	"I wonder," said Mrs. Kearney, who came into the parlour 
in an evidently distressed state of mind -- "I wonder what can be 
delaying Barney? And he has things we want for the dinner."
	"I suppose it was the heavy rain," Mary replied. "No one 
would face out in such a storm; and I daresay Barney waited till it 
cleared up."
	"Even if he did, he might be here now."
	"Well, you know," said Mary, "Mr. Lowe has decided on 
going to the wedding with Hugh, so you need not be particular 
about our dinner to-day."
	"Why so?" Mrs. Kearney asked, as if she could not see the 
force of the reasoning.
	"Why, of course, if they go at all, they'll be there for 
dinner."
	"Oh, yes, they call it a dinner, but it will be more like a 
supper. I'll engage it won't be on the table before eleven o'clock -- 
or ten the earliest."
	"Well, even so," replied Mary. "They'll go at the usual 
hour, and you need not be so particular about our dinner to-day."
	"'Tis too late already," rejoined Mrs. Kearney, with a sigh, 
"to think of roasting a bit of beef. But if that fellow was home in 
time, sure I could have a nice steak for them at any rate. He's 
always disappointing me, and making mistakes, bringing wrong 
things, and running after peepshows, and ballad-singers, and 
Punches and Judys. My heart is broken with him," continued Mrs. 
Kearney, sighing deeply. "But indeed," she added with severe 
dignity, as she folded her plump hands and rested them on her 
knees -- "but indeed, only for the respect my Uncle Dan had for his 
mother I wouldn't keep him another hour under the roof of the 
house."
	Mary was not at all apprehensive that Barney was in danger 
of instant dismissal; but wishing to put her mother into good 
humour she observed, as if to herself, that "poor Barney was very 
devoted and strictly honest."
 	"Well, indeed," replied her mother in a softened tone, 
"there's nothing to be said against his honesty. His father would lay 
down his life for my Uncle Dan, and, indeed, I believe poor 
Barney would do the same for any one of the name."



CHAPTER XXVIII.

BARNEY WINS A BET, AND LOSES MUCH PRECIOUS 
TIME.

	THE cause of Mrs. Kearney's trouble was all this time 
comfortably ensconced in the chimney corner, in the little kitchen 
behind Mrs. Burke's shop, with his foot on the hob -- which foot, 
by the way, the servant girl had seized with the tongs while making 
the fire, mistaking it for a sod of turf of the description known as 
"hand turf"; in the manufacture of which the moulders allow free 
scope to their fancy, and occasionally produce a marvel of 
grotesqueness.
	Barney had but just reached Mrs. Burke's door, when the 
rain began to pour down in right earnest. So, after putting Bobby 
under a shed in the yard, he took possession of the corner, and kept 
it without flinching even when the fire was at the hottest, and the 
big black pot hanging over it was enveloped in the blaze -- which 
drew from the girl who had attempted to boil the potatoes with his 
foot, the remark that "the divil a wan else she ever knew could 
stand the same corner but Dan Brit and John Roche, the lime-
burners."
	"An' spake uv the ould boy an' he'll appear," she added; 
here is Dan himse'f."
	The individual spoken of drew a chair to the fire, scowling 
at Barney as if he considered him an intruder. It could be seen at a 
glance that Dan Brit was not a model of sobriety. After eyeing 
Barney in silence for a minute, he was turning to the girl to order a 
pint of porter, when he looked again at him and hesitated. In fact, 
Dan Brit was debating with himself whether, if he ventured to ask 
Barney to take a drink, was Barney the sort of person to say 
afterwards, "Let us have another." And in case he was the man to 
say so, Dan Brit had his mind made up to call back the girl just as 
she was going for the two pints of porter, saying, "Kitty, I'll take a 
glass of the old malt; I'm not very' well to-day." And so Dan Brit 
would have a glass of whiskey, price threepence, in exchange for 
the pint of porter, price three-halfpence; which, in a social and 
friendly way, and, in the spirit of a good fellow, he was thinking of 
pressing Barney Brodherick to accept at his hands.
	And while Dan Brit was pondering the risks to be run in the 
matter, his eye fell upon Barney's foot on the hob, which object 
seemed to fascinate Dan Brit and drive all other objects and 
subjects out of his thoughts for the time being.
	"The divil so ugly a foot as that," said Dan Brit, solemnly, I 
ever see, anyhow." 
	"There's an uglier wan in the house," rejoined Barney.
	"No, nor in Ireland," returned Dan. "Nor in Europe, Asia, 
Africa, or America."
	"Will you bet a quart uv porther?" said Barney.
	"That there's not an uglier foot in the house?" exclaimed 
Dan, staring in astonishment at him.
	"Yes," replied Barney, with spirit, "I'll wager a quart uv 
porther, an' let Kitty be the judge, that there's an uglier foot in the 
house."
	"Done!" exclaimed Dan Brit, who grasped at the certainty 
of getting a drink without paying for it. "But will you stake the 
money?"
	"Ay, will I," said Barney, suiting the action to the word, 
and slapping down the coppers on a chair near him.
	"Take that money, Kitty," said Dan Brit, "an' decide the 
bet."
	"What is the bet?" Kitty asked.'
	It was explained to her; and Kitty shook her head sorrow 
fully, and told Barney he was always a fool.
	"Stake the money, yourse'f," said Barney. And Dan did so.
	"Come, give me back that change," said Dan; "an' bring in 
the drink. The bet is mine."
	"Wait a bit," returned Barney. "Kitty, give us a peep at your 
own."
	"What impudence 'you have I" exclaimed Kitty,
indignantly. "Who dare say a word agin them, I'd like to know?" 
'And Kitty exhibited a pair of very presentable feet.
 	"Begob, Kitty," said Barney, with a grin, "if I was 
dependin' on thim, I'd lose my bet."
	"An' do you mane to say you haven't lost id?" Dan asked:
	"Run, Kitty, for the porther."
	"Ay,' will she; but 'tisn't my money'll pay for id."
	"Didn't you bet there was an uglier foot in the house than 
that?"
	And Dan Brit pointed to the foot on the hob.
	"I did."
	"An' where is id?"
	Barney Brodherick slowly and deliberately drew his other 
foot from under the chair, and held it up to view.
	 "Here's your money, Barney," exclaimed Kitty, in an 
ecstasy of delight. "You won the bet; I'll go for the porter."
	Dan Brit's jaw fell down as he stared with open mouth at 
Barney. And after swallowing his share of the porter he walked 
away with an expression of countenance which made Kitty observe 
that "wan'd think 'twas a physic o' salts he was afther swallyin'."
	When the rain ceased, Barney, snatching one of his baskets 
from Mrs. Burke's counter, hurried off to Wat Murphy's and 
presented Mrs. Kearney's written order to the butcher.
	"I haven't what she wants," said Wat; "but I can send her a 
nice bit that will answer her as well."
	He seized his knife and saw, and cut and weighed the beef 
so quickly that it was wrapped in the cloth and deposited in the 
basket before Barney could collect his wits to demur to the 
proceeding.
	"An' now," he muttered, scratching his head as if the thing 
were done past recall, "an' now she'll be puttin' the blame on me, 
an' sayin' 'twas my fau't -- an' that's the way they're always layin' 
everything on my shoulders. The divil may care what's done wrong 
-- 'tis Barney wud every wan uv 'em, big an' little."
	"If she finds any fau't wud that," said Wat, as if he were 
threatening somebody, "tell her 'tis her own cow," -- which, 
however, did not happen to be the fact. But Wat Murphy told lies 
in the way of business on principle. "For" -- Wat was wont to 
observe -- "if I didn't tell lies, do you think I could ever sell an ould 
ram?"
	"Och! be the hokey, 'twill dhrag the arm out uv me!" 
exclaimed Barney, as he raised the basket. "If I thought 'twould be 
so heavy, I'd bring up the ass."
	"Put it on your head," Wat suggested.
	"I'm d--n sure I won't. Do you want to make a woman uv 
me? Is it like a can uv wather you want me to carry id?"
	"A purty woman you'd make," observed Wat, as Barney 
stooped under the weight of the heavy basket.
	"Blood-an-ouns, Wat!" he exclaimed, turning round out 
side the door, "when are we to have the bull-bait?"
	The question was suggested by the white bull-dog, who 
walked to the street-door and back again without con descending to 
take the slightest notice of Barney, or anyone else.
	"I'm not at liberty to give particulars," Wat replied, in a 
manner that put a stop to all further inquiries on the important 
subject of the bull-bait.
	Barney held on his way till he reached the corner of the 
street, when he was obliged to rest his basket against the iron 
railings of a genteel house, separated by a small garden from the 
street.
	Oh, murther, murther!" he muttered, "I'll be kilt afore I'm 
down to Mrs. Burke's. An' 'tis a good deed; where was I comin' 
wudout Bobby? An' thanum-un-dioul! the misthress'll murther me 
worse nor the basket. I remimber now, she warned me to be home 
as fast as I could. I wondher what excuse I'll have for her? Let me 
see. Begob, I'll say Bobby got the cholic after the peltin' we got 
comin' through the bog. For how will she know but it was skelpin' 
in our face, barrin' Judy Brien might tell her; an' nice thanks that id 
be afther givin' her a lift from the crass."
	Here Barney pulled up his sleeve to the elbow and looked 
at his arm, upon which the handle of the basket had left its mark.
	"Begob, 'twill cut the arm off uv me," he continued. "An' 
the divil's cure to me; where was I comin' wudout Bobby?"
	He swung the basket on the other arm and was setting off 
again, when the hall door of the genteel house opened, and a lady 
came running towards him down the straight gravel walk,
	"Wait for a minute," she called out, "I want to speak to 
you."
	Barney stopped; but she required a minute or two to 
recover breath.
	"You're Mr. Kearney's man," she said at last.
	"Yes, Miss," replied Barney, "I'm his b'y."
	"What have you in the basket?"
	"Mate, Miss."
	"What sort? Show it to me."
	Barney raised a corner of the cloth.
	"Beef!" she exclaimed "I declare it's a round. Will that be 
all dressed together?"
	"Begob, mese'f don't know, Miss,"
	"Do your people have butchers' meat every day?"
	"Faith, an' they do so, Miss; barrin' Friday."
	"Oh, yes, they're Roman Catholics. Are you a Roman 
Catholic?"
	"Begob, I am, Miss -- though my mother was born a 
haythen."
	"Born a heathen! Is it possible?"
	"The divil a lie in id, Miss -- an' reared. But she turned 
afther runnin' away wud my father -- God rest his sowl."
	She looked at Barney as if he were a natural curiosity; and 
began to wonder what particular race of savages his mother 
belonged to.
	"Of what country was your mother a native?" she asked.
	"A native?" Barney repeated, as if the question were rather 
puzzling. "Oh, ay!" be added after a pause, "is id what 
counthryman is my mother? Begob, she was bred, born, an' reared 
in Ballyporeen. Her father was the clerk uv the church; an' my 
father was sarvin' the slathers whin they wor roofin' id. 'Tis of'n I 
heard her tellin' the ins an' outs uv id. He used to run up an' down 
the laddher so soople, that, be japers, she tuck a sthrange likin' to 
him, an' med off wud him -- though her sivin generations afore her 
wor haythens."
	"Oh, you mean," said the lady, "that your mother was a 
Protestant, and she married a Papist, and became an apostate."
	"Begob, that's' id, Miss," replied Barney, perfectly satisfied 
with her version of the affair. "But this'd never do for me," he 
added, thrusting his arm into the handle of his basket. " 'Tis all 
hours, an' I'm in for gettin' Ballyhooly from the misthress."
	"Wait for a moment," the young lady exclaimed, quite 
frightened at the idea of his escaping. "Tell me; is Mr. Lowe with 
your people still?"
	"Begob, he is, Miss; I have letthers for him."
	Show them to me!" she exclaimed eagerly, thrusting out 
her hand through the railing.
	"They're in the basket, below, at Mrs. Burke's, Miss, wud 
the newspapers an' things for Miss Mary."
	"What things are they?"
	"The divil a know I know. I get a scrap uv writin' 
mentionin' what I'm to brin'. On'y for that they'd bother the life out 
uv me."
	"How does Mr. Lowe spend his time?"
	"He's d--n fond uv discoorsin' Miss Mary," Barney replied, 
with the extraordinary grimace which he meant for a smile.
	"Oh, I suppose he has no other amusement?"
	"Himself and the docthor goes uv an odd time over to 
Hanly's," said Barney; "an' they wor out wud the hounds 
yesterday."
	"I wonder," said she, as if thinking aloud, "did they meet 
Robert?"
	"They didn't lave Mr. Bob's till wan o'clock last night, 
Miss," returned Barney. "An' 'tis I have good raison to know id; for 
I stopped up wud Tom Maher for the horses, an' they kep' me 
dancin' for 'em in the kitchen till I hadn't a leg to put ondher me. 
The docthor was purty well I thank you. An' faith there was no fear 
uv Mr. Lowe aither."
	"Do you mean to say that Mr. Lowe was at Mount Tempe 
last night?"
	"Faith, then, he was so, Miss; an' 'tis I have raison to 
remimber id."
	She turned round and ran into the house, as if she suddenly 
discovered that Barney was not a safe companion, and that the fate 
of the clerk's daughter, of Ballyporeen, might be hers if she did not 
instantly fly from danger. But, so far from having any such 
amiable intentions, Barney, as he swung his basket on his hip, 
ejaculated an imprecation of so extraordinary a character that we 
are not sure whether it would bear repeating -- at least in his own 
words. Miss Lloyd -- we hope the reader has recognised Miss 
Lloyd --  pulled up her skirts considerably higher than her ankles 
as she ran back to the house; and the glimpse thus afforded of the 
nymph's limbs must have suggested to Barney Brodherick the 
before-mentioned imprecation. For, looking after the flying fair 
one, and recollecting the precious time he had lost on her account, 
Barney prayed that a certain sable gentle man might have "her 
shin-bone for a flute, playing the 'Rakes of Mallow' for her sowl," 
into a place where it might dance to the music upon a pavement 
which must be pretty extensive by this time.
	"O Isabella!" Miss Lloyd exclaimed. "O Isabella!" She 
dropped into an arm-chair and panted for breath.
	Isabella ran to the window to try if she could catch a 
glimpse of the desperado who, she had no doubt, must have 
attempted to carry off her sister.
	"O mamma," she continued, "Mr. Lowe has been at Mount 
Tempe."
	"Well; and what of that?"
	"What! Oh, that we must have the party at once, and I am 
sure he will come."
	"No; I tell you he would not unless those people with 
whom he is staying were asked."
	"And what great harm would it be to invite them?"
	"Henrietta, you astound me! But there has been enough of 
that nonsense already. It is out of the question."
	"But what I mean is that they would not come."
	"No matter, it would be talked of. You know the Scotts did 
not ask ourselves last time; and if they knew we had such 
acquaintances what would they not say!"
	"But why do you think he would not come if they were not 
asked?"
	"Indeed, Henrietta," said her sister -- a blooming, blue-eyed 
girl of twenty summers or thereabout -- "it would be positive 
rudeness after your being there."
	"I would not mind the rudeness," rejoined her mother. "But 
when he saw you there he must be under the impression that they 
are recognised by the gentry. Indeed, I don't know how you can 
disabuse him of this notion -- you are for ever thrusting yourself 
into improper places."
	"Oh, I can say it was merely accidental. He knows they are 
only farmers. And Robert is so intimate with their brother."
	"Oh, if there was no one but him I should have no 
objection. But the sister is out of the question. I really wonder both 
she and her mother have not called on you. I saw them drive by the 
day before yesterday. And, indeed, I'd have no objection. Mrs. 
Barn tells me she's a respectable sort of person; and very good to 
make presents."
	"There is Robert," said Isabella, pointing to the window.
	"Oh, we must send for him!" exclaimed Miss Lloyd. "I 
wonder is there a meeting of the club to-night?"
	"No, it is to be on Thursday," her mother replied. "They are 
going to elect Beresford Pender."
	"Robert says he'll black-ball him," said Isabella.
	"I really cannot understand his prejudice against him. He is 
a young man of excellent principles," replied her mother.
	I hate the sight of him!" exclaimed Isabella. "He is the most 
insufferably vulgar creature I ever saw."
	Mr. Robert Lloyd, in hunting costume, and mounted upon 
his well-known grey horse, had ridden quietly past his mother's 
house without turning his eyes towards it. A servant, however, was 
sent to the hotel for him; and he soon strolled up the gravel walk, 
with his hands in his pockets.
	"O Robert," said his eldest sister, "you had Mr. Lowe last 
night?"
	"Ay, faith," he replied.
	"Do you think you could get him to stay with you for a few 
days?"
	"He's a d--d sight better off where he is. I wish I could 
exchange places with him."
	Miss Lloyd made a gesture expressive of the most ineffable 
contempt.
	"He's to be at Ned Brophy's wedding to-night," Bob 
observed.
	"Oh, and we are asked," exclaimed Miss Lloyd. "Are you 
going, Robert?"
	"Ay, faith. I always go to a tenant's wedding."
	"It is what the highest people do," said his mother.
	"And don't you think we ought to go?" Miss Lloyd asked.
	"If you wish it, I see no objection."
	"Will you come, Bell?"
	"If I thought there would be any chance of fun, I would. 
Will there be any fun, Robert?"
	"Ay, faith. He has two pipers and three fiddlers."
	"And an excellent dinner," said Miss Lloyd. "I saw all the 
things. They have three legs and two shoulders of mutton, and -- "
	"Don't mind the bill of fare. But can we make ourselves fit 
to be seen in so short a time?"
	"I'll wear my blue gauze," said Miss Lloyd.
	"What! Will you go in a low body?"
	"Of course I will; and I'll wear my pearls. And, mamma, 
will you lend me your bracelets?"
	"Yes, you may have them; but take care and don't lose 
them, as you did those trinkets the other day."
	"Oh, they were only worth a few shillings."
	"Yes, but it would be just as easy to lose them if they were 
diamonds."
	"Oh, you need not fear; I'll take care of them. Come, 
Isabella. And, mamma, will you tell John to have the car ready?"
	And Miss Lloyd hurried to her chamber, on hostile 
thoughts intent, so far as Mr. Henry Lowe's heart was concerned.
	"Now, Robert," said Mrs. Lloyd, on finding herself alone 
with her son, "did you do anything in that matter yet? You know 
her fortune is very considerable, and would enable you to put 
everything to rights. So I beg you will make up your mind this 
time, and don't act so strangely as you have so often done."
	"I'll talk to Jer about it,"
	"Well, Jer is sensible, and has got you out of some 
awkward scrapes. But this is a different thing altogether. So I 
request you will act for yourself now. Have you seen her?"
	"Ay, 'faith."
	"And how do you like her?"
	Mr. Robert Lloyd opened his mouth very wide and yawned. 
And when his mother looked round to see why he had not replied 
to her question, the gentleman was leisurely walking out of the 
room with his hands in his, pockets. Whistling was one of the 
things that Mr. Robert Lloyd did well; and as he sauntered down 
the gravel walk, his mother could distinctly hear the little air which 
he had played upon his jew's-harp for Mr. Lowe, and of which he 
had become particularly fond since Richard Kearney's 
misadventure in the bog.



CHAPTER XXIX.

THE HAULING HOME. -- "IS NORAH LAHY STRONG?"

	"GOOD evening, Barney," said Mr. Lloyd, as he was 
passing Mrs. Burke's shop-door, where Barney Brodherick was 
fixing sundry baskets and parcels in his donkey-cart. "What 
news?"
	"Nothin' strange, sir," replied Barney; "barrin' that I'm in a 
divil uv a hurry."
	"Barney, maybe you'd carry this as far as Honor Lahy's for 
me?" said Judy Brien, who stood by the donkey-cart with a new 
cradle she had just purchased from a travelling vendor.
	"An' welcome. Judy, an' yourse'f on the top uv id"
	"Oh, I must wait for Tim, an' he'll carry me behind him. I 
was goin' to lave the cradle here at Mrs. Burke's, till I met you. I 
thought you wor gone home hours ago."
	"All right," said Barney. "Put id on top uv this hamper, an' 
I'll tie id down wud this bit of coard."
	"Hallo! Bill," shouted Mr. Bob Lloyd, who watched the 
fixing of the cradle with great interest, and even held it in its place 
while Barney was tying it -- "hallo, Bill, where are you bound 
for?"
	It was Billy Heffernan upon his mule. The saddle was very 
far back towards the animal's tail, and kept in its place by a 
crupper. He was obliged to put both hands to one side of the rein in 
order to bring his steed to a stand, which he effected by very nearly 
riding through Mrs. Burke's shop window. This catastrophe was 
only prevented by Bob Lloyd hitting the mule on the nose with his 
whip.
	"Comin' home wud Ned Brophy, sir," replied Billy. "He 
sint me -- wo, Kit! -- on afore 'em to tell them to sind for another 
gallon uv whiskey an' some ginger cordial, as there's more comin' 
from that side than he expected."
	"All right, Bill," said Mr. Lloyd, turning the mule's head 
towards the road.
	And moving back a pace or two, Mr. Lloyd drew his 
hunting-whip from under his arm and deliberately lashed the mule 
several times under the flanks, which had the effect of making Kit 
fling out her hind legs as if she wanted to fling her shoes at the 
head of her assailant. But finding that this was impracticable, Kit 
put her head between her fore legs, and after a minute's debate with 
herself as to the proper course to be pursued under the 
circumstances, she clattered up the main street at a canter, with her 
nose to the ground, after the manner of mules and donkeys with a 
pack of canine tormentors at their heels.
	"Begob, sir," exclaimed Barney, as if a bright idea had 
struck him, "I b'lieve I might as well wait an' be home wad the 
weddin'."
	"Ay, faith, Barney," replied Mr. Lloyd.
	And there being neither peep-show, nor ballad-singer, nor 
Punch and Judy in Kilthubber on that day, Ned Brophy's wedding 
was a regular god-send to Barney; for were it not for the wedding, 
in spite of his ingenuity in finding temptations to keep him from 
being home at a proper time, Mrs. Kearney might possibly have 
been able to have the "nice steak" for dinner.
	A wedding party is always an object of interest; and Ned 
Brophy being well known in Kilthubber and along the whole line 
of march, men, women, and children were on the look-out for his.
	The procession comprised some ten or fifteen "carriages of 
people," including jaunting cars and "common cars," and a 
considerable troop of equestrians, among whom Mat the Thrasher, 
in his blue body-coat, mounted upon Ned Brophy's colt, was the 
observed of all observers. They were greeted with a cheer from a 
considerable crowd collected at the corner of the street, which 
compliment was attributed to the fact that several boon 
companions of the bridegroom's were in the crowd. But when they 
got a cheer at every cross road and cluster of houses they passed 
after leaving the town behind them, so unusual a circumstance 
began to excite surprise.
	Mat Donovan, however, having to alight to pick up the 
bridegroom's hat, which somehow had got the habit of being blown 
off his head every ten minutes or so, the whole procession rattled 
past him before he could remount; and as he came up with them 
just as they were passing the cross of Dunmoyne, he discovered 
that they were indebted to Barney Brodherick for turning Ned 
Brophy's hauling home into what the newspaper reporters call "a 
regular ovation." Barney was standing with a foot on each shaft, 
belabouring his donkey to keep him at a gallop, and behind him, on 
the top of his load, was Judy Brien's new cradle. It was naturally 
supposed that Ned Brophy had provided himself with a cradle at 
this early stage of his matrimonial journey; and such an instance of 
foresight was hailed with shouts of applause from Kilthubber to 
Knocknagow.
	Barney stopped at Honor Lahy's to leave the cradle there. 
"What is this?" a gentleman asked, putting his head out of a chaise 
that stood near the beech tree while the driver was repairing a 
break in the harness, pointing to the cars and horsemen as they 
passed.
	"Ned Brophy's funeral, sir," replied Barney as he pitched 
the cradle down on the ground.
	"Don't mind him, sir," said Honor Lahy, "'tis his weddin'."
	"The difference is not much," returned the gentleman --  
who must have been an incorrigible old bachelor -- as he pulled up 
the window and leant back in his seat.
	Mary Kearney, and Grace, and Ellie were out walking, and 
on hearing the shouts, and catching a glimpse of the wedding 
party, they ran into Mat the Thrasher's house, where they could see 
without being seen, from the little window, the light from which 
was wont to cheer the belated traveller as he plodded along the 
bleak bog road.
	Nelly Donovan was arraying herself in her best finery for 
the wedding.
	"Come here, Nelly," said Mary, "and point out the bride to 
us."
	"I never see her myself, Miss," replied Nelly, running from 
the room with her hair about her shoulders; "but that's Ned's first 
cousin on the same side of the car wad him; so, I suppose the tall 
wan at this side is the wife."
	"The cousin is very nicely dressed," Grace remarked. 
"That's a very pretty bonnet she has. In fact, she is quite lady-like. 
What is her name?"
	"Bessy Morris, Miss."
	"Is that Bessy?" said Mary, looking at the owner of the 
pretty bonnet with increased interest. "So it is; I see her now." For 
Bessy Morris had turned round and looked over the clipped hedge, 
and up at the old cherry-tree, and then down towards the school-
house beyond the quarry, with a wistful gaze that Mary interpreted 
into a sigh for the times that were gone.
	"She has all the latest fashions, Miss," said Nelly, "after 
coming from Dublin. But she was always tasty."
	"Ned looks as if he were going to be hanged," Grace 
observed. "I should not like to see such an expression as that in my 
husband's face on the wedding-day."
	The matter-of-fact way in which she spoke of her husband 
made them all laugh; while old Mrs. Donovan stopped her knitting 
and raised her hands in wonder.
	"Ah, I wouldn't say," said Nelly, as if to herself, "but that 
house below in the threes is after bringin' some wan to Ned's mind 
that put the heart across in him the night uv the party long ago."
	"And did she refuse him?" Grace asked.
	"No, Miss; she was fond uv the slob -- but she hadn't the 
fortune."
	"The bride is a fine-looking girl," said Mary.
	"Faith, then, she's nothin' short uv id," returned Nelly with 
an assenting notion of the head as she stooped down and pushed 
back her hair to get a better view, "though Billy Heffernan tould 
me she was a step-laddher."
	"Oh, a step-ladder!" exclaimed Grace. "What did he mean 
by that?"
	"Long and narrow, Miss," replied Nelly, laughing, "like 
huxter's turf."
	"Come, Grace;" said Mary; "it is getting late, and we have 
to call at Mrs. Lahy's yet. I didn't like to go in when I saw the 
chaise at the door. I hope all the wedding people are after passing."
	"They are, Miss," replied Nelly. "An' maybe you'd tell Phil 
Lahy not to delay, as I promised to wait for him."
	"Is Phil to be at the wedding?"
	"Faix, 'twouldn't be a weddin' wudout him," said Nelly.
	"You're in great style, Nelly," Mary remarked with a smile. 
"I suppose you are determined to break half-a-dozen hearts at least 
before morning?"
	Nelly sighed, and shook her head; but recovering herself, 
she replied in her wild way:
	"Well, I must thry an' do some good for myse'f among the 
strangers. There'll be some likely lads there to-night, an' who 
knows what luck I might have."
	Mary was welcomed, as usual, by Norah and her mother. 
But Phil seemed to have a weight upon his mind, and was as full of 
importance as if he were about to engage in some undertaking 
upon which the very existence of his little helpless family 
depended.
	"Good evening, Miss," said he in a subdued tone. He paced 
up and down the kitchen, as if it were a sick chamber, rubbing his 
newly-shaven chin, and occasionally feeling the high stiff collar of 
his clean shirt in a hurried way, as if the thought were continually 
occurring to him that he had forgotten to put it on.
	"Nelly Donovan desired me to tell you, Mr. Lahy, that she 
was waiting for you."
	Phil Lahy took down his hat, and putting it on with the air 
of a humane judge assuming the black cap, he left the house 
without uttering a word.
	"Is Mr. Hugh goin' to the weddin'?" Honor inquired.
	"Yes, he and Mr. Lowe are going."
	"Wisha, Miss, maybe you'd tell him to have an eye to Phil."
	"How so?" asked Mary in surprise.
	"Well," replied Honor, thoughtfully, "he's afther promisin' 
me an' Norah not to take anything stronger than cordial; an' if Mr. 
Hugh'd have an eye on him and remind him uv id now an' then, I 
know he'd be all right."
	"Well, I'll tell him," said Mary, with a smile.
	Grace was becoming a great favourite with Norah. Grace 
needed only to try to become a favourite with anybody. And how 
glad she was to see by Honor Lahy's smile that the poor woman 
harboured no prejudice against her, after all.
	"Are you glad that spring is coming?" she asked, turning to 
Norah.
	"Oh, yes, Miss; I'm longing for the fine days, when I can sit 
outside under the tree."
	"Are you fond of reading?"
	"I am, Miss; an' when I'm not strong enough myself, 
Tommy reads for me, an' so does my father sometimes."
	"I think I have some books at home you would like. And 
when I go home I'll send them to you the first opportunity I get."
	Norah looked her thanks, and perhaps there was a little 
pleased surprise in the look.
	"You are fond of music, too, I am told?"
	"I am, Miss, very. I'm told you play the piano beautiful?"
	"Well, I do play; but not near so well as I could wish. I 
played some Irish airs for Mat Donovan this morning."
	"Mat is a fine singer, Miss."
	"Yes, I have often caught snatches of his songs from the 
barn. But he would not sing for us to-day when we asked him."
	Ellie here interrupted them. She came to exhibit Tommy's 
new paper; but Grace motioned her away as if just then she had no 
time for trifling.
	"You showed me that before."
	"No, that was his old copy-book. But he is in Voster now."
	"In what?" She took the paper in her hand and read:

"THE RULE OF THREE DIRECT.
"Commenced by Thomas Lahy, January the 8th,
"Anno Domini, One thousand Eight
"Hundred and . . . ."

This was written at the top of the first page in the school-master's 
most magnificent large hand, and under this the page was divided 
by a black stroke down the middle into two equal parts. In these 
double columns Tommy Lahy had copied each question and 
answer fully and fairly from the book -- and the sums, fully and 
fairly worked out, were given under the questions and answers. 
Several pages of the book were filled in this way; and Tommy told 
them proudly, though somewhat bashfully, that he'd be "in 
Fractions after Easter." At which Grace looked astonished, 
evidently thinking that "fractions" and "smithereens" were 
convertible terms.
	"Show her your Voster, Tommy," said Ellie.
	Tommy brought the book, and, on looking at the title page, 
Grace nodded, and said:
	"Oh, yes; now I understand; but I never saw this book 
before."
	"Maybe 'tis a Gough you have, Miss?"
	Grace contented herself with nodding again by way of 
reply.
	"Could you work the piece of plank, Miss?"
	"What is that?"
	Tommy licked his thumb, and turned over the leaves till he 
came to a problem requiring the dimensions of a piece of plank of 
certain length, breadth, and thickness.
	Grace glanced at the problem and looked wise. But she 
began to think that Tommy Lahy could teach her some useful 
things of which she was altogether ignorant. She happened 
however, to glance at the fly-leaf of Tommy's "Voster," and her 
pleasant laugh made Norah turn round and look at her.
	"'Thomas Lahy, of Knocknagow, His Book,'" she read. 
	"And listen to this: --  

"Steal not this Book, my honest Friend,
For fear the Gallows might be your End;
The Gallows is High, and you are low.
And when you'd be up you'd be like a crow. 
If this Book be lost or Stole, 
I pray the finder will send it home 
To Thomas Lahy, of Knocknagow."


Grace laughed again and held up the book, with her finger pointing 
to the bottom of the page, where Mary, by leaning forward and 
straining her eyes a little, was able to read 

"Thomas Lahy, Copy Dated,"

And under this, in a different hand --  

"On'y for me the pigs would ate it."

	"The schoolmaster says, Miss," observed Honor, "that 
Tommy has a great turn for -- what's that he says you have a turn 
for, Tommy?"
	"For science," replied Tommy.
	"Oh, I always said that Tommy was a very intelligent boy," 
said Mary.
	"On'y for he's so wild, Miss," returned Honor, with a sigh, 
and a glance at the beech-tree.
	"I am very glad, Norah," said Mary, rising from her chair, 
"to see you getting on so well. When the weather gets fine I hope 
you will be much better. And, when the flowers are in bloom, I 
won't be satisfied till we get you up to show you the garden."
	"Thank, you, Miss," replied Norah, with that worshipping 
look with which she always regarded her.
	"An' sure you won't forget, Miss," said Honor, "to tell Mr. 
Hugh to keep Phil in mind uv the cordial?"
	"Oh, never fear. I'll tell him."
	"O Mary," said Grace on their way home, "how much 
mistaken I was.
	"In what were you mistaken?"
	"About Norah Lahy. I believe now she is the happiest girl I 
ever saw."
	"Have you found that out?" Mary asked, with a delighted 
look. "I knew you would."
	"Oh, yes; I am sure of it."
	"And so am I."
	They walked along in silence for some time, till Ellie, who 
had lingered behind them, came running up and said there was a 
gentleman with a red coat riding slowly after them. It was Mr. 
Robert Lloyd; and, on finding that they were aware of his 
proximity, he put his horse to a quicker walk in order to pass them.
	"He had his hand to his hat to salute you," said Grace, "but 
you did not look at him. Do you know, I always thought there was 
affectation in that not looking at people."
	"I am not sure but you are right," replied Mary.
	"It looks like vulgar pride, or sulky ignorance," said Grace. 
"Oh, those are very hard words," said Mary, laughing.
"But do you never turn up your nose at people yourself?"

"'Oh wad some power the giftie gie us,
To see ourselves as ithers see us,'"

replied Grace. "Yes, I do plead guilty to the charge. But,. my dear 
Mary, we can all see the mote in our neighbour's eye much easier 
than the beam in our own. But with regard to the gentleman on the 
grey horse, would you not have returned his salute?"
	"I am not personally acquainted with him," Mary replied. 
"But I would have returned his salute, though I might rather avoid 
it if I could do so without laying myself open. to the charge of -- 
what's that you said it looked like?"
	"I believe I said vulgar pride, or sulky ignorance."
	"Well, if I could not pass the gentleman without being open 
to such a charge, I would, of course, return his salute. And yet," 
she added, with a smile, "if I were a lady he would scarcely have 
saluted me without some previous acquaintance or introduction."
	"Why, what on earth do you mean by saying if you were a 
lady?"
	"Oh, I see you don't know what our notions are respecting 
ladies or gentlemen in the country."
	"Well, tell me."
	"Did you never hear your papa tell what Sally Egan said to 
Mrs. French?"
	"No, I don't remember; but I recollect Sally Egan very well. 
It was she nursed me."
	"Well, your papa gave her an excellent character when she 
was leaving you, and Mrs. French asked her what place she was in 
before that. 'I was with a gentleman, ma'am,' she replied. 'And was 
not your last master a gentleman?' asked Mrs. French. 'Oh, no, 
ma'am,' said Sally, 'he's only a doctor.'"
	Grace reddened with indignation, and pronounced Sally 
Egan's conduct an instance of the basest ingratitude.
	"You mistake altogether," said Mary. "She did not mean to 
make little of the doctor at all."
	"If papa is not a gentleman," exclaimed Grace, "I don't 
know who is."
	"That's my way of thinking, too," replied Mary; "but you 
see it was not Sally Egan's. It is only what are called 'estated men' 
are gentlemen in Ireland, and their wives and daughters are the 
only ladies. Tom Maher thought he was paying me a great 
compliment the other day by saying that I was 'like a lady.'"
	"What must be the reason?" said Grace, musingly.
	"Try and find the solution of the mystery," replied Mary, 
laughing.
	Grace put her finger to her lips and knit her brows. "It is 
because they are slaves!" she exclaimed, with emphasis.
	"I believe you have guessed it," replied Mary, quietly. They 
came up again with Mr. Lloyd, who had gone into a house to light 
his pipe. It was plain he meant to be respectful, for he took the pipe 
from his mouth and put it behind his back while they were passing. 
Mary returned his salute this time.
	"Do you know, Mary," said Grace, "I think it is because he 
knows Richard so well."
	"You are quite right," she replied, quickly; "that never 
occurred to me before."
	"There is something good-natured looking about him," 
Grace observed. "And he is a fine, handsome man, though, I 
should say, somewhat foolish"
	"You are not very flattering," said Mary.
	"Well, now," said Grace after another interval of silence, 
"tell me candidly what you think of him?" She pointed to Mr. 
Lowe, who was walking with the doctor in the lawn.
	"Well, I think he improves on acquaintance," Mary replied. 
"The more I know of him, the better I like him."
	"It is just the contrary with me. I was ready to worship him 
as a superior being at first. His elegant, gentleman-like manner 
quite fascinated me. But now I feel there's some thing wanting. 
There is something milk-and-waterish about him. He is not 
strong."
	Mary looked at her with surprise, as indeed she often did.
	"And is Richard, for instance, strong?" she asked.
	"No, not strong; but he has animation, or something that the 
other wants."
	"And Hugh?"
	"Yes," she replied, compressing her lips, and with a 
movement of the head. "Yes; Hugh is strong. He has a strong 
face."
	"Is Norah Lahy strong?"
	The question seemed to surprise her at first, but, after a 
moment's thought, she replied:
	"Yes: Norah Lahy is strong. There are different kinds of 
strength. I fear I am not strong myself. In some ways I know I am; 
but if I were afflicted like Norah Lahy, I never could endure it as 
she does."
	"You could," replied Mary, "God would give you strength."
	"You could bear it," returned Grace, "just the same as she 
does."
	"Oh, I fear I never could, with such cheerful resignation. 
But if it ever should be my lot to be tried with affliction, how much 
I shall owe to Norah Lahy!"
	"Mary," said Grace, after another pause, "I am beginning to 
feel quite nervous. That is why I can never meditate on such 
things. It makes me think that I shall soon die, and that frightens 
me."
	"It is a thought that ought to frighten us all," returned Mary. 
"But I need not preach to you, Grace. You understand these things 
very well. And I am sure you do some times meditate on death."
	"I try -- sometimes."
	"I seldom talk in this way," said Mary. "I scarcely know 
how you managed to introduce the subject. But we must hurry in 
and deliver Mrs Lahy's injunctions to Hugh before they go."
	"They seem to be in no hurry," Grace remarked. "There is 
Adonis vaulting over the gate, and, I suppose, challenging Apollo 
to follow him. But Apollo prefers opening the gate. And now he 
sees us, and is sorry he has not bounded over it like an antelope."
	"Well, let us hurry," said Mary. "They are waiting for us."
	"I hope," she remarked, on reaching the gate, "I hope you 
will find a great deal to amuse you at the wedding to-night."
	"I am all impatience to see a real Irish wedding," he 
replied. "And to judge from the glimpses we are after getting of the 
party as they drove by, this is to be a genuine affair."
	"Yes, 'twill be the correct thing," the doctor observed "By 
Jove! only for an engagement I have I'd be tempted to go with you. 
Nelly Donovan's ankles would make a saint forget the sky as she 
tripped by just now."
	"But not a sinner forget the important duty of spending a 
long winter evening telling an appreciative circle what he would do 
with the bars of the grate," said Grace.
	The doctor pulled his moustache and tried to laugh.
	"What do you mean by the bars of the grate?" Mary  asked.
	"Oh, don't you know? 'What will you do with this one?' 'I'll 
ask her to sing a song.' 'And what will you do with this one?' 'I'll 
adore her.'"
	"Oh, I suppose you are too wise," returned Mary, "for such 
things. But I must not forget Phil Lahy and the cordial."
	She quickened her pace in order to meet Hugh, who was 
dismounting from his horse, after returning from the out-farms. 
And as Mr. Lowe gazed after her, he thought to himself that if 
some accident occurred to prevent their attendance at Ned 
Brophy's wedding he would bear the disappointment like a 
philosopher, and spend the evening by the fireside.



CHAPTER XXX.

NED BROPHY'S WEDDING

	WHEN Mr. Lowe found himself knee-deep in fresh straw, 
after jumping from the gig in Ned Brophy's yard, he looked about 
him with a slight sense of bewilderment. Their drive for the first 
two miles had been pleasant enough, but when they turned off the 
high road into a narrow "boreen," Mr. Lowe expected every 
moment to be flung over the fence, against which the wheel almost 
rubbed as they jolted along.
	"Have we much farther to go?" he asked, clutching the side 
of the gig, as the wheel at Hugh's side sank into the deepest slough 
they had met yet.
	"Only a couple of fields," Hugh replied. "We'll be in view 
of the house after passing the next turn."
	The couple of fields seemed five miles long at a moderate 
calculation to Mr. Lowe, and it was not till he found himself on his 
legs in the straw he felt satisfied they had really arrived at their 
journey's end. As he gazed about him he had a confused 
consciousness of the twang of fiddles, mingled with the hum of 
many voices and the clatter of many feet, on the one hand, and a 
combination of odours, in which turf, smoke and roast goose 
predominated, on the other. The music came from the barn, and the 
odours from an out-office at the opposite side of the yard, which 
was converted into a kitchen for the occasion -- and there being no 
chimney, a plentiful supply of smoke was the natural consequence.
	Hugh shouted for someone to come and take care of his 
horse; and a workman rushed from the barn, creating considerable 
confusion among a crowd of beggars at the door --  for whom the 
fun at that side seemed to possess more attraction than the culinary 
preparations and savoury odours at the other.
	Mr. Hugh Kearney's arrival was soon made known to the 
people of the house; and Mat Donovan, as "best man" and master 
of the ceremonies, was at the door to receive and welcome him.
	"Is this the doctor you have wud you?" Mat asked. "Begor, 
I'm glad we have him, as I was afeard there'd be no wan to talk to 
the ladies."
	"This is Mr. Lowe," replied Hugh.
	Mat was evidently disappointed; for he had the highest 
opinion of the doctor's powers in the matter of "discoorsin' the 
ladies."
	On entering the kitchen, where preparations for dinner were 
also proceeding on a large scale, Ned Brophy's mother welcomed 
them with a curtsey, and her daughter took their hats and overcoats 
to one of the two bedrooms off the kitchen. Mat Donovan opened 
the parlour door, and showed the gentlemen in with a bow and a 
wave of his hand that even the accomplished Richard, whose 
absence he so much regretted, might have envied.
	Two ladies who sat by the fire -- one in a blue ball-dress 
and pearl necklace, the other in a plain black silk, with only a blue 
ribbon for ornament -- stood up; and Mr. Lowe found himself 
shaking hands with the blue ball-dress almost before he was aware 
of it.
	"Don't you remember Miss Lloyd?" Hugh was obliged to 
say; for it was painfully evident he did not at once recognise her.
	"Oh, I beg pardon," said he, "but really the pleasure was so 
unexpected."
	Miss Lloyd was in fidgets of ecstasy, and called to her 
sister to introduce her.
	Mr. Lowe bowed again, and it was pretty clear from the 
expression of his eye that he thought the plain black dress and the 
blue ribbon a pleasanter sight to look at than the blue gauze and 
pearl necklace.
	"Sit down, sir," said Mat Donovan, placing a chair in  front 
of the fire. "Or, maybe," he added, turning to Hugh, "you'd like to 
have a bout before the tables are brought into the barn?"
 "Oh, no, we'll wait till after dinner," said Hugh.
	"Very well, sir," replied Mat. "Father Hannigan'll be here 
shortly, and I'll bring him in to have a talk wad ye before supper is 
ready. I'm afeard the cook is afther takin' a sup too much,, an' if the 
ladies here don't show 'em what to do, things'll be apt to go 
contrairy."
	"Oh, you may command my services," said the younger 
lady, with a laugh.
	"Thank'ee, Miss," returned Mat. "But she's takin' a sleep, 
and maybe she'd be all right after id."
	"Who is the cook?" Miss Lloyd asked, eagerly. "Is it Mrs. 
Nugent?"
	"'Tis, Miss," replied Mat. "She was up at the castle 
yesterday, preparin' the big dinner, an' she's bate up intirely."
	"Oh, was she at the castle? Where is she? I'd like so much 
to ask her all about it."
	"She's gone into the little room there, Miss, to take a stretch 
on the bed."
	Miss Lloyd was on the rack immediately. Even Mr. Lowe 
faded from her mind and was lost in the steam of that big dinner at 
the castle.
	Seizing a candle from the table, Miss Lloyd rushed into the 
little bedroom off the parlour. Immediately a loud scream made 
them all start to their feet, and fly to her assistance. All was 
darkness in the bedroom, till some one brought in a candle; and 
there was poor Miss Lloyd, blue ball dress, pearl necklace, and all, 
sprawling on the floor, and staring wildly about her. The fat cook -
- who was a very mountain of a woman -- was lying on the floor 
too, snoring sonorously; and it at once became apparent to the 
astonished spectators that Miss Lloyd had tumbled over her.
	Hugh Kearney stepped over the fat cook, and reaching his 
hand to the frightened lady, raised her up.
	"O Mr. Kearney," she exclaimed, panting for breath, what 
have I fallen over?"
	"Over a mountain," replied Hugh, laying his hand on the fat 
cook's shoulder and shaking her.
	The sonorous music that proceeded from the mountain 
suddenly ceased; and a second vigorous shake had the effect of 
causing the fat cook to open her eyes.
	"O Mr. Kearney," she exclaimed piteously, looking into his 
face, "you know what a weak constitution I have."
	This address, uttered as it was in a familiar and affectionate 
manner, took Hugh somewhat by surprise; for it happened that 
Mrs. Nugent was a perfect stranger to him.
	"Tundher an' turf, Mrs. Nugent," exclaimed Mat Donovan, 
"everything is roasted an' biled -- an' there's open war among the 
women. Wan says wan thing, an' another says another thing; an' 
between 'em all, everything is three-na-yhela."
	Mat put his arms round Mrs. Nugent and lifted her to her 
feet -- a feat which no man in "the three parishes" but himself 
would have attempted.
	Mrs. Nugent steadied herself for a moment, untying her 
apron and turning the other side out, with great deliberation.
	"You know, Mr. Kearney," said she, "how a salt herring 
upsets me."
	Hugh felt slightly confused, and altogether at a loss to 
understand why Mrs. Nugent should persist in assuming that he 
had so intimate a knowledge of her constitution.
	"Really, ma'am," said he, "I do not know. I believe this is 
the first time I ever had the pleasure of meeting you."
	"Well, if you don't, your mother does," said Mrs. Nugent, 
as she stuck a pin in her cap a little over her right ear -- for what 
purpose it would be difficult to say.
	"She knows what dressing a dinner is," continued Mrs. 
Nugent, looking round on the company, "for she was used to 
nothing else in her own father's house."
	Hugh felt that this compliment to the O'Carrolls would 
have greatly gratified his mother, and that she would have quite 
overlooked the assertion that she was "used to nothing else" but 
dressing dinners at Ballydunmore.
	"And how are you to-night, Miss Lloyd?" said Mrs. 
Nugent. "I hope your family are well."
	"Quite well, thank you, Mrs. Nugent," replied the lady 
addressed, who was nervously feeling her pearls one by one, to 
know if any of them had come to grief in consequence of her 
tumble.
	"Come, Mrs. Nugent," said Mat Donovan, "an' set 'em to 
rights at the dishin', in the name o' God."
	"Yes, Mat the Thrasher," replied Mrs. Nugent. "Let me 
alone for setting them to rights."
	She moved with great dignity towards the door; but making 
a sudden and quite unexpected detour before she reached it, Mrs. 
Nugent came plump up against Mr. Henry Lowe, who 
mechanically caught her in his arms, as, yielding to the momentum 
he staggered backwards.
	"Hands off, young man, till you're better acquainted," 
exclaimed the fat cook, in an offended tone. "I'm no sick sort of 
indivigel," she added, as she shook the young gentleman from her, 
to his utter confusion and dismay. But before he could collect his 
wits to protest he meant no harm whatever, Mat Donovan took the 
offended lady's arm, and conducted her to the kitchen, where her 
appearance, as she stood with arms akimbo in the middle of the 
floor, made Mrs. Brophy and her servant girls feel like delinquents, 
so awe-inspiring was the glance the mighty empress cast round her 
dominions
	"Mat the Thrasher," said Mrs. Nugent, "will you -- "
	"Begob, there's Father Hannigan; I must be off," exclaimed 
Mat, as he hurried away without waiting to know 'what Mrs. 
Nugent required.
	"God save all here," said Father Hannigan, stamping his 
feet as he stepped over the threshold. "How are you, Mrs. 
Brophy?"
	"You're welcome, sir," was Mrs. Brophy's reply, as she 
opened the parlour door.
	Father Hannigan had a hearty greeting from every one, and 
Mr. Lowe was particularly glad to see him.
	"I beg your pardon, Miss Lloyd; but we must put Mr. 
Flaherty in that corner. Sit down there, Mr. Flaherty," he 
continued, laying his hand on the arm of a respectable looking 
man, who until now had been concealed behind the tall figure of 
the priest.
	The old man was dressed in a decent suit of black, and as 
he sat down in the chair to which the priest had conducted him, 
Mr. Lowe was struck by the placid smile that glowed over his 
round, ruddy face. He wore a brown wig, curled all round from the 
temples, which he now caught hold of over his ear, to fasten it on 
his head. He then commenced playing with a bunch of seals 
attached to his watch-ribbon, which hung from the fob in his small 
clothes.
	"Good night, Miss Lloyd," said he, without turning towards 
her.
	"Good night, Mr. Flaherty," she replied.
	"Ha!" he laughed, appearing to look straight before him, 
though the lady was on one side, and rather behind him. "I think 
this is Miss Isabella I have beside me," he said after playing again 
with the bunch of seals.
	"Yes, Mr. Flaherty. It is a long time now since you paid us 
a visit."
	He did not reply, as he was listening, with an anxious look, 
to the conversation passing between Father Hannigan, Mr. Lowe, 
and Hugh Kearney.
	"This is the English gentleman?" he observed in a whisper, 
leaning his head towards the young lady who had just spoken to 
him.
	"Yes; he is Sir Garrett Butler's nephew," she replied.
	Mr. Lowe's curiosity to know something of Mr. Flaherty 
was so strong that it brought him to the side of Miss Lloyd, at the 
other end of the room. She tossed her flounces about, and made 
way for him in an ecstasy of delight.
	"I am curious to know," he said, "who is that old 
gentleman?"
	As he spoke, his curiosity was further excited by seeing a 
little boy come into the room and place a green bag on the old 
man's knees.
	 "That's the celebrated Irish piper," she replied. "I am 
surprised to see him here. I did not think he attended country 
weddings."
	"I suppose," said Mr. Lowe, "he goes round among the 
nobility and gentry, as we are told the harpers used to do."
	"He does," she replied; "and he has a beautiful little pony 
the countess gave him. But I suppose he is stopping at present with 
the priests, and Father Hannigan has brought him with him."
	"I wish he would begin to play," said Mr. Lowe. And he 
was rather startled when the old man immediately said:
	"Yes, I'll play a tune for you."
	"Oh! thank you; but I really did not think you could hear 
me."
 "Ha!" he replied, laughing; "I can hear the grass growing."
	He pulled out his watch, and after opening the glass and 
fumbling with it for a moment, he said:
 "Twenty minutes past nine."
	Mr. Lowe, who looked at him in surprise as he smiled and 
chuckled while putting up his watch, caught a glimpse of the old 
man's eyeballs, and saw that he was blind.
	"Sit down here near me," said Mr. Flaherty. "I knew Sir 
Garrett and your mother well. I'll play one of poor Garrett's 
favourite tunes for you."
	As he uncovered his pipes their splendour quite took Mr. 
owe by surprise. The keys were of silver, and the bag covered with 
crimson velvet fringed with gold; while the little bellows was quite 
a work of art, so beautifully was it carved and ornamented with 
silver and ivory. Having tied an oval-shaped piece of velvet with a 
ribbon attached to each end above his knee, he adjusted his 
instrument, and after moving his arm, to which the bellows was 
attached by a ribbon, till the crimson velvet bag was inflated, he 
touched the keys, and catching up the "chanter" quickly in both 
hands began to play. Mr. Lowe, who watched him narrowly, now 
saw the use of the piece of velvet tied round his leg, as the 
"chanter" was ever and anon pressed against it to assist in the 
production of certain notes by preventing the escape of the air 
through the end of the tube.
	The musician soon seemed to forget all mere human 
concerns. He threw back his head, as if communing with invisible 
spirits in the air above him; or bent down over his instrument as if 
the spirits bad suddenly flown into it, and he wanted to catch their 
whisperings there, too.
	The audience, to some extent, shared in the musician's 
ecstasy; particularly Father Hannigan, from whose eyes tears were 
actually falling as the delicious melody ceased, and the old man 
raised his sightless eyes, and listened, as it were, for an echo of his 
strains from the skies.
	"Oh!" exclaimed Father Hannigan, turning away his head, 
and flourishing his yellow Indian silk pocket-handkerchief, as he 
affected to sneeze before taking the pinch of snuff he held between 
the fingers of the other hand -- "Oh, there's something wonderful in 
these old Irish airs! There was a ballad in last Saturday's Nation 
about that tune, that was nearly as moving as the tune itself. Did 
you read it?" he asked, turning to Hugh Kearney.
	"Yes," he replied. "Your friend, Dr. Kiely, induced me to 
become a subscriber to the Nation."
	"I don't get it myself," returned Father Hannigan. "'Tis 
Father O'Neill gets it, and I suspect he has a leaning towards those 
Young Irelanders, and dabbles in poetry himself. But I wish I had 
that ballad about the 'Coolin,' to read it for Mr. Flaherty. If poetry 
as well as music could be squeezed out of an Irish bagpipes, I'd say 
that ballad came out of that bag under his oxter."
	The old man's face brightened up, as he raised his head, and 
appeared to be listening to the spirits in the air again.
	"Can you remember any of the lines, Hugh?" 
	"Not to repeat them," he replied; "but I have a general 
recollection of them."
	 "We're obliged to you, intirely, for your general 
recollection," returned Father Hannigan, with his finger on his 
temple. "But what's that he said about 'sorrow and love'?"
	"Sobbing like Eire," replied Hugh.
	"Ay, ay," interrupted Father Hannigan. "Now I have it. The 
poet, Mr. Flaherty, described the 'Coolin' as

'Sobbing like Eire with sorrow and love.'

	Isn't that beautiful? -- and true?
	The old man laughed and listened more intently, as if the 
spirits in the air were very far off, and he were trying to catch the 
flapping of their wings.
	"He also said," Hugh added, "that

'An angel first sung it above in the sky.'"

	This seemed to catch the minstrel's fancy more than the 
other line, for he nodded his head several times, with his mouth 
slightly open, as if he were softly repeating the interjection ha! ha! 
ha!
	The wedding guests had been silently dropping into the 
room, which was now pretty well filled. Mat Donovan 
occasionally seized a bottle or decanter, and filled out a glass of 
wine, or whiskey, or "cordial" for some of them; and Hugh 
Kearney observed that Mat was particularly attentive to old Phil 
Morris, the weaver, whose entrance necessarily attracted attention, 
as be was lame and leant upon a short stick, which he struck 
against the ground at every step, with a sturdy defiant sort of 
knock, which, taken in connection with his tightly compressed lips 
and keen grey eyes, conveyed the idea that old Phil Morris was a 
Tartar, with a dash of the cynic in his composition. And old Phil 
really did look upon the present generation as a degenerate race, 
who could "put up with anything," and altogether unworthy sons of 
his "early youth's compeers."
	As Mat Donovan pressed old Phil Morris to drink with 
unusual earnestness, there was a hustling heard at the door, and 
Ned Brophy himself was seen pushing two blind pipers into the 
parlour with a degree of violence and an expression of countenance 
that led Mr. Lowe to imagine he must have caught them in the act 
of attempting to rob him or something of that kind. The two pipers 
were tall and gaunt and yellow -- a striking contrast in every way 
to Mr. Flaherty. One was arrayed in a soldier's grey watch-coat, 
with the number of the regiment stamped in white figures on the 
back, and the other wore a coarse blue body-coat, with what 
appeared to be the sleeves of another old grey watch-coat sewed to 
it between the shoulders and the elbows. Both wore well-patched 
corduroy knee-breeches and bluish worsted stockings, with 
brogues of unusual thickness of sole, well paved with heavy nails. 
Their rude brass-mounted instruments were in keeping with their 
garments. The sheep-skin bag of one had no covering whatever, 
while that of the other was covered with faded plaid, "cross-barred 
with green and yellow." They dropped into two chairs near the 
door, thrusting their old "caubeens" under them, and sat bolt 
upright like a pair of mummies or figures in a wax-work 
exhibition.
	This invasion of the parlour was caused by the expulsion of 
the dancers from the barn, to make room for laying the tables for 
the banquet.
	"Play that tune that the angel sang again, Mr. Flaherty," 
said Father Hannigan.
	Mr. Flaherty complied, and the noise and hum of voices 
were at once hushed.
	"Have you that?" the piper in the watch-coat asked his 
companion in a whisper, at the same time beginning to work with 
his elbow.
	"I have," replied the other, beginning to work with his 
elbow, too.
	A sound like snoring followed for a moment, and Mr. 
Flaherty jerked up his head suddenly, and looked disturbed --  as if 
an evil spirit had intruded among his "delicate Ariels." But as the 
noise was not repeated, his countenance resumed its wonted 
placidity, and he bent over his instrument again.
	"I think I could do id betther myse'f," said he of the blue 
body-coat, holding his big knotty fingers over the boles of his 
chanter. "He don't shake enough."
	"So could I," replied the grey watch-coat, giving a squeeze 
to his bag, which was followed by a faint squeak.
	"Turn him out!" shouted Mr. Flaherty, in a voice of 
thunder, as he started to his feet, his eyes rolling with indignant 
anger.
	There was great astonishment among the company; and 
Miss Lloyd jumped upon her chair and stared wildly about her, 
with a vague notion that Wat Murphy's bulldog -- of which 
interesting animal she entertained the profoundest dread -- hath got 
into the room and seized Mr. Flaherty by the calf of the leg.
	"Come, Shamus," said Father Hannigan, "this is no place 
for you. Come, Thade, be off with you," and Father Hannigan 
expelled the grumbling minstrels from the parlour; but in doing so 
he gave each a nudge in the ribs, and slipped a shilling into his fist, 
which had the effect of changing their scowl into a broad grin, as 
they jostled out to the kitchen.
	"Well, Phil, are you brave and hearty?" said Father 
Hannigan, when he returned to his seat.
	"Purty well, I thank you, sir."
	"Oh, is that Phil Lahy? I didn't see you till I looked at you. 
'Tis to the old cock I was talking. How goes it, my old Trojan?" he 
added, turning to Phil Morris, whom Mat Donovan was pressing to 
drink a glass of whiskey, which the old man pushed away from 
him.
	"Sound as a bell," was his reply, as he folded his hands and 
leant on his stick.
	"Well, if you won't take it," said Mat, "your namesake 
will."
	"No, Mat, I'm obliged to you. But I'm takin' nothin' stronger 
than cordial."
	"Well, sure, we have lots uv that same," Mat rejoined. "We 
didn't forget the teetotallers. Which soart will you have?"
	"I'll take a small drop of the ginger-cordial."
	"Begor, 'tisn't aisy to know id from the wine for the ladies," 
said Mat, holding up two decanters between him and the light. He 
poured a little of the contents of one into a tumbler and tasted it.
	"Oh, faith, I have id," he continued, coughing; "an' hot stuff 
it is."
	He filled the tumbler, and presented it to Phil Lahy, who 
took it with a look of meek resignation, which was quite affecting.
	Nelly Donovan rushed in with her face very much flushed, 
and, making her way to Miss Isabella Lloyd, said in a whisper
	"Wisha, Miss, maybe you'd come out an' show us what to 
do. We can't get any good uv the cook; she's like the dog in the 
manger, an' won't either do a hand's turn herse'f, or let any wan 
else do id. There's lots uv dacent women here that knows what to 
do as well as herse'f, but she's afther insultin' every wan uv 'em, 
and as for poor Mrs. Brophy, she don't know whether it is on her 
head or her heels she's standin', wad her."
	"I'll try what I can do," replied the young lady, laughing, as 
she followed Nelly to the kitchen.



CHAPTER XXXI.

MR. LLOYD DOES WHAT IRISH LANDLORDS SELDOM 
DO.

	A TABLE at one end of the barn was appropriated to the 
more distinguished guests, at which Father Hannigan presided, 
with the bride on his right hand, and an empty chair on his left; for 
Ned Brophy resolutely resisted all attempts to force him into the 
seat which Miss Isabella Lloyd had assigned him.
	Before the covers were taken off the dishes, however, Mr. 
Robert Lloyd strolled up to the head of the table and quietly took 
possession of the unoccupied chair. To his eldest sister's 
consternation, Mr. Lloyd appeared in his scarlet coat and buckskin 
breeches, and even had his hunting whip tied over his shoulder.
	Ned Brophy, on seeing his landlord, hurried from the lower 
end of one of the two rows of tables that extended along each side 
of the barn, and shook him vigorously by the hand.
	"Welcome, Mr. Bob," said Ned Brophy. "Begor, I'd never 
forgive you if you didn't come." And for the first, time since his 
doom was sealed, Ned Brophy was seen to smile.
	"This is herse'f, sir," Ned added. And Mr. Lloyd shook 
hands with the bride -- reaching his arm behind Father Hannigan's 
back -- in quite an affectionate manner; which caused the bride to 
smile too, apparently for the first time since her doom was sealed. 
So that Mr. Robert Lloyd chased the clouds from the faces of his 
tenant and his tenant's wife -- a thing which, as a rule, Irish 
landlords are not much in the habit of doing.
	Mat Donovan hurried up to make room for two other 
unexpected guests at the principal table, and Maurice Kearney and 
Lory Hanly took their places sufficiently near Miss Lloyd to call 
up a frightened look into that nervous lady's face when she saw 
Lory turning round to address her.
	As soon as Lory saw his sisters wholly taken up with the 
doctor, who punctually kept the appointment to which he had 
casually referred in the evening, the bright idea struck the 
enamoured young gentleman that he had an excuse for paying 
another visit to his fair enslaver. So as Mary Kearney and Grace 
were sitting by the fire, and feeling rather dull and lonely, a knock 
was heard at the door. They listened to know who might be the 
unexpected visitor, and immediately after the door was opened, 
Lory walked into the parlour with the jay's large wicker-cage in his 
arms. They were very glad to see him, and so was Maurice 
Kearney himself: But Mrs. Kearney evidently looked upon Lory as 
a dangerous character, and did not consider herself quite safe so 
long as he was in the house. Lory, however, was asked to sit down; 
and the expression of his countenance as he stared round him, and 
then looked at Grace, might be translated "jolly."
	Ned Brophy's wedding happened to be mentioned, and the 
whim seized Mr. Kearney that he and Lory would go there 
together.
	The fact was, the young gentleman's dancing so tickled 
Maurice Kearney's fancy the evening he first made Lory's 
acquaintance, that he could not resist the temptation to see him 
perform again.
	"Come, and I'll drive you over," said he, "and you'll have a 
good night's fun."
	"Faith, I will!" exclaimed Lory, in a voice that reminded 
Mrs. Kearney of her broken tea-cup.
	"Will you come?" he added, turning to Grace and waiting 
for her reply with his eyes very wide open.
	"Oh, no, thank you," she replied.
	"If you do, I'll dance with nobody else. 'Pon my word I'd 
rather dance with you than with anybody."
	Grace expressed her acknowledgment, but regretted she 
should deny herself the pleasure.
	Mrs. Kearney went to the kitchen to announce to Barney 
that he was to drive the car, and to warn him above all things to 
take care of "Flanigan's Hole." To which injunction Barney replied 
by doing the "side step" in a reel very genteelly, and in a manner 
peculiar to himself: it being the usual practice to have the right foot 
foremost when moving towards the right, and the left foot foremost 
when moving towards the left, whereas Barney reversed this, and 
moved to the left with the right foot in front, and to the right with 
the left foot in front -- the effect of which was very striking.
	"More power, ma'am! Would I doubt you? An' all my 
figure dance gone out uv my head for want uv practice. One-two-
three, one-two-three, one-two-three." And Barney, with his head 
thrown back, till his poll rested on the collar of his coat, one-two-
three'd to the stable.
	The safe arrival of Mr. Kearney and Lory Hanly in Ned 
Brophy's barn just as the wedding guests had sat down to dinner, is 
a sufficient proof that Barney had driven them safely past 
Flanigan's Hole.
	In spite of Miss Isabella Lloyd's exertions, ably seconded 
as she was by Nelly Donovan, the arrangements were not as 
successful as might have been wished. For instance, when Father 
Hannigan raised the cover of the large dish before him, he was 
rather taken by surprise, on seeing two very plump geese reposing 
side by side on a bed of very greasy cabbage; and what added 
considerably to the astonishment of the beholders was the unusual 
circumstance that while one goose was brown, the other was quite 
white.
	A word from Miss Isabella Lloyd, who could not conceal 
her indignation at the stupidity of some one whom she designated 
"that wretch," sent Nelly Donovan flying down between the two 
rows of tables; and when she returned bearing another dish, that 
which contained the geese was pushed out of the way, and before 
he had well recovered from his surprise, Father Hannigan found a 
piece of roast beef before him, which might have vied with that 
wonderful quarter that Father M'Mahon got as a Christmas present, 
and merely to look at which, according to Father Hannigan, would 
"do your heart good." The two geese were removed to another 
dish, and banished to one of the side tables; and Mat Donovan 
completed the arrangements by placing a huge piece of pork on the 
"bolster of cabbage," originally intended as its resting place.
	The roast beef became "small by degrees and beautifully 
less," under Father Hannigan's carving knife. Hugh Kearney and 
his father worked with might and main, too; and knives and forks 
were soon busy all round the barn. But the white goose had 
aroused Miss Lloyd's inquisitiveness, and she could not rest till she 
knew all about it. So when Nelly Donovan was passing, Miss 
Lloyd put back her hand and caught her by the skirt.
	"What soft of a goose is that?" she asked, as Nelly bent 
over her chair.
	"'Tis wan uv their own geese, Miss. Mrs. Brophy always 
rears three or four clutches."
	"But why is it white?"
	"Oh, is id that wan? Ould Molly, Miss, that didn't 
understand the cook, an' popped wan uv 'em into a pot of wather 
an' biled id, instead uv puttin' it in the oven pot as she was tould. 
She did the same to a beautiful pair uv ducks, an' spiled 'em."
	"What's that you have on the plate?"
	"Some bacon an' cabbage, Miss, that Wattletoes is afther 
sendin' me to Mr. Kearney for. An' spake uv the divil an' he'll 
appear," she exclaimed. "Here is Barney himself."
	"Tare-an'-ouns, Nelly," muttered Barney grumblingly, "is 
id goin' to lave me lookin' at 'em all skelpin' away you are, an' not 
as much as ud bait a mouse-trap furnint me, barrin' a dhry pueata?"
	"I have id here for you, Barney," she replied, presenting the 
well-filled plate to him.
	"More power to your oaten-male-pueata-cake -- an' a 
griddle to bile id," exclaimed Barney, as he hurried off to his place 
at the lower end of the barn.
	We have some recollection of a description of an English 
harvest-home, from the pen of Mr. Charles Reade. The guests were 
of the same class as those assembled in Ned Brophy's barn. But the 
English novelist tells us that during the whole time while the 
viands were being demolished, the only words uttered were the 
following
	"Bo-ill, wull you have some weal wud your bacon?"
	"That I woun't, Jock."
	In this respect the Irish wedding presented a singular 
contrast to the English harvest-home. Jokes and laughter were 
heard on every side; and from Father Hannigan at the head of the 
table to Barney Brodherick who sat upon an inverted hamper with 
his back against the winnowing machine, and his plate on his 
knees, at the opposite end of the barn, every face wore a smile, and 
fun sparkled in every eye. The only exceptions to this rule were 
two or three bashful young women whose potatoes broke upon 
their forks, and filled them with confusion. One of these bashful 
young women, after a second and third failure, dropped her arms 
by her side, and resisted every effort to induce her to taste a single 
morsel of anything. Nelly Donovan did all she could to coax her, 
but the bashful young woman rigidly refused to touch knife or fork 
again -- even though Nelly, with mischievous drollery, called out 
to Miss Isabella Lloyd --
	"Wisha, Miss, maybe you'd have a little lane bit there. We 
have a girl down here that won't ate a taste uv anything for us."
	The necessity of peeling the potatoes on the fork at a 
wedding was regarded as a very trying ordeal; and the remark 
"that's the pueata I'd like to get at a weddin'," was one not 
unfrequently heard at Knocknagow, as the speaker held up a 
"white-eye" between her finger and thumb, which had resisted a 
tight squeeze of the hand without breaking.
	But how will Professor Huxley account for the difference 
we have alluded to between the Irish wedding and the English 
harvest home?
	In the matter of smiling faces, however, we should make 
one more exception, besides the bashful young women whose 
potatoes fell to pieces. Miss Lloyd was haunted by the boiled 
goose. That doughy looking object seemed both to fascinate and 
frighten her. She stared at it as a shying horse will stare at a white 
wall. At last, unable to resist any longer, she held out her plate and 
asked to be helped to the boiled goose. A young farmer, who sat 
opposite that neglected and utterly forlorn-looking bird, jumped to 
his feet and plunged a fork into its side; and then sawed away 
vigorously with his knife, but without any regard to the bones or 
joints of the boiled goose. In spite of his vigorous exertions -- or 
rather in consequence of them -- the unhappy boiled goose rolled 
and slipt about the dish, but lost not a particle of flesh under the 
knife of the operator.
	Now, this young farmer partook of boiled goose in his own 
house on an average once a week -- that is to say, every Sunday -- 
since Michaelmas. But then the goose was always dismembered 
before it was put into the pot with the dumplings. And a very 
savoury dish, too, is goose and dumplings cooked in this way.
	Miss Lloyd held out her plate patiently till her arm began to 
feel tired, when the young farmer, becoming quite desperate, 
pulled his fork out of the boiled goose, and plunging it into the 
piece of fat pork that happened to be within arm's length of him, 
slashed off some two or three pounds of the same, and flinging it 
upon the young lady's plate, exclaimed:
	"Maybe you'd rather have a bit of this, Miss?"
	Miss Lloyd stared helplessly at the mass of pork on her 
plate, which, in her bewilderment, she continued to hold out at 
arm's length. Whereupon, the young farmer added a liberal supply 
of cabbage, and Miss Lloyd laid down the plate before her, looking 
as stupefied as Mat Donovan's cock when he was going to walk 
into the fire, after falling from the collar-beam upon Phil Lahy's 
head. And during the rest of the meal Miss Lloyd seemed quite as 
incapable of further action as the bashful young woman for whom 
Nelly Donovan wanted "a little lane bit."
	Dinner over, the two pipers and three fiddlers struck up 
"Haste to the Wedding," which was the signal for removing the 
two rows of tables, and the floor was immediately cleared for 
dancing.
	Mr. Robert Lloyd led out the bride; and, after a good deal 
of rough shaking and pushing, Mat Donovan persuaded the 
bridegroom to go through the usual bowing and scraping in front 
of Miss Lloyd, who was roused from the stupor into which the fat 
pork had thrown her by the words, "I dance to you, Miss," which 
were uttered by Ned Brophy much in the same tone and with the 
same look as usually accompany the phrase, "I'm sorry for your 
trouble."
	"Come, Mr. Lowe," said Father Hannigan, "don't you see 
Miss Isabella there, throwing sheep's eyes at you? Out with you 
and join the fun."
	"Mr. Lory, your sowl," exclaimed Nelly Donovan, clapping 
him on the back, "before the flure is full." And Nelly seized Lory 
by the hand and pulled him along till they found a place among the 
dancers.
	Hugh Kearney walked down the barn looking to the right 
and left among the blooming damsels, but it was evident the object 
of his search was not in sight.
	"You want somebody," said Mat, with a meaning look.
	"Well, I do," replied Hugh. "I want a partner."
	"Who is she, an' I'll make her out for you?"
	"That's just what I don't know," replied Hugh. "But 'tis the 
girl with the white jacket."
	Mat shook his head, as much as to say, "Sure, now, I knew 
what was in your mind." And then looking all round for the white 
jacket, Mat Donovan said aloud --  "The nicest little girl!" and 
there was a melancholy tenderness in his voice, and a softness in 
his smile, which made Hugh at once suspect that the owner of the 
white jacket was no stranger to Mat the Thrasher.
	"Who is she?" he asked.
	"Bessy Morris, sir," replied Mat, after a moment's silence, 
as if he were roused from a reverie.
	"Is that old Phil's granddaughter?" Hugh asked in surprise. 
"I know her very well, but I have not seen her for a long time."
	"She was in Dublin at her aunt's, sir," replied Mat. "I think 
she's gone into the house now to put a stitch in the bridesmaid's 
gown that Wattletoes is afther dhriving his fut through -- would 
you doubt him? I'll run in for her."
	He soon returned with Bessy Morris, who blushed and 
laughed as he told her how Mr. Hugh Kearney had singled  her out.
	"I really did not know you," said Hugh, as he shook hands 
with her, "till Mat told me who you were."
	"They all tell me I am greatly altered, sir," she replied, "but 
I can't see it myself."
	"We have some purty girls here to-night, sir," said Mat, 
looking round on every side.
	"Very pretty girls," Hugh replied. "There, for instance, that 
fair-haired girl sitting near the musicians is about as handsome a 
girl as ever I saw."
	"So she is, sir," said Mat. "She's called the Swan of 
Coolmore. But for all that," he added, with a humorous glance at 
Bessy Morris, "'tis the white jacket he was lookin' for."
	"Oh, but Bessy and I are old acquaintances," replied Hugh, 
laughing.
	"Nabocklish!" returned Mat. "You tould me you didn't 
know who she was. But I always said you had a good eye uv your 
own."
	The two pipers and three fiddlers found the "tuning" 
business so difficult that Mat thought there was still time for him to 
look out for a partner for "the first bout."
	"Now, which would you advise me to take?" he asked, 
stroking his chin as if he found it difficult to make up his mind. 
"The swan or the bridesmaid -- the goolden locks or the goolden 
guineas?"
	This question bad the effect of making Bessy Morris look 
very earnestly at him. But she laughed when he added --  "Here 
goes for a shake at the ould saucepan."
	"But you are forgetting," said Bessy, "that you were desired 
to make some punch for the ladies."
	"Oh murther!' he exclaimed, "that ould saucepan put id out 
uv me head."
	Billy Heffernan here appeared at the door with a jug of 
boiling water in each hand, and Mat hurried to the table to make 
the punch for the ladies; which punch was soon "shared" all round, 
and caused an immense deal of coughing and a grand display of 
"turkey-red" pocket-handkerchiefs.
	Hugh found his partner so lively and intelligent, and 
altogether so captivating, that he quite overlooked the fact that the 
dancing had commenced, till the swinging of Lory Hanly's legs 
warned him that he must either retire, or join in with the rest.
	The "merry din" now commenced in right earnest; but 
beyond all question the happiest mortal under the roof of Ned 
Brophy's barn that night was Barney Brodherick, who, fenced in 
by a table, in a corner all to himself, rattled away through all his 
wonderful steps as if he thought it a sin to let a single bar of jig, 
reel or double go for nothing.



CHAPTER XXXII.

AN OLD CROPPY'S NOTIONS OF SECURITY OF TENURE.

	FATHER HANNIGAN and Maurice Kearney, with old 
Phil Morris and Phil Lahy, and a few more choice spirits, drew 
close together round the social board, and enjoyed themselves in 
their own way.
	"I gave my daughter to Ned Brophy," said old Larry 
Clancy, in reply to a question of Father Hannigan's -- "I gave my 
daughter to Ned Brophy, because he has a good lase."
	"A good landlord is as good as a good lease," said Maurice 
Kearney.
	"I do not know that," returned Larry Clancy, slowly and 
emphatically. "For my own part, I'd rather have a good lase wud 
the worst landlord, than no lase wad the best landlord that ever 
broke bread. Security is the only thing to give a man courage."
	"He's right," exclaimed old Phil Morris, striking his stick 
against the ground. "Security is the only thing. But if every man 
was of my mind he'd have security or know for what."
	"Hold your tongue, you old sinner," said Father Hannigan, 
who had often combated Phil Morris's views, as to how the land 
question could be brought to a speedy settlement.
	"I have my old pike yet -- an' maybe I'd want id yet!" he 
exclaimed, with a look of defiance at the priest. "An' the man that'd 
come to turn me out on the road, as I see
others turned out on the road, I'd give him the length uv id, as sure 
as God made Moses."
	"And swing for it," said Father Hannigan.
	"Ay, an' swing for it," shouted the old Croppy; for it was a 
musket bullet that shattered Phil Morris's knee in '98. "Ay, an' 
swing for it."
	"And be damned," added the priest. "Don't you know 'tis 
murder -- wilful murder?"
	"I don't know that," he replied. "But the prayers of the 
congregation would carry the man's sowl to heaven, that'd do a 
manly act, an' put a tyrant out uv the country, and keep other 
tyrants from following his example. 'Tis self-defence," he added, 
striking his stick against the ground; 'tis justice."
	"'Tis bad work," said Father Hannigan. "And take my word, 
luck or grace will never come of it."
	"I agree with you," Hugh Kearney observed, who had 
joined them during the latter part of the discussion.
	"You do!" exclaimed old Phil, turning upon him with a 
scowl. "An' who the divil cares what you or the likes of you agree 
with? You're well off as you are, and little trouble id gives you to 
see the people hunted like dogs."
	"You're wrong there, Phil," replied Hugh. "I'd like to see 
that old pike of yours taken from the thatch for a manly fight like 
that you fought in '98. But that's a different thing."
	"Well, I know that," returned Phil Morris, letting his chin 
drop upon his chest, and seeming to brood over the  subject for a 
minute or two. "But five years ago," he added, "I could count 
three-an-twenty houses, big an' little, between the cross uv 
Liscorrig an' Shanbally-bridge; an' to-day you couldn't light your 
pipe along that whole piece uv a road, barrin' at wan house -- and 
that's my own. An' why am I left there? Because they knew I'd do 
id," he muttered through his clenched teeth, as if he were speaking 
to himself.
	"Let him alone," said the priest. "There's no use in talking 
to him."
	"There's raison in what he says," says old Larry Clancy, in 
his slow, emphatic way. "I say," he added, looking at the priest, 
"there's raison in what he says."
	"Don't be talking foolish," returned Father Hannigan, who 
saw that the eyes of three or four small farmers were fixed 
inquiringly on his face. "Good never came of it."
	"Do you hear him?" exclaimed old Phil Morris, turning to 
Hugh Kearney.
	"Well, to a great extent," said Hugh, after a short silence -- 
for he saw they all expected he would speak -- "to a great extent I 
agree with Father Hannigan. But there is no use in denying that the 
dread of assassination is the only protection the people have 
against extermination in this part of Ireland."
	"I say 'tis justice in the eye uv God," exclaimed old Phil 
Morris, "to punish the bloody tyrants -- the robbers and murdherers 
that rob the people uv their little spots, an' turn 'em out to perish. 
'Tis justice to punish the bloody robbers!" And as old Phil struck 
his stick against the ground and looked around, there was a 
murmur of applause from the bystanders, who by this time were 
pretty numerous.
	"The man that believes he is robbed or persecuted," said the 
priest, "cannot be an impartial judge. If every one was to take the 
law in his own hands, there would be nothing but violence and 
bloodshed."
	"Well, what do you say to giving the exterminators a fair 
trial before judge and jury?" 
	"What judge and jury?"
	"'Tisn't the judge an' jury in the coort-house," returned Phil 
Morris, "because they're all for the tyrants, an' some uv 'em tyrants 
themselves; but a fair jury uv the people, an' a fair judge."
	"I know what you mean," said Father Hannigan. "But if the 
judge and jury in the court-house be all for the tyrant, don't you 
think your judge and jury would be as much for the victim?"
	"No; they'd never condemn a man that didn't desarve id," 
replied Phil.
	"Ignorant men," rejoined the priest, "blinded by passion --  
perhaps smarting under wrong themselves, or dreading that their 
own turn might come next couldn't be a fair judge and jury, Phil, 
even if what you speak of were lawful or just in the sight of God. 
So hold your tongue."
	"Ay, that's the way always. 'Howld your tongue' settles id.
	"There is Mr. Lloyd," continued Father Hannigan, as that 
gentleman returned to his seat; "and if he put out a tenant would 
you shoot him?"
	"The divil a hair uv his head would be touched," replied 
Phil. "He gives good lases at a fair rent; and the man that does that 
won't turn out a tenant unless he desarves to be turned out. Answer 
me this wan question. Did you  ever know uv a good landlord to be 
shot, or a good agent? Answer me that."
	"Well, no," replied the priest. "I never did."
"There it is," observed Larry Clancy, as if that settled the question, 
and Father Hannigan had thrown up the sponge.
	"Well, now, Mr. Lowe," said Father Hannigan, "what's 
your opinion of this matter?"
	"I am almost entirely ignorant of it," he replied. "But I 
confess I came over to Ireland under the impression that the people 
were lawless and revengeful, particularly in your county."
	"You only saw the dark side of the picture," returned Father 
Hannigan. "We are not so black as we are painted."
	"I believe that. And a remark made by an Irish judge, with 
whom I had the honour of dining a few weeks ago, made a great 
impression on me, I confess."
	"What did he say?"
	"He had sentenced several men to be hanged a short time 
before, and a gentleman present made some severe remarks, while 
discussing the subject of agrarian outrages, when Judge said: 'I 
never met an instance of a landlord being killed, who did not 
deserve -- I won't say to be hanged, as I am a judge -- but I do say, 
a case of the kind never came before me that the landlord did not 
deserve to be damned!"'
	Old Phil Morris looked with astonishment at the speaker.
	"Put id there," he exclaimed, reaching his horny hand 
across the table. "If you were the divil you're an honest man."
	"I don't despair of old Ireland yet," said the priest. "The 
people are good if they only get fair play."
	"Ireland will never do any good till we have trade and 
manufactures of our own," observed Phil Lahy. And a certain 
thickness of utterance indicated that Phil had forgotten his 
resolution respecting the cordial long ago.
	"Our rulers crushed our trade and manufactures," said 
Father Hannigan.
	"Yes," returned Phil Lahy, "but the people are too much 
given to farming. A beggarly sky farmer that's stuck in the mud 
from mornin' to night, an' don't know beef from mutton -- no, nor 
the taste of an egg; for if he dare look at a hen's tail, his wife would 
fling the dish-cloth at him. An' that poor crawler, with his bead 
bald from the rain droppin' on it from the eave from standin' 
outside his honour's window, waitin' till his honour condescended 
to talk to him --  that beggar would despise the tradesman an' look 
down on him. Tom Hogan comes in to me this mornin' to know 
was there any news in the paper. 'There is,' says I. 'I'll read one uv 
the best articles ever you heard for you,' says I. "Look at the 
markets,' says Tom Hogan. Ha! ha! ha!" And Phil Lahy laughed 
quite sardonically. "'Look at the markets.' Ha! ha! ha!"
	"There's some truth in what you say," said Father 
Hannigan.
	"Ay," continued Phil, "an' the big farmer will make doctors 
an' attorneys of his sons, instead of setting 'em up in business."
	"I'm going to bind my youngest son to his uncle," said Mr. 
Kearney.
	"For a wonder," returned Phil Lahy, tasting his punch; and, 
not considering it up to the mark, adding another glass of whiskey.
	"That's what I call a double entendre, Phil," said Father 
Hannigan.
	"I fear you are forgetting your promise," Hugh observed.
	"What promise?" Phil asked.
	"Not to drink anything stronger than cordial."
	Phil Lahy stared at the speaker for half a minute; and then 
stared at the double entendre for half a minute more.
	In fact, Phil Lahy felt himself in a dilemma. Making a 
sudden dive, however, at the ginger cordial decanter, he filled his 
glass and carefully added the glass of cordial to the two glasses of 
whiskey in his tumbler.
	"Will that please you?" he asked, turning to Hugh, as if that 
didn't satisfy him nothing could.
	Hugh rubbed his hand over his face, and did his best to 
keep from laughing.
	"Would you doubt Phil for getting out of a promise?" 
observed Father Hannigan. "He'd drive a coach-and-six through 
any promise that ever was made -- as old Dan used to say of an Act 
of Parliament."
	"Old Dan said many a good thing," rejoined Phil Lahy, not 
choosing to notice the reference to the "promise." "But the best 
thing ever he said," he continued, casting about for something that 
would turn the conversation away from promises and cordial 
altogether -- "the best thing ever he said was: 'England's difficulty 
is Ireland's opportunity" exclaimed Phil Lahy, as the happy 
apothegm suddenly flashed into his mind at the very moment that 
he was about taking refuge in a severe fit of sneezing. "An' you'll 
see Ireland yet -- "Here Phil stopped short, as if he had lost the 
thread of his discourse; but after a good pull at the tumbler, he 
seemed to find it again, and added -- "when a redcoat will be as 
great a curiosity as a white blackbird. There's a storm brewin'," he 
continued, with a portentous scowl. "Columbkill's words is comin' 
to pass. An' the day will come when we can drive the invader out 
of Ireland -- wud square-bottles, as Mat the Thrasher said the other 
day."
	"But I don't like to hear you running down the farmers," 
observed Father Hannigan.
	"I don't run down the farmers -- except when they deserve 
id."
	"Manufactures are good," continued Father Hannigan; "and 
we'll have enough of them when our fine harbours are crowded 
with the shipping of America -- and of the whole world. But for all 
that I'd be sorry to see the homes of the peasantry disappearing 
from our hills and our plains, and the people crowded into 
factories."
	"You're right," exclaimed Phil Lahy, almost with a shout.

"'Princes or lords may flourish or may fade.'

Mat Donovan has a new song that touches upon that."
	"Come, Mat, give us the new song," said Father Hannigan.
	"I'm afeard I haven't id be heart right yet, sir," replied Mat.
	"Oh, we'll excuse you; we'll excuse all mistakes," rejoined 
the priest. "Come, Mr. Hanly," he called out to Lory -- who with a 
dozen others was battering the floor to the tune of " O'Connell's 
Trip to Parliament" -- "We're going to get a song. Give the poor 
pipers and fiddlers a rest. Come, Mat, up with it!"
	There was a general movement towards the table, and all 
waited anxiously for Mat the Thrasher's new song, of which many 
of the company had heard. 
	Mat Donovan leant back in his chair, and with a huge hand 
resting on the table, and clutching one of the gilt buttons on the 
front of the blue body-coat with the other, he turned his eyes to the 
collar-beams, and sang in a fine mellow voice:

THE PEASANT-FARMER'S SONG -- FOR THE TIME TO 
COME.

I've a pound for to lend, and a pound for to spend --
And cad mile filte my word for a friend;
No mortal I envy, no master I own --
Nor lord in his castle, nor king on his throne.
Come, fill up your glasses, the first cup we'll drain
To the comrades we lost on the red battle plain!
Oh, we'll cherish their fame, boys, who died long ago --
And what's that to any man whether or no?

The spinning-wheels stop, and my girls grow pale,
While their mother is telling some sorrowful tale,
Of old cabins levelled, and coffinless graves,
And ships swallowed up in the salt ocean waves.
But, girls, that's over -- for each of you now
I'll have twenty-five pounds and a three-year-old cow;
And we'll have ln na mhla* at your weddings I trow --
And what's that to any man whether or no?

Come here, bhean na tighe+ sit beside me a while,
And the pride of your heart let me read in your smile.
Would you give your old home for the lordliest hall?
Ha! -- you glance at my rifle that hangs on the wall.
And your two gallant boys on parade-day are seen
In the ranks of the brave 'neath the banner of green;
Oh! I've taught them to guard it 'gainst traitor and foe -- 
And what's that to any man whether or no?

But the youngest of all is the "white-headed boy"++ --
The pulse of your heart, and our pride and our joy:
From the dance and the hurling he'll steal off to pray,
And will wander alone by the river all day.
He's as good as the priest at his Latin I hear,
And to college, please God, we'll send him next year.
Oh, he'll offer the Mass for our souls when we go --
And what's that to any man whether or no?

Your hands, then, old neighbours! one more glass we'll drain;
And cad mile filte again and again!
May discord and treason keep far from our shore,
And freedom and peace light our homes evermore.
He's the king of good fellows, the poor, honest man;
So we'll live and be merry as long as we can,
And we'll cling to old Ireland through weal and through woe --
And what's that to any man whether or no?

* "Lan na mhala " -- pronounced lawn-na-waula.---"Full of a bag," -- i.e., 
abundance. 
+ "Bhean na tighe,"--" pronounced van-a-thee. -- "The woman of the house."
++ "The white-headed boy," -- the favourite.

	There was a shout of applause at the conclusion of Mat 
Donovan's song; and some of the women were seen to wipe the 
tears from their cheeks with their aprons. Bessy Morris raised her 
eyes to his; and as she laid her hand upon his arm while turning 
away her head to reply to a question of Hugh Kearney's, Mat 
Donovan pressed his hand over his eyes, and caught his breath, as 
if he had been shot through the body.
	Bessy Morris resumed her coquettish ways as she went on 
talking to Hugh Kearney, who was evidently captivated by her. If 
he had proposed for her on the spot, with or without his father's 
consent, and if it were arranged that they were to be married that 
day week, or any day before Ash-Wednesday, it would not have 
surprised Mat Donovan in the least. But while she talked and 
laughed with Hugh Kearney, her hand remained resting on the 
sleeve of the blue body-coat. Perhaps this little incident did not 
mean much. Mat Donovan never for a moment thought it meant 
anything. But he kept his arm quite still, and would not have 
frightened away that little hand for a trifle.
	"That's a right good song, Mat," said Father Hannigan.
	"The chorus," observed Phil Lahy, who seemed in a mood 
for contradiction, "is as ould as the hills."
	"So much the better," replied the priest. "Are we going to 
get a song from anyone else?"
	"Billy Heffernan has another new wan," said a voice from 
the crowd.
	"Don't mind id!" exclaimed Phil Lahy, contemptuously, 
"'Tis a 'come-all-ye.'" By which Phil meant that Billy Heffernan's 
new song belonged to that class of ballads which invariably 
commence:

"come all ye tender Christians, I hope you will draw near,"

	'Tis a come-all-ye," repeated Phil Lahy. "Don't bother us 
wud id."
	The twang of the fiddles, followed by the sound of drone 
and chanter, however, showed that the dancers were becoming 
impatient, and had urged the musicians to strike up; and Lory 
Hanly was immediately on his legs again with his partner, to finish 
the "bout" which Father Hannigan had cut short so 
unceremoniously.
	Hugh Kearney was about asking Bessy Morris to dance 
again, when Nelly Donovan came up to him.
	"Come into the parlour, sir," said she. "'Tis cleared up, an' 
Mr. Flaherty is afther consentin' to play a few sets for the ladies."
	To the great satisfaction of many of the boys, and not a few 
of the girls, the priest and the "ladies and gentlemen," with about a 
dozen of the more genteel among the guests, withdrew to the 
dwelling-house. Mr. Lowe offered his arm to Miss Lloyd, and 
Miss Isabella evidently expected that Hugh Kearney would 
conduct her through the yard. But Hugh kept possession of the 
piquant Bessy, and Father Hannigan gallantly offered his arm to 
Miss Isabella, who, in spite of her good humour, looked a little 
vexed. Lory Hanly refused point-blank to accompany them, 
declaring that he considered the barn "better value"; in which 
opinion Mr. Robert Lloyd entirely concurred, and pronounced 
Lory a lad of spirit. And here we have to record a very curious fact. 
No sooner was the priest's back turned than fully half-a-score of 
seats round the barn might have been dispensed with; for by some 
strange chance quite a number of the prettiest girls found 
themselves sitting on their partners' knees -- an arrangement, 
however, which not a single "matron's glance" attempted to 
"reprove." And now the fun began in right earnest. But not a single 
dancer, during that memorable night, so distinguished and covered 
himself with glory, as Lory Hanly, who tired down all his partners, 
even Nelly Donovan, who was never before known to throw up the 
sponge. And Barney Brodherick, too, called down thunders of 
applause by dancing a "single bout" upon the big table. In the 
midst of the cheers that greeted Barney's performance, Nelly 
Donovan pushed her way through the crowd to Billy Heffernan, 
and asked breathlessly:
"Billy, have you your flute?"
	"Why so?" returned Billy, in by no means a cheerful 
manner.
	"Because they want you to play the 'Frolic,'" replied Nelly, 
excitedly.
	"Who wants me to play id?" Billy asked, rubbing his nose.
	"Father Hannigan, and all uv 'em. Have you the flute?"
	"Well, I have the flute," said Billy. "But I don't know what 
to say about playin' the 'Frolic' while Mr. Flaherty is there. Maybe 
'tis turned out I'd be like the pipers." Billy Heffernan evidently 
stood in awe of the great Flaherty.
	"Come away," exclaimed Nelly. "'Tis he wants to hear id. 
Man alive! if you heard the way Father Hannigan praised you to 
the skies. He said you wor a born janius. Come, before they're up 
for the next set."
	"Are they dancin'?" Billy asked, scratching his head, as if 
he sought for an excuse to put off the ordeal as long as possible.
	"They are, they are," Nelly exclaimed, impatiently. "The 
strange gentleman an' Miss Lloyd is afther dancin' that new
-dance they call the polka. An' faith, 'tis no great things uv
-a dance. 'Tis all bulla-bulla-baw-sheen. Myse'f don't know how 
they can stand id --

Tal-tal, tal-tal, tal-tal, tal-tal-la!

all the same, round an' round." And Nelly sang a somewhat 
monotonous dancing-tune which was then known in those parts as 
"the polka."
	"By my word," continued Nelly Donovan, contemptuously, 
"they'd soon get tired uv id -- on'y for the ketchin'."
	Billy Heffernan screwed his flute together, and sounded 
low D.
	"Maybe id wants a dhrink," said Nelly, with whom the old 
flute was evidently an old acquaintance.
	"No, 'tis all right," Billy replied. "I iled id yestherday. But 
sure there's no hurry; an' if I was flusthered I'd make
a show uv myse'f. Sit down awhile an' tell me who's wudin, an' 
how they're goin' on."
	"Wisha, sure you know the whole uv 'em as well as 
myse'f," Nelly replied, as she sat down. "Miss Isabella is a darlin', 
an' she's so pleasant. I must be tellin' Miss Mary to-morrow what 
an eye she has afther Mr. Hugh. I'd hould. my life she'd rather have 
him than the young landlord, or whatever he is. But bad cess to me, 
Billy, but Bessy Morris has em all light about her. I think she must 
have a four-laved shamrock or somethin'. She bates the world. An' 
'tisn't because she's so handsome. There's Alice Ryan, an' she's be 
odds a purtier girl -- an' faith she don't want to be reminded uv that 
same, either. If you see the bitther look she gave Tom Daniel, just 
because he asked her was id long since they had a letther from her 
brother. An' signs on, the divil a much any wan cares about her, in 
spite uv all her beauty. An' look at 'em all ready, you'd think, to put 
their hands undher Bessy's feet."
	"Wisha, begor, Nelly," returned Billy Heffernan, "you 
wouldn't let id go wud any uv 'em yourse'f."
	"Arrah, now, Billy, what sign uv a fool do you see on me? 
Don't think you can come Jack Hannan over me that way. The man 
that'll buy me for a fool, will be a long way out of his money."
	I'm on'y tellin' the honest thruth," replied Billy, solemnly. 
"I said id to myse'f when you were dancin' wud Tom Daniel a 
while ago."
	She looked at him with pleased surprise, but said nothing.
	"What way is Phil Lahy goin' on?" he asked. "Is he stickin' 
to the cordial?"
	The question seemed to cast a gloom over Nelly Donovan's 
face, but rousing herself, she replied laughing: 
	"Well, yes; he's stickin' to the cordial, but I'm afraid be puts 
in a drop uv the hardware sometimes by mistake."
	"He's all right," Billy remarked, " 'till he comes to the holy 
wather."
	"Faith, then, he is afther comin' to id," she replied. "Just as 
I was comin' out he was tellin' Father Hannigan the ould story, how 
he never went to bed wudout sprinklin' himse'f wud the holy 
wather."
	"He must be looked afther," said Billy Heffernan. "I 
promised Norah I'd have an eye to him. But he has so many turns 
and twists in him 'tis hard to manage him. 'Tis 'cuter and 'cuter he 
gets the more he has taken. No matther what you'd say, he'd have 
an argument agin you."
	"Well, here, come away," said Nelly, taking him by the arm 
and pulling him to the door. He walked voluntarily across the yard, 
but came to a stand outside the parlour door, and Nelly was 
obliged again to have recourse to force to get him in.



CHAPTER XXXIII.

BILLY HEFFERNAN'S TRIUMPH.

	"OH, is that you, Billy?" exclaimed Father Hannigan. 
"come, sit down here and play that tune you made yourself, for Mr. 
Flaherty. He's not inclined to believe that you made it at all."
	"Begor, I don't know whether I did or not, sir," replied 
Billy, as he sat down. "'Twas to dhrame id I did, sir."
	"Come, do ye sit down, and rest for awhile; we're going to 
get a tune from Billy Heffernan," said Father Hannigan, addressing 
those who had taken their places for the next dance, and were 
patiently waiting for the music. "Sit over here, Mr. Lowe," he 
continued, "and listen to this."
	Mr. Lowe left Miss Lloyd's side, and sat near Billy 
Heffernan.
	"Maybe, sir," said Billy Heffernan, looking reverentially at 
the silver-mounted bagpipes, "maybe Mr. Flaherty wouldn't like 
me to play." 
	"Oh, play," said the old man, patronisingly.
	Billy looked at his flute, and seemed to hesitate. The rustle 
of Miss Lloyd's dress was plainly audible, as she left her chair and 
sat on the corner of a form, intending to resume operations against 
Mr. Lowe as soon as possible; and this stillness added to the 
musician's embarrassment.
	"Come, Billy, don't you see they're all waitin'? Up wud id," 
said Mat the Thrasher.
	"Give us a tune yourse'f," returned Billy, offering him the 
flute.
	"I thought Mat only understood the big drum," said Father 
Hannigan.
	"Faith, then, he do so, sir; and a right good player he is," 
replied Billy.
	"Don't mind him, sir," returned Mat Donovan. " I'm on'y a 
whaiten garden player." By which Mat intended to convey that his 
music was only suitable for the open air, and the harvest field.
	"I believe every one in Knocknagow is a musician," said 
Father Hannigan. "But what's delaying you Billy? I never saw you 
so long about it before."
	"Well, you see, sir," he replied with another glance at the 
silver keys and the crimson-velvet bag, "Mr. Flaherty is such a fine 
player, I feel somewhat daunted."
	"Oh, don't mind, don't mind," returned Mr. Flaherty.
	Thus encouraged, Billy Heffernan commenced to play; and 
as he went on, the incredulous expression in the old blind 
musician's face gave place to a look of surprise, which quickly 
changed again into one of delight. He caught up his chanter, but 
without inflating the velvet bag, and mentally accompanied the 
performer, who soon gave his whole soul to the melody; and, as he 
concluded, Mr. Flaherty exclaimed with emphasis, with his face 
turned up towards the ceiling:
	Billy Heffernan -- you are a musician."
	What did I tell you?" said Father Hannigan, who was 
evidently proud of his judgment. "I always said Billy was a first-
rate player."
	Every one was delighted at Billy Heffernan's triumph --  
particularly Nelly Donovan, who stood leaning against the door 
with her arms akimbo, and could scarcely resist the impulse to 
jump into the middle of the floor, and call for "three cheers for 
Knocknagow, and the sky over it."
	Mr. Flaherty adjusted his pipes, and Father Hannigan held 
up his hand as a signal for silence. And now it was Billy 
Heffernan's turn to be astonished; for the blind musician played the 
tune in a manner which almost made the hair of the composer's 
head stand on end.
	"For God Almighty's sake, sir," Billy exclaimed 
imploringly, "didn't you ever hear id before?"
	"No, I never heard it before," replied Mr. Flaherty.
	"Oh," exclaimed Billy, with a deep sigh, "I can't b'lieve I 
ever med it."
	"I'll play 'Heffernan's Frolic' for Father M'Mahon to 
morrow," said Mr. Flaherty. And Billy Heffernan felt that he was 
famous.
	Miss Lloyd found it impossible to keep quiet any longer. 
She left her seat with a skip, and actually sat down upon Billy 
Heffernan's knee, who occupied the nearest chair to Mr. Lowe.
	"Mamma will be so delighted," she began, resuming the 
conversation which Father Hannigan had interrupted, "when I tell 
her that Mrs. Lowe remembers her." She glanced carelessly at 
Billy Heffernan, who leant back in his chair; and Miss Lloyd could 
not help smiling at the thought that poor Billy Heffernan was quite 
overpowered by the honour she had done him. She even stole a 
look at Mr. Lowe to see if he did not envy Billy Heffernan.
	"And now, Mr. Lowe, won't you promise to come and see 
us before you leave the country?"
	"You're an inconvaniance to me, Miss," said Billy 
Heffernan.
	"What!" exclaimed Miss Lloyd, turning round, and staring 
at the speaker.
	"You're an inconvaniance to me," he repeated, quietly. Mr. 
Lowe, in spite of all he could do, was obliged to laugh.
	"Oh, really!" she exclaimed, jumping up, and retreating 
backwards, with her eyes fixed on Billy Heffernan, as if he had 
been miraculously metamorphosed into a boiled goose.
	And Billy Heffernan, having got rid of the 
"inconvaniance," quietly unscrewed the joints of his flute and put 
them in his pocket.
	On seeing Father Hannigan look at his watch, Mat 
Donovan started up and hastily left the room. He soon returned 
with a plate in each hand.
	"Here, Mr. Hugh," said he, presenting one of the plates to 
Hugh Kearney, "let us not forget the music."
	"That's right, Mat," said Father Hannigan; "make the 
collection for the musicians before we go. 'Tis near twelve 
o'clock."
	Hugh took the plate and went round to make the collection, 
Mat keeping close to him, and transferring to his own plate the 
half-crowns, and shillings, and sixpences -- we don't mind 
including the fourpenny-bits, they were so few -- as fast as they 
were dropped on Hugh's. Each person's contribution was thus plain 
to be seen, which would not be the case if the silver were allowed 
to accumulate on the plate upon which it was dropped.
	'Tis a fine collection," said Mat. "We won't mind the barn 
for another hour or two; but what about the beggars?"
	"Don't mind the collection for the poor people," said Nelly, 
"till by-and-by. Sure there's no wan goin' away but the Miss 
Lloyds, an' the priest, an' the two Mr. Kearneys, an' the strange 
gentleman."
	The collection for the beggars was accordingly put off to a 
later hour, and Mat beckoned to a genteel-looking young man, who 
was serving his time to the grocery business, to help him with the 
negus.
	"Maybe Mr. Lowe an' yourse'f would like a dhrop uv 
somethin' before goin' out in the cowld," said Mat Donovan to 
Hugh Kearney, who was standing near the door with Miss Isabella 
Lloyd's shawl on his arm.
	"Will you have something?" Hugh asked.
	"Oh, no, no," Mr. Lowe replied. "I'd rather not."
	"Let us be all together as far as the cross," said Father 
Hannigan. "Come, Mr. Flaherty."
	When they were gone, it was agreed upon all hands that 
one of the fiddlers should be brought in from the barn, and the 
dance kept up in the parlour. Jugs of punch were "shared" round at 
intervals, and, on the whole, Ned Brophy's wedding gave general 
satisfaction. It was some what remarkable, however, that the two 
principal dramatis personae were almost entirely lost sight of.
	"Where is Ned?" Mat asked, looking around in every 
direction for the bridegroom.
	"Smokin' at the kitchen fire wud Phil Morris," replied his 
sister. "An' there's herse'f in the corner beyand, an' not a stir in 
her."
	"Bring a glass of this to her," said Mat.
	"Wisha, faith I won't," returned Nelly, who was under the 
impression that the bride slighted her as a poor relation. "His 
mother tould me to have an eye about me, and lend a hand to keep 
things to rights; but the new misthress, I'm thinkin', thinks I'm 
makin' myse'f too busy. If she knew but the half uv id!" added 
Nelly, with a toss of her head.
	The white muslin jacket flitted by while Nelly was 
speaking, and Mat gazed after it; and, catching the eye of its owner 
he beckoned to her.
	"Come over here," said he, "an' bring a glass of wine to 
Mrs. Ned, an' talk to her; and if anything will put her in humour 
that will."
	Four young men rushed after the white jacket with a view 
of getting possession of it for the next dance.
	"Here, be off wud ye!" exclaimed Mat. "'Tis the laste I can 
have her for a minute to myse'f. How do you think she can hould 
dancin' always?"
	The "boys" laughed; and scratching their heads in their 
disappointment, went in search of partners elsewhere.
	"I didn't taste a dhrop uv anything to-night," said Mat; "an' 
here, now, sweeten this for me."
	She took the glass, and, with her eyes laughingly raised to 
his, put it to her lips.
	"A little sup," he continued.
	She took a sip and handed back the glass to him.
	"Here is luck," said Mat Donovan. "An' that we may be all 
alive an' well this day twelve-months," he added, laying the empty 
glass on the table.
	There was something in his tone which brought that 
serious, inquiring look we have before noted, into Bessy Morris's 
eyes.
	"Is there anything the matter with Mat?" she asked in a 
whisper, turning to Nelly.
	"No; why so?" Nelly replied, looking surprised.
	"He's not so pleasant as he used to be," said Bessy Morris. 
"Why then, as you spoke uv that," returned Nelly, "I noticed the 
same thing myse'f this while back. He's gettin' careless about 
diversion an' everything. All he wants is an excuse not to go to the 
hurlin' or a dance, or fun uv any soart. Thanks be to God 'tisn't his 
health at any rate," she added, turning round to look at him, "for I 
never see him lookin' betther."
	Bessy Morris looked at him, too, and thought that he was 
not only looking well, but that he was the finest and honestest 
looking fellow in the world. But why that scrutinizing, and at the 
same time melancholy glance with which she regarded him? Did 
she think that she herself had anything to do with the change she 
noticed in him?
	"How do you like Ned's wife?" Nelly asked.
	"I on'y spoke a few words to her," replied Bessy. "She 
seems in bad spirits."
	"I wondher is id Ned's story wud her?" said Nelly.
	"What is that?"
	"Well, I think he had an ould gr for Nancy Hogan."
	"Oh, I see," said Bessy Morris, thoughtfully, as she looked 
earnestly at the bride, who was sitting alone near the bed room 
door. "After all, Nelly, marrying for money is a queer thing."
	"Bring her the glass uv wine," said Nelly, "an' thry an' 
cheer her up. If any wan can get good uv her 'tis yourse'f."
	The compliment was really deserved, for it could be easily 
seen that Bessy Morris was a universal favourite. The only 
exception to this rule, so far as the present company were 
concerned, was a stout young lady, chiefly remarkable for yellow 
kid gloves, which she did not take off during dinner. This young 
lady regarded Bessy with sulky looks because a certain young man 
from the mountain would keep gadding after the white jacket, 
though the yellow-gloved hand and four hundred pounds were at 
his service for the asking. But Bessy Morris had had experience 
enough of the world to en able her to estimate the "warring sighs" 
and amorous glances of the young man from the mountain at their 
true value. They simply meant that the young man from the 
mountain was sorry -- all but heart-broken indeed -- that it wasn't 
she had the four hundred pounds; and if it was, etc., etc., etc.
	"Well, we must try what we can do for Mrs. Ned," said 
Bessy.
	Mrs. Ned took the glass of wine and folded her hands 
about. it, but showed no symptom of any intention to drink it.
	"This is a pleasant night we have," said Bessy, sitting down 
next the bride.
	Mrs. Ned looked straight before her, and made no reply.
	"Ah," thought Bessy, "I fear it is Ned's story with her."
	"You'll like this place very much," she continued, "when 
you become acquainted with the people. They are very nice and 
neighbourly."
	Mrs. Ned said nothing.
	"To be sure one cannot help feeling lonely after leaving 
one's own home," said Bessy. "But it must be a great comfort to 
you to have your family so near you."
	"What soart is the cows?" said Mrs. Ned, turning round 
suddenly, and looking straight into Bessy Morris's face.
	"Oh," she stammered, quite taken by surprise, "I really 
don't know."
	Because," rejoined Mrs. Ned, "I never see such miserable 
calves as them two that was in the yard when we wor comin' in. 
Maybe 'tis late they wor," she added, after a short silence, and 
looking anxiously at Bessy again.
	"Perhaps so," Bessy replied, not well knowing what to say.
	"I'd be long sorry to rear the likes uv 'em," said Mrs. Ned.
	"Won't you drink the wine?" said Bessy.
	Mrs. Ned did drink the wine; and hazarded a hope that the 
two-year olds were not the same breed as the two angishores she 
saw in the yard.
	"There's no fear of her," said Bessy Morris to herself, as 
she took the empty glass back to the table. "She won't die of a 
broken heart."
	In fact, Mrs. Ned Brophy was a very sensible young 
woman. Matches innumerable had been proposed and rejected, and 
"made" and "broke off" for one reason or another, in her case; 
which gave her very little concern, as she knew there was 
wherewithal in the old saucepan to secure her a husband -- or 
rather "a nice place" -- sooner or later. There were two competitors 
in the field this Shrovetide; and, in the difference, she was better 
pleased that Ned Brophy was the one "settled with"; though the 
fact that the other "had an uncle a priest" gained him the favour of 
her mother. But Ned's lease carried the day with old Larry Clancy. 
The circumstance which made the young woman herself incline 
more to Ned Brophy than to the priest's nephew, was, that Ned 
wore a cravat, and was more respectable-looking than his rival. 
Strange to say, however, the rejected wooer of the old saucepan 
actually fell in love afterwards with a young lady -- we use the 
word advisedly --  in his uncle's parish, who had been educated in 
a convent, and married her. And though she did not bring him a 
single sovereign, her husband was wont to declare that she was 
worth her weight in gold -- which he persisted in pronouncing 
"goold," in spite of all she could say to the contrary.
	"Nelly, will you be home wud Phil Lahy, an' have an eye to 
him?" said Billy Heffernan to Nelly Donovan, who was busy 
preparing tea -- or "the tay," as Nelly herself was pleased to call 
that pleasant beverage.
	"Why so?" she asked, rather sharply, "won't you be wud 
him yourse'f?"
	"I must be goin'," he replied. "I ought to be on the road an 
hour ago."
	"You'll be kilt," returned Nelly, in a softened tone, "wudout 
gettin' a wink uv sleep. Couldn't you put id off for wan day?"
	"Well, as they're reg'lar customers I wouldn't like to 
disappoint them."
	"Well, you won't go till you're afther takin' a sup uv this, at 
any rate," returned Nelly. "You that never dhrank a dhrop uv 
anything."
	She filled out a cup of tea, and, after tasting it and 
pronouncing it, "hot, strong, and sweet," presented it to Billy 
Heffernan.
	"The old woman," she continued, while Billy was drinking 
his cup of tea, "wants me to stop a day or two, and help to put the 
place to rights, an' pack up the borrowed things. But I'll warn Mat 
not to lose sight uv Phil till he laves him safe at home."
	"I won't take any more," said Billy, stopping her hand as 
she was about filling his cup again.
	"Now, Billy, don't be makin' an omadhaun uv yourse'f," she 
replied, pouring out the tea at the risk of scalding his hand, with 
which he attempted to cover the tea-cup.
	"Don't you be lonesome," she continued, sitting down near 
him, "thravellin' be yourse'f this way every night?"
	"I don't mind id," he replied. "'Tis some way uneasy I do be 
when I'm comin' near the town, an' I think every minute an hour till 
I'm out uv id agin."
	"But sure 'tis lonesomer in the summer time," she 
continued, "in the bog by yourse'f from mornin' till night."
	"That's what I do be longin' for," said Billy Heffernan. "I'm 
King uv Munster when I'm in the bog, an' the phillibeens whistlin' 
about me. No, begor," continued Billy, smacking his lips after 
emptying his cup; "when I'd sit on a bank uv a fine summer's 
evenin', and' look about me, I wouldn't call the queen my aunt."
	"But why wouldn't you sell your turf in Kilthubber, an' not 
be goin' all the ways to Clo'mel, in the hoighth uv winther?"
	"The divil a betther little town in Ireland to buy turf," 
replied Billy, "but there's too many goin' there."
	"I'm looking for you this hour, Nelly," said a voice that 
made her start. "I'm after tiring them all down. Come and have 
another dance."
	"Oh! Mr. Lory, I thought you wor gone home wud Mr. 
Kearney two hours ago."
	"What a fool I am," replied Lory. "Come."
	"Sure I'm goin' to get the tay," replied Nelly.
 	"Leave that to the old woman," he exclaimed, catching her  
hand and pulling her off to the barn.
	"Come, Mr. Lloyd," said Lory, "get a partner."
	But just then he discovered that the dancing was suspended, 
and that Mr. Lloyd, who had a good voice as well as a correct ear, 
was in the act of favouring the company with a song. Mr. Lloyd's 
song was the "Soldier's Tear," and on coming to the refrain, "and 
wiped away a tear," at the end of each verse, Mr. Lloyd suited the 
action to the word, by seeming to pluck out his left eye with his 
finger and thumb, and fling it on the floor, in a most moving 
manner.
	Mr. Lloyd's song was so highly appreciated that the 
cheering and clapping were kept up for several minutes, during 
which the vocalist untied his hunting-whip, and in the calmest 
manner possible commenced attempting the feat of snuffing a 
candle at the other end of the table with the lash.
	"Well, will you dance now?" said Lory, whose knees were 
beginning to work involuntarily.
	"Another song, Lory. Sit down near me here, Nelly."
	Nelly Donovan sat down near him and Mr. Lloyd sang "My 
Dark-haired Girl," casting admiring glances at her as he went on, 
particularly at the lines -- .

"Thy lip is like the rose, and thy teeth they are pearl, 
And diamonds are the eyes of my dark-haired girl";

which really applied very well to Nelly Donovan.
	A still louder storm of applause followed this effort, and 
Nelly exclaimed:
	"Faith, 'tis no wondher that so many are dyin' about you, 
sir," as she jumped up to rejoin her partner.
	The bridegroom sat all this time in the corner by the 
kitchen fire, listening to old Phil Morris's reminiscences of '98, and 
quietly smoking his pipe. But as the guests began to leave, and 
came to bid him good morning, he would start up suddenly to 
shake hands with them; and after scratching his head with a 
puzzled look, Ned Brophy would seem to remember that he was at 
his own wedding, and then sit down again and forget all about it, 
till another "Good mornin', Ned, I wish you joy," would recall the 
circumstance to his mind.
	At last, old Phil Morris himself thought it time to go home, 
and striking his stick against the hearthstone, he said:
	"Mat, will you see about my ass, and tell that little girl uv 
mine to get ready. She ought to have enough uv the dancin' by this 
time, at any rate."
	And to be sure, how Mat Donovan did start off, and how 
soon the ass was put to the cart, and what a quantity of fresh straw 
-- oaten straw, too, for which he had to run to the haggard -- was 
packed into the said cart, and then shaken up loosely, and patted 
and smoothed, till a sultana might have reclined on it.
	Bessy soon appeared in her cloak and bonnet, looking, if 
possible, more captivating than ever. Half-a-dozen "boys" 
contended for the honour of handing her into the car; one of whom 
contented himself with placing a chair for her to step upon, which 
he held firm with all his might, as if the slightest shake would 
endanger her life. Mat handed the reins to old Phil, and led the ass 
out of the yard, and a little way along the narrow boreen.
	"Why don't you ever come to see us, now?" Bessy asked, 
when he stopped to say good night.
	"I don't have time," he replied, "except uv a Sunday. And 
the days are so short yet."
	"Well, they'll soon be getting long," said she, clasping his 
hand very warmly; "and I'm sure grandfather would like to have a 
shanahus with you."
	"Well, I'll shortly take a walk over."
	"Next Sunday," said Bessy, in a distractingly coaxing tone.
	"Well, the b'ys will be expectin' me to hurl o' Sunday," 
replied Mat. "An' besides, Captain French wants to have a throw 
uv a sledge wud me. He's askin' me ever since he came home to go 
over to the castle some week-day; but I couldn't spare time. And 
they're so d--n exact," he added, "about breakin' the Sabbath, that 
he wouldn't agree to appoint a Sunday. But, now, as the regiment is 
goin' abroad, he wouldn't be satisfied wudout havin' a throw wud 
me."
	"Is the regiment going abroad?" she asked, with an interest 
that took Mat by surprise.
	"They're not the same sogers," he replied, "that's in 
Kilthubber. They're dragoons."
	"Oh! I know. I know Captain French's regiment."
	"An' who cares where they go?" old Phil exclaimed under 
his teeth, as he jerked the reins and dealt a blow of his stick to the 
ass -- for which that patient animal had to thank the English army.
	Mat Donovan slowly retraced his steps to the house, feeling 
as if Bessy Morris's departure had suddenly turned the wed ding 
into a wake, and singing, almost unconsciously

Oh! I'd rather have that car, sir,
With B -- ahem! -- Peggy by my side,
Than a coach-an'-four an' goold galore,
An' a lady for my bride."

He turned into the barn, and stood with folded arms leaning against 
the wall.
	"I didn't see Mat dance to-night," said Mr. Lloyd to Nelly 
Donovan, as she sat down after another jig with Lory Hanly.
	"I'll go myse'f and haul him out," returned Nelly, who was 
allowed to be the best dancer among the girls at Knocknagow.
	"Stir yourse'f, you big lazy fellow," she exclaimed, taking 
hold of his arm and leading him out to the middle of the floor.
	This movement was hailed with general satisfaction, and a 
dozen voices at once called upon the musicians to play "The Wind 
that shakes the Barley."
	It was really a sight worth looking at. The athletic, but at 
the same time lithe and graceful form of the Thrasher was set off to 
the best advantage by Phil Lahy's chef d'oeuvre, the blue body-coat 
with the gilt buttons; and his sister was a partner every way worthy 
of him.
	"What is id?" a stranger to the locality asked on finding the 
barn-door blocked up by a crowd of eager spectators.
	"A brother and sister," was the reply; and it could be 
inferred from the tone and look of the speaker that the relationship 
between the great dancer, Mat Donovan, and his equally famous 
partner added greatly to the interest with which their performance 
was regarded. The excitement rose higher and higher as the dance 
went on, and a loud shout followed every brilliantly executed step. 
After each step the dancers changed places, and, 'moving slowly 
for a few seconds, commenced another which threw the preceding 
one quite into the shade, and, as a matter of course, called out a 
louder "bravo!" and a wilder "hurro!" When the enthusiasm was at 
its height, two men carrying a large door crushed their way through 
the crowd. Two more quickly followed bearing another large door. 
And, without causing any interruption, the doors were slipped 
under the feet of the dancers, which now beat an accompaniment to 
the music, as if a couple of expert drummers had suddenly joined 
the orchestra. There was a hush of silence as if the spectators were 
spell-bound, till Mat Donovan joined hands with his sister, and 
both bowed at the conclusion of the dance. And while a Tipperary 
cheer is shaking the roof of Ned Brophy's barn, we let the curtain 
drop on Ned Brophy's wedding.



CHAPTER XXXIV.

LONELY

	BILLY HEFFERNAN took the key of his door from a hole 
under the thatch and let himself into his own house. Removing the 
ashes from the embers on the hearth, he knelt down, and, after a 
good deal of blowing, succeeded in kindling them into a flame. 
Then, taking a slip of bog-pine from one of several bundles that 
hung in the chimney, he lighted it and placed it on a block of 
bogwood in the corner, having first stuck it in a sod of turf in 
which was a hole for the purpose. He recalled the fine summer 
evening, when, out in the lonesome bog, he thrust his thumb into 
that sod of turf while it Was yet soft, and by that simple process 
converted it into a candlestick.
	Everything about Billy Heffernan's house seemed to have 
come from the bog. The walls, from the floor to the thatch  -- 
which was not of straw, but of sedge -- were lined with turf, the 
side-walls with the rectangular "slane" turf, which looked like 
brick-work blackened with smoke, and the end wall with the 
rougher and somewhat shapeless "hand-turf." The table off which 
Billy Heffernan ate his meals was of bog-oak, as was the block 
upon which he sat. The mule's crib and the pegs in the wall upon 
which the mule's harness hung were of the same material. And 
Billy Heffernan's ratteen riding-coat depended from a portion of 
the horns of an elk -- which had bounded through the forest when 
the table and crib were portions of the living tree -- fastened to one 
of the rafters.
	He now took his antediluvian taper from the antediluvian 
seat and laid it on the antediluvian table; and then hung his riding-
coat upon the antediluvian elk's horns.
	"Wo! Kit," said Billy Heffernan And the mule, who had an 
antediluvian look about her, whisked her tail and thrust her nose 
into her antediluvian manger.
	He put the harness on the mule, and after shaking up the 
hay in the crib, walked out and looked at the sky, in which there 
was a half moon that shone with a sickly sort of lustre. Billy 
Heffernan, without being at all aware of the fact, was of a poetical 
and fanciful turn of mind; and the pale moon at once reminded him 
of a pale face. So he walked down the road as far as the beech-tree; 
and, after looking up at the windows and steep roof and thick 
chimneys of Phil Lahy's old house, Billy Heffernan walked back 
again. Taking the linch-pins from the hob, where they were always 
left for safety, he fixed them in the axle-tree; and then led out his 
mule and put her to the car. He returned to the house to take down 
his old riding-coat, and after wrapping it round him, and blowing 
out the light, he locked his door, and set out with his creel of turf, 
upon his long journey to the town of Clonmel.
	"Wisha, begor! 'tis thrue for her," he soliloquised, as he 
plodded up the hill, "'tis lonesome enough. The road is lonesome, 
an' the house is lonesome, an' the bog is lonesome. An', begor, the 
main street uv Clo'mel is the lonesomest uv all. No matther where I 
am, I'm lonesome. So that I b'lieve 'tisn't the road, or the house, or 
the bog, or the town, but the heart that's lonesome. And whin the 
heart is lone some, the world is lonesome. Wisha, Kit, what do you 
want stoppin' there above all the places on the road? You got your 
drink at the lough; but comin' or goin' nothin' will plase you but a 
sup out of that little strame any day in the year."
	While the mule drank, Billy Heffernan placed a foot at each 
side of the little stream that ran across the road, and stretching out 
his hands, as if he were lifting some one over it, he uttered a low 
moan.
	"Oh! oh! oh!" be cried, as his hands closed on the empty 
air.
	The water running over his feet reminded him that he was 
standing in the middle of the stream, but he did not heed it. With 
his head bent down, and his hands pressed over his face, he 
continued to stand there till the mule moved on of her own accord; 
and then, dashing the fast falling tears from his eyes, he plodded on 
again after his creel.
	"I don't know what brought id so sthrong into my mind to-
night," said he. "But somehow I thought I see her before me, 
lookin' at the wather, an' afeard to lep over like the rest uv 'em; an' 
then lookin' up at myse'f wud her eyes laughin' in her head. I 
hardly had the courage to take her up in my arms. An', the Lord be 
praised! 'twas the last time ever she crossed over the same strame. 
She reminded me uv id yistherday, whatever put id into her head. 
But sure I never pass the same spot wudout thinkin' uv her. I gev 
herse'f an' Nelly Donovan a lift home the same evenin'; an' a 
pleasant, good-hearted girl Nelly is. But there's no wan like 
Norah!"
	He plodded on for some time till the mule stopped to take 
breath before commencing the ascent of an unusually steep though 
not very long hill, that rose abruptly from the lowest part of the 
glen or hollow down which they had been gradually descending.
	"Begor, 'tis thrue for ould Phil," said he, as he looked 
around him. "You couldn't redden the pipe from the bridge to the 
quarry. Though I reminder id myse'f when 'twas the pleasantest 
piece uv a road from Kilthubber to Clo'mel. An', faith, if I could 
redden the pipe now I'd like a smoke, as 'tis afther comin' into my 
head."
	He put his pipe into his mouth and looked around him, 
while the mule rested at the foot of the hill.
	"God be wud poor Mick Brien," said he. "That sally three 
always reminds me uv him. 'Tis many's the piggin uv milk they 
made me dhrink, for 'tis little business I'd have axin' a dhrink uv 
wather at Mick's. But sure if every house, big an' little uv 'em, was 
standin'" continued Billy Heffernan as if he caught himself 
reasoning from unsound premises, "I couldn't kindle the pipe this 
hour uv the night. Come, Kit!" and catching hold of one heel of the 
car, and leaning  his shoulder against the creel, he helped the mule 
on in her zig-zag course up the hill. The descent on the other side 
was gradual, and the mule was left to shift for herself till they got 
upon the level, where she showed some symptoms of stopping for 
another rest; a proceeding which Billy Heffernan thought so 
unreasonable that he took down his whip from the top of the load, 
where it usually rested, and, without a word of warning or 
remonstrance, gave Kit a smart lash under the belly, at which Kit 
shook her ears and whisked her tail, and was about running straight 
into the ditch at the left-hand side, that being the deepest and the 
most likely to swallow her up; but changing her mind as she 
reached the brink, Kit set off at a brisk trot along the road. This 
was too much of a good thing, and her master ran forward, and, 
seizing the rein near the bit, gave it a check that made Kit throw 
back her head and open her jaws very wide; and while still 
pressing on the rein, Billy Heffernan let the lash of his whip drop 
into the same hand that held the handle, and laid both lash and 
handle along Kit's back, between the hip and the butt of the tail, 
with a tremendous whack.
	"Maybe you'd go right now?" said he, letting the rein go 
with a jerk.
	And Kit seemed to think it was the wisest thing she could 
do.
	So they jogged on peacefully again, till the light shining 
through the open door of a house surrounded by trees --  which, 
from their size and outline, even a stranger to the locality would 
have known were very old whitethorns --  attracted his attention.
	"Wo! Kit." said Billy Heffernan, and the mule immediately 
stopped.
	"They're up at ould Phil's," said he, looking considerably 
surprised.
	"But that's thrue," he added, as if the mystery were 
suddenly cleared up; "sure they're at the weddin'."
	He was about ordering Kit to go on, when another thought 
occurred to him.
	"Begob!" he exclaimed, "I might as well have the smoke as 
I have the chance."
	He opened the gate that led to Phil Morris's house, and was 
closing it again behind him when he found himself caught by the 
skirt of the coat. He turned round suddenly somewhat frightened, 
but found himself held fast. After remaining still for a moment, 
during which his heart beat very quick, he ventured to pull the skirt 
of the coat, but could not free himself. As nothing stirred, however, 
he concluded he had merely got entangled in a branch of one of the 
old whitethorns blown down by the storm of the morning that blew 
down the end of his own turf-rick. He fried to free himself without 
tearing his riding-coat, when, to his amazement and terror, the long 
skirt was raised up and shook in his face, with which it was almost 
on a level. He retreated backwards but the coat was pulled the 
other way; and after a short tussle, Billy Heffernan got a sharp 
blow on the mouth. Moved by the instinct of self-preservation he 
stretched out his hands, and boldly grappled with his assailant, 
whom he attempted to throttle as quickly as Possible. In the 
struggle both rolled to the ground, and Billy loudly denounced his 
adversary as a coward; for he not only struck at him while down, 
but aimed his blows where any one having the faintest regard for 
fair fighting would have scorned to strike.
	"He wants to murdher me," exclaimed Billy Heffernan, 
"That's what he wants. Can't you spake," he added, "an' tell me 
who you are an' what are you up to?"
	But the only reply was a repetition of the cowardly assault.
	"D--n your sowl," shouted Billy Heffernan, roused to 
madness by a sharp blow that affected him somewhat like the sting 
of a bee, "if you're a man let go my ould coat an' stand up an' see id 
out if you're able."
	This challenge seemed to have the desired effect, for after 
another violent struggle he found his coat skirt free. Scrambling as 
quickly as Possible to his feet, Billy Heffernan flung off the old 
riding-coat and put himself into a pugilistic attitude.
	"Turn out now, if you're a man," he exclaimed.
	But to his horror and consternation there was no one to 
answer the challenge.
	Billy Heffernan's courage oozed out, we should rather say 
through his toes, than the tips of his fingers, for he began to feel 
very weak about the knees, while the strength that was so rapidly 
departing from his limbs seemed in some mysterious manner to be 
communicated to the hair of his head.
	"The Lord betune us an' all harm," he muttered; "as long as 
I'm goin' this road I never see anything bad before. Though they 
say wan uv the sogers ould Phil kilt long ago, when they set fire to 
the house, used to be risin' about here."
	It was a relief to him when he heard some noise close to the 
gate; for at that moment he would have welcomed with rapture the 
most formidable foe of flesh and blood.
	"In the name uv God," he called out, "who or what are 
you?"
	A sudden bound from behind the gate-pier made him 
retreat a step backwards -- when a familiar voice sent a most 
pleasurable sensation through Billy Heffernan's whole frame. And 
a hysterical flutter about his heart imparted a tremor to his voice as 
he exclaimed:
	"May bad luck to you, for a goat!"
	"Meg-geg-geg-geg," repeated Phil Morris's old goat, as she 
trotted along the boreen to the house.
	But as Billy Heffernan took up his ratteen riding-coat, his 
countenance suddenly fell.
	"The divil sweep you," he exclaimed with great gusto, as he 
looked at the half-moon through a rent in the skirt. "But," he 
continued, "I may as well run in an' redden the pipe at any rate. An' 
the Lord knows I'm afther payin' for id. Begor, they're afther 
comin' home," he added, as he approached the house. "There is the 
ass's car in the yard."
	As he passed the little kitchen window Billy Heffernan 
stopped suddenly, with his eyes and mouth wide open. Something 
upon old Phil Morris's kitchen table excited his wonder to such a 
degree that there he stood staring at it, apparently bereft of the 
power of motion.
	"'Tis goold," he muttered. "I wundher is id a crock he's 
afther findin'?"
	Billy's idea at the moment must have been that the "crock 
itself," as well as its contents, was of gold; for the object which 
excited his astonishment shone, brightly, and flashed back the 
blaze of the turf fire. But, after examining it more closely, he 
clapped his hand against his thigh, and exclaimed:
	"Be japers, he's afther killin' a soger!"
 This idea was sufficiently terrifying, and Billy Heffernan was 
about beating a hasty retreat, when, glancing involuntarily around 
the kitchen, he started again; for straight before him he beheld not 
a dead, but' a living soldier. He was a broad-chested, bearded 
dragoon; and it was his burnished helmet, which he seemed to have 
thrown carelessly on the table, that Billy Heffernan had mistaken 
for a crock of gold.
	Like one awakening from sleep and gradually recovering 
the use of his senses, Billy now saw that the dragoon was holding 
Bessy Morris by the hand, and looking down into her face -- for his 
tall figure towered high above hers -- with a look of sadness. He 
could not see her face, as her back was towards him, but she bent 
her head as if the sad gaze of the dragoon had moved her. Before 
Billy Heffernan could observe further, the soldier shook the hand 
he held in his once or twice with a quick spasmodic jerk, and 
seizing his helmet, which he hung upon his left arm, rushed out of 
the house. Billy Heffernan turned round and stared after him as he 
tramped along the little boreen till he reached the gate and was hid 
by the whitethorns.
	When Billy looked again through the window, Bessy 
Morris was sitting in her grandfather's old arm-chair, with one 
hand resting on the little table beside her, and the other pressed 
over her eyes. It might be supposed that she was overcome by 
fatigue, but for the flush that reddened her forehead, and the 
nervous tapping of her fingers upon the table. She raised her head, 
and letting both hands drop upon her lap, threw herself back in the 
chair. Bessy Morris was certainly excited, but what might be the 
nature of her emotion it would not have been easy to judge from 
the expression of her face. Scarcely anything but a feeling of 
shame or self-reproval could have kept that hot glow on her 
forehead so long; but then in her eyes and about her mouth there 
played a smile of triumph. Bessy Morris was evidently ashamed, 
and proud, and perhaps a little frightened, all at the same time.
	Billy Heffernan felt for a moment at a loss how to act. His 
first impulse was to go back to his mule; but then it occurred to 
him that that would look as if he had stopped for the sole  purpose 
of playing the spy. So, as the door still stood wide  open, he 
decided upon carrying out his original intention of  lighting his 
pipe at Phil Morris's fire.
"God save all here," said he, as he walked into the kitchen.
	"God save you kindly. Wisha, is that Billy Heffernan? 
Faith, I thought you wor dead."
	"Wisha, who did you send to kill me?" returned Billy.
	It wasn't Bessy that spoke, but what Billy himself would 
have described as a "stout block of a girl," who stood up from the 
bench she had been sitting on by the fire, behind the partition 
which shaded the fire-place from the door, and which concealed 
her from view till he had advanced to the middle of the floor.
	Bessy stood up also, and moved out of his way.
	"Don't stir," said he; "I on'y turned in, as I was passin', to 
redden the pipe. You're home early from the weddin'," he 
remarked, as he stooped down and took a partially burnt sod of turf 
from the fire.
	"Yes," replied Bessy. "Grandfather is not able to stop up 
late. I did not expect he would stay half so long."
	"Worn't you there yourse'f?" the stout girl asked.
	"I was," he replied, "but I was obliged to come home to 
start for Clo'mel."
	"Ye had a great night's fun?"
	"'Twas a fine weddin'," he answered. "Why worn't you 
there yourse'f?"
	"Why wasn't I axed? An' ye had ladies and gentlemen there 
too?"
	"Begor, ay," replied Billy, as he blew upon the burnt end of 
the sod of turf till the sparks flew from it with a crackling sound 
into his face. "The two Miss Lloyds, an' Mr. Bob, an' the 
gentleman from England."
	"And Mr. Hugh Kearney," said Bessy Morris.
	"Begor," returned Billy Heffernan, as he sucked his pipe, 
against which he pressed the sod of turf, "Mr. Hugh is a gentleman, 
sure enough -- in his heart."
	"I'll be bound Mat Donovan was there," the stout girl 
remarked, as she drew her kerchief over her bosom; a proceeding 
which Billy Heffernan thought was not unnecessary, as the hooks-
and-eyes intended to fasten her dress up the front had nearly all 
given way to a greater amount of pressure than they were capable 
of sustaining.
	"Sure, he was Ned's sidesman," said Billy Heffernan.
	"The poor fool!" returned the stout girl, with a scornful 
shake of the bead, and a glance at Bessy Morris that brought the 
flush up to her forehead again, and caused her to bite her lip as she 
gazed into the fire.
	"Did you see Judy Loughlan there?" the stout girl asked.
	"She was there," said Billy Heffernan.
	"Indeed, I see her goin'," rejoined the stout girl, "wud her 
yallow mittens an' her boy-o." By which latter expression the stout 
girl meant that article of female attire called a boa.
	"I thought you wor there yourse'f when I see Bessy."
	"Oh, yeh! she's everywhere, like the bad weather. I have no 
time for gallavantin'. "
	"You may as well sit down, Billy," said Bessy Morris, in 
her usual captivating way.
	"Arra do, Billy," said the stout girl. "Sit down and have a 
coort. Anything, you know, to keep our hands in"; and she glanced 
at Bessy, who evidently winced, though she strove to command her 
features.
	"I must be goin'," he replied. "Good night to ye."
	"Good night, Billy," returned Bessy Morris; and there was 
something so winning in her way of saying it that Billy muttered to 
himself on his way up the little boreen:
	"Begor! 'tis no wondher she is every place; for any place 
would be the betther uv her. But I don't know what to say about 
that soger."



CHAPTER XXXV.

ON THE ROAD TO THE BIG TOWN WITH THE CLOUD 
OVER IT.

	"COME, Kit, be lively; 'tis long since we wor on the road 
so late as this. An' you know that load must be bilin' the kittles for 
the breakfasts in Irishtown to-day."
	Kit seemed to understand the state of affairs perfectly, and 
set off briskly, switching her tail as if she expected the whip was 
about being brought into requisition, and shaking one ear 
approvingly -- which had much the same effect as winking with 
one eye -- on finding that her apprehensions were groundless.
	"God save you," said Billy Heffernan, on observing the 
outline of a man's figure leaning against one of those sally trees, 
which at short intervals along that part of the road, marked where a 
peasant's cabin or a small farmhouse once stood.
	"And you, too," returned a deep Voice.
	"God save you kindly," was the response Billy Heffernan 
expected; and it at once occurred to him that the person leaning 
against the sally tree was a stranger; and a cloud having passed 
from the moon at the moment, he was able to recognise the 
dragoon, with his helmet still slung on his arm. Mr. Bob Lloyd's 
song at once occurred to him; and, looking back at the light in Phil 
Morris's window, he could almost fancy he saw Bessy Morris "on 
her knees," waving a "snow white scarf that fluttered in the 
breeze."
	"Do you belong to this neighbourhood?" the dragoon 
asked, on observing him look towards the house.
	"I do," Billy replied. "I was bred, born, and reared at the 
far-off side uv that hill beyand."
	"Do you know the people that live in the house where the 
llght is?"
	"That's ould Phil Morris's, the weaver's," he replied.
	"Are you going far this way?" the dragoon asked.
	"To Clo'mel," was the reply.
	"I'm going there, too," returned the dragoon. "We'll be 
comrades on the road."
	To this Billy Heffernan made no reply; and, after a 
scrutinising look into his face, the dragoon continued the 
conversation.
	"Ye're wild folks down here," said he.  "So they say," 
replied Billy; "though myse'f can't see much difference betune us 
and other people. Yo-up, Kit."
	"The old man has a daughter," said the dragoon.
	"A grand-daughter," replied Billy Heffernan. "I b'lieve 
you're thinkin' uv Bessy?"
	"Yes," returned the dragoon, "I'm thinking of Bessy."
	"She's a nice girl," Billy observed.
	"She is that," said the dragoon.
	"Wud id be any harm to ax are you acquainted wud her?"
	The dragoon looked scrutinisingly at him again; and 
evidently satisfied that his questioner was a harmless fellow, he 
replied: "A relation of her aunt's was a comrade of mine, and I 
knew her in Dublin."
	"She was in Dublin, sure enough," said Billy. "She's not 
long afther comin' home."
	"Her aunt is my friend," the dragoon observed. "And I think 
the girl that lives with her is my friend, too. But I have not seen the 
old man. She says he hates the sight of a red-coat."
	"Well, I b'lieve he do," replied Billy. "An' maybe 'tisn't 
wudout raison"
	"That girl told me she was her cousin. What is her name?"
	"Peg Brady -- she's related to the ould man."
	"She is a good-natured girl," said the dragoon.
	"She's a harmless soart uv a girl," Billy replied. "Come, 
Kit. What! Is id goin' to get into your tantrums you are? I'll soon let 
you know." And Billy Heffernan took down his whip from the top 
of the load of turf; but Kit seemed to think better of it, and put off 
the tantrums for the present. "Begor" he continued addressing 
himself to the dragoon, "wudout mainin' any offince, you're very 
hot in yourse'f."
	"How is that?"
	"Wud your hat, or whatever you call id, hangin' on your 
arm that way," replied Billy.
	The dragoon laughed, and put his helmet on his head. After 
walking on in silence for some time, Billy Heffernan and the 
dragoon stopped short at a turn in the road, both looking 
considerably astonished. A man with his coat off was running 
towards them through a field adjoining the road at the top of his 
speed. They thought some accident must have happened and that 
he was running to call them to the assistance of some one in 
danger, when to their surprise, he turned the angle of the field 
without seeming to notice them, and continued his race in a line 
with the fence. The field was a small one, and he was soon round it 
and passed them again.
	"It must be a madman." said the dragoon.
	"Begor, that's what I'm thinkin' myse'f, too," returned Billy 
Heffernan who showed some symptoms of being frightened as he 
kept his eyes steadily on the runner. But it was not of madmen 
Billy Heffernan stood in awe; but the notion got into his head that 
there were more than one runner, and that the second was invisible 
to them, and consequently supernatural and a thing to be dreaded.
	"Begob," said Billy, as the runner passed a third time, "'tis 
Mick Brien, as sure as I'm alive. I'll call him when he comes round 
again."
	"Is that Mick?" he called out, as the man was passing them 
again.
	"Is that Billy?" was the reply, and he stopped short opposite 
to them.
	"In the name o' God, what are you runnin' that way for?"
	Mick Brien climbed over the fence without replying, and 
came out upon the road. He looked greatly surprised on seeing the 
dragoon; for dragoons were seldom met strolling through that part 
of the country at night. Mick Brien's face darkened as he fixed his 
eyes on the soldier -- and not without reason, perhaps; for the last 
glimpse of a "bold dragoon" which Mick Brien had seen was when 
a troop of these formidable-looking warriors rattled through his 
little farmyard the day the old house was pulled down -- where 
Billy Heffernan was wont to take a piggin of milk in lieu of a drink 
of water whether he would or no -- and Mick Brien and his wife 
and children were flung homeless on the world. So that we must 
excuse Mick Brien if the unexpected sight of an English soldier 
brought a scowl into his face.
	The dragoon observed it, and said --  "Friend, I have only 
been to see a friend off in that quarter" -- and the dragoon turned 
round and pointed towards Knocknagow -- "and on my way back I 
have met your neighbour here on the road; and, as we are both 
bound for the same town, we have kept together so far."
	"That's the way," said Billy Heffernan, in reply to Mick 
Brien's inquiring look. "An' now," he continued, "maybe you'd tell 
us about the runnin'?"
	Mick Brien looked on the ground, and remained silent for a 
moment.
	"Well," said he, with a grim smile, "I will tell you about the 
runnin', for fear you might think I was afther takin' lave uv my 
sinses. But come on. I needn't delay you."
	"Yo-up, Kit," said Billy Heffernan, putting his hand to the 
creel, and helping on Kit with a push.
	All three fell back behind the car, the dragoon and Billy 
Heffernan waiting with no little curiosity for an explanation of the 
running.
	"You're forgettin' your coat," said Billy, looking at Mick 
Brien's torn and threadbare shirt sleeves.
	"No; I hadn't id on me at all," he replied. "An' now," he 
added, as if it had cost him an effort to make up his mind to satisfy 
their curiosity "if you want to know about the runnin', here is the 
ins an' outs uv id for you. The wind tumbled wan end uv the cabin 
on us last night, an' I wasn't able to fix id till I get a bundle uv 
straw. An' wan uv the childher bein' sick, we wor obliged to put 
whatever little coverin' we had on her to keep her warm. An' as the 
roof was stripped, I woke in a stump wud the cowld, an' couldn't 
get a wink uv sleep afther. So I got up an' turned into that field, an' 
said to myse'f I'd have a run to put the life into me. An' begor, 
Billy, my sperits riz whin I found myse'f so soople, an' I purtinded 
to myse'f that I was runnin' for a bet; an' the divil a stop I'd stop till 
I was afther goin' twelve rounds on'y for you called me."
	"Begob, Mick, 'twas a quare notion. An' faith you ran as 
fast as ever I see you runnin' at a hurlin' match when Mat Donovan 
'ud be makin' off wud the ball."
	"Well, good-night to ye," said Mick Brien. "See yourse'f 
the way the roof was swep away at that side."
	They were just opposite a miserable hovel, one side of the 
roof of which was entirely bare. Billy Heffernan shook his head as 
he mentally contrasted the wretched tenement with the warm little 
farm-house where he had been so often welcomed and hospitably 
entertained by the man who now stood before him, as unlike his 
former self as the wretched hovel was unlike the comfortable home 
that once was his. There was surprise and something like pity in 
the dragoon's face, too, as he looked from the cabin to its owner. 
But just as Mick Brien was turning away, he was seized with a 
violent fit of coughing, and, pressing his hand upon his side, he 
staggered against Billy Heffernan, who caught him in his arms. 
The blood gushed from the poor man's mouth, and flowed down 
the breast of his shirt. He had evidently burst a blood vessel.
	"Mick," said Billy, as he threw his arms round him to 
prevent his falling, "I'm sorry to see you this way." And Billy 
Heffernan burst into tears.
	"'Tis nothin'," he gasped, "'tis nothin'. Help me as far as the 
doore, Billy."
	He leant upon Billy's shoulder, and both walked into the 
hovel. Oh! -- we hesitate to follow them. We wish to spare the 
reader such scenes as long as we possibly can. Enough to say that 
when Billy Heffernan looked around him, and felt the cold breeze 
as it whistled through the uncovered roof, and saw the once rosy 
farmer's wife crouching in a corner with her sick child pressed 
against her bosom, and her husband's coat thrown over her 
shoulders, he felt that swelling in his throat which Norah Lahy's 
looks and words so often caused; and, without uttering a word, 
Billy Heffernan pulled off his old riding-coat, wrapped it round the 
evicted farmer, and laid him softly down upon the wisp of straw in 
the corner of the cabin, where his two little boys were asleep, 
locked in each other's arms. The moon shone directly down. upon 
their pale faces, and Billy Heffernan could scarcely suppress a 
groan as he thought of the merry, bright-eyed little fellows who 
used to vie with each other to know who'd be first to run to the 
dairy to tell their mother that Billy Heffernan had stopped his mule 
on the road and was coming up to the house. He fixed the straw so 
that the poor man's head might be in a comfortable position, and 
silently returned to his mule, at whose head the dragoon was 
standing, as if be had turned to poor Kit for companionship.
	At first the dragoon did not recognise Billy Heffernan when 
he appeared without his riding-coat. But when in a subdued tone he 
addressed the usual "Yo-up, Kit," to his mule, the dragoon guessed 
the reason why his companion had left his coat behind him in the 
cabin.
	They walked on without speaking for a considerable 
distance, and then the dragoon asked how much farther had they to 
go.
	"You'll see the cloud over Clo'mel," replied Billy, "when 
we come to the top uv that hill." And they walked on in silence 
again.
	"There id is," said Billy, when they reached the top of the 
hill.
	"What?"
	"The cloud."
	"What cloud?".
	"The cloud over Clo'mel."
	"And why the cloud over Clonmel? And how did you know 
there was a cloud over it?"
	"Becase Clo'mel was never wudout a cloud over id since 
the day Father Sheehy was hung," replied Billy Heffernan.
	"For what was he hung?"
	"Begor, for killin' a man that was alive twenty years 
afther," said Billy. "But the rale raison was becase he wanted to 
save the people from bein' hunted, an' the whole counthry turned 
into pasture for sheep and cattle. But I'll show you the house where 
his blood was sprinkled on the doore when the head was afther 
bein' cut off uv him, and they wor bringin' his body to Shanrahan 
to bury him."
	"And what did they want to sprinkle the blood on the door 
for?"
	"Becase id was the doore uv the bishop's house; an' on'y for 
him Father Sheehy wouldn't be hung at all. He refused to give him 
a character, an' that's what settled him."
	"And why did the bishop refuse?"
	"Becase he was all-in-all wud the great lords an' gentle 
men; and for fear uv offendin' 'em, he wouldn't stir hand or fut to 
save the life uv the poor priest that had the rope about his neck. 
'Tis ould Phil Morris that could give you the ins an' outs uv id."
	"Thim is the Comeragh mountains," continued Billy, 
breaking off abruptly, and pointing towards them.
	But the allusion to old Phil Morris made the dragoon turn. 
round and fix his eyes on the hills in nearly an opposite direction.
	Billy Heffernan was obliged to keep up with his mule, and 
when he got to the foot of the hill he looked round and saw the 
dragoon still standing on the top of it, with his arms folded, 
looking towards Knocknagow.
	"Begob," said Billy, "he's a bad case."
	He soon began to overtake and pass by an occasional 
heavily laden dray or cart, both horse and driver travel-stained, and 
so worn out as to require a rest, near as they were to their journey's 
end; while, on the other hand, Billy himself had often to call out 
"huh!" or "ho!" to his mule, to make way for a fast-walking 
farmer's horse, whose load was not over heavy -- even though the 
farmer's wife was enthroned on the top of it -- or a trotting donkey, 
whose only burden was a couple of blooming country girls, 
coming to town to make purchases, in view, mayhap, of an 
approaching wedding. And the more crowded and noisy the road 
became, the more lonely Billy Heffernan felt, and the more 
anxious to be on his way back to Knocknagow.
	He found it no easy task to guide the mule through the 
crowd of carts that blocked up one of the streets he had to pass 
through. In fact, he was brought to a stand opposite a row of 
thatched houses, which might have been mistaken for a piece of 
Knocknagow, so closely did they resemble the row of thatched 
houses between Phil Lahy's and the bridge.
	While waiting patiently for the way to be cleared, a woman 
ran out from one of the thatched houses and laid a basket close to 
the wheel of the car.
	"Show us a sod uv that," said she.
	He loosened a sod out of his well-packed load and handed 
it to her.
	"Give me twopence worth uv id," said she, after balancing 
the sod in her hand and flinging it into her basket.
	"Is that all you're goin' to give me?" she asked, when he 
had stopped counting the turf into the basket.
	"That's all; an' I'd like to know where you'd get as much uv 
such turf as that?"
	"Well, here," said she, taking hold of one handle of the 
basket.
	Billy Heffernan took hold of the other handle, and the 
purchase was immediately laid on the middle of the floor in one of 
the little thatched houses.
	The woman put her hand in her pocket to pay for the turf, 
when, happening to glance through the little four-paned window, 
with three bull's eyes in it -- which, if one of the bull's eyes 
happened to be in the upper instead of the lower corner, Billy 
Heffernan would have sworn was his own window -- she seized a 
straw-bottom chair, that it required some faith to believe was not 
part of the furniture of Mat Donovan's kitchen, and ran out into the 
street. Billy Heffernan soon saw a well-shaped foot, encased in a 
well-fitting boot, touch the back of the chair, and caught a glimpse 
of a leg quite worthy of the foot, in a grey angola stocking tied 
with a red worsted garter; of which latter, however, he saw no 
more than the two ends that hung down in a manner suggestive of 
a bow-knot. In an instant a female figure leaped lightly to the 
ground and ran into the little thatched house, followed by the 
smiling hostess, bearing the straw bottom chair. Both turned into 
the little room on the right-hand side of the door, and Billy saw a 
pretty young girl fling off her cloak, and commence arranging her 
hair at a diminutive looking-glass that hung near the window; and 
in a minute or two quite a stylishly dressed young lady came out, 
drawing on her gloves, and replying to the inquiries of the woman 
of the house, who addressed her as "Miss Julia," for the "masther " 
and the "misthress."
	"Oh!" exclaimed Miss Julia, as if she had forgotten some 
thing, "run out and bring in the basket that's between the bags on 
the top of the load."
	The woman of the house did as she desired, and soon 
returned with a small basket.
	'Tis something," said Miss Julia, "that mother sent you."
	The woman raised the lid, and exclaimed with a start, as 
she held up her hands in an attitude of surprise and thankfulness.
	"Oh, may God increase her store!"
	Miss Julia walked out, and no one meeting her would have 
dreamed she was the same person that descended from the top of 
the load of wheat, with her gay bonnet hidden under the ample 
cape of her mother's blue cloak; which blue cloak, however, 
seemed more worthy of admiration in the eyes of the woman in 
whose care she had left it, than all Miss Julia's finery put together, 
for she held it up to the light, and looked and looked at it, till she 
seemed to forget everything in the world but the blue cloak.
	"Begor, ma'am," said Billy Heffernan, "I b'lieve you're 
forgettin' me."
	"Oh, honest man," she replied, with a start, "I beg your 
pardon. I thought I was afther payin' you."
	Billy Heffernan put the twopence she handed him in his 
pocket, and, finding the way now more clear, led his mule slowly 
up the street.



CHAPTER XXXVI.

HOME TO KNOCKNAGOW. -- A TENANT AT WILL.

	A HAND was laid on his shoulder, and on looking round, 
he saw the dragoon standing close to him.
	"Come and have a drink," said the dragoon.
	"I don't take anything; thank you all the same," replied 
Billy Heffernan.
	"Oh, d--n it," returned the dragoon, "as we were comrades 
on the road, don't refuse a treat."
	"Well, I'm a teetotaller," rejoined Billy Heffernan; "but if 
you'd have no objection to come over beyand the Wesht gate, I 
know a place where they have peppermint."
	"All right," said the dragoon; and they continued on their 
way through the drays and carts.
	"Is this all corn?" the dragoon asked.
	"All whate," replied Billy Heffernan.
	"I never saw so much corn at a market," returned the 
dragoon; "and yet ye Irish are always talking of starving. How is 
that?"
	"Begob," said Billy Heffernan, "'tis many's the time I said 
thim words to myse'f."
	"Where does it all go?" the dragoon asked.
	"Some uv id is ground in the mills here an' up the river," 
replied Billy Heffernan; "an' more uv id is sent off wudout bein' 
ground. But ground or not ground off id goes. If you'll take a walk 
down to the quay, you'll see 'em loadin' the boats wud id. They 
brin' id on to Carrick, and from that down to Waterford, an' the 
divil a wan uv me knows where id goes afther that. 'Tis ould Phil 
Morris that could explain the ins an' outs uv id for you. But 'tis the 
corn that's makin' a town uv Clo'mel; so there's that much got out 
uv id afore id goes, as ould Phil says; besides the employment uv 
tillin' the land and reapin' id. But 'tis the big grass farms that's the 
ruination uv the counthry. 'Twas on account of thryin' to put a stop 
to 'em that they made up the plan to hang Father Sheehy. So ould 
Phil Morris tells me."
	The mention of Phil Morris's name seemed to have put 
political economy completely out of the dragoon's head, and he did 
not again speak till Billy Heffernan roused him from his reverie 
after they had passed the West Gate.
	"This is the house," said he.
	"Come in," returned the dragoon.
	"Here's luck, any way," said Billy Heffernan, as he tossed 
off his glass of peppermint.
	The dragoon blew the froth from his mug of porter, and 
took him by the hand.
	"Good morning, friend," said he, laying his empty mug on 
the counter.
	"Have another," said Billy.
	"No; no," returned the dragoon. "Good morning."
	"Oh, begob," rejoined Billy Heffernan, getting between him 
and the door, and putting his hand against the soldier's broad chest, 
"we don't undherstand that soart o' work in Ireland."
	"Yes, yes, I understand your custom," returned the dragoon 
smiling. "And," he added, "I will take another."
	Billy Heffernan sold his creel of turf, and, after 
breakfasting upon a brown loaf and a bowl of coffee in a cellar, 
was returning through the Main Street, thanking his stars that the 
big town with its noise and bustle would be soon left behind him, 
when his eye caught the big dragoon standing with folded arms 
opposite a shop window, and seeming absorbed in the examination 
of the articles there displayed. Happening to look round, he 
recognised his companion of the morning and beckoned to him. 
Billy Heffernan stopped his mule, and waited till the dragoon had 
crossed over to the middle of the street.
	"Going home?" said the dragoon.
	"Yes," replied Billy; "I have the turf sowld."
	"Would you," the dragoon asked, after a pause, "would you 
bring a message from me to Bessy Morris?"
	"Well, I will," said Billy; but he felt, he couldn't tell why, 
as if he would rather not.
	"Wait for a minute," said the dragoon, and he walked 
quickly back to the shop.
	He soon returned, and handed to Billy Heffernan what 
seemed a small box wrapped in paper.
	"What will I say?" Billy asked, as he put the parcel in his 
waistcoat pocket.
	"Well, I don't know," returned the dragoon, as if he felt at a 
loss.
	Billy Heffernan very naturally looked at him with some 
surprise.
	"Say," said he, at last, "that it is from a friend."
	"Begob," thought Billy Heffernan, "he is a bad case. I 
wondher what do she think uv him? 'Twould be d--n dhroll if 
Bessy Morris, above all the girls in the parish, would marry a 
soger. Begob, ould Phil 'ud choke her afore he'd give her to a 
redcoat. Come, Kit, be lively, or they'll be all in bed afore we get 
to Knocknagow."
	Billy Heffernan and his mule had left the busy town with 
the cloud over it some miles behind them when the sun was 
disappearing behind the hills upon which the dragoon turned round 
to gaze when his companion would have called his attention to the 
Waterford mountains -- by which piece of eccentricity the reader 
has lost an exciting legend of those mountains, which Billy 
Heffernan was about relating for the amusement and instruction of 
his military friend. But it was all owing to Bessy Morris -- who we 
fear has much more than that to answer for. As the stars began to 
peep out one by one -- and there was one star that shone with a 
pure, steady lustre, and Billy Heffernan felt sure it was looking 
through the beech-tree into a face as mild and beautiful as itself -- 
he began to wonder why he felt so tired and sleepy; but, 
recollecting that he had had no rest the night before, he turned to 
his mule, and said, "Wo! Kit," in a manner that made that 
sagacious animal not only stop, but turn round till her nose touched 
the shaft, and look at him. The fact was, Billy Heffernan was in the 
act of yawning as he pronounced the word "Wo!" and a stiffness in 
his jaw as he attempted to add the other word suggested 
dislocation, which so alarmed Billy Heffernan that his mule's name 
escaped from him with a cry, as if some one were choking him. 
And hence Kit not only halted at the word of command, but looked 
round to see what was the matter. And, finding that there was no 
rude hand on her master's windpipe, Kit expressed her satisfaction 
by advancing her fore-leg as far as possible, and rubbing her nose 
to it.
	Billy Heffernan placed one foot on the nave, and then the 
other on the band of the wheel, and climbed up till he stood on the 
side of his car. He put back his hand several times, and attempted 
to catch the skirt of his barragain coat under his arm. But the skirt 
was too short; and, after two or three unsuccessful attempts, Billy 
Heffernan looked down at himself with a look of drowsy surprise. 
He first thought of the elk's horn fixed to the rafter in his own 
house; then Phil Morris's old goat came to his assistance; and at 
last Billy Heffernan thought of Mick Brien, and a shake of the 
head signified that he was satisfied. In fact, Billy Heffernan, before 
climbing into his creel, was attempting to tuck the skirt of his 
ratteen riding-coat under his arm, and was much astonished on 
finding that trusty companion of his journeyings missing for the 
first time in his life; for the ratteen riding-coat, its owner averred, 
was as good to keep out the heat as the cold, and, consequently, he 
was never known, winter or summer, to take the road without it. 
For a moment he thought he must have left it at home, but then that 
glimpse at the half-moon through the rent in the skirt occurred to 
him, and he knew he had the riding-coat as far as Phil Morris's. 
Then the idea of the half-moon shining through the rent in the 
riding-coat brought the roofless cabin to his mind, and the pale 
faces upon which the moonlight fell so coldly, and Billy Heffernan 
shook his head as he remembered how he had wrapped his riding-
coat around poor Mick Brien. 
	Billy Heffernan climbed into his creel; and, resting his arms 
on the front, and leaning his chin on his arms, waited patiently till 
the mule was done rubbing her nose against her leg; and as the 
mule continued rubbing her nose against her leg rather longer than 
usual, her master began rubbing his nose against the sleeve of his 
coat. There was, in fact, a remarkable sympathy between Billy 
Heffernan and his mule in the matter of rubbing the nose.
	The mule at last moved on of her own accord, for which 
piece of considerate civility her master resolved to give her an 
extra fistful of bran when they got home, for he was so tired and 
drowsy that he felt it would be a task to say "Yo-up, Kit." Indeed, 
the mere thought of being obliged to speak brought on another 
yawn, and Billy Heffernan turned his open mouth to his thumb -- 
which required less exertion than moving his hand to his mouth -- 
and made the Sign of the Cross. To neglect making the Sign of the 
Cross over the mouth while yawning would be even worse in Billy 
Heffernan's eyes than to forget saying "God bless us" after 
sneezing, and almost as bad as going to bed without saying his 
prayers, or sprinkling himself with holy water.
	The mule jogged on quite briskly, as if she knew her 
master's good intentions regarding the additional fistful of bran, 
while he leant over the creel, with his cheek resting on his arm, as 
a weary traveller might rest upon a gate, and looked lazily along 
the road before him in a somewhat confused state of mind. 
Becoming too sleepy to maintain his standing position, he dropped 
down in the bottom of the car; and after a pantomimic wrapping of 
himself in the ratteen riding-coat, resolutely resolved to keep wide 
awake till he reached home. In spite of his firm resolves, however, 
it occurred to him that he must have dozed for half a minute or so, 
as he opened his eyes on missing the rumble of the wheels.
	"Yo-up, Kit," said be, but Kit never stirred.
	He turned upon his elbow; and, looking through the laths of 
the creel, saw that the mule was drinking from a little stream that 
ran across the road.
	Billy Heffernan rubbed his eyes, and thought he must be 
either dreaming or bewitched. But there could be no mistake about 
it. There was the identical little stream over which he had lifted 
Norah Lahy that bright summer evening long ago, and in the 
middle of which he stood the night before and wept.
	"Well, that bangs Banagher," exclaimed Billy Heffernan, 
rising to his feet, and rubbing his eyes again. "I thought I wasn't 
wudin tin mile uv id. I wondher what time uv the night might it 
be?"
	He was wide awake now, and there was an anxious 
expression in his face as he looked about him, while the mule 
moved on briskly, seeming quite refreshed and lively after her 
draught at the little stream. An old fear, by which he was always 
haunted when descending that hill on his way home, fell upon 
Billy Heffernan. Most people, we suspect, have experienced some 
such feeling when approaching home after a lengthened absence. 
But it weighed upon Billy Heffernan's heart after the absence of a 
single day. True, he was alone in the world. He had no father or 
mother, sister or brother, wife or child, to awaken that feeling of 
dread. Yet he never descended that hill on his way from the busy 
town with the cloud over it without fearing that, just after passing 
Mat the Thrasher's clipped hedge, the children would run out from 
one of the next group of houses to the middle of the road, 
exclaiming, "O Billy! poor Norah Lahy is dead!"
	The light shone brightly, as usual, in Mat Donovan's 
window, so that it could not be very far advanced in the night. And 
when he passed the clipped hedge, and saw Honor Lahy's window 
giving the hamlet quite the look of a town, Billy Heffernan's heart 
began to beat as pleasantly as when he discovered that his assailant 
of the night before was Phil Morris's old goat, and not the ghost of 
a Hessian. He climbed out of the creel at his own door; and, taking 
the key from under the thatch, let himself in.
	There was not as much as a cat to welcome him home, nor 
a spark upon the hearth. Yet Billy Heffernan felt that he was at 
home, and was happy in his own way. Taking the mule from the 
car, he let her find her way to her crib, and went himself for "the 
seed of the fire" to the next house. Having lighted the fire, he took 
the tackling off the mule and hung it on the bog-wood pegs. The 
elk's horn reminded him of his riding-coat; and after a glance at the 
fire, which seemed between two minds whether it would light or 
go out, Billy Heffernan shrugged his shoulders, and, sitting down 
in the chimney-corner on his antediluvian block, fixed his eyes on 
the moonlight that shone through the open doorway on the floor. 
Kit seemed to find some attraction in the moonlight, too, for she 
left her crib and smelled that portion of the floor upon which it fell, 
all round, and over and over, and then Kit deliberately lay down in 
the moonlight and tumbled. After which invigorating recreation, 
Kit sat up, and, instead of going back to her crib, remained where 
she was, winking at the moon. And Billy Heffernan, leaning back 
against the wall in the chimney-corner, began to wonder what Kit 
was thinking of. Whatever the subject of her thoughts might be, 
she got up after awhile and returned to her crib; and the working of 
her jaws reminded her master that he could not live upon 
moonshine either. So, taking his old gallon in his hand, he went to 
the well for water, thereby frightening Kit Cummins, who 
happened to be at the well for water, too, almost out of her life; 
she, by some process of reasoning peculiar to herself, having 
mistaken him for "the black dog," because his barragain coat 
happened to be nearly white. Having convinced Kit Cummins that 
he was not the black dog, and disgusted her by "insinuating" a 
doubt of that creature's very existence -- though it was a well-
known fact the well was haunted by him time out of mind --  Billy 
Heffernan returned home with his gallon of water, and, pouring 
some of it into a small pot which he must have filled with washed 
potatoes before going to Ned Brophy's wedding, hung it on the fire 
to boil. Then closing his door behind him, he walked down to 
Honor Lahy's to purchase a half penny herring. He was agreeably 
surprised to see Phil Lahy sitting by his own fireside, holding 
serious discourse with Tom Hogan and Mat Donovan, as he had 
almost made up his mind that the "cordial" at Ned Brophy's 
wedding would have proved the commencement of a protracted 
"spree," which would cost Norah much anxiety and suffering. But 
her smiling face, as she listened to her father expounding the 
various political questions of the day, satisfied Billy Heffernan that 
his apprehensions on this occasion were groundless. Honor, too, 
was the very picture of happiness, and in the excess of her pride 
and delight was actually obliged to put away her knitting, and give 
herself up wholly to the enjoyment of Phil's eloquence.
	"Good-night, Billy; sit down," said Phil Lahy, mildly, the 
words being thrown in parenthetically to the peroration of his 
discourse on home manufactures, which, he contended, could 
never be revived under a foreign government.
	Billy Heffernan was about declining the invitation, but 
seeing it was seconded by Norah Lahy's dark eyes, he couldn't.
	"I don't know," was Tom Hogan's comment at the 
conclusion of the speech. "I never minded them soart uv things. 
An' though I gave my shillin' as well as another to O'Connell, to 
plaise the priest, I never could see the good uv id. If people'd mind 
their business an' industhre, they'd be able to hould on, barrin' sich 
as'd be turned out be the landlord."
	"Tom," said Phil Lahy, with a sort of solemn indignation, 
"'tis wastin' words to be talkin' to you."
	"'Tis thirty years now," continued Tom Hogan, "since I 
came into my little spot, an' so long as God spared me my health I 
never lost half a day; an' signs on, look at id, an' where would you 
find a more compact little place in the country? An' what was id 
but a snipe farm the day I came to id. But I worked airly an' late, 
wet an' dhry, an' glory be to God, I'm milkin' six cows now where 
Billy Heffernan's mule'd perish the day I came into id. An' if others 
done the same they'd have the same story."
	"An' Tom, what rent are you paying now?"
	"Well, 'tis a purty smart rint," replied Tom Hogan seriously. 
"But the land is worth id," he added proudly.
	"An' who made id worth id, Tom? Answer me that."
	"I did," he replied, with something like a swagger. "Thim 
two hands did id for the first ten years, barrin' what help my wife 
gave me; an', begor, so far as diggin' stubbles and work uv that 
sort, she done ridge for ridge wud me of'en an' of'en. But I made 
the dhrains, an' sunk the dykes, an' riz the ditches single hand. But 
now," he continued consequentially, "I can keep a servant boy, an' 
hire a few men. An' I ate my own bit uv butther now an' then," 
added Tom Hogan, with the air of a lord.
	"An' what rent are you payin'?"
	"Well, thirty-eight shillin's, since the last rise."
	"An' suppose the next rise puts it up to forty-eight"
Tom Hogan stared at his questioner with a frightened look.
	"If he was the divil," he exclaimed, after a pause, "he 
couldn't put id up to forty-eight shillin's an acre."
	"An' what was id when you came there first?"
	"About fifteen shillin's an acre all round. But 'tis betther 
worth thirty-eight now."
	"Have you a lase?"
	"No, nor I don't want a lase so long as I have a gentleman 
for my landlord that won't disturb any poor man that'll pay him his 
rent fair and honest."
	"An' as fast as you improve your land, putting the whole 
labour uv your life into id, he'll rise the rint on ye."
	"An' why not, so long as he don't rise id too high?"
	"Tom Hogan," said Phil Lahy, surveying him from head to 
foot, and then looking him steadily in the face -- " Tom Hogan, I'll 
see you scratch a beggarman's back yet."
	Tom Hogan looked astonished, quite unable to comprehend 
why he should be called upon to perform such an office for a 
beggarman or any one else. But Phil Lahy meant to convey, in this 
figurative and unnecessarily roundabout way, that Tom Hogan 
would be a beggar himself.
	"I partly see what Phil is at," observed Mat Donovan. 
"Whin 'tis his own labour an' his own money made the land what 
id is, the rint had no right to be riz on him. Sure he has his place 
just as if he took a piece uv the Golden Vale an' laid id down 
among the rishis an' yallow clay all around id. An' because he wint 
on dhrainin', an' limin', an' fencin', an' manurin' for thirty years, is 
that the raison the rint should be riz on him, wherein more uv 'em 
that never done any thing at all is on'y payin' the ould rint? That's a 
quare way to encourage a man."
	"An' Tom," said Phil Lahy, "what would you take for the 
good-will of that farm?"
	"I wouldn't take a million uv money," he replied, in a husky 
voice. "My heart is stuck in id."
	His chin dropped upon his chest, and his hands began to 
tremble as if he had the palsy.
	Ah, though we cannot help sharing Phil Lahy's contempt 
for Tom Hogan's slavishness, we heartily wish he had a more 
secure hold of that little farm in which "his heart was stuck" than 
the word of a gentleman who went on raising the rent as fast as 
Tom Hogan went on with his draining, and fencing, and liming, 
and manuring -- to say nothing of the new slated barn and cow-
house.
	Norah looked at him with surprise, as if she could scarcely 
believe he was the same Tom Hogan who, a few minutes before, 
seemed so full of consequence as he boasted of eating his own 
butter now and then. She then turned an appealing look to her 
father, which checked the sarcasm and the bitter laugh that Phil 
Lahy was on the point of indulging in at the expense of the poor 
tenant-at-will, who tried so hard to persuade himself and others 
that he was not only satisfied with his serfdom, but proud of it.
	"Good-night to ye," said Tom Hogan, rising from his chair. 
"'Tis time to be goin' home."
	"'Tis time for all uv us," said Mat Donovan. "I'll come 
down to-morrow night," he added, "and lend a hand to that chair of 
Norah's. 'Tis sinkin' too much at the side."
	Norah thanked him with a grateful look. Every little act of 
kindness made her happy.
	"Come out, Honor, and get me a herrin'," said Billy 
Heffernan. "Faith, I'm afeard the spuds'll be broke. I hung 'em 
down to bile when I was comin' out."
	"Good-night," said Torn Hogan, when he came to his own 
gate. His hand trembled so much that he could not raise the hasp, 
and Mat Donovan stopped and opened and closed the gate for him.
	"God help him," said Mat, as he rejoined Billy Heffernan, 
"if ever it comes to his turn."
	"What?"
	"To be turned out."
	"There's no danger uv that," Billy replied. "He's the 
snuggest man in the place."
	"All he's worth in the world," returned Mat, "is buried in 
the land. He couldn't give a fortune to Nancy. An' as for Jemmy, he 
tells me he'll run away an' list, he makes him work so hard, and 
wouldn't give him a shillin' for pocket-money. An' 'tis a hard 
timing, Billy, to think that any man could come up to you and tell 
you to walk out uv the house an' place you wor afther spendin' the 
labour uv your life on."
	"Begor, Mat," returned Billy, "I could stick the man, as 
ould Phil Morris says he'd do, that'd turn me out of that mild cabin 
there, not to say a snug house and farm like Tom Hogan's."
	"Peg Brady was tellin' me," said Mat, "that you called into 
Phil Morris's last night when you wor passin'."
	"I turned in to redden the pipe whin I see the doore open."
	"She was goin' on about somethin' that I couldn't pick head 
or tail out uv," continued Mat Donovan. "On'y she said if I knew id 
I'd be surprised. She said you kem in to light the pipe afther, but I 
couldn't understand her. But she was dhrivin' at somethin'."
	Billy Heffernan put his finger and thumb into his waist-coat 
pocket, and was on the point of saying that he had passed Phil 
Morris's without remembering to give the little box to Bessy, but 
he felt instinctively that he ought not to speak of it, though he had 
no particular reason for supposing that it concerned Mat Donovan 
more than anybody else.
	"Did you see Bessy?" Mat asked, seeing that his companion 
had offered no remark upon what he had just said.
	"I did," Billy replied; "the two uv 'em wor sittin' at the fire."
	"What two?"
	"Peg an' Bessy."
	"Wasn't there any wan else?"
	"Divil a wan -- whin I wint in. The ould man was in bed."
	"Peg is sich an innocent soart uv a girl," said Mat, as if to 
himself. "I suppose she wanted to take a rise out uv me. She was 
hintin' at somethin' or other, but the not a wan uv me knows what 
id was. She tould me," he added, after a pause, "that Bessy was 
comin' over to cut a new gown or somethin' for Miss Mary to-
morrow."
	"Begor," said Billy Heffernan, putting his hand again in his 
pocket, "I may as well give you a message I have for her."
	"What is id?" Mat asked.
	"I won't mind id," returned Billy, as it occurred to him that 
if he gave the box to Mat, he should tell from whom he got it. 
	Billy Heffernan was in the habit of making little purchases 
for his neighbours in Clonmel, and Mat Donovan attributed his 
change of mind regarding the message, to what he considered a 
very natural desire on Billy's part to deliver it to the fascinating 
Bessy himself.
	"Come in an' rest," said Billy, when they had come to his 
house.
	"Oh, 'tis all hours. My mother'll think the mickilleens is 
afther ketchin' me," replied Mat, as he quickened his pace with all 
the appearance of a man in a great hurry. But Billy saw him stop 
almost immediately, and, after hesitating for a moment as if he 
thought of turning back to renew the conversation, walk on again 
very slowly towards his own house.
	"By my word," thought Billy Heffernan, as he took the 
"spuds" off the fire -- which "spuds," to his great relief, he found 
were not broken, owing, perhaps, to the length of time the fire had 
taken to kindle -- "by my word I'm afeard he's a bad case, too."
	He lighted his bog-pine candle, and examined the little 
package the dragoon had given him with considerable curiosity.
	"Now, I wondher what might be in id," he thought, as he 
tried to judge of its weight by moving his hand up and down. 
"'Tisn't heavy, whatever id is. But what is id to me what's in id? I'll 
give id into her own hands, for maybe if any wan else got id they 
might make harm uv id, as little as id is. An'," added Billy 
Heffernan, with a shake of his head, " 'tis a d--n little thing some 
people couldn't make harm uv. Well, 'twouldn't be aisy to make me 
b'lieve any bad uv Bessy Morris; though she is the divil for 
coortin'."
	He strained the water off the "spuds" into the pool outside 
the door, and leaving the pot on the floor to let them cool, he sat 
upon his block and shook the little box close to his ear.
	"Now, as sure as I'm alive," said he, "'tis a thimble. An' sure 
Nelly Donovan tould me 'twas to larn to be a manty maker that 
Bessy stopped in Dublin so long. But 'tis thinkin' uv my two-eyed 
beefsteak I ought to be."
	And, considering that he had eaten nothing since he 
breakfasted in the cellar in Clonmel, it was not surprising that Billy 
Heffernan should now think of his supper. And while he is roasting 
his herring on the tongs, we will go back for a moment to Bessy 
Morris, whom we left sitting in her grandfather's arm-chair, with a 
flush upon her forehead, and nervously tapping with her fingers on 
the table.
	"When did he come?" she asked, without raising her eyes.
	"A little start afther you goin'," replied Peg Brady, who had 
returned to her seat, and was occupied in taking some of the 
partially burnt turf from the fire and quenching it in the ashes in 
the corner. "I was goin' to tell him to run afther ye, an' have his 
share uv the fun."
	Bessy looked at her with surprise, and, drawing a long 
breath, as if she had escaped a great danger -- for she shrank from 
the idea of the sensation the dragoon's appearance in search of her 
would have created at the wedding -- she said with forced 
calmness, "You had no right to let him stay."
	"Was id to turn him out the doores I was? An' how was I to 
know that ye'd stay so late. I thought you'd be home before twelve 
o'clock at the farthest. An' he afther comin' for nothin' else in the 
world but to see you."
	"But didn't you know how my grandfather hated the sight 
of a soldier? There's no knowing what he might say or do if he saw 
him."
	"There's my thanks for sendin' him into your own room till 
your grandfather was gone to bed, whin I hear ye comin'."
	"Peg, you are very foolish." And Bessy commenced 
tapping the table more nervously than ever. "What would be said if 
he was seen in my room?"
	"Faith, you're losin' your courage," returned Peg Brady. "I 
thought you wouldn't mind what any wan 'd say."
	Bessy Morris closed her lips tightly and gazed into the fire.
	"He said he wrote a letter to you from Dublin," said Peg 
Brady.
	"So he told me," Bessy replied, absently. "But I did not get 
it. Maybe 'tis at the post-office."
	"Begor, he's a fine, handsome man, anyhow; an' he's a 
sergeant. He said that in all his thravels he never see the like uv 
you."
	The compressed lips parted, and a flash of light shot from 
Bessy Morris's eyes; and, bending down her head, she covered her 
face with her hands as if she wished to hide these symptoms of 
gratified vanity from her companion.
	"I don't know how you manage to come round the whole uv 
'em," said Peg Brady, with a sigh. "I wish you'd make up your 
mind an' take wan an' put the rest out uv pain. An' maybe thin 
some uv us might have a chance."
	"Well, Peg," said Bessy, as she rose from her chair, " don't 
say anything about it. You don't know how hard the world is."
	"Oh, yes; that's the way. Purtend to the whole uv 'em there's 
no wan but himse'f, and keep 'em all on your hands."
	"There it is," said Bessy, stopping, before she had reached 
the door of her room, as if Peg's remark was a foretaste of what she 
had to expect.
	"Well, you may depend on me," returned Peg, "I'll say 
nothin'."
	Bessy Morris retired to her room greatly excited.
	"But what is there to be frightened at?" she thought. "Sure 
he's not the first bachelor that ever came to see me. But people are 
so bad-minded."
	Yet it never occurred to her that if she had not been such a 
"divil for coortin'," as Billy Heffernan had expressed it, the 
dragoon, in all probability, would never have heard of the 
existence of Knocknagow, where he found himself the previous 
evening, and learned from Mat Donovan's mother that he had 
passed Phil Morris's house and left it a mile or two behind him.
	"May heaven direct me!" exclaimed Bessy Morris, as she 
knelt down to say her prayers. " I feel as if some misfortune was 
hanging over me."
	"I wish to the Lord," said Peg Brady, as she raked the! 
ashes over the embers on the hearth, "that he was afther whippin' 
her away. An' sure what betther match could she expect? An' who 
knows but -- well, there's no use in countin' our chickens afore 
they're hatched. What a fool poor Mat is!" And Peg Brady broke 
off with a sigh as she put the back-stick to the door.



CHAPTER XXXVII.

DISCONTENT AND RESIGNATION

	TOM HOGAN grasped the gate with his trembling hand, 
after Mat Donovan had closed and fastened it, and resting his 
forehead upon his arm, remained standing there for some minutes 
like a man overcome by fatigue or weakness. Rousing himself, he 
looked round the yard -- at the stacks in the haggard, and the snug 
thatched dwelling-house, and the new slated barn, of which he was 
particularly proud. There was a look of blank anxiety, if we may 
use the expression, in his face, till his eyes rested on the new slated 
barn; and then pride seemed to gain the ascendancy over every 
other feeling, and Tom Hogan stood erect and looked more like a 
man than he had done since Phil Lahy placed his helpless 
dependence so vividly before him. From that moment, until his eye 
kindled with pride as he took in the outline of the slated barn -- 
which was equal in every way to Attorney Hanly's, and superior, 
except in size, to Maurice Kearney's -- Tom Hogan was the very 
picture of a crushed and spirit-broken slave. He tried to banish 
from his mind the dread thought that so unmanned him, and 
crossing the yard, went into the cowhouse, and laid his hands upon 
the cows, one by one, as if to assure himself that they were safe, 
and that he was in very deed the owner of six cows -- "as good 
milkers," he muttered, "as you'd find in the parish." He lifted the 
latch and pushed against the barn door to see that it was locked; 
and after paying a visit to the old brown mare and the colt, which 
he intended putting to the plough that spring, Tom Hogan pushed 
in the kitchen-door, and entered with a show of haste and bustle, as 
if he were in capital spirits, and in quite a hearty mood that 
evening. His wife, who was as thrifty and hardworking as himself, 
was "scalding tubs," and his daughter drying a pail, which she had 
just scoured, opposite the fire, turning it round and round, and 
occasionally rubbing the iron hoops with a woollen cloth till they 
shone like bands of bright steel. His son, Jemmy, lay upon his back 
on a form, with his hands clasped over his face; while Ned 
Carrigan, the servant boy, was driving a few "pavers" in the toe of 
his old brogue, by the light of the fire -- for candles were made to 
go far by Mrs. Hogan. Tom Hogan sat down and commenced 
holding his hands to the fire, and drawing them quickly through the 
blaze, and rubbing them together  -- as if he thought it very 
pleasant to sit by one's own fireside on a winter's night. No word, 
however, was spoken by any one, except the short sentence, "Get 
up, Spot," which Tom Hogan himself, who was evidently casting 
about for a pretext for conversation, addressed to the dog, and 
which that drowsy animal, lying at full length upon the hearth, 
responded to by lazily wagging his tail, thereby causing the ashes 
to fly up into Ned Carrigan's eyes, who, at the moment, was 
stooping to admire the row of nails he had driven into the toe of his 
brogue, the sole of which seemed one sheet of iron, that shone 
quite as brightly as the hoops on the pail. The tubs having been 
scalded and rubbed dry, and the pail laid upon the stilling, and Ned 
Carrigan having put his foot into his brogue and retired to his 
sleeping apartment -- for it was after supper when Tom Hogan had 
walked out for a chat with Phil Lahy -- Mrs. Hogan lighted a 
candle, remarking that it was "time for honest people to be in their 
beds." But no sooner had she lighted the candle and snuffed it, and 
carefully removed a little ashes that adhered to it with a large brass 
pin by which her shawl was fastened, than she exclaimed in 
accents of surprise and alarm -- "Tom, what's the matther wud 
you?"
	Jemmy flung himself off the form, looking quite 
frightened; and Nancy turned quickly round and fixed her eyes 
upon her father's face.
	"Nothin' is the matther wad me," replied Tom Hogan, 
looking up at his wife as if he wanted an explanation of her 
question.
	"Tom," said she, "you're as white as the wall. Maybe you're 
not well. Or might id be anything you're afther seem'? God betune 
us an' all harm."
	I didn't see anything worse than myse'f," he replied. "An', 
glory be to God, I was never in betther health in my life."
	"Well, you must be afther gettin' a change, an' let me give 
you a drop out uv the bottle; there was some left since the last 
night James was here." Mrs. Hogan alluded to a visit her brother 
had paid them some months before, when Tom Hogan partook not 
only of "a bit of his own butter," but of a stiff tumbler of whiskey 
punch in his own house.
	"I don't want anything," he answered impatiently, as he 
took the candle from her hand.
	"Maybe 'tis nothin', wud the help uv God," Mrs. Hogan 
observed; "but I didn't see him look so bad since the cow fell in the 
dyke. Jemmy, what are you doin' there? You ought to be in bed an 
hour ago. Get him a bit uv a candle, Nancy. An' don't be stayin' up 
yourse'f, makin' a fool uv yourse'f. 'Tis no wondher for you not to 
be fresh an' sthrong."
	Nancy assured her she would make no unnecessary delay, 
and Mrs. Hogan followed her husband to the bedroom.
	"I think you ought to go to bed, Jemmy," said Nancy 
Hogan, in a sweet low voice.
	"I don't know what I ought to do," he replied fretfully, as he 
dropped his chin on his hand, and stared into the fire.
	He was a singularly handsome young man, with a fresh, 
clear complexion and light blue eyes. His crisp golden curls, like 
his sister's, had a tinge of red in them, and it was a common remark 
among the neighbours that Jemmy Hogan was "too handsome for a 
boy." He certainly appeared delicate and effeminate to strangers; 
but such a thought never occurred to his acquaintances, for it was 
well known that he could do as good a day's work as any man in 
the parish except Mat Donovan; and that at the hurling he was 
often the first, and always among the first, to be "called" when the 
match was making. He was generally good-humoured and amiable; 
but it was remarked that when strongly moved, all colour would fly 
from his lips, which were of so bright a red as to make the paleness 
of his face more striking, and his white, regular teeth seem literally 
of pearl.
	His sister, who bore a strong resemblance to him, looked at 
him now with the deepest sympathy, the tears welling into her 
gentle eyes, and seemed at a loss for something to say that might 
cheer him. She approached him almost timidly, and laid the tips of 
her fingers lightly on his shoulder. He took no notice, and after a 
moment's hesitation, she pulled one of his hands from under his 
chin, and, sitting in his lap, looked playfully into his face.
	"Tell me something about the fair," she said. "Did you meet 
many people you knew?"
	"I didn't meet any wan you'd care to hear about," he replied.
	"Did you call into Mrs. Burke's?"
	"I did; an' I don't know what business I have to call in 
anywhere."
	Her countenance fell at this, but forcing a smile, she said, 
"How is Alice?"
	She's very well," be replied, with assumed indifference.
	"Oh, yes! pretend you don't care which!"
	"You know very well, Nancy," he said, after a short silence, 
" "'tis no use for me to be thinkin' uv any wan."
	"Well, maybe you're too young to think uv gettin' married 
yet awhile, but that's no raison why you wouldn't be thinkin' uv 
somebody. An' if you knew how light they are about you," she 
added laughingly.
	"That's all nonsense," he replied, trying to look displeased, 
while a smile of gratified vanity played upon his red lips.
	"Nancy," said he, after a pause, "I have my mind made up."
	"For what?"
	"Not to stay here any longer."
	"O Jemmy, don't talk that way."
	"Where is my use in stayin' here? My father don't want me. 
An' what am I betther than a common labourer? -- nor so good. So 
there's no use in talkin'; go I will. An', for God's sake, don't say 
anything to throuble me, for 'tis throuble enough that's on me."
	"O Jemmy!" she wailed, resting her head upon his 
shoulder, and trembling violently. "O Jemmy! I'd rather be dead."
	"That's all foolishness," he replied, encircling her waist 
with his arm. "'Twill be the best for all uv us. You know yourse'f 
you never could be settled if I stopped at home, unless I got 
married and got a fortune to give you; an' the Lord knows when 
that might be. So 'tis betther for you to have the place; an' then 
there'll be enough comin' to look for you."
	"I'll never marry, Jemmy. All I'd ever ask is to have us all 
live together as long as God spared us to each other. An' oh! how 
happy we'd be. An' wouldn't you take a delight in improvin' the 
place, like my father? An' afther a time you'd have some money uv 
your own. You might have a few heifers or cows -- I'll give you 
my lamb!" she exclaimed suddenly, as if she were sure that the 
lamb, beyond all doubt, would banish discontent from his mind for 
evermore.
	"You'll never have sinse," he replied, smiling. "But why do 
you say you'll never marry? Is id on account of that blackguard, 
Ned Brophy? I don't know what kep me from -- well, no matther."
	"Don't blame him, Jemmy. Maybe he couldn't help it."
	"Didn't he know all along what he had to expect?" Jemmy
asked, indignantly. "An' when be knew be couldn't marry wudout a 
fortune, where was he keepin' gaddin' afther you, an' makin' you 
the talk uv the counthry?"
	"I don't care about the talk of the counthry," his sister 
replied, with tears in her eyes. "Let 'em talk away."
	"But why do you say he's not to be blamed?"
	"Well, I don't say he's not; only not so much as a person 
might think. I think," she continued, with a sigh, "it was partly my 
mother's fault. She was so anxious for him that the minute she saw 
he took notice of me, she was always huntin' him, an' pressin' him, 
an' nearly makin' him come whether he'd like it or not. I know I 
was foolish myse'f. But when every one used to be jokin' about 
him, an' when I see him so fond of me, I couldn't help it," poor 
Nancy added, blushing deeply, and struggling to keep down the  
sob that swelled up into her throat. "'Tis all over now," she 
continued, plaintively, but more calmly, "an' my mind is at rest, an' 
I'm satisfied. But I don't think I could ever care for any wan again -
- that way. Miss Kearney stopped a whole hour wud me to-day, an' 
'twould do any wan good to talk to her. She says that, no matter 
what our lot may be, we all have duties to do; an' so long as we 
don't neglect 'em, an' if we do our best to be contented, we can be 
happy. An', as she said, what, afther all, is this world, that we 
should set our hearts on it? We ought to think of eternity; an' that 
needn't keep us from enjoyin' whatever of the blessings of this life 
God is pleased to bestow on us. I couldn't explain it as she did; but 
every word she said went to my heart. 'Tis a shame for us to be 
frettin' about every disappointment, an' so much terrible misery in 
the world."
	"Well, that's thrue," returned her brother. "But, for all -- ." 
And he continued gazing into the fire.
	"Are you there, Jemmy?" Tom Hogan called out. "I'm just 
goin'," he replied, imagining that his father meant to order him to 
bed. But instead of that Tom Hogan continued, "Run out, Jemmy, 
and see who is afther stoppin' out side the gate. I hear a step." It 
was said that Tom Hogan knew by instinct when a strange foot, of 
man or beast, approached that little farm in which "his heart was 
stuck." Jemmy went out to the gate, and returned in a minute or 
two, saying that it was "only Mick Brien."
	"Mick Brien," returned his father, apparently both surprised 
and troubled -- for Mick Brien had a larger and a better farm than 
his own only a few years ago -- and "look at him now," thought 
Tom Hogan, beginning to tremble.
	"God help him," his wife remarked; "his poor wife tould 
me this mornin' that she was afraid 'twas the faver her little girl 
had, and she was goin' for a ticket for the docthor, to Mr. Kearney. 
An' where was he goin', Jemmy, this hour uv the night?" she asked, 
raising her voice so as to be heard by her son, who was in the act 
of kicking Spot into the yard, before barring the kitchen door.
	"He didn't well know that himse'f, when I axed him," 
Jemmy answered; "but he said he b'lieved he was goin' over the 
short-cut to Pender's."
	Tom Hogan started up in his bed, to the great bewilderment 
of his wife, who fancied he was going to start off in pursuit of 
Mick Brien.
	"To Pender's!" gasped Tom Hogan, whose breath seemed 
quite taken away by the intelligence. "An' Darby Ruadh tould me 
to-day they wor goin' to throw down the cabin. An' Wat Corcoran 
remarked he didn't like the job at all." Tom Hogan was quite a 
confidential friend and crony of the two bailiffs, who were wont to 
assure him that the master --  meaning Mr. Isaac Pender -- had 
more respect for him (Tom Hogan) "than for any man in the 
parish."
	Nevertheless, it was not fear, but hope that took Tom 
Hogan's breath away.
	"I know, Jemmy," his sister murmured, 'tis that young man 
of Captain French's that's puttin' these notions in your head."
	"No," he replied, " I'm thinkin' uv it this long time. Don't be 
a fool. Sure I can write to ye, an' maybe I might come home afther 
a few years in flyin' colours."
	"Is it to America?" she asked.
	"Well, no," said Jemmy, stopping to gaze into the fire 
again, though he was half-way to his own room when she asked 
the question -- "my father would never give me what would pay 
my passage."
	Nancy bowed her head in sorrow, perhaps in shame -- for 
she felt that he had spoken only the truth -- and remained silent.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

ARE YOU IN LOVE, MARY?"

	"MARY," Grace asked, "do you ever hear from Arthur 
O'Connor now?"
	She was sitting at the window in Mary Kearney's little 
room, precisely in the same attitude as when she set about solving 
the mystery of the footprints in the snow. The snow was gone now; 
but it was evident those mysterious footprints were still visible to 
her mind's eye, and she followed them across the gravelled walk, 
and the box-bordered flowerbeds, and through the laurels, and over 
the stile in the corner, and out upon the road to the Bush, and -- 
where then?
	Grace was puzzled.
	A letter she had from her brother Edmund that morning, in 
which he spoke of his friend Arthur O'Connor -- whom he called 
"M. l'Abb" -- had set Grace thinking. There was a mystery about 
her brother, too, in which his friend Arthur was somehow mixed 
up. Edmund was what Grace called a "jolly good-hearted fellow," 
and he used to tell how he and Arthur were, by some fatality, 
always involuntary rivals in their boyish days; and declared it was 
quite fortunate that Arthur had decided upon becoming a priest, as 
otherwise there would be no knowing what might happen. He also 
often alluded to a certain romantic adventure at the seaside, a year 
or two before, in which Mary Kearney played a prominent part; 
and any allusion to which would be sure to bring a glow into 
Mary's pale cheek to this day. And so Grace could not help 
connecting either her brother or his friend with those provoking 
tracks in the snow.
	"But why on earth?" she asked herself, "should either one 
or the other of them stand there under the window till he must have 
been half froze to death?" For Grace held fast to her own "solution 
of the mystery," and dismissed the idea altogether that the person, 
whoever he was, had been in Mary's room and dropped into the 
garden from the window. If she could only find out who wrote the 
note that Barney threw up to her, it might enlighten her; but Mary 
laughingly refused to tell her anything at all about it. And so Grace 
went on puzzling her brains, till the old grey cat, stealthily picking 
his steps close to the ivied wall under the window, startled a 
blackbird that had been hopping fearfully among the flower-beds; 
and the harsh cry of the blackbird startled Grace from her reverie; 
and turning round, she asked:
	"Mary, do you ever hear from Arthur O'Connor now?"
	"No," Mary answered, looking surprised. "Why so?"
	"No reason in particular," she replied. "But you saw what 
Edmund said about him; and it just occurred to me that he was 
looking quite pale and thin when I saw him last -- and so old. I 
think he must be unhappy."
	Mary bent her head over the sewing she was doing, but 
remained silent.
	"And yet," Grace continued, "you are not unhappy, Mary.
	"Indeed I am not," returned Mary, looking up in surprise. 
"Why should I be unhappy?"
	"Oh, you are one of those angelic beings who are always 
contented with their lot. But I doubt very much that he is 
contented. I never could like him much, he is so proud and so 
cold."
	"You told me the other day that Miss Hanly pronounced me 
'as cold as ice,' and you said she is mistaken."
	"She certainly is. But if you would try to appear warm 
towards people you do not care about, it would be a decided 
improvement."
	"I try to be warm," she replied, "but I cannot always 
succeed. Now, would you say that Hugh, for instance, is cold?"
	"Not cold," returned Grace thoughtfully. "He may be 
reserved, or dark; but he is certainly not cold. Of course I know 
Arthur can be hot as well as cold. But a genial warmth is what I 
like."
	"Are you glad to be going home, Grace?" Mary asked 
sadly.
	"I believe I am always glad to go home -- but I'll be sorry, 
too."
	"If Richard and Mr. Lowe were going before you, you'd 
find this place very dull."
	"Well, it would be dull; but I don't think I ever feel very 
dull when I am with you, though I confess I do like society very 
much. And after all, Mary, there is a magic in polished society 
which can scarcely be found anywhere except among the upper 
ten. Don't you feel it in the case of Mr. Lowe?"
	"Well, I like his manner, certainly; but I have seen quite as 
good manners in my time, though I know very little of your 'upper 
ten.'"
	"Well, I'll never be satisfied till I set foot within that magic 
circle." And Grace walked to the looking-glass with "a hundred 
coats of arms" in her glance.
	"If you wished to lead a life of usefulness," returned Mary, 
"to promote the happiness or alleviate the sufferings of others -- if 
you even wished to distinguish yourself as a writer or an artist, I 
could understand you. But the ambition merely to belong to the 
upper ten, as you call it, is what I can't understand at all. Where 
can you have got such notions? Not from Eva -- and surely not 
from your papa."
	"Oh, papa is a democrat -- that is, in theory. For, between 
you and me, Mary, I can see that in his heart he 'dearly loves a 
lord.' I have heard them discuss the question at one of the literary 
dinners, and though the 'Brehon' gave the aristocrats some hard 
knocks, I was not convinced. What a pity it is that Mr. Lowe is not 
rich. This black-eyed cousin of his, I suspect, is in love with him. 
And I really think you have to answer for turning him from his 
allegiance. There must be something unpleasant in the letters he 
gets from his mother. And the interest he takes in hearing about his 
uncle's romantic marriage looks as if he were thinking of doing 
something of the kind himself. He is quite a treasure for your 
mamma, he affords her so many opportunities of talking of her 
Uncle Dan in connection with Sir Garrett and his music and poetry. 
But then comes the siren with the black eyes, whose singing of the 
'Coolin' brought the tears to Mr. Kearney's eyes, he says. Do you 
feel afraid of her, Mary? I hope she is not revengeful."
	"You are altogether mistaken," returned Mary.
	"Why, he is the picture of misery; and 'tis as plain as a 
pike-staff he admires you."
	"So do several others."
	"Well, how that modest remark would make some of our 
mutual friends stare. But, candidly now, are you in love with any 
one?"
	"I am not," Mary answered, very positively.
	At which Grace turned round, and resting her elbows on the 
window, followed the tracks in the snow across the flower-beds, 
and out to the bush, through the laurels -- and over the hills and far 
away; perhaps over the sea.
	"Come, Grace," said Mary, who began to feel afraid of her, 
"we have had quite enough of idle chat for one morning. I wonder 
what is delaying Bessy Morris? Is this she coming down the road?"
	"Yes," Grace answered; "and that's Billy Heffernan 
stopping his mule to shake hands with her," she added, on seeing 
Billy reach his hand to Bessy Morris, over his creel, in which he 
was standing.
	"And there is Mat Donovan strolling up to the Bush to meet 
her," said Mary. "I suspect Bessy is turning the heads of all the 
boys since her return from the city."
	"She is very nice," Grace observed. "And I really think the 
rustics know how to appreciate refinement."
	"I always remarked," returned Mary, "that it is the smartest 
and most intelligent girls that are most admired."
	"The tastiest," said Grace, "as Nelly Donovan would say."
	"Nelly herself is tasty," returned Mary, "but she is not like 
Bessy Morris. Even before she went to Dublin there was 
something refined about her. She was always borrowing books 
from me."
	"Then Mat has no chance?"
	"I don't know that. With all his queer ways, Mat Donovan 
has something superior about him. And he is such a fine, manly, 
good-natured fellow; and such a hero with the people as the best 
hurler and stone-thrower. He has made the name of Knocknagow 
famous."
	"Did you remark that roguish glance of his?" Grace asked. 
"It must be very effective under favourable circumstances."
	"He only glances roguishly at roguish people," returned 
Mary, laughing.
	"Pray don't be personal. But it strikes me you innocent-
looking people have just as much mischief in you as your 
neighbours."
	"You are quite right," said Mary, rather earnestly. "What 
are called quiet, steady people, are often as full of mischief as 
those who have a turn for saying satirical things, and are 
consequently the terror of their acquaintances."
	"That reminds me," returned Grace, "of what the 'Brehon' 
said in defence of a literary lady of his acquaintance, of whom 
people were saying hard things. The 'Brehon' is dreadful when, as 
papa says, he takes to wielding his battle-axe."
	"And what did he say?"
	"I get his speeches off sometimes," returned Grace, 
pressing her forefinger against her forehead. "Yes, it was some 
thing to the effect that a cultivated woman who happens to have 
brains and is of a lively disposition -- has, in fact, 'the flash of the 
gem' in her -- is apt to be set down as heartless, and insincere, and 
designing, and all that sort of thing; while malice, duplicity, and all 
uncharitableness will pass for goodness and sincerity, and so forth, 
when they are found kneaded into a good big lump of the 
commonest clay, particularly if it be cast in an ugly mould. So you 
see, my dear Mary, wit and beauty have their disadvantages; 
particularly," added Grace, with another glance at the looking-
glass, "when they happen to be combined in the same unfortunate 
individual."
	"Well," returned Mary, laughing, "I suppose I am pretty 
safe; for at worst I can only be charged with one of these 
disadvantages."
	"I don't know that. In the difference, I think beauty without 
wit is a greater sin than wit without beauty. It is easier to forgive a 
woman for being clever than for being handsome. I heard a 
gentleman, not long since, praising some ladies he had met to a 
lady from their neighbourhood; and when she said, 'Margaret is a 
good, sensible girl, she was always my favourite,' I made up my 
mind that Margaret was the plainest of the lot; and such I found 
afterwards was the case."
	"Well, as I often said, I don't know what to make of you, 
and I am puzzled to know how much of what you say you have 
heard from your literary friends, and how much is the result of 
your own observation. But what can be keeping Bessy?"
	"Come and see," returned Grace. "Wouldn't they make a 
picture?"
	"They really would," said Mary, smiling. "Is there not 
something graceful in Mat's attitude?"
	"And how coquettishly she looks up into his face," returned 
Grace. "And the old hawthorn tree, with Billy Heffernan and his 
mule in the distance. I wish I could make a sketch of it."
	Mat Donovan was leaning against the Bush, talking to 
Bessy Morris, who carried a small basket in her hand, and looked 
up at him, as Grace remarked, with a very coquettish air.
	"Mat has been coming out in his usual style," said Mary, as 
Bessy turned away from him, and ran laughing towards the gate.
	"There is the horse for Mr. Lowe," Grace observed. "He 
was only waiting for Barney with the letters. We ought to see him 
before he goes."
	"Oh, it is not necessary," returned Mary. "He is only going 
to call on Mr. Pender."
	"And on some of the tenants," Grace added. "And, by the 
way, I think he is afraid he is to be made a target of."
	"Why should he be afraid of that?" Mary asked. "Well, you 
know he thinks we Irish are a peculiar people, and as the rumour 
has gone about that he will be his uncle's agent at some future 
time, he fancies it would be quite in character to shoot him 
beforehand."
	"Bessy Morris is below," said Ellie, who had come in 
unobserved.
	"Oh, send her up," returned Mary, spreading out the 
material for the new dress on the table, and assuming an air of 
business. "Let us lose no more time, Grace."
	Ellie hurried back before she had reached the stair-head, 
and, with her hand on the door-handle, the following short 
dialogue passed between her and Grace:
	"Grace, we are going to play hide-and-go-seek in the 
stacks. Will you come?"
	"I'd look well."
	"Oh! my dear!" And Ellie turned away with a scornful toss 
of the head.
	"We may as well see Mr. Lowe," Mary observed. "I 
thought so," returned Grace, with a meaning smile. The young 
gentleman was reading a letter, which so entirely engrossed his 
attention that he did not observe their entrance. On looking up, and 
seeing Miss Kearney, he crushed the letter into his pocket, and 
stammered something by way of apology for his apparent 
rudeness.
	"Oh, by no means," said Mary. "I'm glad you will have a 
fine day for your ride."
	"Yes," he replied, glad of an opportunity to look another 
way, "it is very fine. The mountain has quite a summer look."
	"It is more like an autumn evening look," said Grace. 
"Those little white clouds remind me of the last time I was on the 
mountain. Edmund and Arthur O'Connor were with us that day, 
Mary."
	"I remember," she replied, quietly. "But let us not detain 
Mr. Lowe."
	Mr. Lowe bowed; and, after assuring Mrs. Kearney that 
nothing could induce him to dine anywhere but with herself, he 
mounted the horse that Barney held for him, and rode slowly up 
the avenue.
	"He certainly is in a sad way," Grace observed. "And there 
must be something strange in those letters, too."
	"Maybe it is something about the tenants," returned Mary. 
"There are two of them to be ejected."
	"That is quite a natural explanation," said Grace. "I wonder 
it never occurred to me."
	"I hope 'tis nothing about my lease," observed Maurice 
Kearney, who had just come in, looking troubled and uneasy. 
"That rascal Pender'll never stop till he makes Sir Garrett as great a 
tyrant as Yellow Sam. I'm after giving that unfortunate man, Mick 
Brien, some straw to thatch his cabin that was stript the night 
before last by the storm, and he tells me they are going to pull it 
down on him. I wouldn't stand in Pender's shoes this minute for the 
wealth of Damer. But," added Maurice Kearney, suddenly 
becoming cheerful, "if we could get Sir Garrett himself to come 
down for a week or two, all would be right. -- Wattletoes," he 
shouted, as he reached the hall, "get the ass, and tell Mat to bring 
up a bag of the seed-wheat to Raheen to finish that corner. Jim and 
Ned are gone with the horses."
	"There is knavery in every lineament of that old Pender's 
face," Grace observed. "He is even more odious than his ugly son. 
I declare Mr. Kearney is quite a judge of character; he described 
the pair to the life."
	"Yes, he must be a good judge of character. I know a young 
lady he considers quite a treasure."
	"Better than a piper in the house," added Grace, laughing. 
"Between Mr. Kearney and my friend, Lory, I have some excuse 
for being a little vain -- which, of course, I am not, however."
	"Of course not," returned Mary.



CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE HOOK-NOSED STEED.

	HERE is Beresford! Here is Beresford! Here is Beresford! 
Going to dine at Woodlands! Going to dine at Woodlands! Going 
to dine at Woodlands! Well, Beresford! Well, well, Beresford, do 
you expect much company? Do you expect much company to-
day?"
	"I think not to-day. Only the family," replied Mr. Beresford 
Pender, in his mighty voice. 
	Old Isaac stood in the lawn in front of his own house, -- 
talking to three or four poor men, evidently belonging to the class 
of small farmers -- for they looked too spirit-broken for "labouring 
men" -- who pulled off their hats as Beresford strode past, and kept 
them off while he turned round for a minute on reaching the door, 
and stared at nothing in particular straight before him.
	"Going to dine at Woodlands!" muttered the old gentleman, 
contemplating his son with a sort of wonder, as if his greatness 
were something altogether bewildering and unfathomable.
	He was not going to dine at Woodlands -- and old Isaac 
knew it; but old Isaac seemed haunted by the idea that Beresford 
was going to dine at Woodlands at all hours and seasons, because 
Beresford did dine at Woodlands once in his life. It might be 
supposed that he had recourse to this fiction in order to impress his 
hearers with a due sense of his son's importance; but if old Isaac 
were quite alone, he would have muttered to himself three times 
that Beresford was "going to dine at Woodlands."
	Mr. Isaac Pender did not at all resemble Mr. Beresford 
Pender outwardly. He was nervous and fidgety, and seemed 
perpetually on the look-out for some threatened danger; to escape 
from which, judging from appearance, he would go through an 
auger-hole; while Beresford looked a very dare-devil, who would 
glory in finding himself in a den of lions, and seemed always 
defying creation in general to mortal combat. 
	After scowling defiance at the avenue gate, Mr. Beresford 
Pender turned into the parlour and commenced pacing up and 
down the uncarpeted floor.
	"No, no, colonel!" he muttered; "that will never do. The 
scoundrels must be kept down, by  --." We will omit Mr. Beresford 
Pender's oaths.
	Mr. Beresford Pender was as fond of holding imaginary 
conversations with this "colonel" as his father was of sending him 
to eat imaginary dinners at Woodlands.
	"I don't think," said Isaac, closing the door carefully behind 
him, and looking under the table for a concealed assassin, "I don't 
think Mr. Lowe wants to have anything to do with the property. I 
don't think he does. I was afraid he came down to see about these 
complaints some of the fellows are making. But he never went near 
any of the tenants. So that it was only Maurice Kearney asked him 
down for a few days' shooting. That was all. I know that must be 
the way."
	"But you wouldn't know what them Kearneys might put 
into his head," returned Beresford.
	"Well, well," rejoined old Isaac in his nervous, anxious 
way, "I don't think they can take any advantage of us. I don't think 
Sir Garrett would be bothered with stories. You see he didn't renew 
the lease for Kearney when I explained to him that the gentlemen 
of the county were opposed to giving leases. And when Mr. Lowe 
will be after talking to them at the meeting he will understand how 
it is. But, on the other hand, if I was sure he had nothing to do with 
the management of the property, I'd rather he wouldn't go to the 
meeting at all. It might only put things into his head. And he might 
set Sir Garrett astray."
	"I think," muttered Beresford, "he ought to know the 
danger of being in this part of the country. He ought to be made 
see it is no joke to collect rents with the muzzle of a blunderbuss 
looking into your face at every turn."
	Old Isaac started, and, closing one of the shutters, placed 
his back against the wall between the two windows, and 
commenced rubbing his hand over his face as if a swarm of midges 
were persecuting him.
	"Well, if that could be done," he replied, "it might be no  
harm. But I don't see how it could be managed."
	"I was talking to Darby about it," rejoined his son, "and I 
think we can manage it."
	"Well, Beresford, be cautious. Don't do anything rash. Easy 
things are best."
	"That's a fine place Kearney has," Beresford observed, after 
opening the shutter his father had closed, and looking out on the 
unsheltered fields around Wellington Lodge. "Do you think he can 
hold?"
	"I don't know," his father replied. "He was always 
extravagant. Always extravagant," he repeated, as if he were very 
sorry that so good a man as Maurice Kearney had not more sense. 
"But 'tis time enough to think of that. 'Tis the Ballyraheen business 
that's making me uneasy." And Isaac rubbed his face as if the 
midges began biting him again.
	"I'd hunt 'em," returned Beresford, "like rats."
	"Now, Beresford -- now, Beresford, don't be rash. These 
things should be done quietly. There's no use in making a noise 
when it can be avoided. If I had my own way I could manage them. 
But I don't like making a noise and exasperating people when it 
can be done in a quiet way."
	"No surrender!" muttered Beresford.
	"Now, Beresford! There is Stubbleton has his property 
cleared out to a man without even bringing out the Sheriff. I know 
'twas rather expensive at first, but, he got it back on the double 
after a little time; besides avoiding talk."
	"How did he do it?"
	"Well, he let them run into arrears first, and then 'twas easy 
to manage them. They gave up one by one. Then he commenced 
extensive drainage and improvements, and gave employment to all 
the small tenants on condition that they would give up possession, 
and they could then remain as caretakers. Some of them were 
earning thirty shillings and two pounds a week for their horses. 
They were never so well off in their lives, and were always praying 
for their landlord. But when the work was finished, they saw 
whatever they had spared would soon be gone; and as they were 
after giving up their land -- some of them thought they would get it 
back again, for his steward is a knowing man, and when he saw 
any of them unwilling to give up possession he used to give them a 
hint that if they did not give any trouble they might get back the 
farms, and larger farms -- but when they saw they should leave 
even the houses at a week's notice, they went to America while 
they were able. So that Stubbleton had his whole property cleared 
without as much as a paragraph in the newspapers about it. He 
divided it into large farms, then, and got heavy fines and a good 
rent that more than repaid him for what he lost. The parish priest 
denounced him as an exterminator; but Stubbleton gave a farm to 
the priest's nephew, and it put a stop to that. I'm told he's thinking 
of standing for the county on Liberal principles at the next election. 
So you see, Beresford, easy things are best."
	"And do you mean to say," Beresford asked, "that you'd let 
the Ballyraheen fellows run two or three years in arrears?"
	"No, no; that would be too much. But I'd put out only a few 
at first and give their land to the larger tenants. Then others would 
be expecting the same, and they'd offer money to the small holders 
for their good-will. In fact they'd evict one another. The great point 
is to divide them; for when they pull together 'tis dangerous," 
added old Isaac, rubbing his face as if be were bent upon rubbing 
the shrivelled skin off.
	"And what are you going to do with Kearney?"
	"Well, he owes about a year's rent, but I don't think Sir 
Garrett will press him. We'll try and let him alone for a while. 
Maurice Kearney is a good sort of man, and his lease is nearly 
expired. I'd like to have him let run on till the lease drops, and then 
we could see what would be best."
	"Why couldn't you press him and make him pay up? I'd be 
down on him the very day the rent fell due."
	"Now, Beresford, I wonder at you. Just think, if he had his 
rent paid up when the lease dropped, how much harder it would be 
to get him out than if he owed a couple of years' rent. He's an 
open-hearted sort of man that never looks before him; and I don't 
think Sir Garrett would like to press him at present."
	"Is Hanly threatening still to come down on you for that 
bond?" Beresford inquired.
	Old Isaac shambled all round the table, and was again 
attacked by the midges.
	"I'm afraid," he replied at last, "I'm afraid, if we can't 
manage to get him a farm, he'll do something. The two Donnellys 
are giving up possession; and there will be no trouble about the 
Widow Keating; but without Tom Hogan's farm there is no use 
offering their places to Hanly."
	"An' sure Hogan has no lase?"
	"I know that -- I know that. But he has improved the place 
so much, and pays such a high rent, and is so well able to pay it, 
I'm afraid 'twill make a noise if he can't be induced to go of his 
own free will. He's a headstrong kind of a man, and I'm afraid he 
can't be got to listen to reason."
	"But if nothing else will satisfy Hanly?"
	"That's true -- that's true, Beresford. 'Tis a hard case. A very 
hard case." And Isaac fell to rubbing his face again. 
	The fact was Mr. Isaac Pender had speculated in railway 
shares, and burnt his fingers, and Attorney Hanly held his bond for 
a considerable sum. But if Attorney Hanly could get about a 
hundred acres of land adjoining his own, including Tom Hogan's 
farm, he would be accommodating in the matter of the bond. To be 
sure be never said so -- but a nod is as good as a wink from an 
eccentric attorney to an old land agent. And between these two 
worthies it will, we fear, go hard with poor Tom Hogan! 
Particularly as his "heart is stuck" in the little farm, which has cost 
him the labour of thirty long years to make it what it is now, -- like 
"a piece of the Golden Vale dropped among the rushes and yallow 
clay all around it," as Mat Donovan said.
	"But do you think Kearney can hold long?" Beresford 
asked again, putting his flexible nose against the window so that he 
could see the fine old trees and young plantations around Maurice 
Kearney's cottage.
	"Indeed I don't think he can," his worthy father replied, as 
if in the charity of his benevolent heart he wished to believe that 
Maurice Kearney was not quite devoid of Christian principles. "I 
don't think he can. He lost too much by draining that bog; and, he 
met with many disappointments from time to time. He lost his 
cattle by the distemper, and I don't think the sheep pay so well. He 
has the Raheen farm all under tillage, too, and if prices continue 
low he must lose by it. So that I don't think he is likely to hold 
long."
	"Here is Lowe," said Beresford. "I just want to spake to 
Darby. I'll be back in a few minutes."
	"My worthy sir," exclaimed old Isaac, as he shambled out 
to receive his visitor, "I'm proud to welcome you to my humble 
residence -- proud to welcome you to Wellington Lodge. Come in, 
Mr. Lowe -- come in. Darby, take Mr. Lowe's horse -- take Mr. 
Lowe's horse."
	Mr. Lowe glanced at the "humble residence," and thought 
that Wellington Lodge, with its unplastered walls -- for the house 
was unfinished, though not new -- was by no means an inviting 
domicile.
	"Sit down, Mr. Lowe -- sit down. Here is Beresford -- here 
is Beresford."
	"A fine day, Mr. Lowe," said Beresford, advancing with his 
arm stretched out like a pump-handle. "I hope you will dine with 
us to-day," he added; and immediately the runaway look came into 
his countenance, as if he expected to be forthwith ordered out of 
the room, for his assurance.
	"I promised Mrs. Kearney to be back to dinner," returned. 
Mr. Lowe quietly. "I had a letter to-day, and it appears Sir Garrett 
is returning to the Continent immediately. I must be in Dublin 
early next week."
	"I knew Sir Garrett would not stay long in Ireland. I knew 
he would soon go back to the Continent," exclaimed Mr. Isaac 
Pender in a voice almost as big as his son's -- the midges which 
seemed hovering above his head at the mention of the letter, 
vanishing when he heard that the landlord was about leaving 
Ireland without visiting Tipperary.
	"I think we had better go," Mr. Lowe observed, laughing. 
"It would be too bad if I went back without at least looking at the 
houses of some of the tenantry."
	Mr. Isaac Pender laughed too, and shuffled about the room, 
rubbing his hands instead of his face, like a very pleasant old 
gentleman.
	"Why, Beresford -- why, Beresford -- is it going to ride that 
old horse you are? Where is your own horse?" old Isaac asked, in 
real surprise, as one of the poor tenants who remained hanging 
about the house in the hope that some thing might turn up for their 
advantage, led the two horses round from the stable.
	"My own horse is after casting a shoe," Beresford replied.
	"But is it safe to ride that old horse? Look at his knees -- 
look at his knees."
	The animal referred to was a tall, raw-boned, hook-nosed, 
ill-conditioned brute, both morally and physically.
	"There's no danger," replied Beresford, climbing into the 
saddle, in which he sat quite perpendicularly, with his elbows as 
far as possible from his ribs.
	"Where is Darby, to open the gate?" his father called out.
	"I sent him of a message," Beresford answered, as he rode 
off upon the hook-nosed steed, who, it may be remarked, rejoiced 
in the name of "Waterloo."
	Two of the poor tenants before alluded to ran to open the 
gate, dividing the honour equally between them, as one raised the 
latch, while the other pulled up the long, perpendicular bolt. There 
was some delay and a little jostling, as in their hurry the two took 
hold of the same side of the gate, and then both let that side go and 
took hold of the other -- after the manner of people who meet 
suddenly at a street turning; but at last each took his own side, and 
the gate stood wide open, the men pulling off their hats and 
looking, we are ashamed to say, as if they were ready to lie down 
and let "Waterloo" trample upon them, if Mr. Beresford Pender so 
desired. But, it must be remembered, they were conceived and 
born under a notice-to-quit; it took the light out of their mother's 
smile, and ploughed furrows in their father's face while he was yet 
young; it nipped the budding pleasures of childhood as a frost will 
nip the spring flowers, and youth's and manhood's joys withered 
under its shadow; it taught them to cringe, and fawn, and lie; and 
made them what they are now, as they stand there with heads 
uncovered while Mr. Henry Lowe and Mr. Beresford Pender ride 
through the gate of Wellington Lodge.
	They rode for half-an-hour in silence up a narrow road that 
led into a rather wild looking glen among the hills. Mr. Lowe was 
busy with his own thoughts; and his companion, not being largely 
gifted with conversational powers, confined himself to staring at 
nothing but between the ears of the hook-nosed steed.
	"That's Kearney's farm," he observed at last, "where the 
ploughs are at work."
	"I believe that's Mr. Kearney himself at the further end of 
the field," returned Mr. Lowe.
	"He has that place for twenty-five shillings an acre," 
continued Beresford. "It ought to be two pounds, but he has a 
lease."
	"Oh, is that you, Mat?" Mr. Lowe exclaimed, on coming up 
with Mat Donovan, who was striding along in advance of Barney 
Brodherick's donkey-cart -- Barney himself having disappeared 
down a ravine by the roadside to cut a blackthorn stick which had 
caught his fancy, leaving Bobby to tumble after him if anything 
happened to catch his fancy at the bottom of the ravine.
	"Yis, sir, I'm goin' to scatther this grain o' whate," Mat 
answered, pointing to a bag in the donkey-cart. "An' where the 
divil is Wattletoes gone?" he exclaimed, on finding the driver 
missing. But Barney soon appeared with his blackthorn under his 
arm, and Mat walked on with the horsemen.
	"I'm told," said Mr. Pender, who seemed to have recovered 
the use of his tongue, "I'm told Mr. Kearney wants a horse?"
	"Well, he was talkin' uv buyin' a horse, as the spring work 
will be heavy; and he don't like to be hard on the ould mare -- he's 
so fond uv her."
	"I'd sell him this horse I'm riding cheap," said Mr. Pender.
	Mat eyed the hook-nosed steed, and shook his head. "He's a 
first-rate horse for the plough," continued "Waterloo's" owner, 
patting him on the shoulder.
	"He's a legacy," returned Mat Donovan, sententiously.
	"What would you say he's worth?" Mr. Lowe asked, 
laughing.
	"He's an ould Bian, sir," replied Mat.
	"What is that?"
	"Wan uv them broken-down jingle horses," Mat answered.
	"He means one of Bianconi's car-horses," said Beresford, in 
reply to Mr. Lowe's look. "They call 'em Bians. But you are 
mistaken," he added, "this fellow belonged to the lancers."
	"Well, now that you remind me uv id," returned Mat, 
seriously, "he has a warlike look. But the divil a far you'd ride him 
before you'd be axed, 'What tan-yard wor you bound for?'"
	"He'd do the spring work well for Mr. Kearney," rejoined 
Beresford, reining up his steed as they reached the gate of the 
farmyard.
	Mat moved back a pace or two and surveyed "Waterloo," 
from his apology for a tail to his Roman nose.
	"He'll never hear the cuckoo," he observed oracularly. Mr. 
Lowe had become sufficiently acquainted with Mat the Thrasher's 
figurative mode of expression to understand from this that Mat was 
of opinion the warlike steed would not live till the middle of April.
	"I'll turn in to speak to Mr. Kearney," he observed.
	"I'll ride on and you will overtake me," returned Beresford.
	"This is a fine day for seed-sowing, Mr. Kearney," said the 
young gentleman, after riding round the headland; "and this land 
seems to be in very good condition for it."
	"I drained and subsoiled all this place," returned Maurice 
Kearney, waving his hand to indicate the extent of his 
improvement. "And brought the water all down to the river by that 
lead. You, see it would turn a mill."
	"I should not have expected that land on the side of a rather 
steep hill like this would require draining."
	"The subsoil was like a flag, and all the water oozed 
through the surface," replied Mr. Kearney. "Look all along there 
beyond and you can see the difference."
	"I certainly do see the difference," replied Mr. Lowe. 
"There, for instance, that field where the man is digging is not at 
all like this. Even the colour of the soil is quite different."
	"He's preparing that for oats," said Maurice Kearney. "I 
don't know how that poor man is able to live and pay the rent at 
all."
	The man looked up and touched his hat, and they saw Mr. 
Beresford Pender passing within a little distance of him.
	Suddenly he stuck his spade in the ground and started 
forward towards the road. But, stopping short, after running some 
ten or twelve yards, he hastened back and commenced digging 
again with his head bent over his spade.
	"By Jove!" exclaimed Maurice Kearney, "Pender is down!"
	Mr. Lowe put spurs to his horse and galloped to the 
assistance of Mr. Beresford Pender, who was lying motionless 
upon the road. "Waterloo" was down, too, but was exerting all his 
strength in a straggling effort to gather his bony carcass out of the 
puddle.
	"I hope you are not hurt," Mr. Lowe observed, for by the 
time he had reached the scene of the accident, Mr. Pender had risen 
to his feet, and was scraping the puddle off his left cheek with the 
nails of his fingers.
	Beresford only glared all around him, by way of reply. He 
was thinking, as far as the confused state of his wits and the 
singing in his head would allow, whether the affair could be turned 
into an "outrage."
	"Didn't you see me fall?" he muttered, addressing the man 
who had been digging in the field, and who now came up leading 
Mr. Pender's horse, and carefully wiping the mud from the bridle 
with the sleeve of his coat -- for "Waterloo" had set off for home 
at, for him, a very respectable trot --  "Didn't you see me fall?"
	"Begor, I did, sir," he answered, "but when you worn't 
stirrin' I thought you wor dead -- an' you bein' such a bad cha-rac-
ter I was afeard to have anything to do wud you."
	"Nice people to live among," muttered Beresford.
	"What does be mean?" Mr. Lowe asked, turning to Maurice 
Kearney, who had just come up panting for breath, and wiping his 
face with his pocket-handkerchief.
	"He means," was the reply, "that if Pender was killed he 
might swing for it. And, as it is, he may be thankful that you and I 
saw it all. Many a man was transported for less."
	The smoke from the chimneys of Knocknagow attracted 
Mr. Lowe's attention -- for dinner hour was approaching --  and 
from the pointed gables of Phil Lahy's old house he turned to a 
pointed gable in the trees, a little to the right; and thought it would 
be pleasanter to spend the afternoon in that quarter than riding with 
Mr. Beresford Pender up among those wild hills.
	"Of course you won't venture to ride that horse again?" he 
said.
	"No, I'll lead him," replied Mr. Pender.
	"Oh, we'll go back," said Mr. Lowe. "I couldn't think of 
asking you to walk."
	"But I'd like you'd come as far as that place of my own."
	How far is it?"
	"About a mile. There it is above where you see the three 
poplar trees."
	"Oh, 'tis very far," returned Mr. Lowe. "I'd much prefer 
returning."
	Mr. Beresford Pender ground his teeth, and commenced to 
kick "Waterloo" in the ribs.
	"Could I leave him here?" he asked, "and would you send 
one of these men for my servant?"
	"Yes," replied Mr. Kearney, not very graciously, "put him 
under the shed in the yard, and I'll tell Wattletoes to run up for 
your man. As you're going back," he added, turning to Mr. Lowe, 
"I'll go with you."
	"Oh, don't leave your business on my account."
	"I have no more business here; Mat will see everything 
right -- Mat," he called out, "when you have that seed scattered, 
bring your own plough-irons to the forge, as I'm going to break the 
kiln-field."
	"Goin' to break the kiln-field!" exclaimed Mat in 
amazement; "begob, it is a shame for you!"
	Mat Donovan seemed so thunderstruck by this intelligence, 
that Mr. Lowe thought breaking the kiln-field must be a heartless 
and an altogether unjustifiable proceeding -- some thing like 
turning out a widow and nine young children to perish on the 
roadside.
	"An' there is the whole winter gone now," continued Mat, 
looking at Mr. Lowe, as much as to say, "Was the like ever known 
before in any civilized country under the sun?"
	"Why so? " his master asked.
	"Why so?" retorted Mat, almost gruffly. "An' not a field 
about the place that a goal could be hurled in wud any satisfaction. 
We couldn't finish the match between the two sides uv the river in 
Doran's moon-thaun on account uv the disputes about the fall. An' 
there was the kiln-field, that ud put a stop to all bother, goin' for 
nothin'. An' you never let us know you wor goin' to break it."
	"I didn't make up my mind about it till last night," replied 
Maurice Kearney, as if he were really ashamed of himself; for 
when a large field is intended to be broken, it is customary to give 
it for hurling matches, and even horse races during the winter 
months.
	"There's no help for id now," rejoined Mat Donovan, with 
resignation. "But I'll send word to Tom Cuddehy this evenin'," be 
continued musingly, "an' we'll have wan Sunday out uv id at any 
rate."
	He filled the long, narrow straw basket out of the bag, 
which now stood on the ground beside the little blue cart, and 
commenced scattering the seed before the two ploughs. Jim Dunne 
and Tom Maher both remarked that Mat stopped very often to gaze 
towards the three poplar trees on the hill, for which Barney 
Brodherick was now making at the top of his speed -- muttering 
curses on Mr. Beresford Pender and his hook-nosed charger for 
being the cause of sending him upon a journey, that would be sure 
to entail "Ballyhooly" upon his devoted head when he got home, 
for being away so long.

"If ever I marry, I solemnly vow,
I'll marry young Roger that follies the plough,"

Tom Maher chanted, as he passed by Mat in order to attract his 
attention. But Mat gave no heed to him.
	He was thinking how, one summer evening some years 
before, he was standing upon the little bridge upon which Ned 
Brophy's heart was wont to fall to pieces, and seeing the bright 
face beside him become pensive, he inquired the cause. "I always 
feel sad," she replied, "when I look at the Three Trees. I love that 
old place better than any place else in the world." And ever since 
that summer evening, so surely as he looked at the three poplar 
trees, so surely would Mat Donovan commence to build a castle in 
the air.
	"God save all here! Where is Darby?" exclaimed Barney in 
a breath, as he burst into Mr. Beresford Pender's farm house.
	"Wisha, is that Barney?" returned the old woman who acted 
as a housekeeper. "An', Barney, what way are you? An' have you 
any strange news? An' is id thrue ye're goin' to have a weddin' at 
the cottage? An' what soart is the young man? I always said that 
Miss Mary was a lady; an' Barney, is my words goin' to come thrue 
in earnest, an' no mistake?"
	This torrent of questions bewildered Barney considerably;. 
but he grappled with one of them, and answered:
	"Very well, I thank you, Poll."
	"An' 'tis yourse'f that is lookin' brave an' hearty, sure 
enough," returned Poll. "'Tis of'en your mother tould me you wor 
the very moral uv your poor father, God be good to him. 'Poll,' siz 
she, 'look at Barney runnin' up the road. I can hardly b'lieve the 
sight uv my eyes that id isn't his father is in id'"
	A striking proof, it may be remarked, of the truth of the 
proverb, "Every eye forms a beauty " -- bearing in mind the clerk's 
daughter of Ballyporeen.
	"Where is Darby?" Barney asked again.
	"'Maurice Kearney's daughter is a fine girl, Poll,' siz Mr. 
Beresford. ''Tis a pity she hasn't a fortune.' ''Faix an' sure 'tis she 
that will have the fortune, and the fine fortune,' siz I; 'for isn't her 
father wan uv the richest men in the parish?' siz I. 'The divil a 
stiver she'll get,' siz Mr. Beresford, 'he's too extravagant, an' he 
lays out 'too much on his place, drainin' an' plantin',' siz he, 'an' 
more d--n fool Kearney is,' siz Mr. Beresford."
	"Do you think a Kearney would marry one of his breed?" 
exclaimed Barney, indignantly. "Tell me where is Darby, an' don't 
keep me here all day, an' all I have to do."
	"Is id Darby? Well, Darby kem in that doore a while ago, 
an' tuck down the gun off uv the rack. 'Darby,' siz I, 'where are you 
goin'?' 'Ax the divil,' siz Darby. But it might be betther for Darby if 
he kept a civil tongue in his head. I do have my eyes an' my ears 
open, though they think I don't. An' maybe I could tell some things 
that 'ud get some people into a nice hoult if I liked. So 'twould be 
betther for Darby to keep a civil tongue in his head."
	"Blur-an'-ouns, Poll, tell me where he is an' let me go."
	"Well, I see him loadin' the gun in the stable," the old 
woman answered. "An' maybe I didn't notice 'twas a lead ball be 
put in id," she muttered, "though 'twas little Darby suspected I had 
my eye on him. An' maybe 'twould be betther for Darby if he kep a 
civil tongue in his head."
	This speech, except the first few words, was a soliloquy, 
for by the time it was concluded Barney was running from one to 
the other of the out-offices in search of Darby Ruadh -- or Darby 
the "Red-haired."
	"Begob," Barney soliloquised, as he ran from one empty 
and ruined outhouse to another, looking up at the sky through the 
broken roof, and at the patches of grass growing through the floor -
- "begob, this is a quare soart uv a place. The divil a cow or a calf, 
or a sheep or a goat, put a fut in there this five year. Nor a pig, nor 
a slip, nor a bonnive," he added, running in and out of two or three 
other offices in the same condition as the cowhouse. "Nor a goose, 
nor a goslin, nor a duck, nor a cock, nor a hen, nor a chicken -- nor 
a wranneen, nor anything!" he shouted, as he stopped short after 
finishing his round, and gazed in amazement on the ruined 
concern, from the thatched dwelling-house to the roofless pig-sty. 
"This is not the soart uv place id was afore poor Dick Morris was 
turned out, an' Pender on'y keeps grazin' stock in the summer and 
nothin' at all in the winther. Oh! be the hoky! be has a big windy 
broke out here!" exclaimed Barney, as he turned the corner of the 
house and found himself face to face with a large window, which 
certainly was not in keeping with the old thatched house, but 
which, according to Mr. Beresford Pender's notions, had the 
advantage of proclaiming to all passers-by that the place was in the 
possession of a "gentleman."
	"I'll run over to the double-ditch," continued Barney, "an' if 
he's about the place I can see him -- bad luck to him for bringin' me 
up here."
	Not a living thing did he see from the double-ditch, but two 
carrion crows on a little island in the middle of a field covered with 
water. He felt a sense of desolation as he looked all round the 
dreary spot. And observing a single magpie --  which all the world 
knows is a sign of bad luck -- pitching upon one of the rafters of 
the tumble-down barn, Barney resolved to get away from the ill-
omened place as fast as his legs could carry him. He made for a 
pile of stones at a point of the road, where the engineer had to turn 
short at a right angle to avoid a level stretch of country, and carry 
his road over the sharpest point of the hill -- by which ingenious 
manoeuvre the engineer added considerably to the length of his 
road, besides avoiding three miles of a dead level.
	But as Barney approached the landmark by which he 
steered his course, it suddenly occurred to him that it marked the 
spot where "Black Humphrey" was found one winter's morning 
with his skull broken -- and Barney immediately wheeled to one 
side, so as to avoid the pile of stones at the turn of the road. For, 
though it was the middle of the noon-day, and not "the witching 
hour of night when churchyards yawn," Barney Brodherick felt by 
no means comfortable, and had a secret misgiving that, in a back-
of-God-speed spot like that, Black Humphrey might be met with, 
looking for the fragments of his cranium, any hour of the twenty-
four. He faced now to an old sandpit near the road a little lower 
down, and was climbing up the embankment on the brink of it, 
when he suddenly started back and fell down upon his hands and 
knees.
	"The Lord betune us an' all harm!" he muttered through his 
chattering teeth, while big drops of perspiration ran down his face. 
"That flogs all! 'Twas well Billy Heffernan said there was 
somethin' bad about the ould sandpit since the night the mule got 
into a cowld sweat an' she passin' id. But in the middle of the 
noonday to think he'd be out uv his warm grave is a show 
entirely!" For Barney was quite sure he had just caught a glimpse 
of Black Humphrey himself, with his head all bloody, lying in the 
old sandpit.
	"If I could get round to th' other side," he continued, 
"maybe I might be able to cut off before he could see me."
	He crept round the embankment till he came to a gap in it, 
by which he saw he could not pass without exposing himself to the 
object of his tenor. Glancing round fearfully, he discovered, greatly 
to his relief, that Mat Donovan and the ploughmen were within 
view, though too far off to hear his cry for help if the owner of the 
bloody head should lay violent hands upon him. He took courage, 
however, to peep over the embankment again; and to his utter 
horror the bloody head started up at the same moment, and seemed 
to be looking along the road, attracted, no doubt, by the sound of 
horses' hoofs, which Barney could now hear approaching at a brisk 
trot. This last-mentioned circumstance gave him further courage, 
and he looked more steadily than before at the figure in the sand-
pit.
	"Be the hoky!" exclaimed Barney, "'tis Darby Ruadh!"
	And sure enough, there was Darby Ruadh's red head plain 
to be seen, as he peered stealthily through a brake of briars over the 
ravine that divided his hiding-place from the road. A stream 
gurgled down the hill at the bottom of the ravine; and to its hoarse 
music, Barney discovered, was added the cawing of a flock of 
crows, that whirled round and round overhead, sometimes 
swooping down as if they would precipitate themselves into the 
pit, but suddenly stopping short in their headlong descent, and after 
a moment's silence and confused clapping of wings, shooting 
upwards again, till their angry voices were softened and almost lost 
in the distance.
	"Id must be a fox that's about here," Barney thought, "or 
else they smell powdher. An', begob, Darby has a gun. I wondher 
is id rabbits he's watchin'?"
	The horsemen came nearer and nearer; and Barney opened 
his eyes in astonishment and tenor, when he saw Darby Ruadh 
drop upon one knee and thrust the muzzle of his gun through the 
briars, resting his elbow on the brink of the sandpit, evidently with 
the intention of taking steady aim.
	"Be cripes!" Barney mentally ejaculated, "he's goin' to let 
the daylight through some wan!"
	On came the horsemen, nearer and nearer. But just as he 
had the gun to his shoulder, Darby Ruadh drew back, as if 
something unlooked-for had presented itself; and, in stead of firing 
off his gun, he dropped upon his knees and let the horsemen pass. 
And, as they got higher up the hill, Barney could see by their 
shining accoutrements and clanking sabres that they were two 
mounted policemen -- probably bearing a dispatch to the nearest 
military barracks for a troop or company of soldiers to protect the 
sheriff while clearing a townland of its human inhabitants.
	When Barney looked again into the sandpit, Darby was 
sitting in an easy position, quietly filling his pipe, with his gun on 
the ground beside him.
	"Id must be rabbits," thought Barney, "though the divil a 
hole I can see. Bless your work," he added aloud.
	The man in the pit was so startled that his pipe dropped 
from his mouth, as he scrambled to his feet at the risk of cutting 
himself with the open knife he held in his hand.
	"In the divil's name what brought you here?" he growled on 
seeing who it was who had spoken to him.
	"Your own blessed masther," Barney answered, "an' his 
ould broken-winded horse that fell ondher him, an' I was sint up to 
tell you to carry him home. He's below ondher the shed in 
Raheen,"
	"Aren't they comin' up this way?" Darby asked.
	"The divil a up," returned Barney. "He's gone home on 
shanks' mare."
	"Sweet bad luck to him! afther all my trouble," growled 
Darby Ruadh. "I must lave this gun at the house," he added, as he 
walked off without condescending to take any further notice of 
Barney, who set off for home muttering that he'd want to be able to 
change himself into a crow, the way he was ordered from one 
place to another and expected to be back again "while a cat'd be 
lickin' his ear " -- and what was worse, that blackguard Tom Maher 
would be sure to steal his blackthorn out of the ass's car, where in 
an evil hour he had left it.
	It was to "Waterloo" that Darby Ruadh wished "sweet bad 
luck." And we, too, have reason to be indignant with that unlucky 
quadruped. Had he but kept upon his legs till he reached the sand-
pit, even he, "Waterloo," might have been the making of us. We'd 
have something to tell that would make the reader's breath come 
and go. The scene of our story would have been immortalised to 
our hand; half-a-dozen "specials" would have done it. For, had that 
ill-favoured and in every way disreputable brute not fallen with his 
rider, Mr. Beresford Pender's horse would have been shot under 
him -- or, what would have answered as well, the horse would have 
been shot when the rider had dismounted and moved to a safe 
distance; and Mr. Beresford Pender, after discharging all his 
pistols, would have pursued the intended assassin into the fox 
cover in the glen -- and heaven only knows what would have 
happened after.
	It is a comfort to know that the old "legacy" was "bound for 
a tanyard"; and that he never did "hear the cuckoo" again. For 
before that day week his ribs were well polished by old 
Somerfield's beagles; and for many a day after, his shin-bone 
might be seen under a little boy's arm at the gable-end of the 
school-house, behind the quarry, as the little boy glanced over his 
shoulder at the passing traveller -- while another little boy was 
thrusting out his head, impatiently, at the door, and dancing upon 
his heels.



CHAPTER XL.

THE DRAGOON'S PRESENT. -- THE BEAUTY RACE.

	DURING all this time Bessy Morris's tongue and fingers 
were very busy. She talked and plied her needle incessantly; but 
ever and anon she would pause for a little while and take to 
thinking. During those moments of abstraction, Grace remarked 
that Bessy invariably slipped her hand into her pocket; and in this 
little circumstance Grace saw a "mystery" which she resolved 
forthwith to set about unravelling. And as a pocket naturally 
suggests money, Grace concluded that it was of money Bessy 
Morris was thinking every time she stopped working and slipped 
her hand into her pocket. So, by way of a beginning, Grace said: --
	"Just before you came in Miss Kearney was lecturing me 
because I allowed my mind to dwell sometimes on so vulgar a 
subject as wealth. Now, don't you agree with me that poverty must 
be a very disagreeable thing?"
	"Indeed I do," Bessy answered, looking surprised. "I was 
always wishing to be rich."
	Did you ever think it would be pleasant to get a rich 
husband?"
	"Well, I believe that used to cross my mind sometimes," 
replied Bessy with a sad sort of smile. "But what I most desired 
was to be able to do something for myself."
	"I suppose it was that made you learn dressmaking?" Mary 
observed.
	"It was, Miss," she replied. "Though I pretended to my 
grandfather that it was on account of my aunt's health I was 
obliged to stay so long in Dublin. Only for that he would not 
consent to have me away so long."
	"And were you able to get money?"
	"Well, I was able to lay by a little during the last year. But 
'tis very hard to make a fortune, and only that I was stopping with 
my aunt, I'd find it hard enough to live. My ambition was to earn 
as much as would make me independent."
	Grace thought that this was a higher ambition than her own.
	"But you seem to have enjoyed the attractions of the city 
very much, and I wonder how you could come back to the 
country," she observed musingly.
	"Well, I could not leave the old man alone," Bessy replied. 
"And there were others reasons to induce me to come home."
	"And used you not ever wish to be back in the country?" 
Mary asked. "I fancy I'd pine away and die longing for the green 
fields if I were shut up in a city."
	"Well, an odd time I would," Bessy replied. "When I'd be 
alone of an evening I'd find myself wishing for the old place and 
the old friends. But I like excitement, and I think it very dull and 
lonesome now, having no one hardly to converse with, and no 
change, but the same thing over and over every day."
	"I can understand that feeling very well," said Grace. "I am 
dying to plunge into the gaieties and excitement of Dublin. I am to 
go next winter, and it puts me in a fever to think of it."
	"I never could be tired of the country," said Mary.
	Bessy Morris made no reply. Her hand was in her pocket 
again, and her tongue and her needle at rest.
	"Here is a letter that Wattletoes had in his hat, and he forgot 
it," said Willie as he opened the room-door.
	Mary started in a way that was unusual with her, and 
snatched the letter eagerly from her brother. Was she thinking of 
another letter which Barney had put in his hat and forgotten?
	"It is for you," she remarked, handing the letter to Bessy 
Morris, who took it without evincing any surprise, and was putting 
it in her pocket with a quiet smile when Grace said:
	"Oh, you need not stand upon ceremony. Read it."
	Bessy cut open the envelope with her scissors, and read the 
letter.
	"Not a love-letter at all events," thought Grace, who was 
watching the expression of her countenance. "Oh, it is only a habit 
she has," she added, as Bessy's hand glided into her pocket the 
moment she had finished reading the letter.
	Grace was wrong in both conjectures.
	"Is it a love-letter?" Mary asked.
	"It is, Miss," replied Bessy, laughing.
	Both Mary and Grace looked at her in surprise, for neither 
expected such a reply.
	"Maybe you'd like to read it, Miss," she said, turning to 
Grace, who eagerly accepted the offer, remarking that it was the 
first love-letter she had ever seen except in a novel.
	"'DEAR MISS MORRIS,' -- Oh! that's a shockingly bad 
beginning. I am quite disappointed -- 'I take the present favourable 
opportunity of writing these few lines to you, hoping that you are 
in the enjoyment of good health, and free from all the ills that flesh 
is heir to, as Byron says. Dear and best beloved' -- Ah! that is 
something," Grace observed, with an approving nod -- "'words are 
inadequate to convey an idea of the state of my mind since that 
fatal Sunday afternoon, when I called at your highly respectable 
female relative's, at twenty minutes past one P.M., according to 
appointment, for the purpose of escorting you to the Zoological 
Gardens, and the harrowing intelligence fell upon my soul like the 
war of elements, the wreck of matter, and the crash of worlds -- as 
Byron says -- that you had vanished like a star from the horizon 
when the storm-lashed barque of the mariner is tossed upon the 
foaming breakers, and he paces the deck alone, and mourns the 
hopes that leave him, while his life is a wilderness unblest by 
fortune's gale, and his fevered lips are parched on Afric's burning 
sand, and no one near to whisper hopes of happiness and tales of 
distant lands --  as Byron says. It was then, for the first time in the 
course of a chequered existence, that I fully realised the truth of the 
sentiment that absence makes the heart grow fonder, as the 
sunflower that turns on its god when he sets the same look that it 
turned when he rose -- as Byron says. But, dear, Miss Morris, I 
cannot by any possibility endure my present state of mind, which 
sleeping or waking 'tis all just the same, so I have applied for leave 
of absence for a few days; and, borne on the pinions of affection, I 
hope to steer my barque to your native locality, the situation of 
which I have learned from your highly respectable female relative, 
who has on several occasions poured the balm of hope into my 
lacerated bosom, and given me all necessary information for 
finding the whereabouts of the object of my pilgrimage through the 
valley of the shadow. For truly may I say that the kiss, dear maid, 
thy lips have left shall never part from mine till happier hours 
restore the gift untainted back to thine -- as Byron says. Till then 
farewell, and give a thought to one who never can cease to think of 
thee.'"
	"What do you think of it, Miss?" Bessy asked, as Grace 
was trying to make out the signature, which was dashed off in a 
manner betokening the distracted state of the writer's mind.
	"Oh, 'tis very fine indeed," she replied with a wise look.
	"But I don't know what to think of that kissing," Mary 
observed. "Was there really anything of that sort, Bessy?"
	"Well; not much, Miss," returned Bessy, laughing.
	"Take care, Bessy. If he is not a person you really care for, 
there may be something not quite right in it. It is quite possible he 
feels as he says he does; and if so, what would you do?"
	Bessy looked grave, but said nothing.
	"Don't mind her preaching," said Grace. "For my part, I'm 
determined to 'break all hearts like china-ware' -- as Byron says," 
she added with her ringing laugh.
	Bessy Morris continued to look grave, and slipped her hand 
into her pocket, as she had so, often done during the day. But this 
time she drew out the little box Billy Heffernan had given her, 
when Grace thought he was only shaking hands with her over his 
creel. She would have opened it at once, but seeing Mat Donovan 
approaching, she thrust it hurriedly into her pocket, looking so 
frightened for a moment, and so very innocent and unconscious 
immediately after, that Billy Heffernan shook his head as he drove 
on after the usual "Yo-up, Kit!" to his mule, and mentally came to 
the conclusion that Bessy had "the two ways in her."
	"But where is the wan uv 'em that haven't?" Billy 
Heffernan philosophically observed, as he untied his whip, and 
gave Kit -- who was deliberately bent upon bringing the wheel of 
his cart into contact with that of an approaching dray -- a touch 
upon the shoulder that made her wince, and keep her own side of 
the road.
	Mat Donovan escorted Bessy to the house, and she had no 
opportunity to examine the dragoon's gift alone afterwards, though 
her curiosity was sufficiently strong every time her thoughts 
recurred to it.
	Removing the paper in which it was wrapped, she hastily 
took off the lid of the little box. She started on seeing what it 
contained, and after looking at it for nearly a minute with her eyes 
wide open, handed it to Miss Kearney.
	"They are very handsome," she observed.
	"Oh, they are just the same as Eve's," exclaimed Grace, 
snatching the box from Mary's hand, "just the same."
	"Do you think are they gold, Miss?" Bessy asked.
	"Oh, yes, I am quite sure they are gold," returned Mary.
	Bessy Morris seized the box, quite agitated with pleasure, 
and taking from it one of a handsome pair of earrings, fixed it with 
a trembling hand in her ear.
	"Is it the gift or the giver you are thinking of?" Grace 
asked, as she marked the flush deepen upon her cheek.
	Bessy looked as if she did not comprehend the question, 
but after a minute's reflection she understood it very well.
	"I believe," she replied thoughtfully, "I was thinking of 
nothing but that I had a pair of gold earrings. I was often wishing 
to have them, but they were too dear for myself to buy them."
	"You seem to be very candid," returned Mary.
	"It is too much that way I am," she replied.
	"Some wise man has said," Grace observed, "that the 
proper use of language is to conceal our thoughts; and, to a certain 
extent, I agree with him."
	"Indeed you do not," said Mary. "You know nothing is 
more odious than duplicity and deceit."
	"But a little diplomacy is necessary to get on smoothly 
through the world. You have told us nothing about your admirer," 
she added, turning to Bessy Morris. "Who and what is he?"
	"If they are real gold," Bessy observed, contemplatively, as 
she looked at the earrings, "his love must be true."
	"I am not sure that is quite correct reasoning," said Mary,  
with a smile. "I fear real gold is not always a proof of true love."
	"But sure he would not go to such expense," returned 
Bessy.
	"Oh, I have no doubt but he admires you very much," 
replied Mary; "and unless he is rich, so costly a present may be a 
proof of the ardour of his regard for you."
	"Well, he's only a sergeant in the army, Miss," replied 
Bessy.
	"Oh, it is quite romantic!" Grace exclaimed.
	Bessy Morris suddenly became very industrious, and Miss 
Kearney thought she was trying to make up for the time lost on 
account of the gold earrings. But Bessy's mind was busy as well as 
her fingers. Miss Kearney's warning, though given half in jest, 
startled her, and she began to examine her conscience in reference 
to her conduct towards the soldier. She could not conceal from 
herself that she had done her best to attract him, and was flattered 
by every evidence of her success. She had tried to "get inside" 
other girls, and it gratified her vanity to see herself preferred to 
them. She even thought her heart was touched, she felt so pained 
when she fancied her admirer was wavering in his allegiance. But 
when she became quite sure he loved her, she found that she did 
not really care for him; and, perhaps, to get rid of his attentions 
was one reason for her leaving Dublin. The intensity of his passion 
was so evident when she met him in her grandfather's house, after 
returning from the wedding, that it quite frightened her, and, in 
spite of the candour upon which she had just plumed herself, she 
shrank from telling Miss Kearney that her martial suitor had 
already "steered his barque" to Knocknagow; for she devoutly 
hoped no one in the neighbourhood would ever know any thing 
about it, as Peg Brady had promised faithfully to keep the 
dragoon's visit a profound secret, and Billy Heffernan said nothing 
about him except that he had met him in Clonmel.
	She stopped sewing, and, resting her hand upon the table, 
commenced tapping it nervously, just as she had done while sitting 
in her grandfather's chair, after the soldier's passionate farewell. 
Happening to glance through the window, a sad, wistful look came 
into her face; and it was so evident that this look was called up by 
some object upon which her eyes rested, that Grace followed their 
direction to see what it could be that made Bessy Morris look so 
sad, and, as she thought, yearningly. Grace could see nothing in the 
direction of her gaze but three tall trees standing all alone upon the 
bare hill.
	"I often remark those lonely-looking trees," she observed, 
"and when the wind is drifting the snow or the cold rain over the 
hill, I quite pity them. I fancy they must feel the cold. And they 
sometimes remind me of three tall nuns."
	"They are more like round towers, or something of that 
sort," said Mary.
	"Their shadow is now on the house where I was born," said 
Bessy Morris.
	"Indeed!" said Grace. "I thought you must feel interested in 
something up there; you looked so earnestly in that direction."
	"My mother was the daughter of a respectable farmer," 
Bessy continued. "And though my father was the son of a 
tradesman, he was considered a good match for her, as his father 
was able to give him three hundred pounds, which was given as a 
fortune to my mother's sister. I suppose you know, Miss, a weaver 
was a good trade in Ireland long ago. But the rent was raised and 
crops failed, and my father was ejected. 'Twas a cruel case, every 
one said, and no one ever offered to take the farm since; so that it 
comes into my mind sometimes that I'll live there again."
"Is your mother dead?" Grace asked.
	"She is, Miss. The day the sheriff was there to turn them 
out she clung to the door, and one of the bailiffs, in dragging her 
from it, threw her upon the ground, and it was thought the fall 
killed her; but I believe it was her heart that broke."
	"And is your father alive?"
	"I hope he is, but I don't know."
	Grace looked at her with surprise.
	"When he heard my mother scream," continued Bessy, "and 
saw Darby Ruadh fling her upon the ground, he lost all control 
over himself, and taking hold of one of the policemen's guns, he 
dragged it from him and knocked the bailiff down with the butt end 
of it. He then swore he'd shoot the first man who would lay a hand 
on him; and they were all so much taken by surprise that they let 
him walk out of the yard, and he had a good start before they ran 
after him."
	"Did they catch him?" Grace asked eagerly.
	"No, Miss," returned Bessy, "he hid himself in an old 
sandpit on the farm and escaped."
	"Do you remember your father and mother?" Mary asked.
	"I do, Miss, well," she replied. "My mother was a beautiful 
young woman. She died the next night at my grandfather's. And I 
remember my father coming to take his leave of her though the 
soldiers and police were scouring the country after him, for 'twas 
thought Darby Ruadh would not recover, as his skull was 
fractured. There was nothing but meetings of magistrates, and 
rewards offered, and houses searched, and people arrested to give 
evidence. You'd think it was war that was in the country. My 
grandfather advised my father to go to America, 'an let me see the 
man,' said he, 'that'll offer to take your farm. You were robbed, and 
no man but a robber will offer for your land. This trouble about the 
bailiff will blow over, and you can come home again. And I'll be a 
father and mother to little Bessy,' says he, when he saw my father 
taking me in his arms and kissing me. And he kept his word," she 
added, wiping the tears from her eyes.
	"And did you never hear from your father after?"
	"Never," replied Bessy, "except once a man from the 
colliery mentioned in a letter that he saw him out west, and that he 
had carpets on his floors. But though we made every inquiry, we 
could get no tidings of him."
	"And do you wish very much to see him?"
	"'Tis the strongest wish of my heart," she replied. "Only 
that I could not leave my poor old grandfather, I'd go in search of 
my father. That was another motive that induced me to become a 
dressmaker; for I said to myself I'd get employment in the different 
towns in America, and could travel the whole country."
	"Don't do anything hastily," said Mary. "While you would 
be looking for him, he might come back to look for you."
	"That's true," returned Bessy. "But I'd keep up a 
correspondence with Judy Brophy, or some one. I don't think I can 
ever have an easy mind till I am sure of what happened to him, at 
any rate. I am always thinking he is poor and neglected, and was 
ashamed to write to us."
	She looked again towards the trees; but her thoughts 
recurred to the dragoon, and her brow flushed as she recollected 
that she had replied to one or two of his letters. He might, she 
thought, accuse her of faithlessness; and her conscience told her 
the charge would not be altogether without foundation.
	"I will request of him not to come again," she said to 
herself; "and if he be a man of spirit he will respect my wishes."
	"Surely this is Apollo in the garden with Adonis," Grace 
exclaimed. "I wonder where are they going? I thought he was to be 
away on business all day -- what do you think, Mary?"
	"If that is not his fetch, it seems he has come back," replied 
Mary. "But as to where they are going, I wonder you should think 
it necessary to ask."
	"Oh, yes," returned Grace with a toss of her head, "the 
attraction in that quarter must be very strong indeed. But they 
might at least have the politeness to inquire whether we would go."
	Mr. Lowe turned back before he and the doctor had reached 
the stile, and Grace threw open the window.
	"Going to pay your devoirs to the beauty of Castleview?" 
she exclaimed.
	"Yes, the doctor is going to call at Mr. Hanly's; and perhaps 
you and Miss Kearney would come out for a walk as the day is so 
fine?"
	"She is such a model of industry, I don't think you can 
induce her to go out -- but let her answer for herself."
	After a little hesitation Mary came to the window, saying, 
"Well, if you have patience to wait for a few minutes we will go."
	Mr. Lowe bowed, and went to tell the doctor, who was 
standing with folded arms near the laurels, and looking intensely 
sentimental.
	"Well, now," said Grace, as she went on arranging her hair 
-- on observing Bessy Morris move her chair so that she could see 
the two young men in the garden -- "which of those two gallant 
gay Lotharios do you think the best-looking?"
	"I think Mr. Richard has the advantage," Bessy answered.
	"He is particularly well got up just now," returned Grace, 
glancing over her shoulder through the window, "and does really 
look handsome."
	"'Twas always given up to him, Miss," rejoined Bessy, "to 
be the handsomest young man in the parish. 'Tis often I heard it 
said that he was the handsomest boy, and Miss Mary the 
handsomest girl going into the chapel of Kilthubber. Though some 
would give Miss Hanly the palm."
	"Why, Mary, you are quite famous! And do they never talk 
of those who go to church?"
	"Oh, yes, Miss. Miss Isabella Lloyd has a strong party, who 
says she is by odds a finer girl than either of them. I'm told she is 
to be married to Captain French -- and a fine couple they'll be. He's 
to throw the sledge with Mat Donovan next Sunday. But, talking of 
handsome men," continued Bessy, while her eyes sparkled with 
admiration, "there is a handsomer man to my mind than any of 
'em."
	Mary ran to the window with quite an excited look. Was 
there some one who, to her mind, was a handsomer man than her 
remarkably handsome brother? She smiled at what she mentally 
called her foolishness, and the flush faded from her cheek. But her 
eyes sparkled, too, when she saw the person to whom Bessy 
alluded.
	"Why," exclaimed Grace in astonishment, "'tis Fionn 
Macool
	"Who is that, Miss?" Bessy asked.
	"Oh, that's what I call him," she replied, pointing to Hugh, 
who had just come into the garden.
	"You couldn't call him a grander name," returned Bessy. 
"He was the great chief of the Fenians long ago. The top of 
Slievenamon is called Shee-Feen after him. My grand father would 
keep telling you stories about him for a month."
	What way does he tell the story of the Beauty Race? Is it 
that he had all the beautiful women in Ireland assembled in the 
Valley of Compsey, to run a race to the top of the mountain, and 
the first up would be his wife?"
	"Yes, that was the way, Miss," replied Bessy.
	"The longest-legged or the longest-winded was to have 
him. Do you call him a hero? The man was a savage, and the poor 
girls that came to grief in the race were most fortunate."
	"Yes, Miss, but several great kings wanted him to marry 
their daughters, and it was all a plan to keep them from falling out 
with him. And there was one little girl he would rather have than 
the whole box-and-dice of them. So he told her to go fair and easy 
round by the Clodagh, and take her time, and not run with the rest 
at all. They all took to pulling and dragging one another the minute 
they started, and Fionn had Grauna in his arms on the top of Shee-
Feen before one of them was half-way up the first hill."
	"The moral of which is," said Grace, as she swung her 
pretty little cloak over her shoulders, "in running for a husband, 
'take your time,' and 'go fair and easy,' and don't take to 'pulling 
and dragging' your rivals and get yourself pulled and dragged in 
return, besides losing the prize into the bargain. What's that you 
called the 'little girl he'd rather have than any of them?'"
	"She was called the Fair-haired Grauna -- she was a 
namesake of your own -- for Grauna is the Irish of Grace."
	"Oh, I am quite proud to be the namesake of a lady so 
distinguished. And who knows but it may be an omen, and I may, 
like her, be clasped in a warrior's arms. Oh, those brave days of 
old, when one might win the love of some noble knight sans peur 
et sans reproche. When I think of it I am sick of your Apollos and 
your Adonises. In fact Bessy, I could almost envy you your 
'sergeant in the army.'"
	"Whether you joke or no, Miss," replied Bessy, laughing, 
"'twas something like that was in my mind when I met him first."
	"I wonder at you, who are such a patriot, Grace," said 
Mary, "to talk in that way."
	"Oh, I was only thinking of the soldier in the abstract," 
replied Grace, with a frown. "And will not Mr. Lowe be an English 
soldier one of these days?"
	"So I understand," returned Mary. "And how would you 
like," she added, turning to Bessy, "to have your husband with 
those soldiers who passed this way the other day to shoot down the 
poor people whose houses were going to be levelled if they offered 
any resistance to the crowbar brigade?"
	"That's true," Bessy answered thoughtfully. "And I thought, 
too, how my grandfather was flogged in '98."
	"But, Bessy," said Grace, as she drew on her gloves near 
the window, "how can you say such a black-looking fellow as that 
is handsome? I always set him down as the ugliest fellow I ever 
saw. And though I have modified that opinion somewhat latterly -- 
particularly since I saw Mr. Beresford Pender -- still it does make 
me wonder to hear him called a handsome man. Where, in the 
name of goodness, is the beauty?"
	"Well, I don't know, Miss," she answered, laying down her 
work and looking earnestly at Hugh Kearney, "but see how strong, 
and manly, and honest, he looks. If a lion was rushing to devour 
you, or a ship sinking under you, wouldn't you feel safe if his arm 
was around you?"
	"There is really something in what she says," Grace 
observed seriously. "If a lion leaped over that hedge and were 
about seizing you, Fionn would have him by the throat instantly. 
Apollo, too, would stand his ground in his cool way. But I strongly 
suspect Adonis would cut and run. Not out of cowardice exactly, 
but he always thinks first of his precious self, and would only 
remember poor me when I was already gobbled up."
	"Are ye going to keep us waiting all day?" the subject of 
this not very flattering criticism called out.
	"He is not inclined to go 'fair and easy,'" Grace observed. 
"Are you ready, Mary?"
	"I'll be ready in a moment. I merely have to direct this letter 
to Father Carroll."
	"By the way," returned Grace, "you did not show me that 
note Barney threw up to you the other evening. It has just occurred 
to me that Barney put Bessy's letter in his hat, too, and forgot it; 
and as hers was a love-letter, perhaps so was yours." -- "That's all 
nonsense," said Mary.
	"Did you ever see my brother Edmund, Bessy," Grace 
continued, "and what did you think of him?"
	"he's a fine pleasant fellow, Miss," returned Bessy. "He 
used to be fishing with Mr. Hugh at the river, and they sometimes 
called in to have a chat with my grandfather."
	"I thought he would come home at Christmas," said Grace, 
"but something turned up to prevent him. I wrote to him to say that 
he has no business here any more." And she nodded her head 
towards Mary, and then looked out at Mr. Lowe, in a way that 
made both Mary and Bessy Morris laugh.
	"And did you tell him that Anne sent her love to him?"
	"Yes, but that's nothing. I am quite sure Anne will end her 
days in a convent."
	"I thought Edmund would be sure to win that prize for 
which so many are contending."
	"You mean Minnie Delany? No, it will never come to 
anything. He has something in his head that I cannot make out. I 
heard Father Carroll and Arthur O'Connor jesting about it. Edmund 
says that he and Arthur always fell in love with the same lady by 
some fatality; and only that Arthur is to be a priest they would be 
sure to run foul of each other. Only think of a duel between two 
such bosom friends, about some beauty that didn't care a pin about 
either of them."
	"Come away," exclaimed Mary, "unless you want to have 
Richard vowing vengeance against us." And she ran so 
precipitately out of the room, that Grace shook her head and knit 
her brows, as if she thought that between her brother and Arthur 
O'Connor and Mary Kearney there was most certainly a mystery, 
which, as yet, she could make nothing of. She followed Mary to 
the garden, leaving Bessy Morris in the little room alone.



CHAPTER XLI.

MISS KATHLEEN HANLY THINKS IT ADVISABLE TO BE 
"DOING SOMETHING."

	ASK Hugh to come." And Mary's somewhat anxious look 
brightened as she saw Hugh submitting to be led on with them by 
Grace, who seemed to take his compliance as a matter of course. 
Mary was a little afraid of being left alone with Mr. Lowe. His 
admiration had risen to such a height that it was really no vanity in 
her to consider a downright declaration of love within the bounds 
of possibility. Her good sense enabled her to see the folly of such a 
proceeding, and her good nature -- to say nothing of the real liking 
she had for him -- made her shrink from wounding his feelings in 
any way. She said to herself that he would soon forget her in the 
bustle and excitement of the gay world. And if he passed on with 
nothing more definite than a bow and a smile -- or she might have 
no great objection to a sigh -- it would be better for both. So that 
Hugh's docility was a great relief to her, and she talked cheerfully, 
and even gaily, as they passed on through the hamlet, stopping 
occasionally to say a kind or pleasant word to the women and 
children, who always greeted her with smiles and sometimes with 
blessings. Nelly Donovan was examining one of her beehives, 
which had barely escaped being overturned by Kit Cummins's cat 
in endeavouring to escape from its deadly enemy, "Friskey Lahy" 
(in Knocknagow the patronymic of the owner was invariably 
bestowed upon his dog) -- and Nelly became so eloquent in 
detailing the injuries and vexations brought upon her by Kit 
Cummins's cat, that Mr. Lowe forgot his own woes, and stopped to 
listen to Nelly Donovan's harangue with a more cheerful 
expression of countenance than he had been seen to wear for 
several days before. Then old Mrs. Donovan appeared, smoothing 
her white hair over her temples, after removing her spectacles, and 
had a word to say in private to Miss Kearney; so that a quarter of 
an hour was lost before the party came up with the doctor, who 
was waiting at the corner of the clipped hedge, and gazing 
pensively towards the old castle. Catching a glimpse of the 
redoubtable Kit Cummins herself, with arms akimbo inside the 
threshold of her own door, evidently prepared with a defence of 
her persecuted cat, the doctor thought at this rate they'd never 
reach the house on the hill; and, to avoid further interruptions, he 
proposed to turn in by the short-cut through Tom Hogan's farm. 
Whereupon Kit Cummins thrust her hair under her cap, and tried to 
bottle up her wrath for a more favourable opportunity; but finding 
the effort too much for her, she relieved her feelings by a long and 
well-sustained invective upon her next-door neighbour and all 
belonging to her. And the never-varying response on such 
occasions -- " Gir-r-r-r-r out, you bla'guard!" fell with such 
piercing distinctness upon Mr. Lowe's ear, that he stood still in the 
middle of Tom Hogan's field, and gazed around in amazement -- 
though the partition between Kit Cummins and her next-door 
neighbour was so thin that the purring of the vagabond cat could 
easily be heard through it.
	Attorney Hanly laid down the newspaper and left the room 
so abruptly that his wife stared after him for a minute, and 
commenced rubbing her eyebrow. Mrs. Hanly had dropped an 
occasional hint during the morning, intended to lead up gradually 
and naturally to a certain subject with which her mind was 
occupied. But the abrupt and unexpected exit of Mr. Hanly seemed 
to have hopelessly disarranged her plans. Looking through the 
window she saw Mr. Isaac Pender shambling up the avenue; and 
the attorney soon appeared wrapped in his great-coat, and met the 
old agent half-way between the gate and the house.
	"Run, Lory!" exclaimed Mrs. Hanly, as if she saw there 
was but one chance left her, "and tell him I want some money."
	Lory started off without his cap, and quite terrified old 
Isaac by simply pronouncing the word "money" and holding out 
his hand. It seemed to have a stand-and-deliver effect upon Lory's 
father too; for he at once thrust his hands into his trousers pockets, 
and then into his waistcoat pockets, and then into the pockets of his 
great-coat. The result appeared in the shape of two or three pound 
notes, two or three shillings in silver, and two or three pence in 
copper. Rolling all these into one bundle, Mr. Hanly thrust them 
into his son's hand, who ran back to the house rejoicing.
	"Well, it is better than nothing," said Mrs. Hanly, after 
counting the notes.
	"But I wonder why did he mind giving me the odd 
coppers?" Lory asked, dropping them into his pocket, and 
resolving to have a game of pitch-and-toss with Barney Brodherick 
and Jack Delany's apprentice, the first convenient opportunity.
	"Ah, you don't know all the plans he has," observed his 
mother. "Don't you see I am now to suppose that he has given me 
all the money he has, and, left himself penniless?"
	Lory uttered that startling two-fold sound he intended for a 
laugh, and evidently looked upon his father as a clever fellow. "I 
may as well keep this for myself," he remarked, looking at the 
silver in his open hand.
	Scarcely had he uttered the words, when his hand was 
struck, and the money sent rolling about the floor.
	"You must not keep it, sir. I don't know what you want of 
money. Come here and hold him, Kathleen."
	There was a tremendous struggle between Rose and Lory 
for the money; but Kathleen, who was reclining with her lap-dog 
on the sofa, contented herself with holding the little animal fast, 
and trying to stop its barking. Mrs. Hanly quietly picked up one 
shilling which rolled against her foot. Rose seized another. But in 
spite of all she could do, Lory caught hold of the third and thrust it 
into his pocket. In vain did Rose exert herself, till she seemed in 
danger of bursting a blood-vessel, to pull Lory's hand out of his 
pocket. And finding the hand and arm quite immovable, she 
paused to parley and take breath.
	"Now, what do you want that money for?" Rose asked, as 
she twisted up her hair.
	"For the novelty of it," added Lory, jingling the coppers, 
which were all safe in the other pocket.
	"No, sir; it is not for the novelty of it. I have found you out. 
Miss Lloyd, who hates you, cause she thinks 'tis purposely to 
frighten her you talk loud, told me that she saw you call for three 
pints of beer at Bourke's; and that you drank one yourself, and 
gave one to Joe Russel and. another to Brummagem; and that you 
talked and swaggered in a most awful manner. She could not 
understand half what ye said; but it was plain to her ye were 
steeped to the lips in iniquity, she said."
	"And where was she?" Lory asked.
	"She went in through the yard gate when she saw you in the 
shop, and remained behind the door while ye were there."
	"I'm sorry I didn't know she was there," returned Lory; "I'd 
put Brummagem up to kiss her, and pretend he thought it was 
Kitty, the servant girl."
	"O mercy!" exclaimed Rose. "What am I to do with him?"
	"Who is this person you call 'Brummagem'?" her mother 
inquired.
	"That horrid fellow with the black face," Rose answered. 
"They call him 'Lovely Delany,' too. I suppose because he is such a 
monster of ugliness."
	"Don't mind her," said Lory. "He's Jack Delany's nephew. 
His face is black because he's a blacksmith; and they call him 
"Brummagem," because he was born in Birmingham, in England. I 
suppose they call him 'Lovely' on the same principle that you are 
called 'Rose,'" said Lory, with a laugh that would have been the 
death of his enemy, Miss Lloyd, if she were within reach of it.
	"Don't be impertinent, sir," retorted Rose. "And didn't I see 
you playing pitch-and-toss at the end of the grove with this person 
and Joe Russel, and your other interesting friend, Barney 
Brodherick alias Wattletoes,"
	"I suppose it was he gave poor Joe the black eye," Mrs. 
Hanly observed
	"Oh, no," said Rose, "that happened the last day he drove 
us into town. Grace Kiely can tell you all about it."
	"The Kearneys are coming up through the fields," Lory 
observed -- reminded of the fact by his sister's last remark.
	"How do you know?" Rose asked.
	"Because I'm after seeing them," returned Lory.
	"I suppose Richard is with them?" Kathleen inquired with a 
yawn.
	"Yes, he was on before the rest. He was looking back at 
them, or I would have spoken to him."
	Is Grace with them?"
	"She and Hugh were talking to Tom Hogan, who is making 
drains in the field next the grove."
	"Kathleen!" exclaimed Mrs. Hanly, bustling about the room 
to put everything in its proper place, "throw away that wretched 
little dog, and be doing something."
	Kathleen started up, and flung her favourite from her --  
whose doleful whine was suddenly changed into a yelp, Lory 
having accelerated its exit with the toe of his heavy boot, as he 
hurried out to meet the visitors. Kathleen looked about her, at a 
loss as to the "something " she ought to "be doing." She had a 
vague idea that her sleeves should be tucked up above her elbows; 
but as there was not a moment to be lost, she snatched a bunch of 
keys from the table and ran up stairs; with a view to coming down 
when called, with the keys at her girdle, and looking greatly 
surprised on finding her friends in the parlour.
	The doctor's devotion was always looked upon by Mrs. 
Hanly as a means to an end; and we very much fear the fair 
Kathleen herself had come round to that way of thinking also. A 
lecture from her father -- illustrated by divers examples within his 
own personal knowledge, of what the worthy attorney called 
"genteel beggary " -- made a deep impression upon his charming 
daughter. And a question casually put by her mother, apropos of 
Dr. Richard Kearney, to the effect, "was it in his pocket he'd put 
her," helped also to give Kathleen's thoughts a practical turn. So 
that she only yawned and went on pulling her dog's ears as she 
asked "was Richard with them." But the moment she heard that 
Hugh was coming, Kathleen started up to "be doing something."
	But it must not by any means be inferred that Hugh 
Kearney bad won the heart of the beauty of Castleview; except in a 
general way. She had come to connect the very opposite of that 
dreaded "genteel beggary" with the idea of an extensive farmer, 
and lost no opportunity of recommending herself to that class of 
wooers. She had on one occasion all but made sure of a wealthy 
young farmer from the county Limerick, who had purchased some 
cattle from the attorney, and spent the evening at Castleview. The 
knowledge she displayed of everything connected with farming -- 
and particularly the wisdom of her views as to the making of butter 
-- made such an impression upon the gentleman from Limerick, 
that, over and over again (as he afterwards confessed), he found 
himself repeating the words, "This is the girl for me." And as 
Kathleen talked and talked in her bewitching way, the only 
question that troubled the young man's mind was, whether he 
would then and there ask the attorney off-hand to give him his 
treasure of a daughter, or put it off to the first Wednesday in the 
ensuing month, which was the fair-day of Kilthubber. But in the 
very moment of her triumph, Kathleen asked, with a look of the 
profoundest wisdom -- "How many hundreds of butter do you put 
in a firkin in your part of the country?"
	The young man stared; but Kathleen repeated her question 
with a look of self-satisfied experience that absolutely appalled 
him. In vain her mother made signs to signify that she had 
blundered; in vain her father's sarcastic laugh; Kathleen would 
know how many hundred-weight of butter went to a firkin in his 
part of the country. And she smacked her lips and sighed, and 
looked as if she had thought of nothing but filling firkins for the 
best part of her life, as she paused for a reply. To her astonishment, 
however, the young county Limerick farmer suddenly rose and 
took his leave; looking as if he found himself in a place where his 
pockets might be picked if he delayed another instant.
	"O Lord!" exclaimed the young farmer, looking back at the 
house on the hill when he had gone some distance from it -- as if to 
assure himself that he was safe -- " O Lord, there's no depending 
on any of them. I was d--d near being taken in. I wonder did she 
ever see a firkin in her life? 'How many HUNDRED of butter do 
you put in a firkin?' 'Tis my opinion she don't know a firkin from a 
herring-stand. Oh, and the way she talked! I thought she was the 
best manager in Munster. The fact is," he added, as if he had quite 
made up his mind upon the point, "they're not to be depended on."
	For nearly a year after, the young county Limerick farmer 
lived in perpetual dread of being "taken in" -- the sight of a 
delicate white hand affecting him like a snake in the grass --  and 
to put an end to his misery, by effectually guarding against the 
apprehended danger, one fine morning married his dairy-maid; the 
dairy-maid, in the innocence of her heart, attributing her good 
fortune to her blooming cheeks and a pair of soft brown eyes -- 
never dreaming that she owed it all to Miss Kathleen Hanly's 
Brobdignagian ideas of firkins of butter.
	And now Kathleen tripped down stairs with the keys at her 
girdle, and, stopping in the middle of her song, looked so surprised 
to find that Rose was not all alone. She recovered herself 
sufficiently to welcome her visitors in the prescribed fashion. But 
as she looked around, and caught something like a malicious smile 
in Rose's eyes, Kathleen bit her lip, and immediately became 
intensely amiable.
	The keys were a mistake; for Hugh did not come in at all. 
The lap-dog on the sofa would have done much better under the 
circumstances.
	But that unhappy little lap-dog! How dearly he paid for 
these little mistakes and disappointments! The Brobdignagian 
firkin had well-nigh proved the death of him. For when his 
mistress flung herself on the sofa, after being informed that a firkin 
was never known to contain even one hundred of butter, she 
squeezed the poor creature's windpipe till its eyes seemed starting 
out of its head. And -- as if the application of Lory's "blucher" 
were not enough punishment for one day -- the fair Kathleen, on 
resuming her place on the sofa after seeing her visitors part of the 
way home, commenced knocking the persecuted little animal upon 
his skull with the bunch of keys; as if she were determined to 
practically test the truth of the proverb, "There's many a way of 
killing a dog besides choking him with butter."



CHAPTER XLII.

A HAUNTED FARM.

	WHEN Attorney Hanly had delivered up the contents of all 
his pockets to his son, and left himself penniless, he fixed his eyes 
on Mr. Isaac Pender, who was immediately assailed by the midges, 
and rubbed his face all over, as if those imaginary tormentors 
threatened to set him out of his wits. Still Attorney Hanly kept his 
eye upon him, and Mr. Pender turned upon his heel for relief, and 
looked towards the three poplars on the hill.
	"A little outlay," he said, "would make that farm of 
Beresford's a nice place. Look at Maurice Kearney's farm a little 
below it, and draining would make the other place superior to it, 
for it is better situated. I think," he added, venturing to look at the 
attorney, "I think Beresford would give it up."
	"'Twouldn't suit me at all," replied Mr. Hanly.
	"If the presentment for the new road passes," Mr. Pender 
ventured to observe, "'twill be as convenient to the market as your 
own house. And I know we could manage a satisfactory lease."
	"I wouldn't take a present of it," said Mr. Hanly.
	"So I thought. So I said. I knew you wouldn't care for it," 
rejoined Mr. Pender, as if he quite approved of his friend's view on 
the subject, or, at all events, fully appreciated his motives for not 
wishing to have anything to do with the farm. "I know you only 
want some land adjoining this place. And 'tis a pity your farm is 
not larger, when you have such a good house and offices built on 
it. I know you only want what will make the farm suitable for such 
a house and offices."
	To some extent Mr. Isaac Pender was right. It was land 
adjoining his own that Attorney Hanly was most anxious to get. 
But a farm even some distance from Castleview would have suited 
him very well. And when Mr. Pender first spoke of "that farm of 
Beresford's," Mr. Hanly looked up towards the poplar trees as if 
they possessed considerable attraction for him; quite as much, one 
would have supposed from the expression of his face, as the same 
three trees seemed to possess for Mat Donovan. And, curiously 
enough, Attorney Hanly, standing in the middle of his own lawn, 
and gazing at the poplar trees, did precisely what Mat Donovan 
had done, after gazing at them from the middle of Maurice 
Kearney's wheat field an hour or two before. That is, Attorney 
Hanly turned quickly round and fixed his eyes on a cluster of 
whitethorn trees near the foot of another hill behind Maurice 
Kearney's fort. And it was after looking in this direction that 
Attorney Hanly said abruptly he would not "take a present of it," 
meaning the farm where Bessy Morris was born -- as she told 
Grace and Mary -- and which looked so desolate in the eyes of 
Barney Brodherick as he stood on the double-ditch trying to catch 
a sight of Mr. Beresford Pender's servant, to send him to take 
charge of the hook-nosed steed. It was a rather remarkable 
coincidence that Mat Donovan and Bessy Morris and Attorney 
Hanly were all looking towards the three poplar trees at the same 
time.
	"Who knows?" said Mat Donovan, as he went on castle-
building; "greater wonders come to pass every day." And then Mat 
turned round and looked towards the whitethorns at the foot of the 
bill beyond the pit.
	"Something tells me that I will live there yet," said Bessy 
Morris, as she stood upon the rustic seat in the little garden under 
Mary Kearney's window, in order to have a better view of the 
poplar trees over the hedge. And then she, too, turned round and 
looked towards the whitethorns.
	"Yes, it would do very well," thought Attorney Hanly, as 
he looked up at the three trees; "but -- I would not take a present of 
it!' he added aloud, as he turned round and looked towards the 
cluster of whitethorns at the foot of the hill.
	Since the day Dick Morris left the bailiff for dead who had 
flung his fair, delicate young wife from the door, and made his 
escape, the place had been left without a tenant. Many and many a 
greedy eye was turned to the three tall trees; but no one ventured to 
send in a proposal for the farm. Mr. Beresford Pender undertook to 
manage it for the landlord to the best advantage by taking in 
grazing stock and meadowing so much of the land as was fit for it; 
and so long had this state of things continued, that his worthy 
father always spoke of the farm as "that place of Beresford's." Yet 
even Beresford would not have ventured to formally become the 
tenant. He was even occasionally heard to declare that his keeping 
the place was a disagreeable necessity, and that nothing would 
please him better than to hand it over to any one who would be 
acceptable to the landlord. The fact was, that lonesome farm, with 
no living thing visible upon it that bright winter day but two 
carrion crows in the midst of a sheet of water, and a magpie upon 
the roof of the tumble-down barn, was haunted. Not by the ghost of 
Black Humphrey, whose fate was commemorated by the cairn near 
the sand-pit, but by an old lame man, who usually kept his lips 
closed very hard, and whose grey eye gleamed in a piercing sort of 
way that made some people feel uneasy as he stumped about the 
place at regular intervals, marking the ravages that time was 
making in it, and seeming to derive particular satisfaction from the 
grass growing through the floors of the out-offices. Old Phil 
Morris was never accompanied by his granddaughter on these 
occasions, though she often asked to be let go with him. "No," he 
would say in reply to her request, "you will never go till you can 
call it your own home again." And this is bow Dick Morris's farm 
was haunted, and remained tenantless in consequence. This is why 
Attorney Hanly would not "take a present of it."
	"I'm going to tell Tom Hogan," said Mr. Isaac Pender, "that 
his rent is raised."
	"Is Tom Hogan's rent raised?" Attorney Hanly asked, while 
his eyes almost flashed with pleasure and surprise.
	"Only a trifle; only a trifle," replied the agent, sorrowfully. 
" 'Tis not easy to get Sir Garrett to understand these things. Sir 
Thomas was a great loss to the country. He understood the proper 
system; but Sir Garrett knows no more about the management of a 
property than a child. He spent nearly all his life abroad. And his 
nephew tells me he's going again immediately. Why, I believe this 
is Mr. Lowe coming across the field with those ladies," Mr. Pender 
added in surprise. "I thought he was with Beresford. But I suppose 
he didn't mind seeing many of the tenants. Mr. Lowe is a nice 
young fellow -- a very nice young fellow; and doesn't want to 
meddle in the affairs of the tenants at all. His mother wrote to 
Beresford to have an eye to him and keep him out of harm's way. 
She understands the state of the country much better than Sir 
Garrett. And still she thinks she ought to get her rent-charge 
without any delay. Her eldest son is in India, and he ought to be 
able to send his mother something. His pay is high, and he ought to 
be able to do something for his mother. She's always writing for 
money."
	The doctor, who thought Mr. Hanly was away from home, 
looked considerably put out on discovering his mistake. In fact, the 
doctor was never able to reason himself out of a very unreasonable 
and absurd feeling of awe of Miss Kathleen's papa. The attorney 
had a habit of accosting him with, "Well, lad?" whenever he 
happened to encounter hint about the house; and no amount of 
pulling his moustache and looking down at his long legs, could 
altogether satisfy the doctor that he was a middle-sized boy on 
those occasions. He felt so disgustingly young in the attorney's 
presence, that he made it a point to avoid him as much as possible. 
A short time before he was strolling up through the same field, 
when the attorney called out from the grove at the opposite side -- 
"Well, lad; the girls are out." Whereupon the doctor replied, 
pointing to the castle -- "This is a very interesting old ruin up here. 
And the view from the top is very good." "Ay, ay, very interesting 
old ruin!" replied the attorney; and his dry laugh made several 
workmen about the place grin from ear to ear, and Dr. Richard 
Kearney redden up to the eyes. And now the doctor reddened 
again, lest Kathleen's papa should treat him as a small boy before 
his friends. It was a slight relief to him that Grace was so far 
behind, as he dreaded her more than any of them. He walked back 
under the pretence of helping her over the fence, but in reality to 
keep out of Mr. Hanly's reach as long as possible, and until Mr. 
Lowe and Mary could have engaged his attention. Grace was 
highly gratified on seeing him ready to hand her over the fence, 
and immediately forgot Hugh's existence, though he had not 
allowed as much as a bramble to touch her all the way, while the 
doctor thought of nothing but his own boots and Kathleen Hanly, 
Hugh was taking her hand to help her up when she raised her eyes 
and saw the doctor. She had no notion that it was care for his 
dignity, and sheer terror of finding himself suddenly 
metamorphosed into a schoolboy, that drove the doctor back to her. 
And as she tripped on gaily by his side to over take Mary and Mr. 
Lowe, Hugh thought her a very pleasant sight to look at, even 
though she had deserted him so unceremoniously.
	"Oh!" Grace exclaimed, looking back with surprise, "what 
has become of Hugh?" And she looked so sad for a moment, that 
Mary felt alarmed, imagining that some accident might have 
happened to him. But seeing him emerge from a clump of trees and 
go towards a stile which she knew led to the lower part of their 
own farm, Mary laughed at her own fears, and asked Grace why 
she looked so sad.
	"Well, then," Grace replied, "I fear I may have offended 
Hugh."
	"Offended Hugh! How could that be?"
	Grace told what had just occurred, and Mary laughed so 
heartily that the doctor turned sharply round, under the impression 
that she was laughing at himself.
	"What are you laughing at?" he asked.
	"Oh, I can't help it. This young lady is so full of humility. 
She attaches no importance to herself at all! Ah! poor Hugh! I have 
no doubt he is quite miserable!"
	"Oh, you may look at it in that light if you choose. But I 
feel that I have been ungrateful, and must really do something to 
make it up with him."
	The doctor was in the act of snapping his fingers, and in 
fact showed some symptoms of cutting a caper, when his sister's 
laugh made him turn round under the impression that he himself 
was the occasion of it. The attorney and the agent were walking 
away by a footpath that led to the road, apparently as if they had 
not seen him or his friends. And this was such a decided piece of 
good luck in the doctor's eyes, that he really might in the joy of the 
moment have executed one of "Callaghan's steps," a La Barney 
Brodherick, had not Mary's laugh checked him.
	"That is Mr. Hanly walking with the agent," said Mary. 
"They seem to be going to Tom Hogan's."
	"Fair weather after them," returned Grace. "I'm glad they 
did not see us."
	"If all the tenants were like Tom Hogan," the agent 
remarked, "'twould be a nice property. 'Tis a pity his farm is so 
small. But when these three other farms will be added to it, 'twill 
be easy to make a nice place of it."
	"Two thousand pounds," returned the attorney, "wouldn't 
make the rest of it like that." And he pointed to what really looked 
like "a piece of the Golden Vale dropped among the rushes and 
yellow clay all around," to quote Mat Donovan again.
	"That's true; that's true," old Isaac muttered. "But if they 
did like Tom Hogan," he added, half reproachfully, half 
sorrowfully, "they wouldn't feel it. There is Tom at the drains."
	Tom Hogan got that trembling in his hands when he saw 
the agent and his neighbour, Attorney Hanly, coming towards him, 
to such an extent that the spade dropped from them; and not caring 
that this should be observed, he looked about him for some excuse 
for having left off his work. Seeing a solitary crow pitch in the 
middle of his wheat-field -- which looked as if a veil of green 
gauze were flung over the red-brown ridges -- and fearing that the 
marauder would commence pulling up the young blades for the 
sake of the grains of wheat at the roots, he got out of the drain and 
hurried away.
	"One would think he was afraid of us," said the attorney. 
"No, no," returned Mr. Pender. "He knows nothing, unless Darby 
told him about this trifling rise in his rent, and that would not 
frighten him. He's only going into the house for something he 
wants."
	"There was a very suspicious-looking fellow," Mr. Hanly 
observed, "lying in the grove there early this morning, and if I'm 
not much mistaken 'twas a pistol he thrust into his breast when he 
saw me coming towards him."
	"What sort of looking fellow was he?" the agent asked, 
rubbing his face nervously.
	"A tall, wild-looking fellow, with his clothes all in rags."
	"'Twas that unfortunate man, Mick Brien," returned the 
agent. "I'm sorry now we ever held out any hopes to him. Darby 
tells me they don't like at all the way he is going on He got straw 
from Maurice Kearney to-day to thatch his cabin, though they told 
him 'twas to be thrown down."
	"Well, to come to business," said the attorney; "you're sure 
there'll be no difficulty in getting a renewal of my lease, without 
any increase of rent?"
	"Let us walk this way," the agent suggested. "I think I saw 
some one moving behind those trees in the corner. Yes, I'm almost 
sure we can manage the lease of your own place. But what hurry 
are you in? If Maurice Kearney knew just now you were getting a 
renewal, there's no knowing what he might do."
	"I think the man has a right to a renewal," said Mr. Hanly -- 
who possibly was thinking of settling one of his blooming 
daughters comfortably.
	"Well, well," muttered old Isaac, taken quite aback, "just let 
us walk this way."
	"'Tis a pity Tom Hogan is so unreasonable. He can't be got 
to see that his farm is too small, and that he ought to give up 
peaceable possession like the Ryans and Tom Donnelly. And his 
son," added the agent, rubbing his face, and looking around, as if 
he feared some one was about pouncing upon him to tear him to 
pieces -- "his son is a wild young fellow."
	"Is it of a beardless boy you are afraid?" the attorney asked 
contemptuously.
	There was something in old Phil Morris's grey eye that 
struck terror to the heart of Attorney Hanly. But he would have 
entered into possession of Tom Hogan's farm without the slightest 
misgiving.
	"Afraid of a beardless boy!" he muttered. "Bah!"



CHAPTER XLIII.

TOM HOGAN BOASTS THAT HE NEVER FIRED A SHOT.

	MR. ISAAC PENDER and Attorney Hanly got over the 
stile and walked towards the place that Tom Hogan had just left. 
They looked into the deep drains as they went on, and by the time 
they got to the end of the field Tom Hogan had gone into his own 
house.
	Attorney Hanly looked at his watch, and seeing that the 
mail car would not pass the cross for some time, he thought of 
returning home, but changed his mind on recollecting that if he did 
it would be necessary to show some civility to the visitors from 
whom he had just escaped. So he walked with Mr. Isaac Pender up 
and down by Tom Hogan's quickset hedge, talking about business.
	"What is that?" the agent asked, staring and looking 
terrified.
	"It was not a shot," replied the attorney. "The report was 
not sharp enough for a shot from a gun or pistol. Yet it seemed to 
be an explosion of some kind. I'll get up on the ditch and see."
	"Better not," replied the agent, catching hold of him. "Keep 
quiet, and don't let us be seen."
	"Why, what is it you are afraid of?" the attorney asked. 
"Your life must be anything but pleasant if every sound half 
frightens it out of you at this rate. Let us go on to the stile."
	They walked by the quickset hedge till they reached the 
stile that led into the next field. What we have called the quickset 
hedge was not merely a hedge planted on the ground. There was a 
tolerably high embankment of earth -- a "ditch" in fact -- and on 
the top of this the hedge. There were two or three long stone slabs 
fixed in the "ditch" as steps, and some two feet of wicker-work 
woven between stakes on the top. Mr. Isaac Pender had one hand 
on the wicker-work and a foot on each of the two stone slabs, when 
he suddenly uttered a cry and fell back into the arms of the 
attorney. The attorney looked up, and he, too, was so startled, that 
he let old Isaac fall to the ground; and, retreating a step backwards, 
Attorney Hanly himself fell upon his back into one of Torn 
Hogan's newly-made drains. The old agent had fallen upon his 
back too, but raising himself upon his hands he looked up at the 
stile, while every feature gave evidence of the most intense terror.
	The attorney had disappeared altogether in the drain, and 
seemed in no hurry to get out of it.
	It was only Tom Hogan, who had suddenly popped his 
head over the stile. But his face was blackened; and a braver man 
than Mr. Isaac Pender might well have been startled by such an 
apparition.
	Attorney Hanly got upon his hands and knees in the drain, 
and waited for the shot. He thought Tom Hogan must have 
overheard them plotting his ruin, and determined to wreak instant 
vengeance upon the plotters; and the thought was a natural one 
enough under the circumstances.
	Mr. Hanly was not by any means a coward. He would not 
have thrown himself designedly into the drain at the sight of Tom 
Hogan's blackened face. But, having fallen accidentally into it, he 
thought it wise to turn the accident to advantage. He was safe 
under cover; and resolved to keep quiet till Tom Hogan's gun or 
blunderbuss had exploded and riddled Mr. Isaac Pender. Then Mr. 
Hanly would start to his feet and run or fight for his life. He had no 
notion of staying where he was till Tom Hogan had guillotined him 
with his spade, perhaps.
	But why does he not fire?
	The attorney's heart ceased to beat as he waited for the 
shot. Seconds seemed hours as he crouched there in the damp, 
narrow drain, which was so like a grave! He felt his flesh creep as, 
on turning his head to listen, his cheek touched the cold clay. And 
now the terrible thought occurred to him that the agent had been 
slain, not with a gun, but with a spade or pick-axe, and that the 
weapon, hot and bloody, was in the very act of crashing through 
his own brain. He felt, in that brief moment, the agony of dying a 
violent death. It was only a moment; but to him it was an age. He 
tried to rise, but could not. He felt as if the heavy clay had been 
heaped upon him, and that he was buried alive.
	The sound of voices fell upon his ear. Some persons were 
speaking near him in a quiet, unexcited tone. The words were:
	"I hope you are not injured?"
	"Begor, I don't know. Id tuck a start out uv me, at any rate. 
An' look at the way my hand is."
	Mr. Hanly tried again to stand up, and succeeded. He had 
not been more than a minute in the drain; but he looked about him 
as if he expected to discover that the face of Nature had undergone 
some wonderful transformation since last he looked upon it. But 
the trees, and the fields, and. the mountains, as well as his own 
house, and the old castle, and Knocknagow -- from Mat Donovan's 
to the cross; Phil Lahy's pointed roof and thick chimneys, and the 
beech free inclusive -- were precisely in their old places. And Mr. 
Isaac Pender was still in a half-sitting position, propped up by his 
two arms, with his under-jaw hanging down, and his eyes as wide 
open as it was possible for such eyes to be. He was still staring up 
at the stile; but the black face was turned away, which seemed 
some little relief to him, for his month closed, and a slight 
movement about the eyes indicated that, in course of time, they, 
too, might recover the power of shutting.
	"Why, Mr. Hanly, what has happened?" Hugh Kearney 
asked, looking at the attorney with unfeigned astonishment, as he 
emerged from the drain, like a grave-digger, Hugh thought, which 
idea was probably suggested by Mr. Isaac Pender, who, in his suit 
of rusty black, looked very like a withered old sexton.
	"I merely stumbled, by accident, into this drain," replied the 
attorney, trying to remove the yellow clay from his shoulders and 
arms.
	"And Mr. Pender?"
	"I -- I -- I stumbled, too," that gentleman replied, but 
showed no symptom of any intention to rise.
	Tom Hogan looked over his shoulder at the speakers, and 
his blackened face seemed to astonish them as much as at first. The 
surprise was mutual. Tom Hogan was quite as much puzzled to see 
his agent sitting upon the ground and staring at him as the agent 
was to account for Tom Hogan's black face.
	Tom Hogan's wife and daughter appeared upon the scene.
	"O Tom!" exclaimed his wife, "what happened you?"
	"Are you hurt, father?" Nancy asked, looking anxiously 
into his face.
	"'Tis nothin' -- 'Tis nothin'," he replied. "'Twon't signify a 
pin."
	"I think it would be as well if you run up to Mr. Hanly's 
and tell the doctor to come and see him," said Hugh Kearney, 
turning to Nancy Hogan.
 	"I will, sir," she replied eagerly, flinging back her auburn 
hair from her face, and running with the fleetness of a frightened 
fawn towards the house.
	"I think, Mr. Pender, you had better get up," Hugh 
suggested.
	I think so; I think so; I think so," replied old Isaac, as he 
turned round upon his hands and knees and struggled to get upon 
his feet. But his joints appeared to have become either too stiff or 
too weak; and Hugh, catching him by the collar with one hand, 
placed him on his legs, as if he were a rickety old chair.
	The doctor and Mr. Lowe were soon seen hurrying down 
the lawn, followed by Nancy Hogan. She had first started off in 
advance of them, but a feeling of delicacy made her hold back and 
let them pass.
	"I don't think the eyes are injured," said the doctor, as he 
examined Tom Hogan. "There is a slight burn on the left cheek, 
but it will not signify. Ha! yes! the hand must be looked to. But I'll 
have you all right in a day or two," added the doctor, as he laid his 
finger on Tom Hogan's wrist and felt his pulse. "The system seems 
to have sustained a shock," be continued gravely. "That is the 
serious feature in the case." And the doctor pulled out his watch 
and counted Tom Hogan's pulse for a minute.
	The two Miss Hanlys, with Mary and Grace, joined the 
group; and Mary, taking Hugh by the arm, questioned him about 
what had happened. But before he could reply, they were startled 
on seeing Jemmy Hogan clearing the hedge at a bound close to 
where they stood. His eyes flashed fire, as he demanded 
breathlessly, "What happened his father?"
	"Did any one do anything to him?" he continued, almost 
choked with passion, as he looked from one to another of those 
present.
	"No, Jemmy, no," his sister exclaimed, flinging her arms 
round him. "No one did anything to him. 'Twas an accident."
	His hands were clenched, and he looked as if he would 
have sprung like a tiger upon any one who would dare to hurt his 
father.
	"No, Jemmy, no," Tom Hogan repeated -- and he laughed 
in a strange hysterical way. "No, Jemmy; no wan done anything to 
me."
	His sister clung to him, and all present were struck with 
their extreme beauty, and the resemblance they bore to each other, 
notwithstanding the pleading gentleness of her look, and the 
passionate defiance of his.
	"O Mary," Grace whispered, "did you ever imagine Jemmy 
Hogan had such fierceness in him? But what has happened to his 
father? The poor man is a perfect fright, with his hair singed and 
his face blackened. Perhaps he rushed into a fire to save some one -
- but then there is no sign of a fire anywhere."
	"I was just asking Hugh," Mary replied.
	Mr. Lowe came also to inquire of Hugh what had 
happened.
	"I think I understand the matter," replied Hugh. "I was on 
my way to the bottom of our farm, and on hearing a noise I turned 
round, and observed a thick puff of smoke in the middle of that 
wheat-field. I saw Tom Hogan stagger back with his hands to his 
face, and as it was evident an accident had occurred, I turned back. 
He hurried on in this direction, and was just getting over the stile 
when I came up to him. Those gentlemen," he continued, lowering 
his voice and laughing, as he nodded his head towards the agent 
and Attorney Hanly, "seem to have been rather startled, for I found 
Mr. Pender on the broad of his back on the field there, and Mr. 
Hanly emerging from that drain."
	Grace laughed, and even Mr. Lowe could not help smiling 
as he turned quietly round and looked at old Isaac, who had only 
partially recovered from his fright.
	"But still," said he, turning again to Hugh, " I don't know 
what the nature of the accident was."
	"Tom," said Hugh, "Mr. Lowe wishes to know how the 
accident occurred.
	"Frightenin' the crows," replied Tom Hogan, turning to Mr. 
Lowe.
	"How? I really don't understand."
	"Wud a grain uv quarry-powther, sir," returned Tom 
Hogan. "I put id into a hole, an' in the way 'twould make a report I 
was goin' to lay a flat stone on id before I'd set fire to the bit of 
touch. But some way my hand wasn't steady, an' a spark fell on id, 
an', begor, id blasted up into my face. An' that's the way id 
happened, sir."
	"And why would you not frighten the crows with a gun?"
	"Is id me, sir? No, sir," said Tom Hogan, looking 
reproachfully at Mr. Lowe, as if he had done him a great injustice. 
"I'm not that sort of a character, an' never was. I never fired a shot 
in my life, an' plase God I never will. No, sir," continued Tom 
Hogan proudly, "no wan could ever say a bad word uv me."
	Mr. Lowe looked in astonishment at Hugh Kearney, as if he 
wished him to explain what all this meant.
	"Don't you know it is a crime to have arms in Ireland?" said 
Hugh, sarcastically. "No one can have arms without a licence, and 
men like Tom Hogan would not get a licence. So poor Tom has 
come to look upon never having fired a shot as a proof of his 
honesty and respectability."
	"We met a man on the road," said Mr. Lowe, "who had 
pistols."
	"That was Wat Corcoran the bailiff," returned Hugh. "He is 
a great man on the strength of his pistols. In such a case as his, 
arms are the marks of the gentleman, and the man in power."
	"Tom Hogan," put in Mr. Isaac Pender, "was always a quiet 
decent man. He never had anything to do with fire-arms."
	"Nor never will, sir," said Tom Hogan.
	But if Tom Hogan that very hour provided himself with a 
good serviceable musket and bayonet, or a rifle or carbine --  or 
even an old duck gun like that with which Dr. Richard Kearney so 
distinguished himself, it might have been lucky for Tom Hogan, 
and lucky, too, for Mr. Isaac Pender.
	"Tom Hogan never had anything to do with fire-arms," said 
Mr. Isaac Pender again. "Nor his son. Nor his son. Nor his son," he 
repeated, glancing furtively at Jemmy, who was now quite calm, 
except for a little flurry and confusion, which was perhaps less the 
result of his late excitement than of the presence of so many young 
ladies, all of whom were favouring him with a good deal of notice.
	"A very well-conducted, industrious young man," said Mr. 
Isaac Pender. "A very well-conducted young man."
	Attorney Hanly, seeing the mail-car approaching, moved 
away to meet it at the cross-roads.
	"Pender was right," he muttered to himself. "That young 
Hogan is a different sort of character from what
thought. There was a devil in his eye. That chap would do anything 
if driven to it. 'Tis true for old Isaac. The case is a difficult one. 
But that's his business. If his part was done I'd be able to manage 
the affair in such a way that it would not appear that I had anything 
to do with it. Hallo!"
	The driver pulled up, and Mr. Hanly got upon the car; and 
was not seen or heard of in that part of the country till he jumped 
off the same car at the same place that day three weeks.
	"Which way shall we go back?" Grace asked.
	"By the road," replied the doctor, who hoped Kathleen. 
would accompany them as far as the bridge.
	"By the road," said Mary, who feared that Norah Lahy 
might feel disappointed if she returned home without calling to see 
her.



CHAPTER XLIV.

HUGH KEARNEY THINKS HE WILL GET HIS FISHING-ROD 
REPAIRED.

	HUGH KEARNEY changed his mind. He said to himself, 
instead of going to the lower part of the farm, he would go look at 
the hoggets on the hill above the fort. Somehow he found that 
white jacket which had so caught his fancy at the wedding running 
very much in his mind. But this, in some degree, might be 
accounted for by the fact that Grace had just been telling him the 
flattering things Bessy Morris had said of him. And as he had to 
pass close to the house on his way, he began to think of some 
excuse for running up to his sister's room, and having a laugh and a 
few words of conversation with his agreeable partner in the dance 
at Ned Brophy's wedding. It required a good deal of reasoning to 
satisfy him that there was nothing objectionable in the step he was 
about taking; and the mere fact that it did take such an amount of 
argumentation to satisfy him ought of itself to have been enough to 
convince so steady a young man as Mr. Hugh Kearney that it 
might be just as well to go on up the hill, and not mind that curious 
little room up in the pointed roof, in the oldest portion of the old 
cottage, for the present.
	"She is a remarkably intelligent girl," thought Mr. Hugh 
Kearney. "If she were a beauty, like Nancy Hogan, I shouldn't be 
surprised at the admiration she inspires. And surely intellect can 
have nothing to do with it; for what do those young fellows I saw 
crowding about her know about intellect? And sure she attracted 
my own notice before I spoke a word to her, or even knew who she 
was. It would be quite an interesting study to discover the secret of 
her attraction." And he got over the stile behind the laurels with the 
intention of commencing the interesting study at once.
	He started on entering the garden, for while his eyes were 
turned to the window in the ivied gable, he found himself face to 
face with Bessy Morris, who was just passing the laurels with her 
head bent over her sewing. Possibly she had seen him coming, 
from the window.
	Hugh Kearney made a few commonplace remarks, and 
asked one or two commonplace questions as he walked by Bessy 
Morris's side towards the house. But when she turned round at the 
end of the walk, somehow he could not bring himself to turn round 
with her. Perhaps it was pride that prevented him, and he wanted 
an excuse. So far, he was merely on his way to the house. He 
found an excuse, how ever, for delaying her a minute at the little 
gate to inquire whether her grandfather ever went to fish now? 
There was a little trout stream not far from Phil Morris's house, and 
the old man, notwithstanding his lameness, was an expert angler. 
Some years before, Hugh cultivated the gentle craft, and the old 
weaver occasionally supplied him with a cast of flies, when the 
contents of his own fishing-hook failed to lure the trout to rise and 
get themselves hooked. Sometimes, too, the rain would drive him 
from the stream for shelter to the little house among the hawthorns; 
and he would listen for hours to the old "croppy's" reminiscences 
of '98, while the shuttle was allowed to rest as he shouldered his 
crutch to show how fields were won. Mr. Hugh Kearney used not 
to be quite oblivious of the presence of old Phil Morris's lively 
little granddaughter; yet now he wondered why he had not taken 
more notice of her at that time, and began to admire her 
retrospectively, as she moved about the house or sat reading or 
sewing near the window while the old man talked, and the rain 
poured down till the young ducks swam up to the very threshold, 
and seemed to consult among themselves whether they would have 
long to wait before they could sail into the kitchen and explore 
every nook and corner without setting foot on dry land. And the 
glances -- for Bessy Morris was a coquette before ever she saw a 
bold dragoon -- that went for nothing at that time, strange to say, 
began now to produce the desired effect on Mr. Hugh Kearney's 
heart, as memory brought them back again, while he leant over the 
little gate to ask Bessy Morris whether her grandfather ever went 
to fish now.
	She had seen him looking over his flies and tackle a few 
days before, and Hugh resolved to send his rod to Mat Donovan to 
be repaired, and said to himself that he would pay an occasional 
visit to the river during the spring and summer. It would be very 
pleasant. Old Phil was as entertaining as ever, and told him some 
capital stories at Ned Brophy's wedding!
	Hugh Kearney, as he walked alone up the hill, 
acknowledged to himself that he would rather have remained in the 
garden with Bessy Morris than with any girl he knew -- if he had 
an excuse.
	It was generally said and believed among his friends that 
Hugh had never been in love. Yet he had a tinge of romance in 
him, after a fashion. He was a capital builder of castles in the air; 
but be his castle never so stately, never so gorgeous and glittering, 
it was to him cold and unattractive till love shed its rosy light upon 
it. But in spite of all this, he never was in love in downright 
earnest. He had met some -- one or two, perhaps -- whom, under 
favourable circumstances, he might have loved. But he had got a 
habit of weighing possible circumstances, and looking very far 
before him, which made him keep clear of actual danger, and 
content himself with castles in the air. His solitary rambles over the 
moors and mountains were very favourable to castle-building; 
while his close attention to the management of the farm -- with 
which his rambles did not interfere at all -- was calculated to a 
practical business-like turn to his mind. He found health and 
relaxation among the moors and mountains, and never thought the 
time lost which was spent with his dogs and his gun, or upon 
horseback, clearing stone walls and double ditches, after the 
foxhounds or the harriers. He read more, and derived more 
pleasure from books than his acquaintances suspected, and was far 
better informed than he himself knew. He did not parade his 
knowledge, and consequently got credit for knowing nothing. No 
day passed that he did not add to his store. But he read solely for 
the sake of the pleasure it afforded him; and yet he almost shrank 
from opening a new volume unless he had some previous 
knowledge of the author or the subject. He felt no craving for 
novelty, and liked so well to return again and again to some 
cherished favourites that he often thought it would scarcely be a 
matter for regret if the art of bookmaking were lost, and he were 
henceforth obliged to limit his reading to the contents of his own 
shelves, the greater part of which he owed to that paragon of 
uncles, his mother's Uncle Dan. So that Mrs. Kearney could credit 
her Uncle Dan with Hugh's taste for reading as well as with 
Richard's taste for music.
	After walking among the sheep and counting them, and 
even catching one and feeling its ribs, he put his hands in his 
pockets and looked about him. He could see two figures leaning 
over the little bridge; and supposing them to be the doctor and the 
beauty of Castleview, Hugh smiled. He always sympathized with 
lovers. He considered Kathleen, too, singularly handsome; and he 
thought Rose an exceedingly pleasant girl to spend an hour with. 
Yet he turned back at Tom Hogan's boundary a while ago, and had 
determined to do so from the first -- though Miss Grace was quite 
troubled to think that it was because he was "huffed" by the way 
she "treated him" that he left them so abruptly. In fact he felt 
inclined to keep aloof from the house on the hill; and there can 
scarcely be a doubt that the habit of looking before him had a good 
deal to do with producing this somewhat odd frame of mind for a 
young man who admired beauty and sympathized with lovers in 
general, and was so given to building castles in the air. Yet he 
never thought of looking before him in the case of the little house 
among the hawthorns. Was it because it was so humble a little 
house? or was it because there was more attractive metal in it? 
Perhaps both these considerations helped to make Mr. Hugh 
Kearney forget his usual habit of looking to possible consequences 
in this instance. And besides, he had an excuse. He would certainly 
send his fishing-rod to Mat Donovan to have it repaired. And poor 
Mat Donovan! -- had he nothing to do with the affair? Was he in 
no way concerned? Was it nothing to him who came or went to 
and from that little house in the whitethorns?
	At the present moment, however, nothing sublunary seems 
to be troubling Mat Donovan but how best to convey, with the 
greatest certainty and expedition, to Tom Cuddehy, of the Rath, the 
important intelligence that the long disputed hurling match could 
be decided to the satisfaction of all concerned in Maurice 
Kearney's kiln-field on the following Sunday.
	"Maybe," said Mat to himself, as he trudged homeward 
after finishing the seed-sowing, "maybe I might meet some wan 
from that side of the forge. If not I don't know how best to manage; 
an' Tom is likely to be at the fair to morrow." He saw two 
horsemen riding towards him, and on looking more closely he 
observed that there had been a funeral in the little graveyard near 
the castle, for, besides the two horsemen, there were two or three 
cars on the road, and a group of people, mostly women, standing in 
the church yard.
	"I didn't hear of any wan bein' dead about this place," said 
Mat Donovan to himself, "so I suppose it must be some stranger. 
Begor, I'm all right," he exclaimed, quickening his pace; "that's 
ould Paddy Laughlan, an' he'll bring word uv the hurlin' to Tom 
Cuddehy." He hurried on and came out upon the main road before 
the horseman had passed.
	"A fine evenin', Mat," said old Paddy Laughlan; "what way 
are you afther the weddin'? The divil a betther bout uv dancin' I see 
these fifty years than that last bout ye danced. Have you any 
news?" 
	"Not a word strange. Is id a funeral ye're at?"
	"'Tis," was the reply; "a son uv William Maher's."
	"Wisha, now," exclaimed Mat in astonishment. "I didn't 
hear a word uv id."
	Oh, 'tis on'y the youngest little b'y. I b'lieve he wasn't more 
than about fifteen months ould. Where are ye comin' from?"
	"Well, we wor finishin' the seed-sowin' at Raheen; and I'm 
goin' to give some directions to Jack Delany about the plough-
irons, as we're goin' to break a field. An' now as I'm afther meetin' 
you, maybe you'd  -- ." Here Mat Donovan stopped short. The 
second horseman, who had loitered behind, rode up; and as soon as 
Mat Donovan recognised him he ceased speaking, and looked as if 
he had made a mistake. The horseman was the young man from the 
mountain, who kept gadding after a certain white jacket at Ned 
Brophy's wedding, when his allegiance was lawfully due 
elsewhere. Was Mat Donovan jealous of the young man from the 
mountain? On the contrary, his discrimination in the matter of the 
white jacket made Mat Donovan feel as if he were the sworn friend 
of the young man from the mountain. Yet Mat Donovan looked 
grave, and stopped short in the middle of a sentence, the moment 
he recognised the young man from the mountain in the horseman 
who now rode up and resumed his place at old Paddy Laughlan's 
side.
	"What's that you wor sayin', Mat?" old Paddy Laughlan 
asked.
	"Nothin' uv any account," Mat replied. "I was thinkin' uv 
sendin' a message to a friend up in that direction; but I won't mind 
id."
	"I'll brin' a message, an' welcome, for you," returned the old 
farmer. "Maybe 'tis to Ned Brophy? If it is, I won't mind turnin' 
down an' tellin' him, if I don't happen to meet any wan on the road 
to send id by. He's a cousin uv Ned Brophy's," he added, turning to 
the young man who rode by his side, as if he thought it necessary 
to explain why he was so civil to a poor man like Mat Donovan.
	The young man only looked at his spurs, which were very 
large and very bright -- first at one and then at the other --  and 
seemed to think that old Paddy Laughlan was on the whole too 
condescending -- Ned Brophy's relationship to the contrary 
notwithstanding.
	"I won't mind id now," returned Mat. "Good evenin' to ye."
	"Bad luck to id for money," said Mat Donovan to himself 
when Paddy Laughlan and his intended son-in-law had ridden 
forward, "'tis doin' harm here an' there. Well, she'll have her twenty 
cows milkin' at any rate; ay, begor, an' a good-lookin' young 
fellow, too, though he's a gag itse'f. But if ever a woman was fond 
uv a man Judy Laughlan was fond of Tom Cuddehy. An' poor 
Tom'd marry her if she hadn't a cross to bless herself wud in the 
mornin'; an' he tould me he would. An' all on account uv her four 
hundhred pounds fortune they're to be separated. I don't know; she 
might be a happier woman wud Tom, though he has on'y a small 
farm, an' that tillage, than ever she'll be in her fine slate house wud 
her twenty cows comin' into her yard. Well, I was near playin' the 
divil by axin' the ould fellow to tell Tom Cuddehy about the field. 
The not a wan uv me ever thought uv how id was betune 'em till 
the son-in-law reminded me uv id. An' sure I might 'asy know, 
whin Tom himse'f tould me she daren't look at him for the last 
twelvemonth. Now, if Tom dhraws her down, as he always do, the 
next time I meet him, I know the first word that'll come to my 
mouth is, that there's as good fish in the say as ever was caught. 
An' cowld comfort that same ould sayin' is. Well, he'll soon be out 
uv pain anyway. An' maybe 'twould be well for more of us if we 
had the same story." He looked up at the three poplar trees on the 
hill, and then at the little house among the hawthorns. "Well, I 
must see about the plough-irons," he added, rousing himself; "an' 
who knows but wan uv these cars at the church might be from 
Tom's side uv the counthry, an' I can send him word about the 
hurlin'."



CHAPTER XLV.

TOM CUDDEHY BIDS HIS OLD SWEETHEART GOOD-BYE.

	BESSY MORRIS, too, had her reflections as she walked 
round and round the little garden. But she had not much time to 
indulge in them when Miss Kearney's return brought her back to 
the little room, into which the sun was now shining so brightly, 
that Mary seemed in its rosy light a being too ethereally beautiful 
for a mere mortal.
	"Now I wonder what that girl on the car is thinking of," 
said Grace. "And why has she stopped there?"
	It was a farmer's cart, well stuffed with straw, over which 
was spread a blue woollen quilt. The young woman who sat on the 
quilt, with the skirt of a rather showy gown spread over the greater 
part of it, had turned quickly round, and laying her hand on the 
shoulder of the driver, desired him to stop. It was just at the part of 
the road nearest to the house, and Grace was able to see the young 
woman so distinctly, that the expression of her face suggested the 
remark she had just made.
	"Really," she continued, "there is something awfully sullen 
about her. She certainly has about as unprepossessing a face as 
ever I saw."
	"I know her, Miss," said Bessy Morris. "She was at the 
wedding; and she's to be married to one of the richest men at the 
mountain-foot."
	"I can't approve of his taste," returned Grace.
	"But she has four hundred pounds fortune, Miss."
	"I suppose this is the intended," Grace remarked, pointing 
to a man who was just walking by the Bush, with his horse's bridle 
hanging over his arm. "He is a rather good-looking fellow."
	"This is not the man, Miss," returned Bessy. "I saw him 
pass with her father a few minutes ago."
	The young woman in the car was now observed to become 
restless, and floundered about upon her quilt, as if trying to fix 
herself in a more comfortable position; and opened her cloak and 
hooked it again; and knocked her bonnet back upon her poll when 
intending to push it the other way and fasten it on her head; and 
pulled from around her neck --  and immediately flung it back 
again with a swing -- that particular piece of finery which, even 
more than the yellow gloves, seemed to have excited Peg Brady's 
indignation when "indeed she see her goin'" to Ned Brophy's 
wedding, and which Peg designated her "boy-o." And, after 
exhibiting all these symptoms of uneasiness, she bent her head and 
pressed her gloved hand over her eyes, and then looked up.
	"My goodness!" Grace exclaimed. "Did ever any one see 
such a metamorphosis? She is positively beautiful now."
	It was really so. The face that seemed a minute before so 
dull and sullen was now radiant and all aglow with smiles.
	"I never thought Judy Laughlan was so handsome a girl," 
said Bessy Morris, wonderingly. "Look at her teeth, Miss and her 
eyes! I never saw such a change all in a minute."
	'Twas all Tom Cuddehy's doing; though he had not the least 
notion such was the case. He walked on with the bridle on his arm, 
and his eyes bent on the ground. He was just conscious that there 
was a car on the road before him, and on looking carelessly up, 
was startled, and did not know whether to be glad or sorry when he 
saw Judy Laughlan holding out her hand to him, laughing and 
blushing, and on the very brink of crying. Well, why should he not 
shake bands with her? Why should they not be friends? Of course 
there was no reason in life why they should not. So Tom Cuddehy 
stepped up close to the tail-board and shook hands very warmly 
with his old sweetheart. And it was such a long, long time since he 
had done the same thing before -- though they were near 
neighbours. But she had been forbidden to speak to him; and her 
father was heard to say that Tom Cuddehy was no match for his 
daughter; and Tom Cuddehy was not the sort of person to put 
himself in the way of being insulted by a purse-proud old boddagh. 
And so the meadow between his house and old Paddy Laughlan's 
might as well have been the Great Sahara, so far as he and his old 
sweetheart were concerned. And now as she was going to be 
married to a rich man -- the thought crossed his mind that she'd be 
driving in her jaunting-car the next time again he'd see her -- she 
wanted, he supposed, to part friends with him. And, like a manly 
fellow that he was, he shook hands with her in a manly and 
friendly way.
	"I know him now, Miss," Bessy Morris remarked. "He is 
the leader of the hurlers at the other side of the river, the same as 
Mat Donovan is at this side. But he got so stout since I saw him 
last I did not know him till he smiled." He waited, expecting that 
Judy Laughlan would speak; but she only smiled and blushed, and 
kept back the tears as well as she could. "Oh, go on!" said she at 
last to the man who drove the car, as if she were really surprised, 
and could not by any means understand why he should have 
stopped and remained standing there in such a ridiculous manner 
for nothing at all! And then she said, "Good evening," with another 
smile to Tom Cuddehy, and turned her head round very quickly, as 
if she feared the horse was going to run away. And while she 
watched every step the horse made, she was all the time feeling in 
her pocket for her handkerchief, and, drawing it out in a slow, 
stealthy way, Judy Laughlan bent her head and had a good cry. 
Tom Cuddehy did not see this, as she was too far off. He only saw 
the smile; and as he caught hold of his horse's mane, and placed his 
foot in the stirrup, Tom Cuddehy muttered to himself, "God be 
wud ould times."
	A hand was laid on his shoulder, and on turning round he 
saw Mat Donovan at his side.
	"I'm glad I met you," said Mat. "We can get the kiln field 
for the match on Sunday."
	"All right, Mat. I'll give notice to the boys to-morrow."
	"I was thinkin' you might be at the fair to-morrow."
	"No, I'm not goin'. You may depend on me for Sunday."
	He rode off, and Mat Donovan turned into the back gate.
	"I should not have thought that he was a leader, as you say, 
like Mat," Mary observed, in reference to Bessy Morris's last 
remark. "He's not a powerful-looking man like him."
	"Oh, he has the name of being the best hurler in the 
country; but Mat was never beaten at throwing the sledge and 
things of that kind; though I'm told some people are saying that 
Captain French will beat him. There is a great deal of talk about it; 
and you'd think it was a great battle that is to be fought if you 
heard my grandfather talking about it."
	"If Mat were beaten," said Mary, "Tom Maher would 
surely die of a broken heart."
	"And Billy Heffernan," returned Bessy.
	"As for that," Mary observed, "he is quite an idol with them 
all. His defeat would be looked on as a dreadful calamity. But I 
have not the least fear but that Mat will be victorious in this 
instance, as he has always been."



CHAPTER XLVI.

"MAT DONOVAN IS KILLED!"

	THE whole family were assembled in the parlour; and 
Bessy Morris, with her pretty bonnet and cloak on, and her little 
basket on her arm, was talking to Miss Kearney near one of the 
windows, The sun was just setting, and the shadows of the trees on 
the grass were beginning to disappear, when a flash of light 
through the branches of a large elm tree out in the lawn made Mary 
start.
	"Was it lightning?" she asked.
	I thought so, Miss," Bessy replied.
	But, on looking in the direction from which the flash 
seemed to have come, they glanced at each other and smiled. They 
saw Mat Donovan near the top of what remained of a large hay-
rick in the lawn. The rick had been cut away till it looked like a 
rectangular tower, and had quite a picturesque. effect, its brown 
hue contrasting agreeably with the fir grove behind. "Old hay is 
old gold," was a stereotyped phrase with Maurice Kearney's 
visitors when they stood at the hall-door and looked around the 
handsome lawn. Mat Donovan was about commencing to cut away 
another slice of this old gold, and it was the hay-knife he held in 
his hand, flashing in the last rays of the sinking sun, that Mary and 
Bessy Morris had mistaken for lightning. As he buried the sharp, 
broad blade in the hay, and, bending over it, commenced to cut 
away vigorously, Bessy Morris almost laughed outright; for she 
caught a snatch of a well-remembered air, which rolled down from 
the rick in the same old, mellow voice she often loitered to listen to 
on her way from the school beyond the quarry long ago. Even then, 
child as she was, she used to fancy it was of her Mat Donovan was 
thinking whenever he sang --  

"Hi! for it, hi! for it still,
And hi! for the little house under the hill."

And what a world of drollery was in Mat's face while he sang these 
words, and tossed the cherries over the hedge to her! The 
recollection of this came back so vividly now that Bessy could not 
help laughing. She knew he could see her grandfather's house from 
the hay-rick; and the consciousness that he was thinking of herself 
now, as of old, may have had something to do with the laugh that 
leaped up to her eyes as she turned to say "Good evening!" to 
Mary Kearney. She intended to run away without speaking to any 
one else, as the window at which they were standing was near the 
door; and Mary was just in the act of shaking hands with her, when 
a cry from outside caused every one in the room to start. It was the 
cry of a woman, and was followed by the words, "Mat Donovan is 
killed!"
	Mary looked instinctively to the hay-rick. But, to her utter 
amazement, it was gone! There was the elm tree; and the grove 
beyond; and the blue mountain; and the sky. But the tower-like 
remnant of the hay-rick, upon which, one short minute before, she 
saw Mat Donovan standing, had vanished like a vision!
	Everything without seemed calm and still; and the last 
thing she noticed, as she sank almost fainting into a chair, was that 
the sheep were quietly cropping the grass.
	"Oh! Mat Donovan is killed!"
	The cry was not very loud; but the words were strangely 
distinct, and no one could say from what particular direction they 
had come, or whether the person who uttered them was near or far 
off.
	Hugh leaped through the window, and Mary saw that he 
and Tom Maher rushed against each other near the elm tree and 
fell. In an instant they were on their feet again, and wildly flinging 
the hay about in armfuls. They were soon joined by others; and 
immediately the whole place was alive with men, women, and 
children, who seemed to have sprung up as if by magic from the 
ground. They were climbing over the gate, and over the fences, and 
running wildly through the lawn. Mrs. Kearney, who stood 
trembling at the window, burst into tears; not because she had, at 
the moment, any distinct idea of what had occurred -- but there 
was that in the eager, anxious faces of the crowd that might well 
have moved a harder heart than hers. Yet Bessy Morris stood still, 
without moving a muscle, her lips apart, and her eyes fixed upon 
the mass of hay that now lay flung along the field. The constant 
falling of a drop of water will wear away a rock, and the constant 
nibbling of a flock of sheep will undermine a hay-rick.
	Hugh Kearney and a few others continued to fling the hay 
from the place where he judged Mat must have fallen; and his 
voice was heard shouting to the people to keep back.
	After a while the hay was seen to move, and the tall form of 
the Thrasher rose out of it as from a heaving sea. There was a 
moment of breathless silence, and then with a wild cheer the crowd 
pressed upon him and threatened to smother him a second time. 
His sister Nelly flung her arms about him, and, with her face 
pressed against his bosom, sobbed violently. But his mother, 
pushing her way back till she got outside the crowd, sat down 
under the elm tree and rested her head upon her knees. Phil Lahy 
came close to Hugh Kearney's side and solemnly suggested a "little 
nourishment." And Billy Heffernan was seen running faster than 
ever he was known to run before, to bring the joyful news to Norah 
Lahy that Mat Donovan was alive and well.
	But, notwithstanding that wild cheer, there were many 
faces there as pale as Mat Donovan's own, and several women 
were seen wiping the tears from their eyes.
	"I knew something was to happen," said Phil Lahy -- who, 
on the strength of picking up Hugh Kearney's hat that had fallen 
off, and saying to Barney Brodherick, "Barney, you are in the 
way," was pretty well satisfied that Mat the Thrasher owed his life 
principally to his, Phil Lahy's, individual exertions to save him -- 
"I knew something was to happen," said Phil Lahy, wiping 
imaginary drops of sweat from his brow with his pocket-
handkerchief. "A mad bull hunting me all night over ditches and 
hedges, till I thought my heart was broke." And Phil bent down his 
head and finished off the wiping with the skirt of his coat.
	"And didn't I know something was to happen," exclaimed 
Kit Cummins. "That robber next doore to me to make off wud my 
fine new cloak while I was goin' to the well for a can uv wather." 
And Kit Cummins put her arms akimbo and poured out a torrent of 
invective against her next-door neighbour for stealing her "fine 
new cloak." 'Twas only a dream to be sure, and the cloak was at 
the time hanging safely over the wash-tub where she had flung it 
before going to bed, with the hood in the suds; but that made no 
difference in life to Kit Cummins, and, with arms akimbo, she 
continued her harangue till her breath and her vocabulary seemed 
to be exhausted at the same moment, and she stopped short. Then 
from the outskirts of the crowd came the shrill response, "Gir-r-r-r-
r out, you bla'guard!" and Kit Cummins turned round with a 
bounce, and was beginning again, when she was struck dumb with 
surprise on hearing a voice from the clouds right over her head.
	"Mat," said the voice, "will I throw down your coat?"
	All eyes were turned upwards; and Honor Lahy was seen to 
raise her hands as if imploring Providence to take pity on her; for 
there was our friend Tommy as much at his ease on one of the 
highest boughs of the elm tree as if he lived in the old magpie's 
nest, into which he was just after peeping, and had run out merely 
to throw Mat Donovan his coat, which be had hung upon a branch 
of the tree before he commenced cutting the hay.
	The little episode seemed to some extent to remove the 
gloom that hung over the crowd. And when Barney Brodherick 
walked round and round the Thrasher, surveying him from his 
shoes to the crown of his head, and from every possible point of 
view, with a look of the profoundest wonder; and pushing back his 
hat on his poll, exclaimed solemnly --  as if the miracle he had just 
witnessed was too great for his comprehension -- "Begob, 
Donovan! you'll never be killed!  -- be a cock uv hay"; there was a 
shout of laughter, in which Mat himself joined; and all was 
gladness and congratulation as the people dispersed and moved 
towards home --  some returning as they had come, through the 
fields, and others going out by the gate near the Bush and on by the 
road to the hamlet.
	"Did you remark Bessy Morris?" Grace asked.
	"Yes; and it has occurred to me she must be cold-hearted," 
replied Mary. "She was not in the least moved."
	"That was because she was stunned," returned Grace.
	"I don't think so. She said 'Good evening,' quite calmly."
	"Remark what I say," said Grace, with a knowing nod of 
the head. "I was watching her. She can control her feelings. And 
you see she has forgotten her basket."
	To some extent Grace was right. When the flash of the hay-
knife called her attention to Mat Donovan, and she caught the 
words of the well-remembered song, Bessy's thoughts flew back to 
the old happy times. He was the hero of the district. Wherever she 
turned, she heard his name mentioned with praise. The old people 
who smoked their pipes round her grandfather's fire, and the boys 
and girls at school, were equally proud of him. And when he had 
accepted the challenge of some renowned champion from another 
parish, or even another county -- for Mat Donovan's fame had gone 
far beyond the boundaries of his native district -- with what 
nervous anxiety the result of the contest was looked for! And with 
what a thrill of joy the news of their hero's victory was welcomed! 
And then he was such a warm hearted, good-natured fellow -- so 
gentle and so strong -- without an atom of the bully or the braggart 
in him. Yes, Bessy Morris remembered the time when she was 
very proud and happy to think that she was one of Mat Donovan's 
first favourites. And how soon she came to think that she was a 
greater favourite than anybody else. Though how she arrived at 
this conclusion she would have found it difficult to explain. He 
never spoke of love to her, except in jest; just as he was 
accustomed to do with every lively girl who was willing to carry 
on the joke. But somehow Bessy Morris was satisfied that in her 
case Mat Donovan's palavering was "half joking and whole 
earnest." He certainly did single her out at the dance, and escorted 
her from Mass, and dropped in with his "God save all here!" to the 
little house under the hill pretty often. But her winning ways, and 
their mutual relationship to Ned Brophy, and her grandfather's 
stories of '98, ought to have been enough to account for this, 
without jumping to the conclusion that Mat Donovan was "gone" 
about her, To this conclusion, however, Bessy Morris did jump; 
and she was certainly very proud of Mat Donovan's regard for her. 
But she was not slow in discovering the power of her attractions 
elsewhere; and when one or two young farmers began to show 
decided symptoms of being smitten, the thought began to occur to 
her that Mat Donovan, in spite of all his good qualities, and 
notwithstanding the esteem in which he was held, was only a poor 
labourer. But as time rolled on, and even the most ardent of her 
wealthier admirers dropped off one by one and took unto 
themselves wives, the unpleasant conviction forced itself upon her 
that, however easy she found it to catch a rich admirer, catching a 
rich husband was a different affair altogether. And at the time she 
left the country to reside with her aunt in Dublin she was beginning 
unconsciously to lean more and more upon the affection of her old 
lover -- as she believed him to be -- than she had done since her 
girlhood. But the novelty of the change, when she found herself in 
the midst of the city, with all its wonders and attractions, and the 
different sort of people with whom she came in contact, all but 
completely obliterated her rustic admirer from her thoughts. For a 
while she was quite intoxicated by the pleasures of the city. She 
was brought to the theatre, and the different places of Sunday and 
holiday resort, and flattered and courted, till the simple, but at the 
same time keen-witted and ambitious peasant girl had her head 
turned by the brilliancy of this new world. The value of money, 
too, became more apparent than ever; and she felt a strong desire, 
not only to be able to afford to dress well, but to be beyond the 
danger of want -- to be independent. But sad experience soon told 
her that making a fortune in the city was just as difficult as 
catching a rich husband in the country. And an "odd time," as she 
told Mary Kearney, when left alone with her own thoughts, she 
would think of her native place and the friends of her childhood. 
And, on returning to her old home after an absence of two years, 
and meeting Mat Donovan again, his fine, manly, honest face 
revived in a great degree the admiration she used to regard him 
with when she was little more than a child; and her heart did warm 
to him that "night at Mrs. Murphy's," as she reminded him of the 
time he used to throw the cherries over the hedge to her -- though 
well she knew he did not require to be reminded of it. There was 
another consideration which helped to raise him in her esteem. She 
had seen some instances of misery and suffering in homes where 
there were more of the comforts and luxuries that money can 
procure than ever she herself dared to hope for. In fact, Bessy 
Morris was beginning to see that a poor man's wife might be very 
happy, and a rich man's very wretched.
	The soldier's visit had greatly disturbed her; and she 
wished, though she scarcely knew why, that Mat Donovan should 
never know of it. No light matter, she was sure, could weaken his 
love for her. He would go on loving, without a hope that his love 
would ever be returned. But if he once thought her unworthy, she 
felt he would tear her from his heart for ever. And since her return 
from Dublin, the feeling that she could not afford to lose his regard 
was daily growing stronger. And when the cry, "Mat Donovan is 
killed!" struck upon her heart, and for some minutes she thought 
his was stilled for ever, a sense of desolation fell upon her, and she 
felt as if she were alone in the world. She was really stunned, as 
Grace said. And when that wild cheer announced to her that he was 
safe, she felt like one just rescued from drowning, and too 
exhausted to experience the full sense of joy and gratitude which 
one ought naturally to feel on being snatched, as it were, from the 
dark grave back to the bright world, with all its life and sunshine --  
never so bright, never so full of life, and light, and gladness, as 
when it is on the point of being lost to us for ever. Grace, then, was 
mistaken in supposing that only self-control had anything to do 
with Bessy Morris's calmness when she mechanically bade them 
"Good evening" and left the parlour to go home.
	He was thinking of her while he sang the old refrain  -- 
when was it he was not thinking of her? -- and when he felt the 
rick coming down with him, and expected in another second to be 
flung lifeless on the ground below, the last thought that swelled his 
heart was a "God be with you," to Bessy Morris. He then became 
insensible. Consciousness, however, soon returned, and he felt that 
he was being suffocated to death. Then he thought of his grey-
haired mother and his sister, and how desolate their little home 
would be when he was gone; and feeling that he was relapsing into 
unconsciousness, he prayed fervently that God would have mercy 
on his soul. At this moment he fancied that the weight that was 
crushing him became lighter, and, exerting all his strength, he 
raised himself upon his hands and knees, and pulling the hay from 
about his mouth he found that he could breathe. But the weight of 
those who were pulling away the hay, when they happened to stand 
directly over him, threatened to crush him down again; and seizing 
a moment when they had stepped aside, and the pressure was 
lightest, he made a vigorous effort, and emerged into the light like 
a lusty swimmer through the breakers.
	Bessy Morris's first impulse was to get home without 
meeting Mat Donovan. She was hurrying through the kitchen in 
order to get out to the road by the back gate, when she almost 
knocked against Nelly Donovan, who was running into the house 
for a drink of water for her brother. Their eyes met, and the looks 
of surprise and inquiry with which they regarded each other, 
seemed to have something of distrust or suspicion in it. Their looks 
were not alike, however, for while Nelly's expressed reproach, 
Bessy's seemed to indicate a dread of being detected. If Nelly 
Donovan had spoken what she thought, she would have said, "Is 
that all you care about him, you heartless thing?" And if Bessy 
Morris gave utterance to her thoughts she would have said, "I 
wonder has she found out how much I care for him?"
	Bessy, however, recovered quickly from her surprise, and 
at once decided upon making the best of the situation.
	"I saw all from the window, Nelly," said she. "Thank God 
he is safe. It must be a great shock to your poor mother."
	"An' what raison are you runnin' away?" inquired Nelly, 
who was the soul of candour.
	"Well," replied Bessy -- who was not quite so candid --  "I 
thought it would be only troublesome to you and your mother if I 
went to talk to him. I knew ye'd rather have him all to yourselves. 
And, besides, poor Mat himself might rather be left quiet after such 
a shock. So I said to myself I'd slip out by the back gate and run 
home, when I saw he was safe."
	This seemed natural enough to Nelly Donovan, and she was 
satisfied.
	"Well, maybe you're right," said she. "But, for all that, I 
believe he'd be glad to see you, no matter what way he'd be."
	"Well, Nelly," returned Bessy, after some hesitation, "I'd 
rather meet him when there would not be so many people about 
him."
	"Call in when you're passin'," rejoined Nelly, "an' my 
mother an' all uv us will be glad to see you. Though they say," she 
added, shaking her head, "you're too proud now for your ould 
friends."
	"That's not true, Nelly."
	"Well, I don't say it is. But I must run out wud the dhrink of 
wather to him; an' as you don't like to get into the crowd, I hope I'll 
find you sittin' in the little chair you wor so fond uv long ago."
	The allusion to long ago had a decidedly softening effect 
upon Bessy's heart; which, perhaps, wanted softening a little. But 
Mat Donovan's heart -- which did not want softening at all, but 
rather the contrary -- felt very heavy indeed, when he caught a 
glimpse of her as she tripped lightly by the gate, seeming not to 
give a thought to himself.
	He raised the cup of water to his lips, and as he looked into 
his sister's face, and glanced at his mother sitting at the foot of the 
tree, the pain which the thought of Bessy's indifference had caused 
left his heart; and the old smile came back into Mat Donovan's 
face, as he looked from one to another of the friends who still 
lingered about him. There was Phil Lahy, holding the coat which 
Tommy had dropped from the tree with an expression of 
countenance suggestive of woolsacks, and benches of bishops, and 
colleges of cardinals, and holy fathers, and martyrs and confessors 
in general, all rolled into one. And there was Honor, such a picture 
of hearty, homely good nature, that it did him good to look at her, 
thinking, in her own mind, whether she could by any means take 
forcible possession of him, and bring him home with her to rouse 
him, after his smothering, with a cup of tea of fabulous strength, 
out of the little black tea-pot. And there was Mary Kearney, as 
beautiful as an angel, coming from the house, and giving him her 
hand, with such a heavenly smile, and telling him how glad she 
was he had escaped unhurt. And there was Grace following her 
example in her own way; and, strange to say, Mat held Grace's 
hand so tightly and so long, that she at first felt pleased and 
amused, and then looked up in surprise, and almost snatched away 
her hand; for there was something about Grace that reminded Mat 
of throwing cherries over a hedge and other little incidents of 
bygone days -- and so, unconsciously he held her hand and 
squeezed it; and Grace laughingly submitted. Perhaps Grace would 
have frowned and thought it no compliment at all if she knew he 
was thinking all the time of Bessy Morris. And yet to Mat's mind 
the greatest compliment a human being could be paid was to be 
thought like Bessy Morris.
	Then Mrs. Kearney herself came out, and, wiping the tears 
from her eyes, declared that her heart she thought had broken, the 
shock she got was so great -- particularly as it reminded her of the 
day the horse ran away with her Uncle Dan and broke his collar-
bone -- and insisted that Mat should come in and take something; a 
request which Maurice Kearney seconded by seizing Mat by the 
collar, which he was induced to let go when Mat requested 
permission to put on his coat. And as Mat Donovan put on his coat, 
he looked round him again, and wondered that there was one 
particular face which he could not see anywhere. He looked again 
and again, and fried to think of a plausible reason for the absence 
of this particular face as he walked towards the house. And turning 
round on reaching the door-step, he took another look all round, 
and rubbing his poll with his open hand, Mat Donovan called out:
	"Do any uv ye know where is Billy Heffernan?"
	No one could tell where Billy Heffernan was. And as he 
had been seen watering his mule at the "lough" half-an-hour 
before, every one wondered what had become of him. And, in spite 
of all the kindness and congratulations showered upon him, Mat 
Donovan felt as if a screw were loose some where, when Billy 
Heffernan's face was nowhere visible.



CHAPTER XLVII.

BILLY HEFFERNAN WONDERS WHAT IS "COMING OVER" 
NORAH.

	BILLY HEFFERNAN had run off over ditches and hedges 
in a straight line, with his eyes fixed upon the chimney of Phil 
Lahy's old house, and never stopped till he stood behind Norah's 
straw chair. And then Billy Heffernan did stop very suddenly, and 
made a foolish pretence of having walked in very slowly and 
carelessly, and with no object in the world except to pass away the 
time. The instantaneous change from break-neck speed and 
breathless haste to a lazy lounge, as he moved towards Phil Lahy's 
shop-board, caused Norah to smile. He took up a piece of chalk 
and commenced writing the letters of the alphabet in round-hand 
on the lap-board very carefully and deliberately till he came to the 
letter g, and then Billy ventured to glance sideways at Norah, 
sitting in her straw-chair, with her wasted hand on the head of the 
rough terrier.
	Now, it occurred, at the last moment, to Billy Heffernan, 
that to communicate the joyful news of Mat Donovan's safety too 
abruptly to Norah might give her a shock that would prove 
injurious to her. And, in his own way, he set about correcting the 
mistake he had made. But, as he glanced at Norah, and saw how 
calm and collected she was, he thought she must not have heard of 
the accident to Mat Donovan at all, and resolved to go on with his 
writing till her father and mother arrived. To his great surprise, 
however, before he had got half-way to the end of the lap-board, 
Norah said:
	"Well, Billy, why don't you tell me all about Mat?"
	He turned quickly round, and to his great astonishment saw 
not the least symptom of anxiety or agitation about her; but, on the 
contrary, she seemed as if trying to suppress a smile.
	"She knows nothin' about id," thought Billy Heffernan. 
"Begor, I'm glad uv id; for I was afeard it might frighten the life 
out uv her. An' 'twas well she tuck no notice uv the way I ran in. 
'Twas well I didn't tumble up against her, I was in such a pucker to 
make her mind 'asy about Mat."
	"Billy," said Norah, "why don't you tell me all about what's 
after happening to Mat Donovan? Nelly was here with me when 
the report went about that he was killed, and she was terribly 
frightened."
	Her apparent indifference about the matter astonished Billy 
Heffernan beyond expression; and he stared at her with open 
mouth for nearly a minute before he was able to reply.
	"He's all right," said Billy at last.
	"Oh, yes, I know that," returned Norah quite calmly. "But 
he was in danger."
	Billy Heffernan's astonishment now took a different turn 
and, as he looked into her dark eyes and pale, spiritual face, he 
began, with that proneness to superstition for which he was 
remarkable, to fancy that she had supernatural knowledge of events 
passing beyond the ken of mere bodily senses. She seemed to 
know what was passing in his mind and the covert smile about her 
lips and in her eyes tended to strengthen Billy Heffernan's half-
formed suspicion that she must be in communion with those 
invisible beings of whose existence in earth and air he had no more 
doubt than he had of his own. But, notwithstanding the plenitude 
of his faith in such matters, it is worthy of remark that Billy 
Heffernan always held out stoutly against the "black dog" -- which 
piece of infidelity procured for him the undying enmity of Kit 
Cummins.
	"You're wondering at me, Billy," said Norah, giving the 
smile full play at last, and revealing her ivory-white teeth; which 
somehow had the effect of imparting a deeper shade of melancholy 
to her look. "You think I'm a witch or something of that kind."
	"Begor, if you're anything at all id must be somethin' 
good," he answered, seriously.
	"Well, I was frightened, Billy," said Norah. "Poor, brave, 
honest Mat Donovan, with every one so proud of him, and fond of 
him! But I said to myself with God was good, and that I'd offer up 
a few prayers for him. Then I heard the shout, and I knew he was 
safe. And I said to myself, too, he must be after escaping some 
danger, or the people wouldn't shout that way. And Billy," she 
added, smiling again, "I knew you'd be the first to remember me 
and to relieve my mind. So when I saw you rushing in, I was sure 
all was right."
	Billy returned to his chalking and went on carefully till he 
came to m -- which letter was so well executed that he stopped to 
admire it -- but said nothing.
	"Tell me what happened, Billy," said Norah, leaning her 
head against the back of her chair, as if, after all, she felt weary 
and exhausted.
	Billy told her how a high rick, that was higher than the top 
of the chimney, and, in fact, as far as he could judge, as high as the 
beech-tree, had fallen while Mat Donovan was "cutting a bench" 
up near the top of it. And how some thought he was "made bruss 
of" on the ground; and others that it was only smothered he was by 
the hay on top of him; while a few asserted positively that Mat was 
"ripped open" by the sharp hay-knife. But Billy was able to bear 
witness that he had seen Mat with his own eyes, quite whole, 
neither pulverised nor embowelled, and, to all appearances, having 
the free use of his lungs.
	"I'm very glad he's not hurt," said Norah. "But if he was," 
she added thoughtfully after a pause, "he'd have a good nurse in 
Nelly to take care of him."
	"So he would," returned Billy Heffernan; "and his mother, 
too."
	"Nelly is very good," continued Norah. "She's the best-
hearted poor thing in the world. And she's very fond of me. She 
and me were always great friends, Billy."
	"So ye wor," returned Billy. "Always."
	"And if Mat met with an accident, he'd have some one to 
take care of him," rejoined Norah, as if thinking aloud.
	"But, Billy," she continued, "if anything happened you, 
you'd have no one. And what would you do?"
	"I'd take my chance," Billy answered. "God is good."
	"That's true," she replied fervently; "God is good. But 'tis 
hard for you to feel happy all alone by yourself. And you are going 
on very well, by all accounts, and getting more comfortable every 
year."
	"I know who I have to thank for that," he replied.
	"Who?" she asked in surprise.
	"Yourse'f, Norah," returned Billy Heffernan, leaning on his 
elbow upon the shop-board and proceeding with his chalking. 
"You know what I was before you made me take the pledge; and 
that's what I couldn't do for the priest himse'f. An' I know I'd never 
be able to keep id on'y for you prayin' for me, as you said you 
would. I do be wondherin' now at myse'f. I can hardly b'lieve I'm 
the same unfortunate Billy Heffernan that every wan used to have 
compassion for, when I see the respect they all have for me now. 
Begor, I think sometimes 'tis humbuggin' me they do be, the way 
they talk to me an' ax my advice about this or that, when I think 
how the smallest child in the place used to have a laugh at me 
before."
	"Well, if I gave you a good advice at that time, Billy, sure 
you ought to listen to another good advice from me now?"
	"What is id?'
	"Well, you know what I mean," she answered, as if she 
wished to avoid being more explicit. "I often think of id this while 
back, when Nelly Donovan and myself do be talking about old 
times."
	"Norah," said Billy Heffernan, quite agitated, as he 
hurriedly wiped out the letters he had chalked with such pains on 
the lap-board, "for God's sake don't talk to me any more that way. 
I'm well enough as I am. I want for nothin'. An' if I am lonesome 
idse'f, 'tis lonesome I'd rather be."
	Norah smiled. She smiled a little while before, because she 
was amused. But this was a different kind of smile altogether. Yes; 
Billy Heffernan's refusal to listen to what she was about proposing 
to him gave her pleasure. Yet, if he did listen to her advice and 
followed it, it would have given her pleasure too -- pleasure 
sweetened by self-sacrifice. She would be glad to see Billy 
Heffernan and Nelly Donovan happy. Yet she was glad that Billy 
Heffernan would not listen to her plan for his happiness. Self-
sacrifice is sure of its reward either way.
	"Well, Billy," said Norah Lahy, "you will remember my 
words hereafter."
	Oh! that "hereafter" -- how heavily it fell upon his heart!
	His back was still turned to her; and with one elbow on the 
table, and shading his eyes with his hand, he went on with the 
chalking again; but instead of carefully formed letters, he covered 
the board with mere dots and shapeless figures. He felt almost 
angry with her. "Sure she has no right," he said to himself, "to be 
talkin' that way. Don't she know I'd as lief be dead as the way I do 
be when id comes into my head?" And Billy held the lap-board 
near his eyes -- for it was now nearly dark -- and seemed to be 
frying to decipher the hieroglyphics he had traced upon it. " I don't 
know what's comin' over her this while back," he continued, 
glancing stealthily at Norah; "every wan used to be remarkin' that 
you'd never hear a word from her that'd look as if she was thinkin' 
uv dyin' at all. Even her mother says she never heard a word about 
id from her. But this is the third turn wud her dhrawin' id down to 
me these days back. She began t'other night about the evenin' I 
carried her over the sthrame. There's some change comin' over her 
I'm afeard, or she wouldn't be goin' on this way."
	He was interrupted in his reflections by the entrance of 
Honor Lahy, who -- rather to the surprise of Billy -- was 
immediately followed by her husband.
	"Wisha, is id there you are, Billy?" exclaimed Honor. "Mat 
is after axin' where you wor; an' not wan uv us could tell him. We 
wor all wonderin' what happened you."
	"I ran down to tell Norah, whin I see he wasn't hurt. I 
thought she might be unaisy."
	"Well, well," returned Honor, as if she felt quite ashamed 
of herself, "see how not wan uv us ever thought uv that. An' sure I 
might 'asy know her mind'd be throubled; an' for all I never 
thought uv id." She knelt down as she spoke, and arranged Norah's 
shawl more comfortably about her shoulders. "We had no right," 
she continued, as she pinned the shawl, "to run away an' lave you 
by yourse'f. But I got such a start thinkin' poor Mat was killed, that 
I didn't know what I was doin'. An' sure on'y the mercy uv God 'tis 
killed he'd be."
	Phil had flung himself in a chair in an almost gasping 
condition after his exertions. He fixed a severe glance on his wife, 
and even on his daughter, and then shook his head and looked into 
the fire. There was no sign, not the shadow of a symptom of a 
"little nourishment," and Phil Lahy seemed to have made up his 
mind that all Christian charity had vanished from the world, and 
that there was nothing left for him but to be resigned. And he was 
resigned! He did not complain in the least. No murmur would ever 
escape his lips. He was never a grumbler; never "a man for 
complaining." And in a spirit of resignation and self-abnegation, 
Phil Lahy dismissed all thought of his own sufferings from his 
mind, and only thought, as a patriot and philanthropist, of the 
grievances of his fellow-men.
	"Billy," said he, addressing himself to Billy Heffernan, who 
had turned round and now stood with his back to the shop-board, 
resting against it, "these are quare times."
	"How so?" Billy asked.
	"Well, I'm afther havin' a talk wud that poor crawler, Tom 
Hogan; and the fact is I'm not the betther uv id.
	"How so?" Billy asked again.
	"I was never a man of extreme views," returned Phil. "I 
admire some of the extreme party for their genius, and I never took 
part in the cry against them. But I'm a man of moderate views, and 
always was. Old Phil Morris and I could never agree on some 
points. But, Billy, 'tis enough to knock moderation out of any man 
to talk to a crawler. You heard the conversation I had with that 
man sitting at this fire?"
	"I remember," replied Billy Heffernan. "An' Mat remarked 
as we wor goin' home, that all he was worth in the world was sunk 
in his little spot -- that he hadn't a penny; on'y as fast as he'd have 
id lettin' id all go in dhrainin' an' buildin'."
	"Well, that same Tom Hogan calls me over an' I passin'. 
'Phil,' says he, 'I couldn't help laughin' a while ago when I thought 
uv you. Faith, a person'd think,' says he, 'that you knew what they 
wor goin' to do.' 'What do you mane, Tom?' says I -- speakin' as 
civil as I could to him, because Norah here begged uv me not to be 
severe on him, since the way he began thremblin' when I spoke 
about risin' his rent from thirty-eight to forty-eight shillin's an acre. 
So I asked him civilly what did he mane. 'Well, my rint is riz,' says 
be, 'just as you said id would.' I thought 'twas humbuggin' me he 
was, till I remembered I see Darby Ruadh turnin into his gate a 
start before. 'Tom,' says I, 'are you in airnest, or is id jokin' you 
are?' 'He is in airnest, Phil,' the wife makes answer. 'Darby is afther 
given us notice of another rise." I looked at him," continued Phil, 
turning round in his chair and resting his elbow on the back of it, 
so as that he could look up into Billy Heffernan's face, of which, 
however, there was not light enough to afford more than a dim 
outline -- "I looked at him; and there he was, breakin' his heart 
laughin'; 'Tis on'y two shillin's an acre, Phil,' says he, 'to make id 
the even money. A couple uv pounds a year won't make much 
difference. But whin Darby walked in an' spoke uv another rise, 
begor, I thought of what you wor sayin' to me last night. An' wasn't 
id dhroll,' he says, laughin', 'that your words come to pass all at 
wance?' 'Tom,' says I, 'I have nothin' to say to you.' 'Darby tould 
me,' says the wife, 'that Mr. Pender was sorry, but that he couldn't 
help id whin the ordher came down from the landlord.' But 'tisn't 
Tom Hogan that's throublin' me," continued Phil, after a pause; 
"but I fear we're goin' to have some bad work in the counthry!"
	"What bad work, Phil?" his wife asked in alarm.
	"Well, that blessed bird," he returned, "that came in to light 
the lamp t'other night -- honest Darby -- and Mat Corcoran wor 
overheard makin' some remarks to-day about bein' near stirrin' 
times about here. An' we all know what that manes. Mat Donovan 
is likely to lose his little garden, too. An' that's a bad sign. An' 
there's poor Mick Brien that they beggared. Kept him hangin' on 
expectin' they'd give him a little spot somewhere, if 'twas on'y a 
skirt uv the bog, till every penny he had was gone uv whatever 
thrifle he was able to make by sellin' the few things he had left 
afther bein turned out uv the nice little farm that his people lived in 
for hundreds uv years. Well, Maurice Kearney gave him a couple 
uv bundles uv straw to cover the roof over his wife an' childher. 
An' just when he had id finished, the guardian angels come to tell 
him he must go out; that the cabin is to be pulled down, as such 
cabins can't be allowed on the property any longer. I'm tould he's 
out uv his mind. The wife is thought to be in a decline, an' two uv 
the childher have the faver. An' the thought uv the poorhouse sets 
him mad."
	At these last few words the tears began to fall silently from 
Norah's eyes; and Billy Heffernan, on seeing them dropping down 
one by one, began to be angry with some one or other, and felt a 
strong desire to relieve his feelings by beating Darby Ruadh and 
Wat Corcoran black and blue. Indeed at that moment Billy would 
have faced a whole legion of "guardian angels," and done heaven 
knows what desperate things, if he had the chance.
	"So you see, Billy," said Phil Lahy, "that thinkin' of such 
things is enough to make any man violent."
	"'Tis thrue!" replied Billy Heffernan, almost fiercely.
	"I of'en think uv Mick Brien's wife," Honor observed, as if 
she were thinking aloud, while, with her chin on her hand and her 
elbow resting on the shop-board, she gazed at the moon through 
the branches of the beech-tree. "She was sich a good, charitable 
woman. 'Tis too good she was. Of'en Father M'Mahon said 'twas a 
pity she wasn't as rich as Damer."
	"'Tis many a piggin uv milk she made me dhrink," said 
Billy Heffernan, "when I'd be passin' comin' from Clo'mel. An' 
Mick brought home my ould coat that I put about him the last night 
I was passin'. I'd rather he'd keep id," added Billy, "for the divil a 
much harm a wettin' ever done me. But Mick wouldn't be satisfied. 
An' whin he was comin' for the straw to Misther Kearney's, he 
brought home the coat. Ould Phil Morris gave him the lend uv his 
ass to brin' the straw. An' sure if he kem to me for the mule I'd give 
her to him an' welcome. But he says he thought I might be on the 
road. An' he knew Phil Morris's ass was idle."
	"Were you talking to Bessy Morris since she came home?" 
Norah asked, after an interval of silence. "She ran in to see me, but 
she had no time to delay."
	"She was at the weddin'," returned Billy; "an' I called -- . 
An' I met her above the Bush" -- he broke off --  "this mornin', as 
she was comin' to Misther Kearney's to make a dhress for Miss 
Mary."
	Norah raised her eyes quickly when Billy hesitated and 
seemed embarrassed after saying he "called in." And when he 
turned the "calling in" to meeting Bessy on the road, she did not 
know what to think, She admired Bessy Morris very much, and 
liked her pretty well; though she never did warm to her so much as 
to Nelly Donovan and one or two more of her school-fellows.
	She saw how much superior to them all Bessy was in many 
respects; but in spite of her cleverness and winning ways, Norah 
could not help thinking that Bessy Morris wanted heart. She often 
accused herself of being unjust, but she could not reason herself 
out of this impression. Many little instances of selfishness on 
Bessy's part would occur to her; but it was Bessy's love of 
conquest and admiration that tended most to prejudice Norah Lahy 
against her.
	And now, on observing Billy Heffernan's embarrassment, 
she thought Bessy might have been trying the power of her 
fascination upon him, too. It was but the thought of a moment, 
dismissed almost as soon as formed. But Norah did say to herself, 
after a moment's reflection, that she "would not like it."
	Billy Heffernan's embarrassment, however, was simply 
caused by remembering his resolution to say nothing about the 
dragoon.
	"I think," Phil Lahy observed, "I ought to take a walk up to 
see Mat."
	"Give him time to be done his supper, at any rate," returned 
his wife.
	"Very well," he rejoined. "But what I'm afraid uv is that 
this fall may come against him in throwing the sledge with the 
captain. I'll advise Mat not to venture. 'Tis too serious a matter. 
And -- and," added Phil Lahy, in a dignified way, "a man should 
not forget his duty to the public. That's Mat's weak point. He can't 
be got to see that he's a public character. The people at large are 
concerned. The credit of Knocknagow is at stake. So I must 
explain this to Mat. The captain, too, though a good fellow, is an 
aristocrat. That fact cannot be lost sight of. So I must explain 
matters to Mat. An' if he's not in condition, he's bound to decline 
throwing the sledge with Captain French on the present occasion."
	"Do you think there's any danger he might be bet?" Billy 
Heffernan asked, with a blending of terror and incredulity in his 
look.
	"There's no knowin', Billy," returned Phil. "A man 'd want 
to be careful upon important occasions; particularly when the 
public are -- are -- the fact is," said Phil, at a loss for a word, "I 
must have a talk with Mat."
	"Begor," returned Billy Heffernan, "you're afther makin' me 
someway uneasy. Good evenin' to ye."
	"Good evenin', Billy," returned Phil Lahy, benevolently. 
"Don't let anything I'm afther sayin' prey on your mind. Let us 
hope for the best."
	I'll never b'lieve," returned Billy Heffernan, stopping before 
he reached the shop door, "I'll never b'lieve the man was ever born 
that's able to bate Mat Donovan at the sledge."
	"You are right, Billy -- unless he does himself injustice --  
an' what I want to prevent is that. You know yourse'f Mat is a soft 
soart of a fellow; and requires a friend to advise him. Are you goin' 
up that way yourse'f?"
	"No," Billy replied. "I have to mend the mule's breechin', 
an' to fill the load, as I'm to be on the road to night."
	"Billy," said Mrs. Lahy, "maybe you'd take a walk down 
again, as I want a box of candies an' a few other things that I'm 
nearly out uv."
	"Very well," he replied. "I'll take a walk down before I go 
to bed." And as Billy, after lighting one of his antediluvian tapers, 
sat down upon his antediluvian block, to repair Kit's harness, he 
felt so oppressed and nervous, thinking of the strange change he 
had noticed in Norah Lahy, and of the possibility of Captain 
French beating Mat Donovan at the sledge, he heartily wished for 
the long summer days, when he could stretch upon a bank in the 
lonesome bog and listen to the whistle of the plover.



CHAPTER XLVIII.

THE "DEAD PAST" AND THE "LIVING PRESENT." -- MRS. 
DONOVAN'S SAD FACE.

	BESSY MORRIS tripped lightly up the hill, till she came 
to the clipped hedge. And then she began to walk more and more 
slowly, with her eyes bent on the ground. After passing the little 
gate and the neatly thatched house, she stopped, and, turning 
round, looked at the clipped hedge and up at the old cherry-tree. 
And while she looked, the hedge grew green, and the bare 
branches of the cherry-tree were covered with leaves, through 
which the cherries peeped, and seemed to whisper above the hum 
of the bees -- "'Tis for you we have grown red and ripe and juicy; 
for you we are kept here so long; for you and nobody else, little 
Bessy Morris!" -- just as the cherries used to whisper long ago. The 
trees flung their shadows across the white and dusty road; the birds 
twittered among the branches; the swallows skimmed over the 
bright little river; the distant lowing of the cows floated upon the 
clover-scented air; the thrush's evening song rang out bold and 
clear from the bushy glen; the blue smoke stole up through the 
grey sally-trees: and she was a happy, innocent school-girl.
	The deepening shadows and the bleak, wintry landscape 
called her back from the dead past to the living present; and after a 
moment's hesitation, she turned in from the road, and raised the 
latch of Mat Donovan's door.
	There was no change. Everything was as it used to be. The 
little chair of which Nelly spoke was in its old place; and she could 
almost fancy she saw the Bessy Morris of the old time sitting in it. 
And how fond they all were of her then! A shadow seemed to fall 
upon her face as the thought struck her that she had let these true 
friends drop almost completely out of her memory, except Mat 
himself; and if she gave him a thought, it was only in some 
moment of disappointment or mental suffering, when the 
recollection of his unchanging love would cross her mind. Her 
cheek flushed as she reflected how little she had prized that love; 
and for a moment she felt as if she had been not only ungrateful 
but false. She looked again at the familiar objects around. The 
dresser -- the wheel upon which Mrs. Donovan had given her her 
first lesson in spinning -- Mat's hurly over the fire-place  -- 
everything just the same! As her eye rested on the famous 
Knocknagow drum, hung so high up that none but Mat himself 
could reach to it, she smiled, and her thoughts seemed to take a 
more cheerful turn. Seeing a slate upon the little window -- a blue 
slate without a frame, and having only one side polished -- she 
took it in her hand, for it reminded her of the old school days. A 
little to her surprise, she saw there was a sum carefully worked out 
upon the slate, and some sentences correctly and fairly written. The 
fact was, Mat Donovan had taken to study of late. He endeavoured 
to induce a sufficient number of pupils to pay half-a-crown in 
advance, to make it worth the schoolmaster's while to take a 
lodging in the village -- instead of sleeping at a farmer's house two 
miles away -- and open a night-school for the winter. But a 
sufficient number of half-crowns not being forthcoming, Mat 
Donovan set about teaching himself -- greatly to the distress of his 
mother, who could see no possible explanation of so strange a 
proceeding, but an intention on Mat's part of "going to join the 
peelers"; which, to her mind, was as bad as going into the poor-
house, and infinitely worse than going to be hanged. For poor Mrs. 
Donovan got that sad face of hers one bright summer day in the 
year '98, when her father's house was surrounded by soldiers and 
yeomen, and her only brother, a bright-eyed boy of seventeen, was 
torn from the arms of his mother, and shot dead outside the door. 
And then a gallant officer twisted his hand in the boy's golden hair, 
and invited them all to observe how, with one blow of his trusty 
sword, he would sever the rebel head from the rebel carcass. But 
one blow, nor two, not three, nor ten, did not do; and the gallant 
officer hacked away at the poor boy's neck in a fury, and was in so 
great a passion, that when the trunk fell down at last, leaving the 
head in his hand, he flung it on the ground, and kicked it like a 
football; and when it rolled against the feet of the horrified young 
girl, who stood as if she were turned to stone near the door, she fell 
down senseless without cry or moan, and they all thought she too 
was dead. She awoke, however, the  second next day following, 
just in time to kiss the poor bruised and disfigured lips before the 
coffin-lid was nailed down upon them. But the sad look was in her 
face, and never wholly left it from that hour. It was beginning to 
clear away in after years; till once again the house was surrounded 
by soldiers. They came with the sheriff and bailiffs. It was not a 
bright summer day, but a bitter cold day in the bleak December 
this time. Yet, as she and her father and mother passed through the 
glittering bayonets and shining accoutrements that filled the yard, 
that fatal summer day in '98 came back with such strange vividness 
that she thought she felt her brother's head strike against her foot; 
and again she fell down senseless without cry or moan. After that 
the sad look became fixed and permanent, and she was destined to 
carry it with her into her coffin. It was the shadow of a curse.
	So Mat Donovan's slate and pencil made the sad look in his 
mother's face a shade sadder, lest by any chance he should be 
qualifying himself for the "peelers." She would rather a thousand 
times see him dragged out and shot like the bright-eyed boy whose 
head rolled against her foot in '98 or hanged from the old cherry-
tree in the garden.
	It strikes us that statesmen might learn something from the 
sad look in Mrs. Donovan's face.
	Bessy Morris carelessly turned over the slate, and as she 
looked at the unpolished back, a strange light came into her eyes. 
Every inch of the back of Mat Donovan's slate was covered with 
B's.
	She laid the slate down quickly on hearing his footstep, and 
looked along the road, as if she had been brought to the window by 
the braying of Mr. Beresford Pender's tinhorn, which he had just 
put to his lips to warn all whom it might concern to keep out of the 
way of the wheels of his tax-cart, and clear the road for a 
"gentleman." And how Mat Donovan did start when he saw her! 
For a moment he could scarcely credit the sight of his eyes, that it 
was really Bessy Morris, all alone in his own house. Recovering, 
how ever, from his surprise, he advanced a step or two and held 
out his hand.
	"You're welcome!" said he, with that odd smile of his. He 
thought there was something very cold in her manner as she placed 
her hand in his. Not the faintest pressure could he feel from that 
dear little hand.
	"You're welcome!" was all he could say. And as he said it a 
second time, for want of something else, there was a very little 
pressure upon his fingers, just as if she couldn't help it.
	"You had a narrow escape," said she; "I hope you are not 
hurt."
	"'Tis nothin'," he replied, letting her hand go suddenly, for 
he felt that she was trying to withdraw it. But the withdrawing of 
the hand would not have caused that pain he felt coming about his 
heart again, if he knew it was done simply because she saw his 
sister Nelly coming towards the door.
	"'Tis nothin'," said he, "on'y a tumble in the hay."
	He was surprised and displeased to see that Nelly took 
scarcely any notice of Bessy Morris; but he did not know they had 
met a few minutes before. He watched with some anxiety to see if 
his mother's greeting would be as cold as his sister's; and when the 
old woman came in, with her sad face seeming sadder than ever, 
and looked first surprised, and then glad, and then held out her 
hand to Bessy and said, "You are welcome," in such a kind way, 
Mat felt quite happy.
	"And won't you sit down?" said Mrs. Donovan, with a 
brighter look than Mat had seen in the sad face for many a long 
day.
	"'Tis getting late, ma'am," returned Bessy; sitting down at 
the same time in the little old chair.
	Mrs. Donovan sat down too, and, putting her hand under 
her chin, looked into Bessy's face for a full minute. It was plain she 
was thinking of the bright little girl who used to sit in that old chair 
a few years before, and so delight them all with her merry laugh 
and her ready wit, and her quaint, half-childish, half-womanly 
ways.
	"Is id yourself that's in id at all?" said Mrs. Donovan.
	Bessy laughed; but she was moved by the kind tone of the 
old woman's voice, and still more by her look. She felt it was in 
such a tone and with such a look her own mother would have 
addressed her.
	"An' how is the old man?" she continued. "'Tis a long time 
since he stopped to talk to me now about the year uv the hill, an' 
the hangin' an' the floggin' an' all. An' Bessy, avoorneen, had ye 
any account of your father since? Or is there any tale or tidin's uv 
him?"
	"Not a word, ma'am," Bessy answered.
	"Well, Bessy, as sure as you're sittin' in that chair a man 
from near the colliery met him in America, an' was talkin' to him in 
his own house. An' he had carpets on his flure, he says. The man 
he was tellin' was in here wud me."
	"Well, we heard about that, ma'am; but 'twas a long time 
ago since the man you speak of saw him, or rather thinks he did. 
For all he could remember was his surname, and that he made 
inquiries about my grandfather."
	"Well, from what the man from the colliery said, I'm a'most 
sure 'twas your father he was talkin' to," said Mrs. Donovan, 
beginning to rock herself softly from side to side as she looked 
kindly into the young girl's face.
	The desire to find her father was a redeeming trait in Bessy 
Morris's character. It helped to guard her heart against the 
worldliness, and vanity, and discontent which sometimes 
threatened to take possession of it. And sitting there in that little 
chair, her heart began to warm to the kind old woman, whose look 
was so like a mother's; and Bessy Morris felt that at that moment 
she had more of good in her than at any other time since the 
innocent days of her childhood.
	Mat Donovan sat on the bench, which Billy Heffernan was 
wont to take possession of whenever he paid them a visit. Mat 
chose this seat rather than the "sugn-bottom" chair, because from 
it be could watch the play of Bessy's expressive features without 
attracting attention. And how his heart did swell as he looked and 
looked, and asked himself how or when she managed to get into it 
-- a question which for the life of him honest Mat could not answer 
satisfactorily. But there she was, and no mistake; and Mat sighed 
such a big, heavy sigh at the thought of how hard it would be to 
eject her -- when that proceeding would become an absolute 
necessity and a duty -- that Bessy Morris looked at him with a 
melancholy sort of look, as if she knew exactly what he was 
thinking of. Whereupon Mat Donovan assumed an exceedingly 
humorous expression of countenance, and wanted to say something 
in his usual style; something very droll and extravagant -- as 
became a "palaverer" and a "deluder" and "a rag on every bush." 
But somehow his drollery had quite deserted him; and not a single 
"quare thing" could he remember, that would convince Bessy 
Morris that he, Mat Donovan, commonly called Mat the Thrasher, 
was the rollickingest, rovingest blade in all Tipperary, whom it was 
not given to woman born of woman to capture and hold captive. So 
Mat Donovan could do nothing better than lean the back of his 
head against the partition, and look up the chimney.
	"An' what way did you lave your aunt?" Mrs. Donovan 
asked.
	"She was very delicate for a long time," Bessy replied; "but 
she's better now. The doctor advised her to come to the country. 
And if her son comes home from England, as he promised, I think 
she'll spend part of the summer with us."
	"Well, I'd be glad to see her," returned the old woman.
	"We all thought she made a fine match -- he was such a 
grand elegant young fellow. But I b'lieve the poor woman met with 
her own share uv the world."
	"Indeed she had her trials," replied Bessy.
	"'Tis little any wan thought he'd turn out as he did," 
rejoined the old woman. " But 'tis hard to judge uv people by their 
looks. Id might be betther for her if she married some honest b'y 
she knew always. But 'tis 'asy to talk now when we see the 
difference; but no wan'd think so at the time."
	"I'll call in again to-morrow, or after, Mrs. Donovan," said 
Bessy, as she stood up and rested her hand on the little old chair. 
"But I promised my grandfather to be home early; and he might be 
sending Peg Brady to know what is delaying me."
	"Go wud her a piece uv the road, Mat," said his mother, 
looking reproachfully at him, as if she thought he ought to have at 
once volunteered his services.
	"Oh, no," Bessy exclaimed; "'tis a fine bright night. An' 
sure I ought to know the road well."
	I'll put you apast the sthrame," said Mat, stretching out his 
arms and yawning, as if he felt very tired and lazy, and would 
much prefer being left to doze upon the bench with his poll against 
the partition, and a bright little star looking down through the 
chimney at him from a patch of blue sky.
	"See -- I was near forgettin' to tell you," said Mrs. 
Donovan, as Mat and Bessy were going out, "to tell your grand 
father about the soger."
	Bessy Morris looked at her with surprise, not unmingled 
with alarm. And Mat, too, stopped in the doorway, seeming at a 
loss to understand what she meant.
	"Bad cess to him," continued Mrs. Donovan, he tuck a 
great start out uv me, when he walked in, an' nobody wud me but 
myse'f, as they wor at the weddin'. I was hardly able to answer him 
whin he axed me where Phil Morris lived. Id brought the time uv 
the Coercion Act to my mind."
	"Oh, wait till you see himse'f," said Mat, who evidently 
thought the story was an old one.
	This mistake was a relief to Bessy, and she brightened up 
on seeing him walk out without waiting for further particulars; but 
as she walked quickly after him, her mind became troubled. The 
dragoon, it seemed, had been as far as the hamlet; and the object of 
his visit she feared might become a subject for gossip and even 
scandal.
	Mat Donovan looked up at the little star that was looking 
down at him through the chimney; and then Mat Donovan looked 
at the moon, which was tolerably bright. But star and moon failed 
to inspire Mat Donovan with a suitable topic for conversation. And 
failing to find it among the heavenly bodies, he bent his gaze on 
the muddy road, and seemed to search diligently for it there, as he 
walked on, with Bessy Morris by his side. Greatly to his surprise, 
he found himself at the stream before he had spoken one word to 
her. He strode across and reached her his hand. She placed her foot 
on the single stepping-stone, and leaped lightly over.
	"'Tis a fine night," said he, still holding her hand.
	"Very fine," she replied. "Good-night."
	He was looking at the moon again, and seemed to forget 
that he had hold of her hand, when they were both startled by the 
words:
	"Wisha, is id there ye are?"
	It was only Peg Brady. who had been sent by Bessy's 
grandfather to meet her. And Peg laughed, as if Mat Donovan 
holding Bessy Morris by the hand and looking at the moon were 
the best joke in the world. But there was something in the laugh 
which Bessy did not like. And for an innocent, good-natured, 
"harmless sort of a girl" like Peg Brady, her glance was very sly 
indeed, as, turning to Mat, she said:
	"The little house undher the hill, Mat?"
	"God be wud ould times," returned Mat, with a shake of the 
head and a smile, in which there was something so sad that Bessy 
Morris fixed that thoughtful, inquiring look upon him, and then 
looked down at the moonbeams shimmering in the little stream.
	What did he mean? Might it be that he had been told 
something about her, and that he was sorry she was no longer the 
Bessy Morris of "old times?"
	"What's comin' over me at all?" he thought, after bidding 
them good-night. "Sure I never expected she'd ever think uv me 
except as a friend and a neighbour. An' she's as friendly an' plasin' 
in every way as ever I see her. But, for all that, I feel quarer than 
ever I felt in my life. She looks some way sorrowful at me 
sometimes, just as if she knew what was in my mind. I must take 
care an' not let her know, for I know id would throuble her. An' 
sorry I'd be to give her throuble. Well, God bless her! anyway," he 
added, stopping, just where she had stopped an hour or two before. 
"The like uv her is not within the walls uv the world."
	He looked at the clipped hedge, and up at the old cherry 
tree, and down towards the school-house, behind the quarry. And 
the hedge grew green, and the ripe cherries peeped from among the 
leaves, and he, too, heard the twitter of the birds, and the song of 
the thrush, and the lowing of the kine; and he waited for the shout 
of the children "just let loose from school." The candle was, just 
then, laid in its usual place in the little window, and its light 
recalled him to the living Present. The "living Present?" And the 
"dead Past?" We hold that the Past is the more living of the two, 
some times.
	Mat Donovan looked at the outline of the mountains, and 
all around the horizon.

Hi for it, hi! for it, hi! for it still,
And hi! for the little house under the hill."

 -- he sang, as he closed the little gate of the "haggart," which, no 
doubt, Nelly had left open when she came to pull the leeks for her 
mother's supper.
	Mat Donovan's house was not "under," but rather on the top 
of a hill. But Peg Brady had her own reason for her allusion to a 
little house that was under a hill. And we fear Peg's reason was not 
a very amiable one; for she shook her head and repeated the 
phrase, "the poor fool!" several times on her way home, glancing 
at the same time from the corners of her eyes at Bessy Morris.
	The light in the little window recalled another dreamer 
besides Mat Donovan from the dead Past to the living Present. This 
dreamer was a woman. She sat alone at a window. Her face was 
pale and very beautiful; and her white arm gleamed like snow in 
the moonlight through her abundant dark hair, which had fallen 
down and flowed in glossy waves over the little table upon which 
the arm was leaning. Her lips were parted, and her face wore a 
look of sadness, as she gazed intently at the moon. She was 
dreaming. She was walking by the sea-side -- not alone. She leant 
upon the arm of one whom she regarded as a very dear friend; one 
who to her mind was a superior being -- something higher and 
nobler than ordinary mortal men -- but whom to regard as more 
than a friend she would have thought a crime. The waves stole in 
softly over the smooth sand. The wide expanse of waters was calm 
as her own soul. They stood still, neither looking at the other, and 
gazed along the tranquil main. And she was happy, and thought he 
must be so too. But how rudely was she awakened from that happy 
dream! It is the thought of this awaking that has brought that look 
of pain into her face, upon which the cold moonlight falls like 
spray upon a lily. And while her mild blue eyes are raised to the 
pale moon, a gleam of light, as if a little star had peeped over the 
brow of the hill, shines through the branches of the elm tree  -- and 
Mary Kearney is recalled to the living Present; for she knows it is 
the light in Mat Donovan's window. She looks around her, as if 
fearful of being observed; but she is alone, and the light laugh of a 
girl from the next room assures her that her absence has not been 
remarked upon, or Grace would have come to seek her. She ties up 
her hair with a steady hand; and joins the laughing circle with a 
face so calm and unruffled that no one could for a moment have 
suspected that it ever wore a look of pain.



CHAPTER XLIX.

IN THE LONESOME MOOR -- MEDITATING MURDER -- 
DARBY RUADH THINKS HIMSELF BADLY USED -- TOM 
HOGAN HAS AN ARGUMENT AGAINST PHIL LAHY.

	THE light in Mat Donovan's little window called a third 
dreamer back from the dead Past to the living Present. He, too, was 
gazing on the moon, which shed its silvery light upon him as softly 
as upon the pale face and mild eyes of the lovely girl who at the 
same moment sat alone at the window of the old cottage among the 
trees. His dream is of a golden autumn evening. He is standing in 
the shade of a row of elders, at the back of a thatched farmhouse, 
looking out upon the stooks in a newly reaped corn-field. His hand 
rests on the shoulder of a blushing girl; and he tells her that the 
field is his, and points out how thickly it is studded with stooks, 
and what a rich harvest it will prove. The scene changes to a bright 
fireside. The blushing girl is a happy wife with an infant at her 
breast, listening to the prattle of three rosy children who crowd 
about their father's knees as he takes his accustomed place by the 
hearth after the day's toil. And, though his toil was hard, he did not 
grudge it so long as he could keep that hearth warm for those 
happy prattlers, and feel that at least the dread of want would never 
cast a shadow upon that dear face bent so sweetly over the sleeping 
infant. But the gleam of light from Mat Donovan's little window 
makes him start to his feet. The bright hearth is quenched for ever. 
The mother and children are cowering over a few embers in a 
wretched hovel. The fields which his toil had made fruitful are 
added to the broad acres of his wealthy neighbour, whose gold 
induced the irresponsible absentee landlord to do the deed that left 
him a pauper, with no prospect in the wide world before him but a 
pauper's grave. He had been leaning against a bank out in the 
lonesome bog -- one of those banks upon which Billy Heffernan 
loved to recline, and revel in bliss till he would scorn to claim 
relationship to royalty itself! But far different from Billy 
Heffernan's visions were those of him who now, kneeling upon one 
knee, and with one hand resting upon the black mould, looked 
cautiously around the desolate moor. There scarcely could have 
been any necessity for this caution; for at that hour, and in that 
place, it was extremely unlikely that any human eye could observe 
his movements. He took a gun from where it lay beside the bank, 
and after carefully examining the lock, placed it at half cock. As he 
was about letting down the hammer again, a sound like a sigh, or a 
deep breathing, close to his ear, made him pause, and a sensation 
of fear crept through his frame. A shadowy object passed over his 
head, and, on casting his eyes upwards, he beheld something 
between him and the sky which filled him with amazement and 
terror. In shape it was a bird; but of such monstrous dimensions, 
that it seemed like a great cloud hanging in the air. For a moment 
he thought it was only a cloud; but the slow, regular waving of the 
huge wings satisfied him that it was a living thing. The long snake-
like head and neck were thrust out towards him, and in his terror he 
let the gun fall from his nerveless grasp. The head was quickly 
drawn back, and the monstrous bird waved its huge wings, and 
sailed away through the moonlit air. He followed it with his eyes 
till it dropped on the brink of the water that covered a large portion 
of the bog like a lake. And now he saw it was only a heron that had 
lodged for a moment on the bank above his head. While he thought 
it high up in the air, the bird was within a few feet of him; and 
hence the illusion by which he was so terrified. With an 
exclamation of scorn at being frightened like a child, he stooped to 
pick up his gun. But he had been lying near the brink of a square 
bog-hole filled with water, and the gun had fallen into it, and, of 
course, sunk to the bottom. He knew the hole was eight or ten feet 
deep, and that to attempt recovering the gun would be useless. He 
ground his teeth with rage; but after gazing round the silent moor, 
and up at the peaceful moon, it occurred to him that the weapon 
had been snatched, as it were, by the hand of Providence, from his 
grasp; and the thirst for vengeance ceased to burn within him, and 
he felt as if God had not abandoned him.
	"I must see about gettin' id up anyway," he observed to 
himself, "or poor Barney might get into throuble about id. He tould 
me he was bringin' id to Mat Donovan to put a piece on the stock, 
where the doctor broke id when he fell on the ice. But he's such a 
fool he won't remimber the bush he stuck id in when he med off 
afther the hounds. I don't know what put id into my head to take a 
fancy to such an ould Queen Anne, when this is handier and surer." 
And he took a horse-pistol from his breast and clutched it firmly in 
his hand. He looked down into the square bog-hole, and touched 
the smooth black surface of the water with his hand. The action 
reminded him of the holy water with which he used to sprinkle 
himself on entering and leaving the chapel before his clothes had 
become too ragged to allow him to appear with decency among the 
congregation; and involuntarily he sprinkled his forehead, and 
made the sign of the Cross.
	"There's some great change afther comin' over me," he 
thought. "My mind is someway 'asier; an' the madness is gone off 
uv me."
	And looking at the pistol again, he replaced it in his breast.
	"I'll do nothin' to-night," he continued with a deep sigh, like 
a man overpowered by fatigue. "If I could lie down here in the 
heath an' fall asleep, an' never waken again -- I'd be all right. But," 
he added, rousing himself by an effort, "but -- I mustn't forget poor 
Mary!" He walked towards a road which looked like a high 
embankment, the surface of the bog having been cut away at both 
sides of it; and as he climbed up this embankment, the light in Mat 
Donovan's window again caught his eye.
	"'Tis long since I exchanged a word wad any uv the ould 
neighbours," he continued, "till Billy Heffernan chanced to come 
on me th' other night, an' I makin' a show uv mese'f. An' sure 'tis 
little wish I had to talk to any wan. But someway I think now I'd 
like to hear a few friendly words from some wan. An' that light in 
Mat's window reminds me how I used hardly ever pass by wudout 
callin' in to light the pipe."
	He looked wistfully towards the light, and then looked 
down upon his tattered habiliments.
	"I'm a quare object," he muttered with a bitter smile, "to go 
anywhere. But as 'tis afther comin' into my mind I'll turn back."
	Instead of following the road or "togher" upon which he 
stood, he crossed an angle of the bog till he came to the stream or 
canal in which Dr. Richard Kearney left the leg of his nether 
garment, and following it for a few hundred yards came out on the 
public road.
	The road was quite deserted. He reached the hamlet without 
meeting a living thing; and as he stood at the "cross," and looked 
up along the silent street, he felt a strange wish to steal through it 
without being seen by any one. He moved on like a spectre, 
treading lightly as he passed those houses the doors of which were 
open, and glancing furtively to the right and left at the lights in the 
window panes. On coming to the beech-tree be stood still and 
looked up at the pointed gables and thick chimneys of the 
"barrack"; and happening to glance through the kitchen window, 
he caught a glimpse of Norah Lahy's pale face. She was praying, 
with clasped hands and eyes raised to Heaven; and there was 
something in her look that moved him instantly to tears.
	"I wondher is id dhramin' I am?" he said to himself, "I can't 
remember what's after happenin' to me, or what brought me here, 
except like a man 'd feel afther the faver, or somethin' uv that soart. 
On'y I'd be afeard I'd frighten her, I'd go in an' ax her to pray for 
me, an' I know 'twould do me good. An' as id is I feel I'm the 
betther of lookin' at her; for no wan could see such a look as that 
an' not know there was another world besides this. I could kneel 
down on the road here an' pray myse'f; what I didn't do this many a 
day -- right, at any rate. I might go on my knees an' say the words; 
but id wasn't prayin'. The curses used to choke the prayers! I could 
hardly keep from tellin' God that He was a bad God! But I'm not 
that way now at all; an' maybe 'twas the Lord that sint me round 
this way. No wan lookin' at her could doubt there was a heaven. 
The angels are talkin' to her this minute! An' someway I think 'tis 
for unfortunate sinners like me she is prayin'. For sure she don't 
want to pray for herse'f. Oh, an' look at her now," be exclaimed in 
surprise, "an' how she smiles an' laughs like a child whin her 
mother came in. She wants to cheer up the poor mother that knows 
she won't have her long. The Lord save us! I feel my heart laughin' 
wud her! But I'd betther not let anyone see me standin' here," he 
observed, as he walked on, on hearing Kit Cummins calling to her 
husband to come home to his supper, and judged from the pitch of 
Kit's voice that Jack was down towards the forge, and must 
necessarily pass by the beech-tree on his way home.
	Mat Donovan was humming "The little house under the 
hill" by the fireside, while Nelly was turning the "quarters" of a 
griddle of whole-meal bread that was baking over the fire, when 
the latch was raised, and a tall, gaunt figure stood between them 
and the candle in the window. The fire, being covered with the 
large griddle, did not afford sufficient light to enable them to 
recognise the new-comer; and the candle being behind his back 
only showed the outline of his figure, in which Nelly fancied she 
saw something wild; and she felt and looked somewhat frightened 
as she thought of the "gang," which, according to common report, 
were just then prowling nightly about the neighbourhood. Mrs. 
Donovan, too, seemed alarmed, as she dropped her knitting on her 
knees, and stared over her spectacles at the man, who stood 
looking at them for nearly a minute without speaking.
	"God save all here," said he, at last.
	"God save you, kindly," returned Mat, starting from his 
chair, and moving towards him till he was able to see his face. "Is 
id Mick Brien?"
	"The very man," was the reply.
	Mrs. Donovan and Nelly exchanged looks of the deepest 
pity, but remained quite silent.
	"Sit down," said Mat, placing a chair for him.
	"I don't know," he replied, irresolutely. "I just see the 
candle in the windy, an' id reminded me to come in."
	"Sit down and take a hate uv the fire," said Nelly, in a 
subdued tone, and as if it required an effort to address him. "I hope 
herse'f an' the childher is in good health?"
	''They're on'y middlin', then, Nelly," he replied. "The 
winther was very hard."
	He sat down, however, and said more cheerfully:
	"I'm glad to see you lookin' so well, Mrs. Donovan. You're 
as young-lookin' this minute as you wor the night uv poor little 
Sally's wake; God rest her sowl. But sure I needn't pray for her; for 
she had as little sin on her as an infant, though I b'lieve she was 
goin' on thirteen years when she died."
	"She was a beautiful child," returned Mrs. Donovan. "But 
God is good; and maybe 'twas for her good, and your good, and her 
mother's good, that she was taken from you. God knows what is 
best for us all."
	"That's thrue," rejoined Mick Brien. "An' 'tis of'en I think 
'twould be well for the whole uv 'em if they went too."
	"Don't say that, Mick," returned Mrs. Donovan. "Ye had 
yer own share uv sufferin' and throuble; but there's no knowin' 
what might be in store for ye yet."
	"I'm afeard," said he in a hollow voice, "'tis gone too far for 
that."
	While his mother was speaking, Mat was hurriedly filling 
his pipe, which, after lighting, he presented to Mick Brien, who 
took it eagerly, but checked himself as he was putting it to his 
mouth.
	"No, Mat, I'm obliged to you," said he, handing back the 
pipe. "'Tis a good start since I tuck a blast; an' maybe 'twould be 
betther for me not to mind id."
	Nelly and her mother exchanged looks again, and the old 
woman shook her head sorrowfully.
	Drawing his chair to the fire, he held the backs of his hands 
close to the blaze that struggled from under the griddle.
	"Was id in the bog you wor?" Mat asked; "your hands are 
black wud the turf-mould. An', begor, there's enough uv id stuck to 
your old brogues, too."
	Mick Brien was taken by surprise, and seemed 
embarrassed. He could have had no legitimate business in the bog 
at that late hour, and felt at a loss what reply to make.
	Mat noticed his embarrassment, and, with instinctive 
delicacy, appeared to forget the question altogether; and turning to 
his sister, he said:
	"Are you goin' to let that bread be burnt?"
	She turned the four quarters of bread, and finding them 
properly baked, placed them standing on their ends on the griddle, 
so as that the thick edges cut by the knife in dividing the circular 
cake into four quarters might be fully baked. While she was thus 
employed, the door was opened, and two men walked in with an 
apologetic grin, holding their pipes in their hands.
	"God save ye!" said the foremost, as he approached the fire 
to light a piece of paper which be held between his fingers.
	"God save you kindly!" returned Mat, in a manner that 
plainly showed they were no welcome guests.
	The second man was advancing to light his pipe at the fire 
also. But the moment their eyes fell upon Mick Brien, both 
wheeled quickly round, and, lighting their bits of paper at the 
candle in the window, hurriedly applied them to their pipes as they 
made for the door, where they encountered something which drove 
them backwards into the kitchen again.
	It was only Tom Hogan, who walked slowly after them; 
and, after glancing at Mick Brien -- who never raised his head all 
the time -- and looking wildly about them, the two men, with a 
sneaking soft of "Good-night to ye," left the house.
	"Wisha, is that Tom Hogan?" said Mat -- for Tom was not 
a frequent visitor there. "Sit down."
	"I was down at Phil Lahy's," returned Tom Hogan, "an' 
Honor towld me he was up here. So I tuck a walk up."
	In fact, Tom Hogan had got quite a mania for talking about 
landlords and agents, and kindred subjects, since that conversation 
with Phil Lahy when his hands began to tremble in so strange a 
manner. Before that, he only cared to know about "the markets"; 
but now nothing that bore on the land question, or, indeed, upon 
any social or political question, from Columbkille's prophecies to 
the latest missive ornamented with a skull and cross-bones, came 
amiss to Tom Hogan. And he felt so restless and ill at ease all the 
evening, he walked down to Phil Lahy's the moment he was done 
his supper, for the sole purpose of getting himself abused as a 
"crawler."
	Mick Brien continued warming his hands, and never raised 
his head. Nelly took up the quarters of bread and laid them on the 
dresser, and, whipping the griddle off the fire, raked up the lighted 
turf that was spread out under it till it blazed so brightly that he 
was obliged to draw back his chair and close his eyes, as if the 
light dazzled him.
	Tom Hogan was quite as much astonished as the two men 
who had come in to light their pipes, on seeing Mick Brien sitting 
before Mat Donovan's fire; but, instead of retreating like them, 
Tom Hogan seemed fascinated by the gaunt and ragged figure over 
which the firelight flickered; and as the hollow eyes were turned 
towards him, he mechanically drew near and sat down on the chair 
from which Mat Donovan had risen when he recognised him.
	"Mick," said Tom Hogan, keeping his eyes fixed on the 
worn, emaciated face, "did they rise the rint on you?"
	Mick Brien seemed surprised, and evidently did not 
understand the question.
	"Did they rise the rint on you?" Tom Hogan repeated 
anxiously.
	"Is id the rint of the cabin?" he asked.
	"No," returned Tom Hogan, "but the rint uv the farm, 
before they put you out?"
	"Well, no," replied Mick Brien; "when the lase dhropped 
they said I should go, as my houldin' wasn't large enough. An' no 
matther what rint I'd offer 'twouldn't be taken."
	"So they never riz the rint?"
	"No."
	"What did I tell you?" exclaimed Tom Hogan excitedly, 
turning to Mat Donovan, his eyes lighted up with joy. "What did I 
tell you, Mat?" he repeated triumphantly.
	Mat was greatly astonished; for it happened Tom Hogan 
had never spoken a word to him on the subject.
	"What did I tell you, Mat?" he exclaimed a third time, 
apparently in the greatest glee.
	"Begor," returned Mat at last, greatly puzzled, "you never 
tould me anythin' about id at all, so far as I can remember."
	"They never rise the rint, Mat, when they're goin' to put a 
man out. Never. Don't b'lieve any wan that tells you anything else. 
Never. Such a thing was never known."
	"Oh, maybe so," said Mat, quite unable to comprehend his 
meaning, but wishing to be civil.
	"You may be sure uv id, Mat," rejoined Tom Hogan.
	"Make your mind 'asy on that p'int," he continued, laying 
his hand on Mat's knee, as he sat down on Billy Heffernan's bench. 
"No, Mat. There's nothin' so incouragin' to a poor man as to have 
the rint riz on him. For then he knows they're not goin' to disturb 
him, Mat. Look at this poor man that held, I b'lieve, as good as 
fifteen acres more than I have mese'f; an' see, what a loss it was to 
him that the rent wasn't riz on him. There's nothin' like a rise to 
give a poor man courage. I must go an' find Phil Lahy, an' have a 
talk wud him. He thinks there's no wan able to argue these p'ints 
but himse'f. But let me alone if I don't open his eyes for him. 
Good-night to ye." He turned round at the door and asked: "Ah, 
thin, Mat, what was Wat an' Darby doin' here?"
	"They on'y came in to redden their pipes," Mat replied.
	"Oh, is that all? Well, I must go look for Phil Lahy to open 
his eye for him."
	"An' I wondher where them fellows wor?" Mat muttered, 
after appearing to brood over the question for some time. "They 
passed up this way late in the evenin'."
	"Wisha, how do I know?" his sister replied, as if the 
question were addressed to her. "But wherever they wor, 'tisn't in 
the betther uv them, you may be sure."
	The two worthies of whom she spoke walked quickly and 
in silence down the road, seeming wholly absorbed with their 
pipes.
	"'Tis an admiration" said Wat Corcoran, at last, "how long 
he stuck about the place. I thought he'd be gone uv his own accord 
long ago."
	"So did we all," returned Darby Ruadh. "But whin we 
found him thatchin' the cabin, the masther said he should get 
notice. He's not safe; an' begob, we'd want to keep an eye on him."
	"'Tisn't you or me he'd mind," replied Wat.
	"You wouldn't know," rejoined Darby Ruadh. "When 
they're in that soart uv way, whoever comes next to hand'll meet id. 
They're d--n fools," continued Darby mildly. "They seldom or ever 
knock down the right bird. Now, he'd as soon stretch you or me, as 
the man that sent us; an' that's foolish."
	"What about Tom Hogan?" Wat asked.
	"Well, from all I can see, he must go."
	"There'll be no great throuble wud him. He'll get a thrifle 
uv money, an' he'll go away quiet an' asy."
	"I don't know that, Wat. Men uv his soart is the worst of 
all."
	"He knows nothin' about firearms, nor nothin'," returned 
Wat Corcoran. "He's always braggin' he never fired a shot.
	"Thim's the men, Wat, that'll get a fellow to do the job. I 
met some coves uv that soart in my time.'
	"Faith, be all accounts, you done some quare things 
yourse'f in your time, Darby."
	"Well, maybe I did, an' maybe I didn't. An', by --!" he 
added fiercely, "maybe I would agin, if id was worth my while. 
'Tis enough to dhrive a man to anything to think uv the beggarly 
way we're paid. They want you to put your life in danger every day 
in the year -- an to swear anything they ax you besides; an', by --, 
you're not paid betther than a cowboy afther."
	"'Tis a hard life," returned Wat Corcoran; "an' 'tis of'en I do 
be wishin' to give id up, an' turn to somethin' else.
But when wance you get into id, 'tis hard to get out uv id."
	"Unless a man could make a haul," returned Darby Ruadh, 
"an' make off to America. Good night, Wat."
	"Good night, Darby; an' safe home."
	They parted at the cross-roads; Wat Corcoran turning to the 
right towards his own house, and Darby Ruadh going on straight to 
Wellington Lodge.
	Mick Brien drew his chair still further back from the 
blazing turf fire. The heat seemed too much for him, for the 
perspiration stood in large drops upon his face; and when he took 
off his hat, they remarked that his hair was damp and clammy. Yet 
it was not the heat that so affected him. It was the smell of the 
newly-baked bread. He was fainting; but by a great effort he 
roused himself, and asked for a drink of water.
	Nelly dipped a cup in the never empty pail under the 
window, and handed it to him. He gulped down the clear spring 
water hurriedly; and, as he handed back the cup, he turned to Mat, 
and, with apparent cheerfulness, asked:
	"What news, Mat? is there anything at all goin'?"
	"No, then," replied Mat. "I don't know uv anything."
	Mrs. Donovan, who had kept her sad eyes fixed upon Mick 
Brien's haggard face, while her knitting rested upon her knees as if 
she had forgotten it, now rose from her chair, and, going to the 
dresser, poured something from a jug into a saucepan, which she 
placed upon the fire. Her daughter looked inquiringly at her as if 
this proceeding had taken her by surprise; but the old woman 
resumed her seat without speaking.
	"I think," said Mick Brien, "the weather is likely to hould 
up."
	"This was a fine day," returned Mat. "But I'm afeard 'twas 
on'y a pet day. Phil Lahy tells me we're to have a change uv the 
moon to-morrow; an' he says the almanac talks uv broken weather, 
wad cowld showers, an' aistherly winds."
	Mick Brien made no reply. His head drooped, and he 
seemed to be falling fast asleep.
	"Nelly," said Mrs. Donovan, "hand me that white bowl." 
She filled the bowl with warm milk from the saucepan she had 
placed on the fire; and Nelly looked quite frightened on seeing her 
mother present the bowl to Mick Brien.
	"Here, Mick," said she, "dhrink this. I know by you there's 
somethin' the matter wad you. An' if id be a touch uv an inward 
pain you're gettin', there's nothin' like a dhrop uv hot milk for id."
	On opening his eyes and seeing the bowl held close to him 
he started like one suddenly awakened from sleep. He looked at the 
milk and then into Mrs. Donovan's face, upon which he kept his 
eyes fixed for several seconds. Then taking the bowl between his 
hands, he looked at her again with a bewildered stare.
	"Drink id while 'tis hot, Mick," said she, "an' 'twill do you 
good."
	'Twas a great relief to Nelly to see him lift the bowl to his 
lips and drink; not swallowing the milk hurriedly, as he had 
swallowed the cup of water, but slowly and continuously, as a 
child will do.
	Mick Brien had been one of the most comfortable and 
respectable small farmers in the neighbourhood; and he and his 
handsome wife used to call in on their way from town for a rest 
and a chat with Mrs. Donovan, who was much respected by them -
- as indeed she was by all who knew her. And now that he was 
reduced to poverty, Nelly was quite afraid the offer of the milk, 
under the circumstances, might hurt his feelings, and be taken as 
an insult.
	Mick Brien handed the bowl to the kind old woman, and 
buried his face between his hands. He remained so long in this 
position they all began to look embarrassed, and did not well know 
how they ought to act -- fearing that to rouse him might look as if 
they wished him to go away.
	After some time, however, he raised his head, and 
stretching out his arms, but without venturing to look at any one, 
said with assumed cheerfulness:
	"Faith, I b'lieve 'twas fallin' asleep I was."
	"What hurry are you in?' said Mat, on seeing him rise; "sure 
you may as well rest yourse'f."
	I must be goin'," he replied; "herse'f 'll be wondherin' where 
I was all the evenin'."
	He had been lying many hours by that bank in the bog, 
maddened by hunger and the thought of the cruel wrongs inflicted 
upon him and his. He lay there waiting for the night, and bent upon 
having revenge. He lay there hour after hour, meditating a deed of 
blood; till the mild moon called up visions of the "dead Past." And 
then the light in Mat Donovan's window recalled him to the "living 
Present," and to his purpose. And it was only the waving of a bird's 
wing saved his soul from the guilt of murder.
	No word has ever escaped our pen intended to justify such 
a deed as that contemplated by this poor maddened victim of 
tyranny Yet when we think of his blameless life of patient toil; of 
his cheerful unquestioning surrender of the greater part of the fruits 
of that toil to the irresponsible taskmaster to whose tender mercies 
the rulers of the land had handed him over body and soul; of the 
pittance which he was con tent to retain for himself; of his terror 
and anguish on discovering that a felon hand was determined to 
tear even that pittance from him, and fling the wife of his bosom, 
and the little ones that were the light of his eyes, homeless outcasts 
upon the world; of the roofless cabin, the cold, the fever, the 
hunger, -- when we think of all this, we find it hard to brand Mick 
Brien as a MURDERER. And surely no one will for a moment 
class him with the human wild beasts with whom the writer of 
these pages was doomed to herd for years, and among whom at 
this hour Irishmen, whose only crime is the crime of loving their 
country, are wearing away their lives in the Convict Prisons of 
England?
	Mat Donovan stood up to open the door for Mick Brien and 
see him out to the road.
	"Good-night to ye," said Mick Brien, as nearly as he could 
in the same tone as he used to say it in after a chat and a smoke on 
his way from Kilthubber on market days.
	Nelly ran to the dresser; and then followed them to the 
door. "Mr. Brien," said she.
	He turned round, but Nelly seemed to have forgotten what 
she was going to say. She stood with her hands behind her back, 
and looked into his face. At last, while the blood mounted to her 
forehead, she quickly brought her hands round to the front, and 
pressing two of the quarters of bread against his breast, she 
wrapped his coat over them, placing his own hand so as to keep 
them from falling, and looking anxiously into his face all the time. 
He remained quite passive, gazing with a vacant stare straight 
before him. Seeing no sign of displeasure in his look, she 
cautiously withdrew her hand as if in doubt whether he would 
continue to hold the bread where she had placed it. He did continue 
to hold it, however, and followed Mat outside the door without 
speaking a word.
	Nelly leant over the back of the chair he had been sitting 
on, and rested her cheek on her hand.
	"God help him!" said she.
	"God help him!" returned her mother, whose head was also 
resting on her hand.
	So they continued gazing into the fire.
	"God help him!" said Mat Donovan, as he resumed his seat 
by the fireside opposite his mother.
	These were the last audible words spoken under Mat 
Donovan's roof that night.
	Yet poor Mick Brien had unconsciously laid the train of 
much suffering for those kind hearts that sympathized so deeply 
with him.
	"Tom," said Phil Lahy solemnly, "I wish 'you would not be 
introducin' these subjects to me. I don't want to hurt your feelin's, 
or say anything offensive or insultin'. But indurance has its limits. 
An' now I tell you what, Tom Hogan, 'tisn't in human nature to 
have patience wad you!"
	"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Tom Hogan. "I knew I'd open his 
eye. I knew I had an argument that'd put him down. Ha, ha, ha! 
Begor, Phil, you're bet! Good-night to ye. Good-night to ye. 
There's nothin'," muttered Tom Hogan, as he closed the door 
behind him, "there's nothin' to give a poor man courage like a rise 
in the rint -- now an' then. Look at that unfortunate man, Mick 
Brien, an' wouldn't id be a lucky day for him if his rint was riz? 
What signifies a few pounds a year? I'll let Jemmy go sell that 
grain uv oats, as my face is marked afther that powdher. Jemmy is 
a good boy. An' how wild he was whim he thought 'twas any wan 
was afther touchin' me! I'm very fond uv that fellow! Aye, an' I'll 
give him lave to spind a shillin' in Clo'mel; unless he'd rather keep 
id for the races. Ha, ha, ha! the divil a word I left Phil."
	"Father," said Norah Lahy, "I'm afraid poor Tom Hogan is 
not right in his mind."



CHAPTER L.

TOM CUDDEHY FEELS "SOMEWAY QUARE." -- A GLANCE 
BACKWARDS TO CLEAR UP THE MYSTERY OF THE 
TRACKS IN THE SNOW.

	TOM CUDDEHY took down his hurly from the hurdle 
over the chimney corner, and examined it carefully, as a soldier 
might examine his sword before the battle. His eye could detect no 
crack or flaw; but to make assurance doubly sure, Tom Cuddehy 
let his hurly drop several times against the hearth stone, holding it 
by the small end as loosely as possible in one hand, in order to test 
its soundness by the ring it gave out. The great match between the 
two sides of the river was to come off next day in Maurice 
Kearney's kiln-field, and Tom Cuddehy's twenty picked men had 
reported themselves ready in all respects to meet the Knocknagow 
boys on their own chosen ground. The excitement at both sides of 
the river was at its height; and it was known that Mat Donovan had 
despatched a messenger all the way to Cloughshannavo, for Tom 
Doherty, whom Mrs. Kearney had induced to go as servant to her 
cousin, Father Carroll, when he was appointed administrator of 
that parish -- to the great grief and sorrow of the Knocknagow 
boys; for Tom Doherty was one of their best hurlers. If Tom 
Doherty failed to put in an appearance it was the general opinion 
that victory would fall to "the farmers" -- for Tom Cuddehy's men 
were all farmers' sons --  while Mat Donovan's were all "labouring 
men." But, in spite of these favourable omens, Tom Cuddehy put 
back his hurly in its usual resting-place with a heavy sigh.
	That accidental meeting with his old sweetheart the day 
before had awakened a curious feeling in his breast, which he 
described as "someway quare." The young man from the mountain 
had spent the night at old Paddy Laughlan's, and Tom had just 
been told that the old man and his intended son-in-law had ridden 
away together after breakfast to get the marriage articles drawn by 
Attorney Hanly, if they were fortunate enough to catch that 
eccentric limb of the law at home. So Tom Cuddehy sighed, and 
wished that dreary Saturday were well over; for nothing less, he 
thought, could rouse him to shake off that "someway quare" state 
of mind than the excitement of the hurling match between the two 
sides of the river. He was throwing his riding-coat over his 
shoulders to go out, when the half-door was flung open, and Lory 
Hanly in a fearful state of excitement stood before him.
	"I have a message for you," he exclaimed.
	Lory's voice was sufficiently startling in itself, and his 
manner of opening his eyes very wide added considerably to the 
effect. But, in addition to the voice and the look, the unusual 
circumstance of Lory's wearing an old straw hat of the rudest 
description suggested to Tom Cuddehy that his sudden and 
unexpected appearance could only be the result of some very 
startling occurrence, of the nature of which he could not form the 
remotest conjecture.
	So he stared at Lory, and Lory -- as was his wont after 
causing a sensation -- stared at him. While waiting to hear the 
expected "message," which Lory seemed on the point of projecting 
every moment from his half-open mouth, but which did not come 
for all that, Tom noticed that his visitor wore the immense straw 
hat in a peculiar fashion -- that is, the broad leaf was turned back 
into the high and somewhat comical mould in front, so that the 
straw hat looked like a bonnet put on wrong side foremost. It just 
occurs to us, however, that this attempt to convey an idea of the 
manner in which Mr. Lory Hanly was pleased to wear his hat on 
this occasion, will be quite thrown away upon most of our readers, 
including (as a matter of course) all our fair readers; for it is not for 
a moment to be supposed that one of them could remember what a 
bonnet was like, when a bonnet was a bonnet.
	"What is id?" Tom asked at last.
	"Miss Laughlan desired me to tell you" -- Here Tom 
Cuddehy's bitch, Venom, took it into her head to start up from her 
place in the corner with a vicious snarl, misled, no doubt, by that 
peculiarity of Mr. Hanly's which Mrs. Kearney designated his 
"terrible throat," into the belief that his "message" was anything 
but "a message of peace."
	"Down, Venom!" said Tom Cuddehy, who got very red in 
the face at the mention of Miss Laughlan's name, and somehow 
connected Lory's appearance with the marriage articles which Tom 
supposed Lory's father was busy in drafting at that moment. "Well, 
what is id you wor goin' to say?" he added meekly, as he lifted 
Venom up in his arms and flung her over the half-door.
	But here we must leave Lory to deliver his message, and 
Tom Cuddehy to act upon it or not, as he thought fit. We must 
even leave the great hurling-match in Maurice Kearney's kiln-field 
undecided -- to which the message had no reference whatever, and 
in which we openly avow our sympathies are with the "labouring 
men"; and if Tom Doherty fails, let him not hope for mercy at our 
hands. We must also leave the reader in suspense concerning the 
result of the contest between Mat Donovan and Captain French -- 
and here again we are heart and soul against the "aristocrat"; 
though we by no means approve of Tom Doherty's knocking down 
old Major French's steward for confidently predicting the captain's 
victory, and offering to lay a gallon of beer thereon. But we were 
about to say that we must leave these exciting events undecided, 
and interrupt the regular course of our chronicle, in order to throw 
light upon certain circumstances of which the reader may have 
caught fitful glimpses in the foregoing chapters, and which, 
perhaps, ought to have been made clear long before now. And for 
this purpose the courteous reader will please to go back with us a 
year or two, and take a rapid glance at one or two new faces and 
scenes; after which we shall return to our old friends, and follow 
their fortunes, through gloom and through gladness, over oceans 
and into strange lands, till we kneel by the graves of some, and -- 
God be praised! -- feel our heart beat quick while we tell of the 
happiness of others.
	A young man in the garb of an ecclesiastical student was 
pacing up and down in front of a long, low, thatched house, which 
might be taken for an ordinary farm-house of the humbler sort 
were it not for its green hall-door -- the fan light of which was 
quite hidden by the eave -- and the three good-sized windows of 
twelve panes each, two at one side and one at the other of the door, 
which was not exactly in the middle, and suggested the idea that 
the room at one side of the hall was twice the size of that on the 
other side. The field in which the house stood -- and there was no 
gravelled space before the door or round the house, and no avenue 
but a pathway from which the grass had been worn off -- would be 
by no means a favourable sample of the "emerald isle," for it was 
dry and dusty-looking, and so bare that the old white donkey who 
had leave to roam at will, without let or hindrance, over the whole 
two acres, seemed to have given up as hopeless the task of 
gathering a belly-full -- there being no thistles within the enclosure 
-- and philosophically resigned himself to that state of existence 
which, it is said the canine species either affect or are doomed to, 
and which is popularly supposed to consist in "hunger and ease." 
The country, as far as the eye could reach in front and rear, and on 
one side of the house, was treeless and without hedges, the fences 
being either of stone or clay, and presented generally that sterile 
appearance which we have just noticed in the old donkey's 
paddock. But though this was the general aspect of the landscape 
on the right and left, and in front of the young student as he closed 
his book on reaching the low wall of loose stones that divided the 
lawn from a potato-field to the right of the cottage; far different 
was the picture he had before him when he turned full round, and 
the rich green slopes of Hazelford met his gaze. The demesne was 
only divided from the field in which he stood by a little river that 
seemed to belong more to the poorer than to the more favoured 
portion of the landscape, from which it was shut out by the hazels 
which grew so thickly along the bank, that, except at a few places, 
narrow and far apart, the existence of the stream could be known to 
the denizens of this paradise only by its dreamy murmurings as it 
wound round the roots of trees, and coiled into hollows and 
caverns, or dashed itself fretfully against some little promontory of 
rock, as if it sought, or would make for itself, an entrance into the 
shady woods and sunny meadows of which it had caught glimpses 
as it hurried down the furze-covered hill in the distance, where it 
ceased to be a mere brook, and was first honoured with the name 
of river. But strive and murmur as it would, the cool groves and 
sunny meadows were for bidden ground, and the river went its way 
to the great ocean without ever once reflecting the fair scenes 
around Hazelford Castle in its bosom.
	There was something in the deep-set eyes of the young 
student as they dwelt upon these fair scenes, that might suggest the 
thought that he, too, felt that he was excluded from them. There 
were fair forms gliding backwards and forwards upon a terraced 
walk under the ivied wall of the castle, and his pale face flushed on 
observing a field-glass, or telescope, directed towards himself, and 
handed from one to another of a group of ladies, who had evidently 
suspended their promenading for the purpose of surveying him. He 
mechanically looked around him for some less exposed place 
where he could continue his walk, but there was not a tree or bush 
near the cottage to screen him, except two old grey sally-trees, that 
served the purpose of piers to the wooden gate at the road. His first 
impulse was to walk down to the river, where he would be 
screened by the bushes on the opposite bank; but this, he thought, 
would look as if he wanted to get a nearer view of the group on the 
terrace, who seemed to concern themselves so much with his 
movements; and throwing back his shoulders, and holding his head 
very high, he faced towards the cottage, and pushing in the green 
hall-door, with the fanlight up in the thatch, turned into the parlour 
and sat down by the window.
	Father Carroll was lying on a very stiff-looking straight-
backed sofa, after a long ride to the farthest-away part of his 
parish. He was mentally contrasting his uncomfortable couch with 
the soft velvety loungers in the dean's well furnished rooms, when 
the young student entered.
	"Well, Arthur," he asked, "has Edmund made his 
appearance yet?"
	"No," was the reply, "though he ought to be here before 
now."
	"And why have you come in?"
	"Those women at the castle are so unmannerly, I couldn't 
stand it."
	"What did they do to you?" the priest asked, smiling. for 
the student's sensitiveness was a source of amusement to his 
friends.
	"They looked at me," he replied in a tone of displeasure.
	A hearty laugh from the priest prevented his finishing the 
sentence, and he turned to his book without attempting any further 
explanation.
	The priest looked round his scantily furnished room, with 
its bare walls and uncarpeted floor. The least bit of moulding on 
the ceiling would, he thought, be a relief to his eyes --  to say 
nothing of hangings to the windows, or a more modern article of 
furniture in lieu of the old mahogany concern called a desk, with 
its eight or ten drawers, and their brass handles like the mounting 
of a coffin; though this same desk was the especial pride and glory 
of Mrs. Hayes, the housekeeper, who always watched the faces of 
visitors when she flung open the parlour door to see the effect 
produced by the mahogany desk and its brass handles. "But there's 
nothing like independence," said Father Carroll to himself. "I 
wouldn't go back again as curate for a good deal. And I'll be 
economical for a while, and will soon be able to furnish the old 
cottage comfortably. I'm sorry now I never thought of laying by a 
little money."
	"Do you think," the young student asked, "I ought to go 
back to the college for another year?"
	"I certainly think you ought," returned the priest. "You may 
have a vocation, though you fancy you have not. Or it may come in 
good time, if God wills it. I was at times myself perplexed and in 
doubt as you are now; but it all passed away."
	"But I never had a wish to be a priest from proper motives. 
Since I was born, my mother's daily prayer has been that she would 
live to see me a good priest, and I cannot bear the thought of 
disappointing her hopes, particularly since the failure of this 
unlucky bank has left us in rather straitened circumstances. Nearly 
all that was left by my father to educate me for a profession is 
gone; and 'tis fearful to think that so much has been thrown away 
upon me; and here I am now and don't know what course to take, 
even if I had the courage to tell my mother the state of my mind. 
But will it not be like acting a lie to go back again?"
	"I don't think so," returned Father Carroll, "unless you take 
the loss of more time and money into account."
	"The time, and the money, too, would be lost even if I did 
not return to college, for I could not make up my mind what to do 
next, for some time at least. Indolence and pride are my besetting 
sins. My only idea in reference to becoming a priest was that it was 
the easiest way to become a gentleman, and have people putting 
their hands to their hats for me."
	"I don't know that most of us have not some such notion as 
that," returned Father Carroll, laughing. "I think you will be a 
priest yet."
	"Here is Edmund," exclaimed the student, his sad face 
lighting up with pleasure as he hurried out to welcome his friend, 
who had just leaped off a car on the road, and vaulted over the 
gate, leaving the driver to open it and follow with his portmanteau 
to the cottage.
	Edmund Kiely looked the very opposite of the pale, slightly 
built student whose thin hand he grasped in his warm palm, while 
his blue eyes and fresh, laughing face beamed with hearty good-
nature. Edmund, as his little sister Grace used to say, was a "jolly 
fellow," never by any chance out of spirits for more than five 
minutes at a time. And yet the two friends whose society he most 
loved were Arthur O'Connor and Hugh Kearney. His father wished 
him to commence the study of the law, as he had a strong dislike to 
his own profession. But the young man had set his heart upon an 
open-air life, and in order to prevent his flying away to the 
antipodes, or to hunt buffaloes on the prairies of the West, Doctor 
Kiely promised to purchase some land for him in Ireland. when a 
favourable opportunity presented itself. And Mr. Edmund Kiely is 
now one of those enviable mortals who have nothing on earth to 
trouble them. He and Arthur and Father Carroll have made several 
tours together, which proved such out-and-out pleasant affairs, that 
he is now bent upon adding one more to the number.
	"I like the look of your house," he said, as he shook hands 
with the priest at the door of his thatched domicile. "There is 
something suggestive of the romantic about it. I have no doubt 
many a runaway couple dismounted at this door in the good old 
times, to demand the services of Father Cleary. Oh," he exclaimed 
on entering the parlour, "surely that armchair in the corner must 
have belonged to him. I can almost fancy I see the venerable old 
soggarth sitting in it at the present moment."
	"Yes; it and all the rest of the furniture belonged to him," 
Father Carroll replied. "I bought them all at the auction; and 
though, as you see, they are not over elegant or expensive articles, 
I am in debt on account of them for the first time in my life."
	"And talking of romance," Edmund went on, "of course, it 
was in this room Sir Thomas Butler's brother was married. I'd like 
to know all about it. Did you ever see his wife?"
	"No; but Arthur can tell you all about it. She was his 
cousin."
	"So she was, sir," old Mrs. Hayes, the housekeeper, who 
was laying the table, quietly observed -- somewhat to Edmund's 
surprise. "You'd think he'd break his heart crying after poor Miss 
Annie. 'O uncle,' he used to say, 'what made you let that old man 
take her away?' An' sure he wasn't an old man, though he was 
stooped and delicate-looking. We all thought he was only a painter, 
or an artist, as he used to say; but he told Father Ned who he was, 
an' when he saw poor Miss Annie so given for him, though she 
thought he was only a poor painter, he gave his consent to the 
marriage. The poor thing got delicate soon after, an' when she 
found that his brother and family were makin' little of him, I know 
it used to fret her. He took her away to Italy for the air, for he was 
as fond of her as of his life. But she only held two years, an' her 
last letter to her uncle would bring tears from a rock, 'twas so 
movin'. Her husband she said, was as kind an' lovin' as ever, an' 
she was sure he'd be kind an' lovin' to her little Annie when she 
was gone."
	"How did they happen to become acquainted first?" 
Edmund asked, as Mrs. Hayes took her bunch of keys from her 
pocket, and ostentatiously shook them, preparatory to unlocking 
one of the drawers of the brass-mounted desk.
	"Well," Mrs. Hayes replied, as she selected the key she 
wanted from the bunch, "herself an' Father Ned gave three weeks 
that year at the water. An', it seems, Mr. Butler spent all his time 
abroad learning the paintin' business -- an' sure, I never see a man 
so fond of anything as he was of makin' pictures. He painted all 
Major French's children while he was here, an' 'tis little they 
thought 'twas a near cousin of their own was paintin' 'em. There is 
the three of 'em beyond -- fine young women now," said Mrs. 
Hayes, pointing to the ladies who so annoyed the over-sensitive 
student a few minutes before. "But the pictures are all there still, 
an' if ever you are at the Castle 'twould be worth your while to look 
at 'em -- you'd think they wor alive. But he was always practisin'. 
That an' playin' the flute was all that troubled him."
	So, 'twas while he was at the Castle he saw Miss Cleary?" 
"Yes, sir; but he was shipwrecked, an' a'most dhrowned, an' Father 
Ned took him to the house where he lodged, an' Miss Annie nursed 
him; for 'twas thought he'd never get over it. An' afther that, he 
went about paintin' at the great houses. An' that's the way it came 
about. Poor Miss Annie was an orphan, you know, sir, an' lived 
wud her uncle ever since she came from the convent where she 
was educated. I'm told they had nothin' to live on but what he was 
able to earn, an' his brother an' all his family turned against him. 
'Tis said now that Sir Thomas is near his end, an', as he never got 
married, Miss Annie's husband, I suppose, will come in for the 
property."
	"And the title," added Father Carroll. "By the way, I trust it 
may turn out well for our friends at Ballinaclash."
	"Why, what difference can it make to them?" Edmund 
asked.
	"Oh, 'tis a matter of no little anxiety to a farmer to know 
what sort his new landlord will be. But any change is likely to be 
for the better in this case; for the present man is a rack-renter."
	"I never heard Mr. Kearney say anything against him," 
returned Edmund. "Though he is by no means sparing of censure," 
he added, laughing. " 'Tis a treat to listen to his comments 
sometimes."
	"Yes, but he has a lease," replied Father Carroll. "But 
numbers of his tenants have been smashed trying to pay impossible 
rents. I should not wonder if his agent, old Pender, is urging him 
on in this course. But I'm inclined to think his brother will be a 
kind landlord, unless he is led astray; and it is said, too, Sir 
Thomas will leave the property greatly incumbered."
	"Why, Arthur," exclaimed Edmund, "as your cousin's black 
eyes made so deep an impression on your boyish heart, I can't help 
thinking, if her daughter be at all like her, you had better keep out 
of her way, or she will spoil your vocation."
	"I am not likely to come in contact with her," returned 
Arthur. "Though, for her mother's sake, I should like to know her."
	"Of course, if he succeeds to the property, he will return to 
Ireland."
	"I think not," Arthur replied. " It is said he is a complete 
Frenchman in his tastes and habits, and I suspect he will always 
live on the Continent. But where are we going to go?"
	"To Tramore," Edmund answered.
	"Nonsense," returned Arthur. "Let us go somewhere where 
there will be no crowds. I detest the class of people you meet at 
these bathing places."
	"Oh, yes," rejoined Edmund, laughing. "I remember your 
notions in this respect. You used to say you could imagine yourself 
marrying a peasant girl or a high-born lady; but that you could not 
abide the bourgeoisie."
	"That is my idea still," replied the student. "They are a 
compound of ridiculous pride and vulgarity. But a peasant girl is 
seldom vulgar to my mind."
	"Well, I have seen something of all classes," Father Carroll 
observed, "and I must say I have met some women of the class you 
condemn, who certainly were neither ignorant nor vulgar."
	He's a humbug," said Edmund Kiely, as if his friend's 
remark had nettled him a little. "'Tis sour grapes with him, because 
a certain lady had the bad taste to prefer me to himself, once upon 
a time. You know we were always sure to be smitten by the same 
divinity, and though I gave him every fair play, he was never able 
to win a single smile the moment I entered the lists against him. 
And that's why be detests the sort of people one meets at the 
seaside. But what do you say to Tramore?"
	"I vote for it," Father Carroll replied. "I suppose old 
associations have something to do with it, but I can enjoy a stroll 
along the 'Great Strand,' more than I can the grandest cliffs and 
finest scenery we have. And then we'll be sure to meet some old 
friends there."
	"Hear, hear," Edmund exclaimed. "We start to-morrow. I'll 
introduce you," he continued, turning to Arthur, "to the brightest 
and most fascinating little being that ever turned a wise man's 
head. And an heiress, too, for she is an only child, and her father is 
as rich as a Jew."
	"I don't want to be introduced to her," was the reply. "The 
less I see of such people the better I like it."
	I suppose it is Miss Delany?" said Father Carroll. "I heard 
something about her. She has got an immense deal of polishing at 
all events."
	"And it has not been thrown away -- nor has it spoiled her 
in the least," returned Edmund. "But, by the way, I'm told Mary 
Kearney has turned out a downright beauty. My little sister Grace 
says I must marry her. She is twenty times handsomer, Grace says, 
than Minnie Delany. But I always thought her sister Anne would 
be a finer girl."
	"I have not seen them for a long time," said Father Carroll. 
"I'm in the black books with their mother, it is so long since I paid 
her a visit. Father Hannigan told me she was saying to him that the 
world was gone when one's own flesh and blood will forget you 
and pass by your door without inquiring whether you are dead or 
alive. In fact, I got what Barney Brodherick calls 'Ballyhooly' from 
her. 'After getting him the best servant in the three counties,' said 
she, never as much as to say "Thank you!"' I'm quite afraid to show 
my face to her. I suppose you have met Richard in Dublin?"
	"Yes, we had some pleasant evenings at his uncle's. He will 
soon be a full-blown surgeon. I am promising myself a few days' 
shooting with Hugh shortly, and, if you could manage to come 
while I am there, I'll make your peace with Mrs. Kearney, as I am a 
great favourite of hers."
	"Do you know any of them, Arthur?" Father Carroll asked.
	"No, I never met any of them," he replied. "But I often 
heard of them."
	"Come," said Edmund, pushing away his plate, "let us go 
out and look about us. Do you ever venture into Major French's 
grounds? I'd like to get a nearer view of those nymphs I caught a 
glimpse of as I was coming in. Unless it be that 'distance lends 
enchantment to the view,' they are worth looking at."
	"Yes, we can cross the river by the weir," returned Father 
Carroll. "There is a place there in a grove of large fir-trees called 
the Priest's Walk. Poor Father Cleary was accustomed to read his 
Office there for more than forty years; and it is even whispered that 
he may be met there still on a moonlight night. It was there his 
niece and her husband always walked, too, Mrs. Hayes tells me. 
But, according to Tom Doherty, there are other associations of not 
quite so innocent a character connected with the Priest's Walk; 
particularly one in which a French governess figures."
	"Oh, let us go to the place at once," exclaimed Edmund, 
tossing his white hat carelessly on his brown curls, "and you can 
tell the story of the governess; and who knows but we may catch a 
glimpse of the old priest and his beautiful niece? I wish I could 
believe in such things."
	"Just wait till I tell Tom Doherty that we are to start early in 
the morning. But what do you say to a glass of punch before going 
out?"
	"Oh, wait till we come back, and sitting in that old chair I'll 
drink the health of all true lovers, and sympathizing uncles, who, 
like kind, old Father Ned, will let them be happy."



CHAPTER LI.

MAT DONOVAN IN TRAMORE. -- MRS. KEARNEY AND 
HER "OWN CAR." -- THE "COULIN."

	TRAMORE -- the "Great Strand" -- is a household word in 
very many Tipperary homes. There the child gets the first sight of 
those waves, whose singing had been so often listened to in the 
sea-shell on the parlour chimney-piece; and there the grandsire, 
leaning upon his staff, gazes for the last time upon the same waves 
with wonder and delight more childish than the child's. Few 
married couples will you meet along the Golden Vale, and for 
many a mile to right and left of it, who have not wandered over 
that level, velvety strand, or reclined upon the sloping turf above 
the steep shore, while the bay flashed in the autumn sun, when 
life's journey seemed to them a very "path of rays." And when the 
corn is "drawn in," and the orchard "shook," and October frosts 
make it pleasant to come within the glow of the farmer's fire, see if 
the mention of "Tramore" will not call a dreamy look into the eyes 
of stalwart youths and blushing maidens!
	Yes, pleasant memories of the sea are cherished in the 
homes of Tipperary. Yet who could ever look upon the sea without 
a sigh for the homes of Tipperary -- and the homes of Ireland?
	Father Carroll and his two young friends were walking 
down the steep street towards the beach, when Edmund exclaimed:
	 "Surely, that is Mat Donovan with the spade in his hand. 
What on earth can have brought him here?"
	Mat was greeted as an old acquaintance by both Edmund 
and Father Carroll, but Arthur O'Connor had never seen him 
before, and contented himself with admiring the broad shoulders 
and sinewy limbs of the young peasant.
	"Miss Mary, an' Miss Ann, an' the Misthress, sir," said Mat, 
in reply to a question from Father Carroll. "We're goin' home to-
morrow, an' the misthress wouldn't be satisfied to have anyone 
dhrive 'em but myse'f, an' she sent for the car the week before last, 
so that I'm here now nearly a fortnight."
	The fact was, Mrs. Kearney found that her neighbour, Mrs. 
O'Shaughnessy, had her own car at the seaside, and discovered at 
the same time that she herself was by no means well, and required 
"the sea air" to bring her round. Mary pointed to the window-
curtain, which was fanning her mother's face at the moment, as she 
watched the breakers leaping up to clasp the dusky cliffs in their 
white arms, and then slide down and hide themselves in the bosom 
of the blue waves that rolled in as if to call back the truants to their 
proper home.
	"What do you mean?" says Mrs. Kearney with severity, on 
observing the laugh in Mary's blue eyes.
	"Is there not sea air enough here?" returned Mary. "And 
sure you can sit on the rocks, or on one of the seats on the 
Doneraile Walk. You have the sea air wherever you go."
	But Mrs. Kearney had made up her mind that the sea air 
could only be taken in its purity while driving in "her own car" 
down to the Rabbit-burrow and back again. And so the car and the 
old mare and Mat Donovan were sent for; and every day after their 
arrival Mrs. Kearney might be seen, with her plump hands folded 
over her stomacher, jogging slowly by the tide -- which ever and 
anon glided under the old mare's feet and startled the two young 
ladles on the other side of the car, whose exclamations were utterly 
ignored by their mamma, as she gave her whole mind to the "sea 
air"; with Mat Donovan "in an ezad" -- to borrow his own 
expression -- on the driver's seat. For Mat's legs were long and the 
driver's seat was low, and he always descended from his throne 
after a long drive, vowing that he was metamorphosed into the last 
letter of the alphabet.
	This jogging by the tide was a severe penance to Mary 
Kearney and her sister, who often turned round to gaze with 
longing looks at the promenaders on the "Doneraile Walk"; and we 
fear Miss Anne sometimes wished that the wheel would fall off, or 
that the old mare would obstinately refuse to walk or trot upon sea 
sand for love or money.
	But really, young ladies, you must have patience. The 
moon will be bright to-night; and -- don't you see the 
O'Shaughnessys driving behind you?
	"'Twould be worth your while, sir," said Mat Donovan, "to 
go out in a boat to the Metal-man's Cave, an' fire a shot in id. Such 
an ai-cho you never heard in your life! I'd give a crown to get wan 
box at the Knocknagow dhrum in id. 'Twould be like the end uv 
the world! Mr. Richard fired a shot in id a few days ago, an' id 
made the hair stand on my head. But I knew a box uv the big 
dhrum would be a show intirely!"
	"So we have Richard here," said Edmund; "that's 
fortunate."
	"No, sir"; returned Mat, "he cut away home. All they could 
say couldn't stop him. The minute he laid his eyes on that bit uv 
paper stuck on that windy above," continued Mat, pointing to a 
window they were just passing, "nothin' could keep him. You'd 
think that little scrap was a latitat, he was so frightened when he 
see it."
	"Do you mean the label with 'Lodgings' on it?" Father 
Carroll asked.
	"Yes, sir," replied Mat, "the Miss Hanlys wor lodgin' there; 
but their father came to bring 'em home unexpected."
	"Oh, I understand," said Edmund, laughing. "He is now 
rambling under the shadow of the old castle with the fair 
Kathleen."
	As they walked along the beach by the "storm wall" they 
were obliged to cross to the other side of the road, as some hundred 
yards of the footway were enclosed by a high paling with a gate at 
each end. This arrangement puzzled Arthur O'Connor a good deal, 
and he wondered what was the object of locking out the public 
from this portion of the walk.
	"The gates will be open by-an'-by, sir," Mat Donovan 
observed. "That palin' was put up to keep the men from speculatin' 
on the ladies."
	"Speculating on the ladies?" Arthur repeated, inquiringly. 
"Yes, sir," replied Mat seriously. "They're here from all parts -- 
they're here from London," he added, with emphasis, as if London 
were at the other end of the world. "There's a Lady Elizabeth, an' a 
Lady Mary, an' ladies the divil knows what here."
	"How did you happen to learn the names of those 
distinguished visitors, Mat?" Father Carroll asked with a smile.
	"Well, sir," Mat answered, with a very solemn expression 
of countenance, "Phil Morris is here, an' he's lodgin' at a 
mantymaker's up near the chapel, an' their women do be in there. 
You might as well thry to understand a turkey-cock as to 
understand wan uv 'em," added Mat with a blending of 
astonishment and indignation in his tone.
	"But about the speculating?" asked Arthur O'Connor, who 
was able to make nothing of Mat Donovan's explanation of the 
paling along the storm wall.
	"He means that the paling is intended to keep the men from 
looking over the wall at the ladies bathing," returned Edmund. 
"That's what he calls speculating on the ladies. But, Mat, what are 
you going to do with the spade?"
	"To bury Phil Morris, sir," Mat answered.
	"Is old Phil dead? I'm very sorry to hear it. It was a treat to 
listen to him telling of his adventures when he was out' in '98."
	"He's as stout as a buck," returned Mat. "I'm on'y goin' to 
bury him for his pains. If you walk down as far as the mast of the 
ship that was wracked last winther you'll see him buried in the 
sand, wud on'y his head above ground, and the sweat runnin' down 
his face from the weight on him. He says wan buryin' is betther 
than twenty baths."
	"Was there a vessel lost in the bay last winter?"
	"There was, sir. Wanst they get in apast them two white 
pillars they're done for. Though the fishermen at the Boat-cove 
tells me there's not an honester bay in Ireland, if the captain would 
on'y run the vessel in on the strand, instead uv tryin' to get back 
again."
	"By the way, Mat," said Edmund, "has old Phil Morris his 
pretty granddaughter with him?"
	"He has, sir," returned Mat; "he couldn't live wudout her, I 
b'lieve. An', begor, she'd surprise you. She's able to talk to the best 
uv 'em, an' to undherstand what they'd say. An' she was able to 
show the dressmaker how to manage some turns an' twists in a 
new-fashioned gown that she wasn't able to come at herself, afther 
takin' id asundher. I was standin' by mese'f; an' she might as well 
thry to make a watch as put id together, on'y for Bessy."
	Mat did not mind telling that he spent a good deal of his 
time picking shells with Bessy Morris -- which shells, in after 
days, he could never catch the slightest glimpse of, on the fire-
board to which they were glued, in Bessy's own little room, 
without a sigh and mental "God be with old times."
	The bathers were now flocking up from the strand, and 
Edmund Kiely, recognising a light-footed nymph among them, 
with her silky tresses hanging down her back, was about giving 
instant chase, when Arthur caught him by the arm, and requested 
that he would take the world easy.
	"It is Minnie Delany," exclaimed Edmund, keeping his eyes 
on the shining tresses. " Just let me see where she is stopping."
	"I'll show you the house," said Mat Donovan, who seemed 
to be a walking edition of that interesting weekly sheet, 'The 
Tramore Visitor.'
	"She's too damp yet," Arthur observed; "and possibly her 
nose is blue, for the water must be rather cold to-day. Let us get a 
boat and go to the cave, and you can see your friends in the 
evening."
	"They'll be out in all the colours uv the rainbow, by-an'-
by," Mat Donovan observed. "But I can't see wan uv 'em to equal 
Miss Mary."
	"Then this lady Mr. Kiely was about running after does not 
come up to Miss Kearney, in your opinion?" asked Arthur, who 
was greatly amused by Mat's free-and-easy remarks on things in 
general.
	"Not at all!" returned Mat indignantly. "She's a nice lively 
little girl, an' she has so many bows, an' feathers, an' goold chains, 
an' sich things, that people take notice uv her. But she's on'y an 
Ally Blasther near Miss Mary. But I see Phil Morris waitin' for me, 
an' I must be off to bury him."
	"But who is Ally Blaster?" Arthur asked.
	"Ha'penny dolls are called Ally Blasters," replied Father 
Carroll. " I suspect it is a corruption of 'alabaster.'
	"I hope you will introduce me to your Ally Blaster," said 
Arthur.
	Edmund Kiely was too disgusted to reply, and, buttoning 
up his "zephyr," he strode on towards the Boat-cove in advance of 
his friends, looking as if he considered their observations quite 
beneath contempt.
	"This is really a nice bathing place," Arthur O'Connor 
remarked as he sat at the window of his room in the evening. "But 
is it not a wonder that the people who build these handsome houses 
never plant a tree?"
	"Come, brush yourself up and be ready to come out," said 
Edmund, who had run up to his friend's bed-room to protest 
against his shutting himself up for the evening. "The belles you 
see, are just about to appear in all the colours of the rainbow, as 
Mat Donovan said." And Edmund pointed to a young lady at a 
door a little lower down the street, opening and shutting her 
parasol.
	The evening was calm and sultry, and as Edmund ran his 
eye along the row of houses opposite, he remarked that all the 
windows were thrown open and pretty faces were visible at more 
than one; but for some reason or other none of them as yet 
emerged into the open air.
	"What are they waiting for?" the young gentleman thought 
to himself, as the parasols at the doors became more numerous. 
"By Jove, Arthur, I'm in luck!" he exclaimed, aloud. "There she is 
in the bow-window just opposite!"
	"What are you talking about?" returned Arthur.
	"But I must warn you to take care of your heart and 
vocation," Edmund ran on, "for I am positively haunted by the 
thought that sooner or later you will come to look upon me as the 
destroyer of your happiness."
	"In the name of common sense what are you talking 
about?"
	"Look at that dazzling little being in the bow-window."
	"I see her but can see nothing wonderful about her."
	"But, my dear fellow, don't you see it is sweet little Minnie 
Delany." Here Edmund Kiely bowed and smiled, but the young 
lady seemed quite unconscious that the eyes of her admirer were 
on her. She had leant out of the window and looked up at the sky, 
and Edmund Kiely, following her example, saw that a heavy cloud 
was hanging like a pall above them. The bay, which an hour or two 
before looked so sunny, was now almost black. The fringe of white 
along the strand had become broader, and little eruptions of foam 
were bursting up here and there far out between the Metal-man and 
the two white pillars on the opposite side of the bay, marking 
where those treacherous rocks, so dangerous to the mariner, lifted 
their iron foreheads almost to the surface of the heaving billows, 
which now seemed roused from sleep by some mysterious agency; 
for

"There was not wind enough in the air
To move away the ringlet curl."

from Minnie Delany's cheek, as, with her chin resting on her 
gloved hand, she leant out of the bow-window and glanced up at 
the great black cloud hanging in the sky.
	"I fear the evening is likely to be wet," Edmund observed 
ruefully. "I'll ask Father Carroll to step over to see Mrs. Delany, 
and manage to have us all asked to tea. There will be no walking. 
There is Somerfield's carriage going back to the stable-yard, too. A 
splendid pair they are; Mat Donovan pointed them out to me as we 
were coming up, and I was honoured by a nod of recognition from 
one of the ladies."
	"Who are they?" Arthur asked.
	"Sam Somerfield's daughters, of Woodlands," returned 
Edmund. "It is he, or rather his father, keeps the harriers.
Hugh Kearney and I have often had a good run with them."
	Arthur O'Connor gave very little attention to what his 
friend was saying. He was listening with a look of surprise to the 
soft sweet tones of a flute, which he could hear distinctly through 
the hoarse chant of the breakers. The circumstance which excited 
his surprise was, that the music suddenly stopped almost as soon as 
it had commenced, and then began again, to cease as suddenly as 
before. This was repeated over and over till Arthur's surprise began 
to change to something like irritation; for the strain seemed 
familiar to him, and affected him strongly, as will often happen

"Should some notes we used to love
In days of boyhood meet our ear."

	"Can you recognise the air?" he added, turning to Edmund, 
who was pensively contemplating the movements of Miss Minnie 
Delany's fingers, as she twisted up her ringlets after taking off her 
bonnet -- and it would be no violent stretch of the imagination to 
suppose that Miss Delany had at least a slight suspicion that Mr. 
Edmund Kiely was so engaged.
	"Yes," he replied, after listening for a moment, "'tis an Irish 
air." But it stopped again before he could be sure what particular 
Irish air it was.
	Those snatches of melody were becoming fainter and. 
fainter, as if the performer were moving farther away from them; 
but they soon noticed them becoming more distinct again, till 
every note of the few oft-repeated bars could be plainly heard.
	"I see how it is," said Arthur. "He began to play at this side 
of the street, and now he is coming back at the other side."
"Yes, there he is," returned Edmund, "and a most picturesque-
looking figure he is, with his cloak and long white hair. He must be 
a foreigner, I should say."
	The musician commenced his melody for the twentieth 
time; but the window before which he stood was pulled down, and 
he let his flute drop into the hollow of his arm, and, hesitating for a 
moment, walked a few steps, and commenced again -- but only to 
meet with the same reception.
	He tried again and again with no better success, till he came 
within a door or two of the house at the window of which Miss 
Delany stood toying with her curls.
	"He must be new to the business," said Edmund, "or it 
would not be so easy to shut him up. Did you remark the way his 
hands trembled when that window was pulled down with such 
unnecessary violence? And, by the way, what thin, delicate hands 
they are. And there is something striking in his pale, melancholy 
face, too. He certainly must have seen better days."
	"'Tis a shame!" exclaimed Arthur O'Connor, as the poor 
flute-player met with still another repulse. "What sort of people 
must these be?"
	"I know the air," said Edmund. "It is the 'Coulin.'" For the 
poor musician had walked on to the next house without taking the 
flute from his lips.
	"Hang her!" muttered Arthur, as Miss Minnie Delany, too, 
pulled down her window; though she did it so slowly and 
hesitatingly, that the old minstrel played on seemingly unconscious 
of this last repulse. Or it might be that he was borne away to other 
scenes by the sweet melody --  

                      "The home-loving Coulin,
That's sobbing, like Eire, with Sorrow and Love" --

and that poverty and sorrow and humiliation were all forgotten. 
This, indeed, must have been the case, for the two friends 
observed, as he turned his mild, melancholy face side ways, 
towards the sea, that his eyes were closed.
	Edmund Kiely reddened, and bit his lips.
	Yet pretty Minnie Delany had done only what she had seen 
others do. She had not the courage to do as her own heart 
prompted. And, perhaps, the same excuse, such as it is, may be 
pleaded for some of the others who so rudely spurned the poor 
flute-player from their doors.
	When the Misses Somerfield, of Woodlands, would not 
listen to the "Coulin" -- for the splendid pair of bays champing 
their bits before the Miss Somerfield's door induced the old 
musician to begin with them -- how could those who had no 
carriages-and-pairs at all venture to listen to it? But if the Misses 
Somerfield, of Woodlands, had the faintest 'suspicion of who that 
poor flute-player was, they would have been charmed with the 
"Coulin," or any other tune he might choose to play, even though it 
were as Irish as "Garryowen" itself.
	He played on now with his face towards the "melancholy 
ocean," as if he were playing in a dream.

Though the last glimpse of Erin with sorrow I see,
Yet wherever thou art will seem Erin to me.
In exile thy bosom shall still be my home,
And thine eyes make my climate wherever we roam."

	Edmund had murmured the words softly to the air, and was 
commencing the next verse, when the sweet tones of the flute were 
drowned by the shrill voices of a couple of ragged urchins, who 
accompanied themselves with a most unmusical rattling of bones 
as they sang, or rather yelled --  

"Out of the way, old Dan Tucker,
You're too late to get your supper."

	The window was thrown up again by Miss Delany's 
mamma, who seemed quite charmed by the hideous din; and even 
Minnie stopped twisting her curls, and beat time to it with her little 
rosy fingers upon her shoulder. But still the old musician played 
on, with his pale face turned towards the sea.
	A hand -- an exquisitely fair and delicate hand -- was laid 
upon his arm, and a pair of large dark lustrous eyes were raised to 
his. It could be seen at a glance that she was his daughter. The old 
man started as his eyes met hers; and after casting a bewildered 
look around, a painful smile passed over his pale face, as he hid his 
flute hurriedly in the folds of his cloak. The girl was tall, and, in 
spite of her worn and faded apparel, singularly graceful. Her lips 
trembled and her eyes filled with tears as she drew her father away 
from the crowd of idlers that began to collect around the boys, who 
"yah, yahed," and rattled their "castanets," till Mrs. Delany seemed 
to be getting quite faint from the excess of her delight. They had 
not moved many steps from the crowd when Arthur O'Connor 
stood by the young girl's side and pressed a piece of silver into her 
hand. She blushed deeply; and before she could recover from her 
surprise, a second piece was placed in the same hand, and, on 
looking round, the fairest face and the heavenliest blue eyes, she 
thought, she had ever beheld, met her gaze. For a moment all three 
seemed spell-bound. The musician's daughter looked from one to 
the other of her benefactors, while they looked at each other. 
Arthur O'Connor thought, too, that the young girl who, like 
himself, had run after the poor flute-player, was the loveliest 
creature he had ever seen. She was the first to recover presence of 
mind, and turning quickly round hurried past the grinning 
vocalists, who were becoming alarmingly black in the face from 
the vigour of their exertions, and entered a house within a few 
doors of Mrs. Delany's. The musician's daughter gazed after her 
with eyes brimful of admiration and gratitude; but observing that 
her father had walked on without appearing to miss her from his 
side, she thanked the student with a smile, and hastened after him.
	Edmund Kiely was a spectator of all this; but he saw 
nothing distinctly but the musician's dark-eyed daughter. He 
watched her till she was out of sight, and then seizing his hat 
started off in pursuit.
	Half-an-hour after Edmund Kiely found himself looking 
down a steep, almost perpendicular wall of rock, into a little cove, 
where the white surf was swaying backward and forward over the 
round pebbles with a sharp crashing noise that pierced through the 
deep rolling of the waves like the rattle of musketry amid the roar 
of cannon upon the battlefield. To his surprise the old man and his 
daughter hurried on, and on, keeping close to the shore for more 
than a mile. He suddenly lost sight of them at this point, and on 
coming up to the place, he looked over the cliff with a curiosity not 
unmingled with alarm, for the thought occurred to him that they 
might have missed their footing and been precipitated into the 
seething waters below. His heart beat quick as he looked in vain 
for some trace of them; and a cry almost escaped from him, on 
seeing some dark object rising and falling with the waves some 
fifty yards or so from the shore. He soon, however, saw that the 
dark object was a mass of seaweed, and his eyes wandered again in 
every direction in search of the old musician and his daughter.
	"Surely," he thought, "it was just here I saw them last; and 
where can they have gone? So old a man would scarcely have 
ventured down that narrow pathway, where a goat might run the 
risk of breaking its neck. By Jove!" he exclaimed with a start, 
"there she is on the top of that black cliff, with the waves tumbling 
and twisting around its base. What a corsair's bride she would 
make!"
	After standing upon the rock for a minute or two, she 
waited till the receding wave allowed her to leap upon the strand, 
and in another moment Edmund watched her climbing, or rather 
bounding, up the steep pathway, with a step as light as the wild 
goat's. The path led up close to the rock behind which he was 
standing, and as she came nearer, her silvery tones fell upon his 
ear.
	"And that's the place where you first saw my dear mother?" 
said she, stopping a little below where he stood.
	"Yes," returned the old man, who sat upon a ledge of the 
cliff, concealed from Edmund's view. "When consciousness 
returned, she and the good old priest were standing over me by the 
side of that rock."
	"And they took you to the same house where we are 
staying. I'm so glad you have brought me to see the place!"
	"But I fear I have acted imprudently. It is strange I have got 
no reply to my letter before now. I very much fear some accident 
of which I have not heard must have occurred to the friend to 
whom I have written; for he never failed me before."
	"Oh, I am sure you will have a letter to-morrow; and this 
money the beautiful girl and the young abb have so kindly given 
to me will be quite enough for us until then. I only wish I could 
keep it as a souvenir of them. He is so very handsome; and she so 
exquisitely lovely! Did you notice them?"
	"No, I noticed nothing," he replied. "My debut as an. 
itinerant musician has not been encouraging."
	"I asked the name of those ladies for whom you first 
played," returned his daughter. "I thought it very unkind of them to 
close their window as they did, and they such stylish people. I was 
told their name is Somerfield."
	"Somerfield," repeated the old man, musingly. "I am 
acquainted with that name.
	"The Somerfields of Woodlands," she added.
	"The same," returned her father. "It is a strange 
coincidence."
	"How is that?" she asked.
	I'll tell you another time," he answered. "Let us go now. 
The fisherman promised to inquire for a letter in Waterford, and I 
am not without hopes that he may have one for us when he comes 
back. I scarcely expected your uncle would write, but it will 
surprise me much if the friend to whom I have written do not send 
the small sum I asked of him. I am determined to put my case in 
the hands of a lawyer at last, and see whether I cannot compel my 
unkind brother to do me justice. It is a duty I owe to you, my 
child."
	"My dear father," she returned, "don't be so anxious about 
me. Thanks to the care you have bestowed on my education, I feel 
I can earn my bread respectably whenever it is necessary."
	I trust it will not come to that," replied the old man. "You 
do not know how bitter a thing it is to be dependent upon strangers. 
But see, those heavy clouds are about to burst, and we must hasten 
back, or we shall get well drenched before we can reach the 
cottage."
	They retraced their steps for some distance along the path 
over the cliffs, and Edmund, climbing to the top of the rock against 
which he had been leaning, saw them turn to the left up a steep 
narrow road, and enter a small thatched cottage a couple of 
hundred yards from the shore.
	If we ventured to turn Mr. Edmund Kiely's thoughts, as he 
stood with folded arms upon that rock high above the surging sea, 
into plain prose, we fear some at least of our readers would not 
readily set him down for the sensible fellow he really was. He was 
startled from his reverie, however, by a vivid flash of lightning, 
followed quickly by a terrific thunder-clap that seemed to shake 
the rocks around him. Then, as the old musician had foretold, 
down came the Tam in a hissing torrent; and Mr. Edmund Kiely 
leaped from his elevated position, and pulling the collar of his 
zephyr up over his ears, made straight for the fisherman's cottage, 
with the fleetness of an arrow; persuading himself that his only 
earthly object was to escape getting wet to the skin. Raising the 
latch, he flung the door open, and standing inside the threshold, 
shook the rain from his hat and coat without even looking about to 
see who or what the inmates of the house might be. It was quite 
plain the young gentleman only sought shelter from the thunder-
shower The woman of the house, however, placed a chair in front 
of the fire, and invited him to sit down; and then he saw an old 
man with white hair sitting by the fire, and a young girl with dark 
hair at a table near the small window, writing or making a sketch 
upon the blank leaf of a book.
	I have just run in to escape from the shower," Edmund 
remarked. "It has come down very suddenly, but I do not think it 
will last long."
	The door was again opened before the old man could make  
any reply, and the fisherman entered with the water running down 
from his "sou'-wester," and over his oil-cloth jacket, as if he had 
just emerged from the waves. Thrusting his hand inside his 
waistcoat, he produced a letter, and presented it without speaking 
to the old musician, who snatched it nervously from his hand, and 
retired into an inner room, followed by the young girl.
	"Who is that old gentleman?" Edmund asked.
	"I couldn't tell you, sir," the fisherman answered. " He says 
he lodged here the year the French vessel was lost in the bay. That 
was in my father's time, and I was in Newfoundland myself. So I 
have no recollection of him. There wasn't near so many houses in 
Tramore then, and people used to come and lodge here in the 
summer. But, though poor he is, he's a gentleman. I'd take my oath 
uv that any day."
	"Ay, an' his daughter is a born lady," added his wife. "An' 
they're welcome to stop for a month if they like before I'd ax 'em 
for a penny. 'Twould rise the cockles uv your heart to hear her 
singin' the 'Coulin,' an' her father playin' id on the flute. I thought I 
was in heaven listenin' to 'em last night."
	The old man or his daughter did not return to the kitchen, 
and the rain having ceased quite suddenly, Edmund stood up to 
leave, resolving that he would find some pretext for returning to 
the cottage next day. Seeing that the young girl had left her book, 
with the pencil in it, on the table, curiosity impelled him to take it 
up and look at it. It was a well-worn copy of Moore's Melodies. 
Glancing at the blank leaf between the "Irish" and "National 
Melodies," his face betokened the utmost astonishment; for on the 
blank leaf he beheld Arthur O'Connor's handsome profile done to 
the life. The sensations created by this discovery were not 
altogether of the pleasurable sort; and! he remembered with some 
satisfaction that she spoke of Arthur a little while before as "the 
young abb." There was also an unfinished female head, the 
contour of which reminded him of some one, though just then he 
could not say of whom; but he had no doubt it was meant for "the 
beautiful girl" mentioned in connection with "the young abb."
	"'Tis most extraordinary," thought Edmund. "Arthur and I 
will most certainly be at logger-heads some day."
	He wrote with the pencil on the leaf -- "Don't be offended. I 
am a friend of the young abb." And slipping a pound note 
between the leaves, he replaced the book on the table.
	It is quite fine now," he remarked. "There is the moon 
rising out of the bay. I shall have quite a pleasant walk back." And 
bidding the fisherman and his wife "Good evening," he proceeded 
on his way back to the town by the "Doneraile Walk." Minnie 
Delany was among the moonlight promenaders on the walk -- for 
one of the advantages of this pleasant seaside resort is that five 
minutes after the heaviest fall of rain, the daintiest feet can venture 
out without fear of wet or mud -- but alas! Mr. Edmund Kiely 
deliberately turned from the smooth gravelled walk, and, 
descending to the brink of the steep shore, stood there for a good 
hour and more, watching the shimmering of the moonlit bay.
	Edmund Kiely did not sleep as soundly as was his wont 
that night, and in the morning he was pacing up and down by the 
storm-wall long before there were any fair nymphs to "speculate" 
upon among the breakers. He saw Mat Donovan at some distance 
purchasing cockles from a barefooted woman on her way from the 
Black Strand; and it occurred to him that Mat would be able to 
learn something about the old musician and his daughter for him. 
But Mat, with his purchase tied up in his red cotton pocket-
handkerchief, was gone before he could come near enough to 
speak to him, and he put it off till he should fall in with him in the 
course of the day. But during the morning and afternoon he looked 
about in vain for a sight of Mat Donovan. In the evening
he recognised Bessy Morris and her grandfather among th rocks at 
the Boat-cove, and leaving Father Carroll and Arthur O'Connor to 
comment upon Tom Steele's remarkable speed at the last "usual 
weekly meeting" of the "Loyal National Repeal Association," 
made his way over the slippery sea weed, and, after congratulating 
the old weaver on his good looks, inquired of Bessy whether she 
had seen Mat Donovan during the day.
	"I saw him buying cockles on the strand early in the 
morning," he added, "but I have not seen him since."
	"He went home to-day, sir," Bessy answered, looking very 
innocent and unconscious.
	And the fact was, at that identical moment, Willie Kearney 
and Tommy Lahy, sitting by the side of a hay-cock in the kiln-
field, were grinding those same cockles one against another and 
greedily devouring them; while Ellie was rolling the most beautiful 
"pair" of jackstones (consisting of five) ever seen, between her 
hands; and Jack Delany's twins were making desperate efforts to 
choke themselves with two monstrous lobster-claws -- cockles and 
jackstones and lobster-claws being presents from Mat the 
Thrasher, who was just then expatiating upon the virtues of a 
peculiar kind of sand, a small bag of which he was the happy 
possessor of, for sharpening a scythe, and holding forth in his own 
expressive and felicitous manner upon the wonders of the mighty 
deep, to the amazement and delight of Tom Maher and Barney 
Brodherick. And at that moment, too, Kit Cummins left off 
abusing her next-door neighbour, and pushing her dishevelled hair 
under her cap of dubious hue, stood outside her own door, and 
addressing all Knocknagow, gave it as her private opinion that 
Mrs. Kearney looked younger and rosier than her own daughters 
"afther the wather" -- an opinion which no one in Knocknagow 
ventured to contradict, unless a suppressed "gir-r-r-r-out, you 
bla'guard," from the next door neighbour, might be taken as an 
expression of dissent.
	"It seems Mrs. Kearney is gone home," said Edmund, after 
returning to his companions. "I'm sorry I did not see them."
	"They were wondering why you did not make your 
appearance anywhere last evening," returned Father Carroll. "I 
wanted to persuade Arthur to spend the evening with them as you 
could not be found, but he would not. And, by the way, I see Sir 
Thomas Butler's death announced in this paper."
	"What has that to do with my refusal?" Arthur asked.
	"He was Maurice Kearney's landlord," returned Father 
Carroll. "It may be a matter of some consequence to them."
	Edmund, seeing the fisherman, in whose house he took 
shelter from the rain the evening before, coming up from the cove 
with a boat-hook on his shoulder, hastened to meet him. The man 
immediately presented him with a letter.
	"Are they gone?" Edmund asked, after glancing at its 
contents.
	"They went early this morning, sir," replied the fisherman.
	"Where?" Edmund asked eagerly.
	"The Lord knows," returned the fisherman. "An' the Lord 
bless 'em wherever they go; for they behaved well to us, any way. 
There was some great news in that letter I brought from Waterford 
yesterday, but when my wife made the same remark they said 
nothin'."
	The pound-note was enclosed in the letter which Edmund 
now held in his hand. But there was no signature, no clue by which 
he could hope to trace them; only the words:
	"Many, many thanks -- but we do not now require it. May 
God bless you for your kindness. We shall never forget it."
	"And so ends my dream!" thought Edmund. "But 
something tells me I shall meet her again. She thinks Arthur is 
already a priest; it may be better for his peace of mind not to be 
told of that sketch. It was a wonderfully true likeness. I wonder has 
she made a sketch of me? -- Did you remark that girl with the old 
flute-player yesterday?" he asked aloud as he came up with Arthur, 
who seemed to have his own fancies at the moment.
	"She was very beautiful," he replied absently.
	"Beauty 'like the night,'" rejoined Edmund.
	"No," said Arthur, looking surprised. "She was singularly 
fair; and her eyes were blue."
	"There must have been something the matter with your 
eyes," returned Edmund. "I never saw such a pair of black eyes in 
all my life."
	"Oh, you mean the girl that seemed to be his daughter?"
	"Of course I do. Did you ever see such eyes?"
	"Well, yes. They reminded me of my cousin Annie, of 
whom we were talking the other evening."
	"Then, by all means keep out of their way-if you would. not 
endanger your vocation," said Edmund, laughing.
	Arthur O'Connor looked grave, and made no reply. He 
knew he had no vocation for the church. But he thought of his 
mother, and resolved to strive and pray for it.
	"This place is infernally dull, after all," yawned Edmund 
Kiely. "I'm tired of it already."
	One gloomy day in the following winter, Arthur was 
"pounding" for the examinations, in his room in -- College, when 
Father Carroll was announced.
	"Come over to the Ursuline Convent with me," said he after 
shaking hands with the student. "I'm going to see Sister Clare."
	Sister Clare received her reverend brother and his friend 
with bright smiles of welcome, and after innumerable inquiries 
about friends at home and abroad, she exclaimed in reply to a 
question of Father Carroll's. -- "Oh, I'll bring her down to you," 
and left the room.
	Arthur was so occupied examining a painting of the Virgin, 
copied, Sister Clare had just told him, by one of the nuns from an 
original of one of the old masters which a gentleman in the 
neighbourhood had lent to them, that he was not aware of Sister 
Clare's return to the room till he heard Father Carroll say -- 	"She is 
keeping up the beauty, I see."
	"Oh, she'll be quite spoiled," returned the nun. "Every one 
talks of her beauty."
	Arthur turned round; and if the picture he had been 
examining had moved its lips or its eyes, his look could scarcely 
have expressed greater astonishment. Yet there was nothing in the 
least miraculous to excite his wonder.
	"Don't you know Arthur O'Connor?" Father Carroll asked.
	"No," was the low, hesitating reply.
	"What is it all about?" exclaimed Father Carroll. "Ye both 
look as if ye had seen a ghost. This is my cousin, Miss Kearney; so 
don't be afraid."
	"I saw Miss Kearney once before," returned Arthur; "but I 
did not know who she was."
	"I remember," said Mary, with a smile and a blush.
	"Where was it?" Father Carroll asked. 
	"In Tramore," Mary answered.
	"Would you like to hear her play?" said Sister Clare.
	"Do give us a tune, Mary?" said Father Carroll. "Though I 
don't know I'll care much for your music after Flaherty. He was at 
Major French's a few weeks ago, and did me the honour of coming 
over for an hour or two occasionally -- but it was in compliment to 
your mother and her Uncle Dan, who, next to Sir Garrett Butler, he 
says, was the best friend ever he had."
	Mary went to the piano, and after a little hesitation and 
embarrassment commenced an Irish melody, and played it with 
such feeling that Father Carroll exclaimed -- "You really play very 
well, Mary. And one would think you wanted to rival Flaherty. 
That is his favourite tune; and you play it in his manner. Did you 
ever hear him?"
	"No, I never heard Mr. Flaherty play, though I often wished 
to hear him," Mary replied.
	"She ought to play that air well," Sister Clare observed, "for 
she is continually practising it. Edmund Kiely was here lately, and 
he would not let her play anything but the 'Coulin,' the 'Coulin,' 
over and over."
	"Ha! is that the way the wind blows?" said Father Carroll.
	Mary bent her head and laughed, but made no reply.
	After this Arthur O'Connor and Mary Kearney became 
great friends. He spent a week at Christmas at Ballinaclash, and 
two weeks in the summer -- besides meeting her at the seaside. Oh, 
those seaside musings and communings! But then Arthur's mother 
openly accused Mary of trying to lure her son from the high and 
holy path he had entered upon; an accusation which so pained and 
shocked the gentle girl that she insisted upon breaking off all 
further intercourse with him. Her brother Hugh approved of her 
resolution, and ever Arthur himself admitted that she was right. He 
pursued his studies industriously, and was among the students of -- 
College chosen to be sent to Maynooth at the examinations which 
took place a week or two before Sir Garrett Butler's nephew did 
Maurice Kearney the honour of becoming his guest. Arthur, 
however, preferred the Irish College at Paris to Maynooth, and was 
on his way to spend a day or two with Father Carroll before 
leaving Ireland, when he chanced to see Barney Brodherick and his 
black donkey in the main street of Kilthubber. There was some 
delay about the car he had ordered; and, as he would have to pass 
by the cottage on his way to Father Carroll's, the wish to see Mary 
Kearney once more, and bid her good-bye, became so strong, that 
he wrote a hasty line, asking her to be at the little window in the 
ivied gable to shake hands with him. If she had no objection, he 
said, he would like to see her father and mother, and all of them, 
before he left. But, if she feared whispering tongues might be busy 
if he called in the usual way, he would be satisfied with a good-bye 
from the garden. He gave the note to Barney, who thrust it into his 
hat, and, as a matter of course, forgot to deliver it till Mary's 
question, the evening after, reminded him of it, when she was 
wondering whose could be those mysterious footprints in the snow 
from under her window to the stile behind the laurels.
	"And now he is gone!" said Mary, after reading the note. 
Yes, he was gone; and in by no means a happy frame of mind.
	And now the reader knows more of the tracks in the snow 
than Mr. Henry Lowe; to whom we will return, just to see him safe 
out of Tipperary; that is, so far as his bones are concerned. But we 
do not by any means vouch for the wholeness of the young 
gentleman's heart.



CHAPTER LII.

THE BULL-BAIT. -- THE CARRICK-MAN AND HIS DOG 
"TRUE-BOY."  --  LORY PUNISHES BERESFORD PENDER, 
AND RIDES HOME BEHIND MR. BOB LLOYD, ON THE 
GREY HUNTER. -- MISS LLOYD INVOLUNTARILY SITS 
DOWN.

	MR. HENRY LOWE is pacing slowly and thoughtfully up 
and down the box-bordered walk in the little garden at the end of 
the cottage. He stops occasionally to gaze upon the blue 
mountains; and once or twice he stood upon the stile behind the 
laurels, and looked along the road towards the hamlet. But, 
whether gazing at the mountain, or looking along the road, or 
pacing the box-bordered walk, Mr. Henry Lowe's mind's eye is 
ever turned to the little window in the ivied gable. As the day of 
his departure drew nearer and nearer, he had been watching for an 
opportunity to speak to Mary Kearney alone. But whether it 
happened by accident or design, he never could find the 
opportunity he sought. She was always accompanied by Grace or 
Ellie; and once or twice, when he met her by herself, she found 
some excuse for going away before he could screw his courage to 
the sticking place. There was nothing to hinder him from saying at 
once and in plain words that he wished to have a minute's private 
conversation with her; but he couldn't make up his mind to take 
what he considered so decided a step. He wished to feel his way a 
little, and would prefer a casual meeting. But the fates seemed to 
be against him. He had observed that Mary was in the habit of 
walking alone in the garden about this hour every day; but until 
this morning the doctor or Hugh was always with him at the time, 
and he could find no excuse for leaving them.
	"Now," he thought -- looking at his watch and finding that 
it was past the hour when she was accustomed to take her walk -- 
"now if she does not come out as usual, I must conclude she is 
purposely avoiding me." The thought at first gave him a twinge of 
pain; but on reflection he said to himself that, if she were 
indifferent about him, she would not keep out of his way at all. He 
found consolation in this last-mentioned reflection, and continued 
his walk and his reverie. He thought that, if he were a man of 
property, he would, beyond all doubt, marry the beautiful daughter 
of his uncle's principal tenant, or that if he had not given up his 
intention of becoming a clergyman -- and if Miss Kearney's 
religion were not an awkward stumbling-block in the way -- what a 
happy quiet life he could live with her in some snug parsonage 
upon as many hundred pounds a year as he could get! But as both 
the property and the parsonage were out of the question, he could 
see nothing better, that was at all practicable under present 
circumstances, than a very sentimental love affair, involving 
voluminous correspondence, with a dim vista of something turning 
up in the distant future, that might prove a substitute for the 
property which he had not, or the parsonage which it was now too 
late to think of. His reveries were interrupted by the opening of the 
garden gate, and Mr. Lowe looked up quickly; but it was not Mary, 
but her young brother, Willie, bearing the accomplished jay in its 
wicker cage in his arms, followed by Ellie with her goldfinch. The 
day was sufficiently soft and sunny to suggest to Ellie that both the 
goldfinch and the jay would like a little fresh air and sunshine. 
Grace was just then practising a new song, and Ellie knew it would 
be useless asking her to trouble herself even about her own jay -- 
"My dear!" -- and Willie's services were engaged. He laid the 
wicker cage on a rustic seat near the laurels, while Ellie climbed 
upon the back of the seat to hang her little green cage upon a nail 
which she had driven into the trunk of an ash tree, sufficiently 
high, as she thought, to save her bird from the old grey cat, who 
sometimes came prowling about that way. Tommy Lahy had 
offered to catch the old grey cat and rub his nose against the wires 
till it bled freely, by way of warning; but this Ellie positively 
objected to, as there was no overt act to prove that the old grey cat 
entertained any felonious intentions whatever against her 
goldfinch.
	At first Mr. Lowe felt annoyed when he saw they intended 
making an indefinite stay in the garden; but then it occurred to him 
their presence would not interfere with his conversation with their 
sister, but, on the contrary, would make her feel more at ease. So 
he looked at his watch again, and took another turn up and down 
the walk. And now those tantalising tracks in the snow came into 
his head for the thousandth time. What could they mean? The idea 
that there was a "lord of the valley," who came with "false vows," 
as Grace suggested, was, he thought, utterly preposterous. Yet it 
was not quite so clear that there might not be someone who was 
not a lord of a valley and whose vows were not false vows. He 
could not, however, look upon any of the young men whom from 
time to time he had seen trying to make themselves agreeable -- 
and to all of whom she was equally gracious -- as likely to prove a 
very dangerous rival. Not one; not even the stylish young man in 
top-boots, with the horse-shoe pin in his scarf, who so astonished 
him by touching his hat and addressing him as "your honour." It 
scarcely amounted to coxcombry in Mr. Lowe to feel pretty well 
satisfied that he himself held a high place in Miss Kearney's 
esteem, and that in fact if any one held a higher, it was her brother 
Hugh. He wondered at her taste in regard to Hugh; but of course he 
was not going to be jealous of her brother. Yet a brother may 
sometimes prove a more formidable rival than lovers dream of; 
particularly when the world in general is so stupid as not to 
recognise his super-excellent qualities -- which happened to be the 
case in this instance. She was angry with her lady acquaintances 
that they did not fall down and worship him. And it must be 
admitted she was sometimes angry with Hugh for not being as 
enthusiastic as he ought to be about one or two dear friends of hers 
who, she thought, had the good taste to appreciate him. There was 
one in particular with whom she was sure he ought to have fallen 
in love. On one occasion this young lady, when presenting Mary 
with a bunch of flowers, ran to the end of the lawn for a little sprig 
of hawthorn and secured it in the nosegay; a rather odd proceeding, 
seeing that both sides of the road nearly all the way from the 
residence of the young lady to Ballinaclash were white with 
hawthorn blossoms. But the mystery was cleared up in the most 
satisfactory manner when she whispered into Mary's ear that the 
hawthorn was for Hugh; for all the world -- except Hugh himself -- 
knew that hawthorn blossom was "emblematic of hope." Hugh, 
however, took the blossom with a smile; and Mary said gravely; 
"She was in earnest." To which Hugh just as gravely replied, "Of 
course." Whereupon Mary became indignant, and told him she did 
not know "what to make of him," and that no one could know 
"what was in his mind"; and that she did not see why people 
should be "bothering their heads about him," with more to the 
same effect.
	Nevertheless, Mr. Lowe was not far wrong in suspecting 
that Miss Kearney made her eldest brother the standard by which 
she measured other men.
	He was glancing again at the window when his olfactory 
nerves detected the odour of the fragrant weed, and on looking 
towards the gate he saw the doctor leisurely approaching with his 
hands in his pockets.
	"What a fine day it is for this season!" the doctor
observed, waving away a little blue cloud that almost stood still 
before his face, and then stopping to admire his hand, which was 
sufficiently white and slender. "By Jove, there is quite a glow in 
the air."
	Mr. Lowe replied with a sigh; for he saw all hope of the 
looked-for interview was gone for that day at least. And, what was 
particularly irritating, Mary made her appearance at the same 
moment, and with that smile of hers, which more than anything 
else about her tended to turn his head, said --
	"What a lovely day this is, Mr. Lowe! I wish you could see 
the country about here in the summer. But the mountains at least 
are beautiful at all seasons."
	"Very," he replied, somewhat sulkily.
	"I hope you enjoyed the evening at Woodlands?" she asked.
	"Well, not much."
	"Because you had not the ladies, I suppose."
	"No, not exactly that. But the conversation was not 
interesting. It was all about landlords and tenants, and leases and 
ejectments, and that sort of thing. The party seemed got up 
specially to discuss such matters, I expected something rollicking, 
but it was nothing of the kind."
	"Had you Mr. Lloyd there?"
	"No, but his name was introduced several times. He was 
strongly condemned for the way he manages his property. He gives 
leases, and has no objection to small farms; and is, it would appear, 
in bad odour on that account. It seems They all feel bound to abide 
by a resolution adopted at some meeting of landlords a long time 
ago not to renew leases when they expire. Mr. Somerfield thinks 
the more independent the tenantry become, the harder it will be to 
manage them. He says Mr. Lloyd's tenants don't care a rush for 
him, as they have all long leases at a low rent."
	"Oh, if all landlords were like Mr. Somerfield," returned 
Mary, "Ireland would soon be a desert. There is not even one 
house now left on his whole property."
	"Yes," her brother observed, "and you can count the 
number of houses he has levelled if you have any curiosity out it; 
for he has left a gable of each standing as a monument of all the 
good he has done. But of course you know I allude to Sam; for the 
old fellow had nothing to do with it. On the contrary, I'm told it 
grieved him to see his old tenants hunted away. Hugh tells me, too, 
it was a dead loss to him, and that they are head and ears in debt, 
stocking the land was so expensive."
	"I'm heartily sick of the whole subject since last night," 
returned Mr. Lowe. "I think much of what they said was meant 
specially for me. But the more I hear about the relations between 
landlord and tenant, the more I am bewildered."
	Mr. Lowe did feel bewildered at the moment; for Mary's 
blue eyes would bewilder a sage, as she watched her young sister 
chasing the bold grey cat, who had come slyly prowling about her 
goldfinch.
	"There's something up," the doctor exclaimed, on observing 
Phil Lahy and half-a-dozen others crossing the lawn by the short-
cut from Knocknagow to the cross of Rosdrum.
	"Perhaps they are going to a funeral," said Mary. "They 
always go to funerals in that direction by the short-cut."
	"Judging from their looks and the hurry they are in," 
returned the doctor, "it must be something more exciting than a 
funeral."
	He stood upon the rustic seat in order to have a better view, 
and saw a man with a dog at his heels, accompanied by two boys 
who were making desperate efforts to take sufficiently long strides 
to keep up with him, but were obliged to get into a sling trot every 
now and then, so rapid was the pace at which he swept along, with 
his hat so far back on his poll that it seemed as nearly at a right 
angle as if it were hanging against a wall. The boys managed to get 
a little in advance of him occasionally, and looked up in his face, 
evidently reverencing him as an oracle, and wishing to observe the 
expression of his countenance, which was very red and excited, 
while he uttered his words of wisdom, all the time keeping his eyes 
steadily fixed on the hill over Rosdrum, straight before him.
	"He is a stranger to me," said the doctor. "And these two 
young scamps with him do not belong to this neighbour hood, 
either, I think."
	"I never saw any of them before," returned Mary. "And 
there is Barney off after them," she added, "leaving the ass in the 
middle of the lawn to go wherever he pleases. I wonder --" Here 
Mary uttered a cry of terror, and grasped Mr. Lowe by the arm; 
which so astonished the young gentleman that the agreeable 
sensations the proceeding was calculated to awaken were quite 
lost. The cause of her alarm was nothing more or less than Wat 
Murphy's bull-dog, who stood wagging his tail, and holding up his 
muzzled snout as he looked into her face, evidently doing his best 
to be as amiable and fascinating as possible, but, like some others 
of her admirers, with only indifferent success.
	"Morrow, Wat," said Maurice Kearney, who, stick in hand, 
was standing near the half-dozen small cocks into which the fallen 
remnant of the hay-rick had been hastily converted in order to save 
it from the weather.
	"Five pounds," was the butcher's reply to the salutation.
	"I won't give it to you to-day," returned Maurice Kearney 
brusquely.
	"To buy the bull," Wat added; and then whistled to his dog.
	Maurice Kearney rubbed his poll contemplatively for a 
moment, and then walked leisurely into the house to procure the 
money.
	"O Richard, Richard!" exclaimed Mrs. Kearney, hurrying 
into the garden in a state of distraction. "There is the ass running 
off, and he'll be sure to run down into that pit, and all the things 
will be in pieces -- the wine and all. Oh, what's to become of me 
with that fellow? I suppose that man with the dog must be a ballad-
singer, and there he's off after him."
	The doctor jumped from the rustic seat over the hedge, and 
set off across the lawn at the top of his speed in pursuit. Coming up 
with the runaway donkey before he reached the pit, the doctor 
seized the little blue cart behind, and commenced pulling it back 
with all his might. But Bobby trotted on, quite regardless of his 
efforts. The doctor pulled and pulled till the struggle became quite 
exciting. But, just as he reached the brink of the pit, and as Mrs. 
Kearney raised her hands in despair, Bobby, without giving the 
slightest notice of his intention, stood stock still, and the doctor sat 
down much in the same manner as he had done upon the ice on 
Bob Lloyd's pond, with his legs stretched out under the donkey-
cart, his nose touching the tail-board, and his heels almost in 
contact with the donkey's. After reflecting for a moment, he found 
it was necessary to lie upon his back and turn himself over before 
he could get up; a manoeuvre which he executed with great 
precipitation; for it occurred to him that Bobby might take a fancy 
to set back, and trample upon him.
	"Come on, sir," said the doctor, catching the donkey's 
winkers, and pulling him on.
	But Bobby never stirred a foot.
	He called him "poor fellow," and patted him on the neck, 
and, putting his closed hand to his mouth, blew an imaginary horn, 
as Barney was wont to do when he would encourage Bobby to put 
forth all his speed.
	But Bobby refused to budge.
	Losing all patience, Richard looked round for a stick 
wherewith to punish the aggravating little brute, when another 
expedient occurred to him. Seizing the reins, he got up and sat 
upon the front of the cart with a foot on each shaft. Scarcely had he 
fixed himself comfortably in this position when Bobby bounded 
forward at a gallop, flinging the doctor on his back in the cart with 
his legs in the air. Baskets, and parcels, and bottles began bumping 
and tumbling about his head in a most bewildering manner; for 
Bobby had taken a sweep round to a part of the field where there 
were a number of open drains, and, after clearing them all in 
excellent style, ran straight for the hall door, where he again 
stopped short, looking as meek as a lamb.
	"O Richard," cried his mother, "are you killed?"
	The doctor tumbled himself out of the cart, and looked 
wildly about him.
	"Are you killed, Richard?" Mrs. Kearney asked again.
	The doctor stared at his mother with a look of the most 
profound astonishment; and then stared at Bobby; and then at the 
hall door, and the windows, and up at the chimneys, and all around 
him. Then he fixed his eyes on the ground, and seemed plunged in 
some mental effort that taxed his powers of thought to the utmost. 
It was evident that the little misadventure had proved confusing in 
a very high degree to his faculties -- which was not at all 
surprising, as he clearing of the last drain had brought a bottle of 
port vine out of the hamper straight upon his forehead -- and that, 
in the whole, he was not quite sure of his whereabouts or how he 
happened to get there.
	"Are you hurt, Richard?" his mother asked again, laying 
her hand upon his arm.
	"Blazes!" muttered the doctor, clapping his hand against is 
forehead.
	What blazes had to do with the matter, or whether he ought 
"blazes" a rational and suitable reply to his mother's anxious and 
oft-repeated inquiry, is more than we can venture to say. But 
"blazes" was the only word uttered by the doctor up to this stage of 
the proceeding.
	Mr. Lowe took the doctor's hat from among the straw in the 
donkey-cart and presented it to the owner, who accepted in 
surprise, and honoured Mr. Lowe with a stare of surprise, as if he 
had not the least idea who that gentleman was.
	"Morrow, Dick," said Mr. Bob Lloyd, who had turned the 
corner of the house, mounted on his grey horse, unobserved except 
by Grace, who was sitting at the drawing-room window, and whom 
he had already honoured with a few admiring glances.
	"Good morrow," returned the doctor, who seemed to be 
slowly recovering his senses.
	"Are you coming to the bull-bait?" Mr. Lloyd asked.
	"What do you say?" said the doctor turning to Mr. Lowe. 
	"Well, I'd like to see what it is like," he replied.
	"So would I," returned the doctor, somewhat sulkily. But 
unfortunately the horses are all ploughing to-day, and don't see 
how we can manage."
	"'Tis only a pleasant walk by the short-cut," rejoined Bob 
Lloyd.
	"Are you going the short-cut?" Mr. Lowe asked.
	"Ay, faith," replied Mr. Lloyd, smiling at Grace in the 
window. "But, Dick, what the devil fancy did you take to lying on 
your back in the cart with your legs stuck out? I thought you were 
a plough with a breeches on it."
	"Come and let us get ready," said the doctor, darting an 
angry glance at Grace, whose ringing laugh called his attention to 
her.
	"Positively, Grace," said Mary, half-an-hour after the 
gentlemen had left, "you have made a conquest of Mr. Lloyd. He 
never took his eyes off you all the time."
	"Yes, I remarked him," returned Grace, with her wise look. 
"He is much more intelligent-looking than I thought. And that idea 
of comparing Richard's legs to a plough was really good."
	"And then he is a man of property," returned Mary, with a 
smile.
	"That fact is by no means to be lost sight of," rejoined 
Grace, "whatever you innocently romantic people may say. But 
surely," she added with a look of surprise, "those are Lory's legs 
careering at such a tremendous rate across that field; but, what, in 
the name of wonder, is that on his head?"
	It is a straw hat," replied Mary, seeing the article in 
question blown from Lory's head as he was about jumping from 
the top of the "new ditch."
	"Yes, I see how it is," Grace observed. "Rose has locked up 
his cap to keep him from going to the bull-bait; and Lory has taken 
Joe Russel's huge straw hat, and broken loose from his captor. That 
boy's energy is wonderful; and I have no doubt he will yet 
distinguish himself in some way. But Rose does rule him with a 
rod of iron. And yet the trouble she takes brushing his hair, in the 
vain hope of keeping it from sticking out like the quills of a 
porcupine, cannot be too much admired. But I decidedly 
disapprove of the big bow-knot into which she insists on tying his 
cravat."
	"There is the hat off again," said Mary.
	"By the way," rejoined Grace, "did I tell you of the little 
drama I had the pleasure of witnessing the other day when I drove 
to town with Rose, on account of that same hat?"
	"No, you did not tell me."
	"Well, Joe Russel was our coachman, and the big straw hat, 
however becoming on the driver of a cart or dray, was not in 
keeping with the phaeton. But, however, while Rose was in at 
Quinlan's getting some note-paper, a youth on the pavement asked 
Joe what would he take 'for the fur of his hat.' 'Will you hould the 
reins for wan minute, Miss?' says Joe. Of course I could not refuse, 
particularly as the request was made in a tone of the blandest 
politeness. Well, Joe got down, and, walking over to the inquisitive 
youth, commenced pummelling him in the most awful manner. He 
struck back vigorously, however, and there was a tremendous 
fight, till Mat Donovan happened to be passing and put them 
asunder. Joe came back and resumed the reins, evidently quite 
satisfied in his mind, notwithstanding that his left eye was shut up. 
I saw the inquisitive youth after at the pump trying to stop his nose 
from bleeding; and he certainly looked as if he had made up his 
mind not to trouble himself again about the value of the fur of Joe 
Russel's straw hat."
	On went Lory "as the crow flies," clearing everything in his 
way till he came to Mr. Beresford Pender's gate at the three 
poplars, which was secured by a broken gig wheel that leant 
against it.
	"Go back out of that," shouted Mr. Pender from the big 
window that so astonished Barney Brodherick the day of his visit 
to that interesting concern. "Don't dare to climb over that gate."
	"I passed through a good many places in my time," 
returned Lory, as he deliberately climbed to the top of the gate, 
"and this is the first time I was ever told to go back."
	"You may pass through farmers' places," rejoined Mr. 
Beresford Pender in his big voice, "but this is a gentleman's 
demesne."
	"A gentleman's fiddle-stick," replied Lory, pulling Joe 
Russel's straw-hat tightly over his ears -- having first hit upon the 
ingenious contrivance of bending the leaf back in front into the 
inside to keep the hat from flying off, thereby giving it the 
appearance of a bonnet put on the wrong way, to which we have 
before likened it.
	"I'll summon you before the bench," roared Beresford.
	"Summon your grandmother," retorted Lory, jumping off 
the gate and resuming his race.
	This was quite a random shot of Lory's, but it put Mr. 
Pender into a fury; for the venerable lady alluded to had really 
been brought before "the bench" for making free with certain 
articles of wearing apparel, drying on a hedge, which did not 
belong to her. This was a mere tradition, however, only 
remembered by Poll the housekeeper and a few others; but it had 
been thrown in Beresford's face once or twice, and he now swore 
he would "make Hanly pay for his insolence."
	Lory dashed on, however, caring little for Mr. Beresford 
Pender's threatened vengeance, till he came to the narrow boreen 
leading to Ned Brophy's house.
	"Morrow, Ned," cried Lory, seeing him fencing a gap at 
some distance. But, to his astonishment, instead of returning his 
salutation in his usual friendly way, Ned flung the spade out of his 
hand, and ran as if it were for his life, never once glancing behind 
him.
	"He thinks I'm a process-server," said Lory to himself. 
"Or," he added, with his sepulchral laugh, pulling off his hat and 
holding it at arms' length before him, "maybe 'tis Joe Russel's hat 
that frightened him." He walked through the yard, intending to 
follow Ned into the house, and assure him that he had nothing to 
fear, when he encountered Mrs. Ned at the door.
	"I want to ask Ned to show me where the bull-bait is," said 
Lory, with another laugh at what he supposed Ned's mistake as to 
his identity, or his intentions.
	"Ned knows nothin' about id," returned Mrs. Ned, standing 
in the middle of the doorway, and with a look that made Lory think 
she, too, must have formed some erroneous idea about him. 
"They're over beyand the sallies, I b'lieve," Mrs. Ned added.
	The fact was, that, since his marriage, Ned Brophy ran and 
hid himself from every acquaintance who happened to come near 
the house. For his wife declared that the business of all visitors was 
solely and simply "to fill their craw," as she expressed it. And Ned, 
seeing her "so bitter" on his friends, felt so ashamed that he 
thought it best to shun them altogether. He tried to console himself 
with the reflection that, at least, he'd soon have an old saucepan 
half filled with golden sovereigns, Mrs. Ned was such a "fine 
housekeeper." But he sometimes thought, not of golden sovereigns, 
but of Nancy Hogan's golden hair, and sighed.
	Lory looked at Mrs. Ned Brophy with unfeigned surprise, 
and set off for the nearest house --  which happened to be old 
Paddy Laughlan's --  to seek the information he required.
	Paddy Laughlan's blooming daughter not only told him 
where the bull-bait was, but walked to the end of her father's farm 
with him, in spite of his protestations that her doing so was quite 
unnecessary, and that he could not allow her to go to so much 
trouble on his account.
	"You see that little boy on the tree," said Miss Laughlan 
"They are in the hollow just under him." But though pointing with 
her hand to the boy on the tree, Miss Laughlan kept her eyes fixed 
very earnestly upon a small farm-house on her left.
	"Thank you," said Lory, starting off again.
	"I beg your pardon, sir," said Miss Laughlan.
	Lory stopped.
	But Miss Laughlan only blushed and hesitated.
	"I thought you spoke to me," said he. And it occurred to 
him at the moment that she was by far a handsomer girl than he 
had thought --  there was such a light in her eyes
	"If you'd bring a message for me to that house --  to Tom 
Cuddehy," said Miss Laughlan, "I'd be very thankful to you."
	"Of course I will," replied Lory. "I know Tom Cuddehy 
well. He's the best hurler in the county, except Mat Donovan."
	"Well, will you tell him I am waiting here, and that I want 
to speak to him just for one minute," returned Miss Laughlan, 
falteringly. And Lory fancied her eyes filled with tears.
	"Certainly I will," he replied. "Why not?" This was the 
"message" Lory took so long to deliver when we left him in Tom 
Cuddehy's kitchen --  when, some chapters back, we thought it 
necessary to interrupt the regular course of this history, in order to 
guard against the possibility of disturbing the equanimity of our 
readers here after by anything that might bear even the faintest 
resemblance to a surprise.
	"Good morning," said Lory, "I'm going to the bull-bait."
	"I promised to go myself," returned Tom Cuddehy, "to thry 
the little bitch, for I think she has the right dhrop in her. Wait for a 
few minutes an' I'll be with you."
	After exchanging a few words with his old sweetheart 
through the hedge, he returned to Lory, who was rapidly getting 
into the good graces of Venom, looking very solemn, and 
indisposed for conversation.
	Miss Laughlan, it may be remarked, returned home, 
looking very serious, too --  the young man from the mountain and 
his fine slate-house and jaunting-car notwithstanding --  and 
looking at one of her hands which was bleeding. For during the 
few minutes' tte--tte with Tom Cuddehy, Miss Laughlan made 
such violent attempts to break off a sprig of blackthorn from the 
hedge, as if she mistook it for a bunch of thyme or the spearmint 
under her window in the garden, that when she looked at her hand 
she found several deep scratches upon it. Ladies under such 
circumstances should keep clear of thorn hedges.
	Two or three dogs had been conquered and driven from the 
lists by the bull, when Tom and Lory arrived and the man with the 
hat back on his poll was leading his dog to the encounter in a state 
of intense excitement, which was fully shared by the two boys.
	"Come, Trueboy!" said the man with the hat on his poll.
	"Come, Trueboy!" shouted boy No. 1.
	"Come, Trueboy," bawled boy No. 2.
	And boys One and Two danced wildly about Trueboy, who 
was a lank, long-legged animal, and seemed greatly at a loss to 
guess what it was all about.
	"Soho! Trueboy," said his owner softly, patting him on the 
head.
	"Soho! Trueboy," repeated boy No. 1.
	"Soho! Trueboy," echoed boy No. 2.
	And both boys patted Trueboy on the head.
	But the cry, "Here is Tom Cuddehy," caused Trueboy's 
proprietor to start and look round with an expression of intense 
dismay and disappointment. He had been told that Tom Cuddehy's 
bitch should be let at the bull before his dog. and great was his 
anxiety lest the bull should be worn out before Trueboy had an 
opportunity of exhibiting his prowess. Great was his joy, then, 
when some one announced that Tom Cuddehy would not put in an 
appearance at all; and now proportionally intense was his 
disappointment and anguish of spirit when on looking round he 
beheld Tom Cuddehy and his white bitch, Venom, on the bank 
above him, just at the foot of the tree upon a branch of which 
Tommy Lahy was swaying up and down with a gentle motion, and 
quietly trying to extract a thorn from his big toe with a pin.
	The bull was tied by a rope round his neck in the centre of a 
large hollow or pit, which answered the purposes of an 
amphitheatre very well; the crowd, which was select, but not 
numerous, standing round the sloping sides. He was not at all a 
lordly bull to look at; but a small, red, rough-coated hardy, sturdy, 
good-tempered animal  -- in fact, what might be called a peasant 
bull. He was very much at his ease, and not at all excited, having 
made short work of his three or four assailants --  as Wat Murphy 
prophesied he would; for not one of them, Wat averred, "knew that 
a bull had a nose on his face," or, knowing it, had the slightest idea 
of what that nose was intended for.
	Trueboy's owner and master looked at Tom Cuddehy's 
bitch, and was struck speechless with despair; for Venom, though 
not large, was broad in the chest, and had a lurking devil in her 
eye, that made it plain to the most ignorant that she was a tough 
customer.
	Recovering himself, however, by an effort, he approached 
Tom Cuddehy, and implored of him, as a 
"decent man " and a man of spirit, to let his dog go in first, 
dwelling upon the fact that he had walked fifteen miles that day, 
and would have to walk the same distance back again; that it was 
the first time he had the honour and the pleasure of coming 
amongst them, though he had long known them by reputation; that 
his, Tom Cuddehy's, name was a household word far and near; that 
"Venom" was a beauty all out, and won his heart the moment he 
set eyes on her; that she was "under-shod" in a manner that would 
make a Turk warm to her; and, above all, that he, the petitioner, 
was a "Carrick-man," and 'twas an old and well-known saying that 
"wherever you go, you'll meet a Carrick-man"; and that he, the 
Carrick-man, might have it in his power to do as much for Tom 
Cuddehy another time.
	"Very well," says Tom Cuddehy, with an indifference that 
astonished his 	friends; "have at him."
	"Sound man!" shouted the Carrick-man.
	"Sound man!" exclaimed boy No. 1.
	"Sound man!" repeated boy No. 2. And Trueboy was gain 
seized by all three and pulled into the ring.
	"Good dog, Trueboy," says the Carrick-man. "Grapple 
him."
	"Good dog, Trueboy; grapple him," muttered the two boys 
under their teeth.
	Thus encouraged, Trueboy leaped into the ring, and ran all 
round the bull, who remained quite calm and still, pretending not 
to see him.
	"Grapple him, Trueboy!" cried the Carrick-man, dropping 
upon one knee, as if he were going to take aim with a rifle at the 
bull's eye.
	"Grapple him, Trueboy!" repeated the two boys, dropping 
upon their knees, too, like sharpshooters waiting the order to fire.
	There was a moment of breathless silence, and Trueboy 
looked about him in all directions, evidently at a loss, and having 
no idea of what he was expected to "grapple."
	"Grapple him, Trueboy!" repeated the Carrick-man, 
savagely.
	Trueboy looked about him quite wildly now, but could not 
make up his mind who or what the "him" was meant to apply to; 
till, glancing upwards, some object overhead caught his attention, 
and Trueboy commenced barking furiously at it. The eyes of the 
spectators were turned in the same direction, and there was a loud 
roar of laughter when Tommy Lahy was discovered in the tree, 
looking at first surprised and then delighted at finding himself the 
object of their attention. Tommy laughed down at the open mouths 
below him, and for a moment the Carrick-man and his dog were 
forgotten.
	But the Carrick-man rushed at Trueboy, and, seizing him 
by the throat, knocked him down and stamped his foot upon him.
	Boy No. 1 then danced on Trueboy; and boy No. 2 went 
and did likewise. Then boy One struck boy Two with his clenched 
fist in the right eye; and both boys were immediately "in grips," 
and fought fiercely for five minutes to relieve their feelings.
	The Carrick-man pulled Trueboy into the ring again, and 
hallooed him at the bull; but Trueboy again wheeled round and 
barked furiously at Tommy Lahy in the tree.
	"He don't undherstand," said the Carrick-man; "but wait till 
I bring him close to his head, an' ye'll see something."
	He threw a leg over Trueboy, as if he were going to have a 
ride, and seized him by the neck with both hands with a view to 
wheeling him round, when the bull quietly advanced to the end of 
his rope, and gave the Carrick-man a playful touch of his horn 
under the coat-tails; which so astonished the Carrick-man that he 
cleared Trueboy's head at a bound as if he were playing at frog-
leaps with him, falling flat upon his face and hands some three 
yards beyond him. At this Trueboy, as if conscious of his disgrace, 
rushed over his prostrate master and up the side of the pit, uttering 
a dismal howl, and scampered off over ditches and hedges, as if a 
score of old kettles were tied to his tail; and was never seen or 
heard  of afterwards -- save that a gaunt hound was sometimes 
observed prowling among the rocks in the loneliest recesses of the 
mountains, like the ghost of the last Irish wolf; and it was 
conjectured by some that this unhappy animal was the Carrick-
man's dog, Trueboy.
	The Carrick-man himself pulled his hat over his eyes, and 
walked away without a word or a look to any one, followed by the 
two boys wiping the bitter tears of vexation and disappointment 
from their noses, and, it is to be feared, with the seeds of 
scepticism and misanthropy sown in their young bosoms.
	Tom Cuddehy's "Venom" was next led into the arena. We 
will spare the reader a detailed description of how she acquitted 
herself. It was admitted on all hands that Venom was "blood to the 
eyes"; but still she never once "took a right hoult." And there was 
something so vicious and viperish and spitfirey in her mode of 
attack, that when, at last, she was carried away maimed and 
bleeding, no one was sorry for her.
	"Well, now," says Wat Murphy, "are ye all satisfied? Or is 
there any wan else that wants to thry his dog? If there is, say the 
word; for I'm in no hurry in life. Down, Danger!" There was no 
one else to be accommodated; and Danger's muzzle was taken off.
	Danger walked slowly towards the bull, wagging his tail 
and locking his lips, as if his intentions were quite amicable. But 
the bull saw that he had a formidable foe before him now, and with 
his head bent down and his eyes rolling -- no longer looking the 
mere plebeian animal he had seemed before, but a real lordly bull -
- prepared to receive him.
	Here again we shrink from attempting a minute description 
of the exciting, but, we fear, revolting encounter between "Danger" 
and the stout-hearted little bull. Enough to say that, in spite of his 
gallant efforts to fling his fierce assailant from him, or pin him to 
the ground, he was pulled upon his knees at last and held there as if 
his nose were in an iron vice. Then he plunged forward once more, 
and tried to shake his foe from him by dragging him along the 
ground. But all in vain; the dog clung to the poor brute's nose as if 
he grew there. Then the wretched bull raised his head in the air, 
and uttered a low plaintive moan as if his very heart were broken.
	For the first time every one present seemed struck with the 
cruelty of the "sport " they had been watching so eagerly.
	"D--n it, Wat," said Mr. Lloyd, with tears in his eyes, 
"loose him."
	"Yes, Wat," added Phil Lahy, solemnly, "loosen his hoult." 
Wat Murphy advanced, and, scientifically pressing his thumb upon 
the dog's windpipe, waited quietly till want of breath forced him to 
gasp, and then Wat snatched him quickly up in his arms, and 
carried him off; the dog keeping his eyes fixed sullenly upon the 
poor bull, who dropped down, sobbing, upon the ground, his rough 
coat all wet and dabbled with the sweat of his agony.
	I think we had better start for home," said the doctor.
	Yes, I think so," returned Mr. Lowe, who had kept behind a 
clump of bushes, as if he felt rather ashamed of being seen at such 
a place.
	As they were turning away, a roaring, louder than any 
bull's, startled them; and on looking up to the place whence it 
proceeded, they beheld, to their amazement, Lory Hanly 
"punishing " Mr. Beresford Pender most severely. Beresford 
retreated backwards as Lory continued to "plant" the right and left 
alternately upon his mouth and nose, until he got his back to the 
tall ash tree, a bough of which Tommy Lahy had converted into a 
reserved seat, from which he could enjoy the spectacle in the pit 
below with ease and dignity. This proved a most injudicious move 
on Mr. Pender's part, for Lory struck higher, about the eyes and 
forehead, and at every blow Tommy Lahy distinctly felt the shock, 
as Beresford's poll came in contact with the tree.
	"Oh oh oh-o-o-o!" roared Mr. Beresford Pender, working 
his elbows up and down like wings, and lifting, now one leg, now 
the other, as if he insanely hoped to defend his face with his knees. 
At last a well-aimed blow so completely shut up one of his visual 
organs, that Mr. Beresford Pender dropped down upon his knees, 
his face buried in both hands, and loudly proclaimed several times, 
to all whom it might concern, that his "eye was out."
	At this stage Darby Ruadh came to his master's assistance. 
"Here, get up," said Darby Ruadh, seizing him by the collar.
	Beresford did stand up, and clapping his hand over one eye, 
and finding that, after all, he was able to see Darby Ruadh and 
several other objects, both near and in the distance, with the other, 
became re-assured, and muttered "No surrender!"
	To account for this little episode, it should be mentioned 
that Mr. Pender, after Lory's impertinent allusion to "his 
grandmother," mounted his horse and started in pursuit; and Lory, 
finding himself suddenly collared and "arrested in the queen's 
name," and seeing that his captor was Mr. Beresford Pender, at 
once shook himself free, and brought the knuckles of his right hand 
into contact with the bridge of Mr. Beresford Pender's nose, which 
immediately produced the bellowing that so surprised Mr. Lowe 
and the doctor.
	Bob Lloyd walked deliberately up the side of the pit and 
shook Lory vigorously by the hand.
	"I think I gave him enough of it," Lory observed.
	"Ay, faith," returned Mr. Lloyd.
	"Nice work to see a gentleman encouraging the violation of 
the law," muttered Mr. Beresford Pender.
	"Hold your tongue, you whelp," retorted Bob Lloyd, "or I'll 
give you a greater cutting than ever your father gave a hound,"
	"Bailiffs about your house!" he muttered again -- but so as 
to be heard only by those who stood close to him -- in allusion to 
Mr. Lloyd's occasional difficulties with his creditors, when even 
Jer's ingenuity could not ward off an execution, and Tom Ryan and 
most of the other tenants had their rents paid in advance.
	Here Tommy Lahy came sliding down the tree with 
considerable rapidity of motion; and, without in the least intending 
it, came with a very violent bump straight upon Mr. Beresford 
Pender's head. This mysterious assault brought him down upon his 
marrow-bones again, and caused him to roar louder than ever. 
And, what added considerably to the mirth of the spectators, 
Tommy Lahy seemed to have been quite as frightened by the 
shock as Mr. Pender, and remained clinging to the free at the spot 
where his descent had been so unexpectedly stopped short, staring 
over his shoulder, with his eyes wide open, till his father advanced, 
and, gripping him firmly by the corduroys, dragged him down by 
main force.
	Mr. Bob Lloyd shook hands with Tommy Lahy also, and 
gave him a sixpence -- to Tommy's utter amazement, for he could 
not see what he had done to deserve it.
	And then Mr. Lloyd insisted that Lory Hanly should mount 
behind him on his grey hunter and ride home with him -- an 
honour that not only made his peace with Rose for having escaped 
to the bull-bait, contrary to her express injunctions, but so puffed 
up that young lady with consequence, that Johnny Wilson, the 
bank-clerk, was received quite coldly the next time he called, 
notwithstanding his new "Albert chain" and silk umbrella.
	And that same evening, when Kathleen was drawing the 
pony's rein at Maurice Kearney's gate, Rose tossed her head and 
said, "Don't mind," and they drove on without stopping. But all this 
did not prevent Lory from having his revenge for being obliged to 
wear Joe Russel's hat at the bull-bait; and he deliberately made up 
his mind to sit, by accident, the very first favourable opportunity, 
upon Rose's new bonnet -- the one with the feathers -- and "make a 
pancake of it."
	Lory now found himself quite a popular character, and was 
greeted with looks and words of admiration wherever he went. 
Barney Brodherick, in particular, became his sworn friend, and 
hugged himself in the hope of having a quiet set-to with Mr. Lory 
some fine evening in the grove, while Bobby was left to roam at 
will among Miss Hanly's flowerbeds. For Barney dearly loved the 
man or boy who would fight him; and his implacable enmity 
towards Father M'Mahon's servant was solely owing to the fact 
that that unaccommodating individual could never, for love or 
money, be induced to knock him down.
	Wat Murphy kept his purchase of the bull a secret from his 
customers, and even satisfied some of them that the flesh of that 
animal was by far the primest beef he had ever killed in his life 
before. But Miss Lloyd found him out; and arraying herself in her 
lavender silk dress, sallied forth to denounce him for selling such 
meat "to the gentry," and to proclaim his wickedness all over the 
town. Wat took her abuse rather coolly, however, and even put 
some rude questions to her on the subject of her complaint.
	But her harangue threatening to be of longer duration than 
he thought agreeable, Wat quietly opened the back door, and the 
white bull-dog quietly walked in. And Miss Lloyd, seeing the 
white bull-dog looking up into her face, lost her speech and her 
breath, and the use of her limbs, and dropped down helplessly 
upon Wat Murphy's block, that happened to be behind her, thereby 
ruining the lavender silk dress for ever. When she had recovered 
somewhat, Wat Murphy politely offered to wipe the grease and 
blood off the silk dress with a coarse cloth, but Miss Lloyd 
declined his services.
	"Let me scrape it wud the knife at any rate," said Wat, 
sorrowfully.
	But Miss Lloyd gathered up her skirts and ran home, 
creating great astonishment along the street -- men, women, and 
children crowding to every door to look after her; and frightening 
her mother and sisters -- who at first thought she was dangerously 
wounded -- almost out of their lives.



CHAPTER LIII.

THE HURLING IN THE KILN-FIELD -- CAPTAIN FRENCH 
THROWS THE SLEDGE AGAINST MAT THE THRASHER -- 
BARNEY IN TROUBLE. -- FATHER M'MAHON'S "PROUD 
WALK."

	"WHAT a pity it is," said Mrs. Kearney, "that Mr. Lowe is 
not a Catholic. 'Pon my word he's good enough to be one. And 'tis 
often my Uncle Dan said the same of his uncle."
	Grace, who sat with Mr. Kearney on one side of the car, 
laughed as she turned quickly round and looked at Mary, who was 
with her mother on the other side.
	They were returning from last Mass, and Mr. Lowe stood 
outside the door to hand the ladies off the car.
	"I wonder Richard would be making such a fool of himself 
about that Kathleen Hanly," continued Mrs. Kearney; "walking by 
the side of their old phaeton all the way from Kilthubber, instead 
of driving home with Hugh in the gig, and leaving poor Mr. Lowe 
by himself all the morning."
	"Where is Wattletoes?" Mr. Kearney called out as he got 
off the car.
	"This was his day to be at first Mass," Mrs. Kearney 
observed, "and he ought to be at home an hour ago."
	"He wasn't at first Mass, then," said the dairymaid, who ran 
out on hearing her master's voice, and who had a grudge against 
Barney for a reason of her own. "He spent his mornin' at Kit 
Cummins's, card-playin' wud the lads."
	Mrs. Kearney raised her hands in horror and amazement at 
this damning proof of Barney's wickedness. Running after ballad-
singers, peep-shows, and Punches-and-Judys, were mere venial 
offences compared with losing Mass on Sunday; and spending the 
time with "the lads" deepened the offence to the darkest hue of 
guilt. A certain little club or fraternity, of whom one Andy Dooley 
(alias Andy Meeawe) was the leader and oracle, who frequented 
Kit Cummins's, were universally known as "the lads" or "the 
school"; and with them, we grieve to say, Barney was tempted to 
spend the morning, sitting upon a skillet, and playing "scoobeen" 
upon the bottom of Kit Cummins's wash-tub, which was turned 
upside down for the purpose. Barney, however, was hurrying home 
early enough to escape detection, counting his coppers on the way, 
when, in an evil hour, he espied Brummagem (who, owing to early 
impressions, could never be persuaded that anything more was 
required to keep holy the Sabbath-day than washing his face in the 
pool in the quarry, and drying it with his cap) placing a small stone 
on the smooth part of the road, and, after moving backwards half-
a-dozen yards, pitching a penny at it. Barney pitched a penny at the 
"bob" too. It required a critical eye to judge which was the better 
pitch; but Brummagem, taking a bit of iron hoop from his pocket, 
used it as a rule, making it plain that his penny was the eighth of an 
inch nearer to the "bob." This Barney admitted by a nod of assent 
in reply to a look from Brummagem. The hopeful youth then laid a 
half penny on the bit of hoop and held it towards Barney, who 
placed another halfpenny beside it; and Brummagem, after 
solemnly spitting upon them for good luck, whirled both half 
pence into the air with a peculiar movement of the wrist. They 
came down "heads," and Brummagem pocketed them in silence 
and pitched again. So the pitching and tossing went on with 
varying luck till Tom Maher announced to Barney that the family 
were home from Mass "this hour," and that the mistress had found 
out how Barney had been engaged during the morning.
	"Begob, I'm done for now for ever," exclaimed Barney. 
And he began to debate with himself whether it was to his mother's 
cabin above Glounamuckadhee, or to his relations near 
Ballydunmore, he had better fly to escape Mrs. Kearney's wrath.
	But the roll of the big drum reminded him of the great 
hurling match that was to come off in the kiln-field that day, and of 
the sledge-throwing between Mat Donovan and Captain French, 
and of the "high-gates" and "hell-and-heaven"; and, above all, of 
Peg Brady, whom Barney pronounced to be "tuppence a pound 
before any girl in the parish" -- and a kiss from whom, he assured 
Tom Maher in confidence, was "eating and drinking"; and Barney 
was a happy man once more!
	"Begob, Tom," he exclaimed, his eye glistening with 
delight, "there'll be no show but all the b'ys an' girls we'll have in 
the kiln-field to-day. Look up thowar's Bohervogga. The road is 
black wud 'em."
	"'Twill be a great gatherin'," returned Tom Maher.
	"Do you think will Mat bate the captain?" Barney asked, 
anxiously. "I'd rather we'd lose the hurlin' than have Mat bet at the 
sledge."
	"There's no danger, wud the help uv God," Tom replied, 
"though Phil Lahy is unaisy. An' the captain is a powerful man. I 
never see such a pair uv arms. An' Tom Doherty tells me he never 
stopped practisin' for the last week. But, never you fear, but Mat'll 
open his eye for him. An' we're purty sure uv the hurlin', too, as we 
have Tom Doherty. I never knew Tom to fail on a p'int. He says 
he'll depind upon Miss Mary to get his pardon for him from Father 
Carroll, as he had to stale away at the first light, an' he's afeard 
Father Carroll couldn't find any wan to serve Mass. An' Miss Mary 
promised, for she's as anxious about the hurlin' as any uv us."
	This was quite true; and when Tom Doherty told her how, 
every evening, when he went to water Father Carroll's horse to the 
weir, he was sure to see Captain French in the Priest's Walk, with 
his coat off, throwing a sledge "for the bare life," and that he'd give 
"a twenty-pound note" to beat Mat Donovan, Mary became quite 
nervous lest the laurels were at last about to be snatched from Mat 
Donovan's brows.
	"What is it in that letter," Grace asked, "that brings that 
happy look into your eyes? This is the third time you have read it 
within the past half-hour; and you always look so glad."
	Mr. Lowe had remarked, too, that he had never seen her 
look so animated -- though it was the last day of his stay!
	"Read it yourself," said Mary, offering her the letter --  
which was from her sister Anne.
	"I read it before, and couldn't see anything to account for 
your delight. It scarcely can be this piece of news about Arthur 
O'Connor."
	But it was the piece of news about Arthur O'Connor. And 
every time Mary read it she felt (or fancied she felt) a great load 
taken off her heart, and said to herself that "now she could write to 
him," and explain why she was not at the window that snowy 
Christmas Eve when he waited so long and so patiently for her.
	"I'm so glad," said Grace, "that Richard and Mr. Lowe are 
to leave the same day I am going myself. It is quite a coincidence."
	"And why are you so glad?"
	"Oh, I have a plan."
	"What is it?"
	"Well, I'll get papa to ask them to spend the evening with 
us; and we'll have Minnie Delany and the 'Brehon' and 'Shamrock' 
and a few others, and I think it will be very pleasant."
	"I suppose Eva will take them by storm."
	"Well, I rather think not. She requires time in spite of her 
beauty and her golden ringlets. You are far more striking."
	"And does no thought of me enter into your plan?"
	"Didn't you say there was no use thinking you would 
come?" Grace asked in surprise.
	"Yes; but does it not occur to you that I'll be very lonely 
when you are all gone?"
	Grace was silent for a minute, and then said -- "Mary, I am 
the incarnation of selfishness. That is the essential difference 
between you and me -- I think of myself first, and you think of 
yourself last. You will be dreadfully lonely without a soul with 
you. And now that I see it I'd gladly stay if I could. But why did it 
not occur to me before? Because I am selfish -- that's the why."
	"You are too severe upon yourself," returned Mary. "But 
why do you say I'll be 'without a soul'? Do Hugh, and my father 
and mother, and Ellie and Willie, count for nothing? And that 
reminds me that I have left Ellie altogether to her story-books and 
her birds for some time; and you know she is to be sent to school 
when Anne comes home in summer."
	"Oh, you'll be all right when Anne comes home. She is so 
blessed with animal spirits. I expect she'll go wild after the jail-like 
discipline of that convent. I'm sure she'll be as great a flirt as Bessy 
Morris."
	"Why do you suppose Bessy Morris is a flirt?"
	"Well, that soldier's letter was pretty strong circumstantial 
evidence; and, besides, I heard them discussing her character in the 
kitchen last night, when I was helping your mamma with the 
pudding."
	"What did they say of her?"
	"Barney said she'd court 'a haggart o' sparrows'; but the 
general opinion was that she was 'a nice crack' -- what ever that 
means."
	"A 'crack' is a person who dresses too stylishly. But Bessy's 
taste is so exquisite, it is impossible to find fault with her in that 
respect."
	"Yes, that brown stuff dress is perfection," returned Grace. 
"I must get one like it. And how Mat Donovan worships her! But I 
suppose she would not have him."
	"Oh, Mat is what might be called a universal lover," said 
Mary. "He has quite a number of sweethearts."
	"Ah, but there's something more than that in Bessy's case. 
But I can hardly reconcile myself to the idea of her becoming the 
wife of a labourer. Yet the little house is very pretty. The garden 
and the beehives would do very well. But Bessy ought to have a 
nicely furnished little parlour, with white curtains to the window, 
and some books, and a bird in a cage to sing for her all day long."
	"Like Norah Lahy's linnet," Mary added.
	"No," rejoined Grace, "he is too grave and sober for Bessy. 
Ellie's goldfinch would be more suitable, or a canary. But Mat 
himself would be for a thrush that would awaken the Seven 
Sleepers. Bessy, however, has, I think, more ambitious views than 
to be the mistress of that little house."
	"I'd be sorry to think you are not mistaken," returned Mary, 
thoughtfully. "Mat is just the sort of man who would feel such a 
disappointment deeply. I can't help laughing at myself," she added, 
"I am so anxious about the hurling, and this trial of strength with 
Captain French. I would not wish for anything that Mat should be 
beaten. And yet of what consequence is it?"
	"The reason is, you sympathise so strongly with those 
around you," Grace observed. "I have often noticed it. There, now, 
your eyes light up because that bevy of girls crossing the lawn are 
showing their white teeth -- and very white teeth they have, and 
very beautiful and luxuriant hair. But why do they all prefer 
scrambling over the ditch to going through the gate a few yards 
lower down? Oh, yes! Those youths will pull them up, and I 
suppose they like that. There goes the big drum and the fifes. And, 
my goodness! what a number of people! 'Tis like a races."
	"And is it not pleasant to see them all so happy?" said 
Mary, with sparkling eyes. "But to my mind the prettiest sight of 
all is that long line of children, joined hand in hand, and winding 
round and round in that way."
	"You might call them a wreath of rosebuds," returned 
Grace; "though that play they are at is known by the unpoetical 
name of 'thread the needle,' You see the two tallest hold up their 
joined hands like an arch, through which the whole line runs. The 
'Brehon' told me there is a most poetical description of the same 
game in an old Irish manuscript, in which the king and queen are at 
the head of the line of youths and maidens, who glide under their 
majesties' arms to the music of the harp. But I hope it was not 
called 'thread the needle' in those happy days. But mind the wide 
circle of children of larger growth at the upper end of the field."
	"That's 'high-gates,'" said Mary.
	"And behold Barney Brodherick in full chase after some 
fair one of large dimensions, who, I fancy, is too fat to hold out 
long," Grace continued. "Yes, there he has the prize captured 
already."
	"That is Bessy Morris's cousin, Peg Brady," said Mary, 
laughing. "Barney is a great admirer of her."
	"There go the next pair," continued Grace. "Ha! she won't 
be caught so easily. She's as fleet as a deer."
	"I think it is Nelly Donovan," said Mary.
	So it is," returned Grace. " There is something gazelle-like 
about Nelly. I often think what a huntress she would make. She is 
like one of Diana's nymphs. There, she has distanced her pursuer, 
and is now walking at her leisure, till he comes nearer. But he is 
trying to get her into the corner and catch her as she doubles back. 
What a happy, light hearted girl Nelly is!"
	And a good girl, too," returned Mary. " It is quite affecting 
to see herself and poor Norah Lahy together; one so strong and 
healthy, and the other so weak and helpless. They love each other 
like sisters. But surely that is Nancy Hogan's golden hair! I'm so 
glad to see poor Nancy out among them again."
	"Yes; and she is evidently not indifferent to the 
conversation of her companion," Grace remarked.
	"That is her old admirer, Tom Carey, the carpenter," 
returned Mary. "I am really very glad."
	"I thought you'd go in for dying of a broken heart in such a 
case?" said Grace.
	"No, not when a man proves unworthy," Mary answered. 
"And Ned Brophy acted very badly."
	"I'm trying to find out Bessy Morris among them," said 
Grace; "but I don't think she is there. Perhaps she is too grand? But 
look, there is Mr. Lloyd riding backwards and forwards over the 
new ditch; and I suppose that is Captain French with him."
	Here we are reminded that we owe an apology to the "new 
ditch." When we first had occasion to refer to this freak of Maurice 
Kearney's, we stated that it never was and never would be of the 
slightest earthly use. But, in justice to the "new ditch," we feel 
bound to admit that it was the best, and the "firmest," and in every 
way the most suitable ditch in the neighbourhood for training a 
horse to "topping," and was availed of for that purpose by 
professional and amateur trainers for miles around. And few 
equestrians could, when passing the way, resist the temptation of 
taking a few jumps over the "new ditch"; so that a strip of the field 
at either side of this admirable fence generally presented the 
appearance of a race-course between the ropes after the last heat 
for the "consolation stakes." Most humbly do we beg the "new 
ditch's" pardon for asserting that it was of no earthly use.
	"I think we ought to go out, and get near them," said Grace. 
" I see the hurlers falling into battle array. And there are the Hanlys 
on the road above the grove, and Richard holding the pony by the 
head, lest he should set off for home backwards, as he sometimes 
does, by way of a practical joke."
	"I have no objection to a walk," returned Mary. "But you 
never thought you were not near enough till you saw Captain 
French and Mr. Lloyd."
	"Well, I have some slight curiosity in that way," rejoined 
Grace, putting on her bonnet. "I want to see what sort of looking 
person he is."
	"And to be seen," Mary added, laughing.
	"Certainly."
	"Well, come then. I see Hugh and Mr. Lowe are going, and 
we may as well join them,"
	By the time they reached the phaeton -- the occupants of 
which bowed condescendingly to them -- the high-gates and other 
games were suspended, and the children and young girls stood 
upon the fences round the field out of the way of the hurlers. There 
was a hush, and an eager, anxious look in every face, as Mat 
Donovan moved from the crowd towards the middle of the field, 
followed by his twenty picked men. He pulled the ball with some 
difficulty from his pocket, and, throwing it with his hurly on the 
field, took off his coat slowly, and with a quiet smile. The others 
pulled off their coats, too; but some of them were quite pale, while 
their teeth chattered with excitement.
	"What's delayin' ye, boys?" Mat called out, seeing with 
surprise that the hurlers at the other side were not taking their 
places.
	The party whom he addressed made no reply, but they 
whispered among themselves, and one or two got upon the "new 
ditch" and looked towards the Three Poplars.
	"Is there anything wrong, boys?" said Mat, after leaving his 
place at the head of his men, and mingling with the crowd, from 
which "the farmers" had not yet separated.
	"Tom is not here," was the reply, slowly and reluctantly 
given.
	"Tom Cuddehy not here!" exclaimed Mat Donovan, as if a 
thunderbolt had fallen at his feet. "Where is he?"
	"We don't know," was the reply. "We thought he'd be here 
before us. But we're afther sendin' for him."
	"Here they are," cried the young men on the ditch; and 
three swift-footed youths were seen hurrying down the hill.
	"Is he comin'?" a dozen voices asked together. "He's not," 
the foremost of the three scouts replied, gasping for breath and 
dashing the perspiration from his face.
	"Well, if I hadn't the sight uv my own eyes," Mat Donovan 
observed with the deepest sorrow, "I'd never b'lieve Tom was the 
man to do a mane act. Afther givin' me his hand an' word on id!"
	"He couldn't help id," said one of the messengers. "Maybe, 
'tis to break a leg or an arm he did?" returned Mat, somewhat 
anxiously. "For, if I'm not mistaken, nothin' less'd keep Tom from 
his post on such an occasion as this."
	"Well, no," the youth replied, with a grin. "But I don't know 
but he might be afther injurin' wan uv his ribs."
	"How so?" Mat asked.
	"Begor, bekase he's afther gettin' a new wan," was the 
reply. "Ould Paddy Laughlan's daughter is afther runnin' away wud 
him."
	"Well, I'm not sorry to hear that," said Mat. "But when I 
tould him the field was to be broke this week, he had a right to put 
id off for another time."
	"Mat," said Phil Lahy, "human nature is human nature. 
Where is the man that hasn't his wakenesses? So don't be too hard 
on Tom. Make it your own case."
	And Mat happening to look towards the little group on the 
road -- for he had noticed with pleasure that Miss Kearney had got 
upon the fence in her eagerness to see the match begin -- his eye 
caught sight of a figure on the fence at the other side of the road, 
dearer to him than all the world beside and he forgave Tom 
Cuddehy.
	"Will ye hurl wudout him?" he asked.
	"We'd rather not," was the reply.
	"Well, I'd rather not myse'f," returned Mat. "There'd be no 
satisfaction. I suppose we may as well put on our coats."
	"I think, Mat," Phil Lahy suggested, "you ought to make a 
promiscuous match."
	"Do you mane over and hether?" Mat asked.
	"I do," replied Phil. "Make a match, you and Mister 
O'Donnell, wudout any regard to the two sides."
	"Very well; I'm satisfied," said Mat, whirling his hurly up 
in the air, and calling out, "Right or left for first call."
	"Left," cried Mr. O'Donnell.
	"You lost," returned Mat, as the hurly fell upon the field 
with the handle towards the right. He ran his eye along the line of 
hurlers, and said quietly, "Come here, Jemmy Hogan."
	Jemmy Hogan's eye flashed with pride as he advanced and 
stood beside Mat Donovan.
	Captain French's servant pointed to him, and whispered 
something into his master's ear that made his eye flash almost as 
bright as Jemmy Hogan's. Captain French was a soldier, and the 
son of a soldier, and, as one by one the hurlers stepped forward as 
their names were called, and pulled off their coats, he thought what 
a sin and a shame it was that such splendid "material" should be 
going to waste in that way.
	"There is Bessy Morris and Judy Brophy," said Nelly 
Donovan. "I wonder why don't they come into the field?"
	"She tould me she wouldn't come at all," returned Peg 
Brady, with something like a scowl. "But I suppose Judy Brophy 
called in for her, and she came wud her."
	"I'll go call 'em over," said Nelly, starting off at the top of 
her speed. Now, Billy Heffernan happened to be standing all alone 
not far from the corner of the grove near which the ladies had 
taken their places, and whether it was that Nelly looked at him 
instead of looking before her, or what ever else might be the cause 
of her carelessness, her foot was caught in a bramble, and she was 
flung forward upon her face and hands with such violence that 
both Grace and Mary uttered an exclamation and looked 
frightened.
	"O Nelly, did you fall?" said Billy Heffernan. "Come here 
till I take you up."
	"Well, Billy Heffernan is a provokingly ungallant young 
man," Grace exclaimed with her ringing laugh.
	Nelly Donovan, who was quickly on her feet again, 
laughed too, and flinging back her dark hair and twisting it into a 
knot behind, came towards them more slowly, and called to her 
friends to come into the field. Judy Brophy, who was radiant with 
smiles -- and well she might, for since Ned's marriage she had had 
no less than three proposals -- came down from the fence, and 
crossing the road at a run, climbed over the other, and was 
immediately shaking hands vigorously with Nelly Donovan. Bessy 
Morris seemed half afraid to descend from the fence, which was 
unusually high, and Kathleen Hanly's frown was even darker than 
Peg Brady's, when she saw Hugh Kearney hand her down as 
carefully as if Bessy Morris were a lady.
	"Thank you, sir," said Bessy; and after returning Mary's 
smile with a little bow, she got over the other fence without Hugh's 
assistance, pretending not to notice that it was proffered.
	Captain French's servant called his attention to Bessy 
Morris, and he immediately came towards her and commenced 
talking to her.
	Mary Kearney seemed surprised on observing this; and she 
looked grave, if not pained, when she saw that Bessy's face was 
crimson and her eyes cast down, while the captain's white teeth 
gleamed -- unpleasantly, Mary thought -- through his dark beard.
	"He is a splendid-looking man," said Grace.
	"But what can he be saying to Bessy Morris?" Mary asked.
	"Oh, flattering her, of course," replied Grace. "And
really I never thought she was so very bashful. But she is strikingly 
-- not handsome, but some way fascinating. If I were Miss Isabella 
Lloyd I might be jealous."
	Mat Donovan felt himself pulled by the sleeve, and, on 
looking round, saw Peg Brady by his side.
	"Well, Peg, what's the matter?" says Mat Donovan.
	She pointed to the captain and Bessy Morris.
	"Oh, ay, 'tis Bessy," he remarked. "I didn't know she was 
here till I see her on the ditch a minute ago."
	Peg Brady kept her eyes fixed upon his face, but she saw 
nothing there but a smile of admiration and pleasure, as he watched 
them.
	"Bessy always had a great respect for you, Mat," says Peg 
Brady.
	"Well, I b'lieve she had," says Mat Donovan.
	"As a friend," returned Peg Brady.
	"As a friend," Mat Donovan repeated. "What else?"
	"But she's not the same since she was in Dublin," said Peg 
Brady. "I must tell you somethin' wan uv these days. Mind the 
captain, how pleasant he is."
	Bessy Morris turned away to seek Judy Brophy -- who was 
taken possession of by one of her new admirers, and seemed quite 
intoxicated by his high-flown compliments -- when the word 
"sojer" fell upon her ear, and on looking up she saw a group of Peg 
Brady's special cronies regarding her with meaning looks, and 
whispering among themselves, keeping their eyes fixed upon her 
all the time. It was plain they knew her secret; and wherever she 
turned she fancied she met looks of suspicion and malice. This was 
mere fancy; but, perhaps, it was conscience made a coward of her. 
She wished she had remained at home, and a pang shot through her 
heart at the thought of how people would talk of her. She 
brightened up as she passed Mat Donovan, for the same honest 
smile as ever met her scrutinising glance. She could almost have 
thrown herself into his arms for shelter from the poisoned arrows 
which she fancied were about being launched at her.
	"Come, boys," said Mat, "up wad the ball."
	The ball was thrown up, and there was some good play, and 
running, with a friendly fall or two; but as it was only a few goals 
"for fun," there was little or no excitement, and the "high-gates," 
and "hell-and-heaven," and "thread-the-needle" were resumed, the 
players merely running away like a flock of frightened sheep 
whenever the ball came bounding in among them.
	"Mat," said Phil Lahy, when two or three goals had been 
hurled, "I think you might send for the sledge."
	"Well, sure I'm agreeable at any time," replied Mat, "but 
'twouldn't do to send for id until the captain proposes id first; you 
know 'twas he sent the challenge."
	"Well, Donovan," said Captain French, "are we going to 
have the sledge? I can't stay much longer."
	"Uv coorse, sir, as you came to have a throw we wouldn't 
like to disappoint you," returned Mat. "I'll send down to Jack 
Delany's for the sledge -- Barney!" he shouted, as Wattletoes was 
passing hot-foot after a young girl, who was evidently bent upon 
leading him a long chase.
	"You lost, Mat," said Barney, as he stopped and wheeled 
round, with a grin of intense enjoyment lighting up his face.
	"How is that, Barney?" Mat asked.
	"Oh, if you wor wud me at the high-gates," returned 
Barney, "you'd get your belly-full uv kisses."
	"All right, Barney," rejoined Mat. "But I want you to run 
down to the forge for the sledge, as the captain 'd like to have a 
throw before he goes."
	"Begob, an' I will so," exclaimed Barney, becoming 
suddenly quite serious, on finding himself entrusted with so 
important a commission.
	"Take up that ball," said Phil Lahy, in a tone that quite 
frightened Jackey Ryan; for it reminded him of the bishop's "Come 
down out of that window," the day that he, Jackey, and two other 
aspiring youths climbed to one of the high windows in Kilthubber 
chapel, to hear His Grace's sermon in comfort, and, as Jackey said, 
without having the life "scroodged" out of them. "An' 
Brummagem," added Phil, "do you folly Wattletoes, for fear he 
might bring the wrong wan."
	"I think I'll go down to the forge after 'em," said Billy 
Heffernan, "as they'll be apt to box about id, an' delay ye too long." 
But Billy Heffernan's real motive was to tell Norah Lahy that Tom 
Cuddehy had "disappointed," as it occurred to him that Norah 
might think the Knocknagow boys were beaten because there was 
no cheering.
	Barney soon appeared with the sledge upon his shoulder, 
and Mat Donovan, after balancing it in his hand, laid it at Captain 
French's feet.
	The captain stripped with the look of a man sure to win, 
and handed his coat and vest to his servant. A murmur, partly of 
admiration and partly of anxiety for the result of the contest, arose 
from the crowd of men, women, and children around, as he bared 
his arms; for compared with them Mat Donovan's appeared almost 
slight and attenuated.
	"I never saw the like of him," some one was heard to 
exclaim in a low, solemn tone, but which was distinctly audible in 
the dead silence.
	He took the heavy sledge, and placing his foot to the mark, 
swung it backwards and forwards twice, and then wheeling rapidly 
full round, brought his foot to the mark again, and, flying from his 
arm as from a catapult, the sledge sailed through the air, and fell at 
a distance that seemed to startle many of the spectators.
	It was then brought back and handed to Mat Donovan, who 
took it with a quiet smile that somewhat re-assured his friends. Mat 
threw the sledge some three feet beyond the captain's mark, and 
many of those around drew a long breath of relief; but there was no 
applause.
	But the captain's next throw was fully six feet beyond Mat 
Donovan's, and several of his father's tenants and retainers cried, 
"More power, captain!"
	Mat Donovan, however, cleared the best mark again by 
three feet.
	The captain now grasped the sledge, clenching his teeth, 
and looking so fierce and tiger-like, his eyes flashing from under 
his knitted brows, that the women at the front of the crowd 
involuntarily pressed back appalled. With every muscle strained to 
the utmost, he hurled the huge sledge from him, falling forward 
upon his hands; and as the iron ploughed up the green sward far 
beyond Mat Donovan's throw, the shout of the captain's partisans 
was drowned by something like a cry of pain from the majority of 
the spectators.
	"Begor, captain," said Mat Donovan, surveying his 
adversary with a look of thoroughly genuine admiration, "you're 
good!"
	Taking his place again at the stand, he laid down the 
sledge, and, folding his arms, fell into deep thought. Many a tear-
dimmed eye was fixed upon him, for all imagined that he was 
beaten.
	"His heart'll break," Bessy Morris heard a girl near her 
murmur.
	"The captain is a good fellow," thought Mat Donovan; "an' 
I'd like to lave him the majority -- if I could do it honourable."
	He looked on the anxious faces around him; he looked at 
Bessy Morris; but still he was undecided. Some one struck the big 
drum a single blow, as if by accident, and, turning round quickly, 
the thatched roofs of the hamlet caught his eye. And, strange to 
say, those old mud walls and thatched roofs roused him as nothing 
else could. His breast heaved, as, with glistening eyes, and that soft 
plaintive smile of his, he uttered the words, "For the credit of the 
little village!" in a tone of the deepest tenderness. Then, grasping 
the sledge in his right hand, and drawing himself up to his full 
height, he measured the captain's cast with his eye. The muscles of 
his arms seemed to start out like cords of steel as he wheeled 
slowly round and shot the ponderous hammer through the air.
	His eyes dilated, as, with quivering nostrils, he watched its 
flight, till it fell so far beyond the best mark that even he himself 
started with astonishment. Then a shout of exultation burst from 
the excited throng; hands were convulsively grasped, and hats sent 
flying into the air; and in their wild joy they crushed around him 
and tried to lift him upon their shoulders.
	"O boys, boys," he remonstrated, "be 'asy. Sure 'tisn't the 
first time ye see me throw a sledge. Don't do anything that might 
offend the captain afther comin' here among us to show ye a little 
diversion."
	This remonstrance had the desired effect, and the people 
drew back and broke up into groups to discuss the event more 
calmly. But Mat's eye lighted up with pride when he saw Miss 
Kearney upon the fence with her handkerchief fluttering in the 
breeze above her head, and Hugh waving his hat by her side. Even 
the ladies in the phaeton caught the enthusiasm and displayed their 
handkerchiefs; while Grace ran to the doctor and got him to lift her 
up in his arms in order that she might have a better view. 
	"Donovan," said Captain French, "your match is not in 
Europe. I was never beaten before."
	"Well, it took a Tipperary-man to beat you, captain," 
returned Mat Donovan.
	"That's some consolation," said the captain. "I'm a 
Tipperary-boy myself, and I'm glad you reminded me of it."
	"Mat," said Billy Heffernan, with the tears standing in his 
eyes, "can you forgive me
	"For what, Billy?" asked Mat, in surprise.
	"For misdoubtin' you," replied Billy, gulping down his 
emotion.
	"How is that?" returned Mat.
	"Whin I see you pausin' an' lookin' so quare," said Billy 
Heffernan, turning away to dash the tears from his face, "I said to 
Phil Lahy that Knocknagow was gone."
	"Knocknagow is not gone, Billy," exclaimed Mat, shaking 
him vigorously by the hand. "Knocknagow is not gone."
	"Knocknagow is not gone," repeated a clear mellow voice 
behind them; and on looking round they saw Father M'Mahon 
close to them, mounted on his bay mare.
	"Knocknagow is not gone," Father M'Mahon repeated, 
while his eye wandered from one to another of the groups of 
youths and maidens who had again returned to their sports over the 
field. "But how long can it be said that Knocknagow is not gone?" 
he added dreamily.
	The good priest was just after kneeling by poor Mick Brien, 
stretched upon his wisp of straw in the miserable cabin; and as he 
counted the houses that had been levelled along the way, his heart 
sank within him, and he asked himself were the people he loved, 
and who loved him in their heart of hearts, doomed indeed to 
destruction?
	He rode back again, seeming to have forgotten the purpose 
for which he had turned into the field. But seeing Barney 
Brodherick making a short-cut to the forge, with the sledge on his 
shoulder, Father M'Mahon called to him.
 "Oh, bloodan'ouns!" muttered Barney, "I'm goin' to get id now for 
ever, for losin' Mass -- God help me."
	"Barney," said the priest, "do you remember anything about 
a gun of Mr. Kearney's you hid in a bush?"
	"Be cripes! your reverence." returned Barney with a start, 
"id wint out uv my head till this blessed minute. The masther tould 
me to brin' id over to Mat to mend the stock that Mr. Richard 
broke, an' the beagles chanced to be passin' hot fut afther a hare, 
an' I thrust the gun into a brake uv briars there above, an' cut afther 
the hunt. An' God help me! I never thought uv id, to carry id to 
Mat, but I'll go for id now."
	'Tis not where you put it," returned the priest. "'Tis in the 
square bog-hole in Billy Heffernan's turbary. I was desired to tell 
you so, lest you should get blamed; but say nothing about my 
telling you."
	"The square bog-hole," muttered Barney, as the priest rode 
on. "Sure the divil a bottom the square bog-hole have. In the name 
uv the Lord I'll ax lave uv the masther to go see my mother, an' 
keep out uv harm's way till Sathurday, at any rate." And Barney, 
dropping the sledge from his shoulder on the field -- where it 
remained till Tom Maher broke his scythe against it the next 
summer -- hurried off to ask leave to go to see his mother.
	"I'm comin' to ax you to give me lave to go home for a 
couple uv days, sir," said Barney, with quite a broken-hearted look.
	"Home I" returned his master, "what business have you 
home?"
	"My mother that's ill-disposhed, sir," replied Barney 
sorrowfully.
	"More d--n shame for her," said his master.
	"Good luck to you, sir," exclaimed Barney, brightening up 
with extraordinary suddenness, and setting off for the little cabin 
above Glounamuckadhee, where he found his venerable parent in 
excellent health and spirits.
	"I wish we had some place for a dance," remarked Mat 
Donovan, "to put the girls in good humour."
	"I'll give you my barn for a dance," said Tom Hogan 
proudly; "the best barn in the parish."
	"More power, Tom," exclaimed a dozen voices. "Up wud 
the music."
	Mat Donovan threw the strap of the big drum over his head, 
and a succession of loud bangs reminded Mr. Lowe of his fright on 
Christmas morning, when he thought a blunder buss had been 
discharged through his window. Billy Heffernan and the other 
musicians produced their fifes, and a loud cheer greeted the 
announcement that they were to have a dance in Tom Hogan's 
barn.
	The sound of the drum seemed to rouse Father M'Mahon 
from his gloomy reverie, as he rode on through the village. "No; 
they are not gone yet," he thought, as he stopped under the beech-
tree -- looking up among the boughs, as if he wanted Tommy Lahy 
to hold the bay mare, and thought the top of the tree the most likely 
place to find him -- "let us trust in God, and hope for the best."
	Honor Lahy appeared at the door with a curtsey; and verily 
that wholesome, honest, smiling face of hers seemed to say, even 
more plainly than the big drum itself, that Knocknagow was safe 
and sound -- a little old or so; but hale and hearty and kindly, 
withal.
	"Well, Mrs. Lahy, how is she?"
	"Finely, your reverence," Honor replied.
	Father M'Mahon cast his eyes up through the boughs again.
	"He's gone wud the drum, sir," said Honor.
	"Oh, yes, that's quite right. I'll just step in to see Norah," 
returned Father M'Mahon, alighting and hanging the rein on an 
iron hook in the beech-tree.
	And how Honor Lahy's face did light up as she curtsied 
again! And how poor Norah's eyes beamed with pleasure and 
thankfulness! After inquiring how she felt, and hoping she would 
be better when the fine weather came, he was going away, when a 
long roll of the drum softened by distance made him pause.
	"Do you feel sorry that you cannot join them?" he asked, 
looking pityingly into the poor girl's pale face.
	"Oh, no, sir," she replied -- and there was gladness in her 
low, sweet tones. "'Tis just the same as if I was with them."
	"Ay, then," added her mother, "an' she makes me go out to 
see which side uv the field the girls do be at, an' then she thinks 
she do be wud 'em from that out."
	"That's right, that's right," said Father M'Mahon, hurrying 
out as if the bay mare were trying to break loose and run away. 
And as he took the rein from the hook, Father M'Mahon flourished 
his crimson silk pocket-handkerchief and blew his nose loudly.
	Throwing the rein over his arm, and thrusting his thumbs in 
his waistcoat, Father M'Mahon then walked down the hill, with his 
head so high, and looking so awfully proud, that Jack Delany's 
wife snatched up the twins from the middle of the road, seizing one 
by the small of the back and the other by the left arm -- which, 
strange to say, was not dislocated that time -- and, ran with them 
into the house, not even venturing to stop to pick up the "rattler" 
and wooden "corncrake" which Brummagem had bought for the 
twins at the fair after winning one-and-fourpence at "trick-o'-the-
loop;" Mrs. Delany being fully persuaded that in his then mood 
Father M'Mahon would think nothing of crushing the twins -- one 
under each foot; and then turn round and ask her how dared she 
bring such nuisances into the world, two at a time!
	"God bless us!" exclaimed Jack Delany's wife as she 
stooped to pick up the "rattler" and " corncrake," when the priest 
had passed, "did any wan ever see a man wud such a proud walk?"
	"Mother," said Norah Lahy, "I'm as sure as I'm alive that I 
know two saints who are still walking the earth."
	"Who are they?" her mother asked.
	"Father M'Mahon and Miss Kearney," replied Norah.
	"Why, then, I know a saint," thought the poor woman, with 
a sorrowful shake of her head, "I know a saint, an' she's not able to 
walk at all." And Honor Lahy turned away her face and wept 
silently.
	Great was Phil Lahy's astonishment when he heard that 
Tom Hogan had given his barn for the dance even without being 
asked. And, after pondering over the extraordinary circumstance 
for a minute or two, Phil declared that, "after that, we'd get the 
Repeal of the Union." He could talk of nothing, however, but Mat 
Donovan's triumph, which he attributed in no small degree to 
certain "directions" which he had given Mat; and even when Judy 
Brophy's new admirer beckoned him aside, and wanted to know 
"what part of a woman was her contour," Phil answered shortly 
that he never "studied them subjects much"; so that the young man, 
who thought he had hit upon a new compliment, went back to 
Judy's side no wiser than he came, muttering, as he rubbed his poll 
with a puzzled look, that he "didn't like to venture the 'contour,' 
though he was nearly sure 'twas all right"; and he had to go over 
the old compliments again; to which Judy Brophy listened with as 
much delight as if she had not heard them all fifty times before. 
And now it is only fair to say that there was not a warmer admirer -
- that is, a warmer female admirer -- of Nancy Hogan's beauty at 
the dance that night than Judy Brophy; and in protesting against 
her brother's bringing home a penniless bride, perhaps Judy 
Brophy did no more than a good many tolerably amiable young 
women might have done under similar circumstances. And, 
furthermore, we feel bound to admit, that were it not for those two 
hundred sovereigns out of Larry Clancy's old saucepan, that 
somewhat pedantic young man, who is so assiduous in his 
attentions, would not be puzzling his brains about her contour," as 
he is at this moment.
	Bessy Morris's is the only sad face I can see," Grace 
remarked to Mary, as the joyous crowd left the field. "I wonder 
what can have happened to her."
	Mary beckoned to Bessy as she was passing, and after 
saying something about the alteration of a dress, asked carelessly 
what was it Captain French had been saying to her.
	"Well, he was humbugging me about the sergeant," Bessy 
replied, with a look of pain.
	"Oh, yes, yes," returned Mary, brightening up. "I 
understand. Good evening. And tell Mat Donovan how delighted I 
am at his victory."
	Norah Lahy sat in her straw-chair looking into the bright 
turf fire, and deriving as much pleasure from the dance in Tom 
Hogan's barn as if her foot were the fleetest among them all. But 
she hoped, when the dance was over, that Billy Heffernan would 
come down and play "Auld Lang Syne" for her -- or "something 
lively," if her mother put her veto upon "grievous ould airs."



CHAPTER LIV.

BOB LLOYD IN DANGER. -- MAT DONOVAN'S OPINION OF 
"DESAVING" PEOPLE IN THE WAY OF COURTSHIP.

	THE last straggler had left the field, and hurried on after 
the fifes and drums. The Miss Hanlys had shaken hands with Mr. 
Lowe and the doctor, and driven up the hill, disappearing round the 
angle of the road like a vanishing rainbow, or anything else very 
bright and beautiful, from the doctor's gaze. Maurice Kearney was 
pointing out the wonderful straightness of the new ditch to Mr. 
Bob Lloyd, and telling him how Mat Donovan had marked out the 
line for it with his plough. And Mr. Lloyd, stooping forward and 
shutting one eye, had looked along the new ditch between the ears 
of his grey hunter, and said, "Ay, faith." Mr. Lowe had turned into 
the avenue gate to overtake Mary and Grace--  when Grace, who 
looked round to see whether the pony would take it into his head to 
play one of his practical jokes and return to the gate backwards, 
uttered an exclamation and stood still, with sparkling eyes and 
flushed cheek. Then Grace ran forward a few yards and stopped 
again; and then retreated backwards, holding out her hand to feel 
for Mary, and keeping her eyes fixed upon a carriage that had just 
topped the hill and was coming slowly towards them. Having 
found Mary without the help of her eyes, she grasped her by the 
arm, holding on as if some unseen force were pulling her away, 
and panting like a startled greyhound. For a minute or so she 
seemed uncertain as to the occupants of the carriage; but all doubt 
was soon removed, and, regardless of consequences or 
appearances, Grace sprang forward and flew up the hill as if she 
had wings. The old coachman, allowing his solemn face to relax 
into a smile, reined in his horses, and in another instant Grace was 
in the carriage.
	It is Dr. Kiely," exclaimed Mary. " It is her father." And 
Mary looked so excited, that a new idea got into Mr. Lowe's head; 
and when he saw a tall man of noble presence alight from the 
carriage holding his little daughter by the hand, Mr. Lowe felt sure 
that Dr. Kiely was the rival he had most to dread. He remembered 
how Miss Kearney had described him as the "finest man she ever 
saw"; and he could see by her look that she almost worshipped 
him.
	"Oh, he has Eva with him," she exclaimed again, and 
hurried quickly back to the gate, as Richard handed a graceful girl 
with very long golden ringlets out of the carriage.
	When the greetings and introductions were over -- and Dr. 
Kiely did not fail to shake hands with Mr. Lloyd, whom he had 
met before -- the party all walked through the lawn, the carriage 
going round to the back entrance; but Maurice Kearney observed 
that Mr. Bob Lloyd remained outside the gate, as motionless as any 
equestrian statue.
	"Come, Mr. Lloyd, and have pot-luck with us," said 
Maurice Kearney, going back and pulling the gate open.
	Mr. Lloyd rode in like a man in a dream, till he came to the 
hall-door.
	"Take Mr. Lloyd's horse to the stable," said Mr. Kearney to 
Tom Maher. "Come in, Mr. Lloyd."
	Grace never let go her father's hand all this time; but she 
glanced at Eva occasionally as if she feared some harm might 
happen to her, and thought the "poor child" required looking after. 
Mary was obliged to come down from her room to remind her of 
the necessity of preparing for dinner, and Grace returned with her; 
but instead of taking off her bonnet, she sat on a chair near the 
window, looking quite bewildered.
	"What on earth has come over you, Grace?" Mary asked. 
"You have never once opened your lips since they arrived."
	To which Grace replied by rushing at her sister, and 
flinging her arms round her neck. Eva stooped down and gently 
submitted to a choking.
	"You have lost your senses," said Mary, laughing.
	"Here now, Mary," returned Grace, in a business-like 
manner, "sit down and write a note which I will dictate."
	"To whom?" Mary asked.
	"To Castleview. Papa likes a dance, and I can't see that we 
can get on quite well by ourselves. So ask them to spend the 
evening."
	"Very well," returned Mary; "I suppose I'm to include 
Lory?"
	"Yes, of course."
	"Who is Lory?" Eva inquired, as she fried to re-arrange her 
curls.
	"Oh, he's one of my admirers," Grace replied.
	"Shall I say, by way of inducement, that we have Mr. 
Lloyd?"
	"Well, I think not, It would look as if we regarded that fact 
as a great matter. I'll send Adonis with the note, and he can just 
mention Mr. Lloyd incidentally. And, by-the-by, don't be too sure 
of Mr. Lloyd. Here is his man Jer in pursuit of him, and you know 
what Richard told us about him."
	Mr. Lloyd was soon seen, without his hat, in the garden.
	"Well, Jer?" said he.
	"Aren't we goin' to the County Carlow?" returned Jer. 
"Afther gettin' the new traces for the tandem an' all."
	"Ay, faith," replied his master. "To-morrow."
	"Well, sure you may as well come away home so," rejoined 
Jer.
	"I'm staying for dinner with Mr. Kearney," returned his 
master.
	Jer looked at him in silence for a minute. "God help you," 
he muttered, with a pitying shake of the head. "You never had a 
stim uv sinse, since you wor the hoighth o' that." And Jer held his 
hand two feet from the ground.
	"No danger, Jer," said Bob Lloyd, walking back to the 
house with a good-humoured smile.
	"No danger," Jer muttered to himself, as he glanced at Miss 
Kearney in the window. "How mild an' innocent she looks. An' 
she's always quite an' studdy, an' stays at home, an' keeps her mind 
to herse'f. But thim's the dangerous wans," added Jer, with a look 
of deep wisdom, "an' 'tisn't the little cockers that's always runnin' 
about waggin' their tails and givin' tongue from mornin' till night. 
But id can't be helped, an' he can't say that he wasn't warned, at any 
rate." And Jer returned to Mount Tempe full of sad forebodings, 
and almost regretting his promise to Tom Otway to go down to the 
County Carlow to have a look at his cousin.
	The dinner was equal to anything that Mrs. Kearney had 
ever seen even in "her own father's house." It imparted an 
Epicurean pout to Dr. Kiely's under lip, and threw a sort of "dim 
religious light" over the spirits of the whole company, which 
checked everything approaching to levity till the dishes were 
removed. Grace's laugh was hushed, and even the brilliancy of her 
eyes toned down. In fact, her face merely reflected her father's, and 
she even unconsciously imitated his movements, until after a 
graceful flourish of the hand she leant back in her chair and 
attempted to stick her thumb in an imaginary waistcoat -- which 
reminded her that she was not six feet high and the finest 
gentleman in all the world. But then she was his daughter, and 
maintained her dignified deportment accordingly.
	Dr. Kiely had the gift of drawing people out; and the true 
politeness to exercise it impartially. Mr. Lowe acquitted himself so 
entirely to his own satisfaction, that his prejudice against his new 
acquaintance vanished like mist before the sun. A question or two 
about his professional studies gave Richard an opportunity of 
airing a whole vocabulary of hard words, which quite frightened 
his mother -- so stupendous, she thought, must be his learning. 
Even Mr. Bob Lloyd talked so well that Grace was impressed with 
quite a high opinion of his good sense; and wondered why he 
looked so seldom towards her side of the table. Hugh alone was 
left in the background; and she thought it too bad that her papa 
should treat him as if he were a mere boor. But she soon noticed 
that Hugh and her papa exchanged looks now and then, and 
seemed to understand each other very well; which was quite a 
"mystery" to her, but just then she could not turn her mind to 
unravelling it.
	But Mr. Lloyd soon took to sighing so deeply, and with so 
melancholy an expression of face, that Mrs. Kearney became quite 
distressed-- 'twas so like her poor Uncle Dan after the marriage of 
his first love, for whose sake he remained all his life a bachelor, 
and took to writing poetry and playing the fiddle. Mr. Lloyd, she 
thought, must surely have been crossed in love, and her heart 
melted in compassion for him. She thanked goodness she had 
never made any one unhappy in that way. Though, to be sure, their 
neighbour, Mr. Sweeny, who was "rolling in riches," fell in love 
with her when she was only nineteen, and offered to marry her 
"without a penny." And though her father thought it would be a 
most fortunate match for her, and even her Uncle Dan said she 
ought not to be too hasty in refusing, and poor Mr. Sweeny was "so 
fond of her"; still she couldn't bear the thought of marrying him -- 
on account of his nose. Not that the nose, though somewhat long, 
was by any means an ugly nose. But it was a cold nose! That's 
what did the mischief. Mr. Sweeny arrived unexpectedly at 
Ballydunmore one winter's night -- it was the night after Twelfth 
Night, for all the world -- and the light happening to be blown out 
in the hall, Mr. Sweeny, in an evil hour for himself, attempted to 
kiss her, and the contact of his nose with her glowing cheek, sent a 
cold shiver to her heart, and quenched the incipient combustion 
that was beginning to take place there, from the mingling of her 
own good nature with her Uncle Dan's approval; and which would 
inevitably have burst into a flame, were it not for that unlucky 
icicle of a nose. It was all in vain that she tried to reason with 
herself that the coldness of the nose was merely accidental, and the 
result of the cold rain and sleet, which the east wind had been 
blowing straight in Mr. Sweeny's face since he had left his own 
house. Unhappily reason is a mere bellows without a valve in such 
cases. No matter how hard you work with it, it won't help in the 
least to get up a blaze. And in spite of all she could do, the rosy-
checked Miss O'Carroll of Ballydunmore found herself singing, 
involuntarily, twenty times a day --

"You're too old and you're too cold,
And I won't have you, I won't have you,"

greatly to her own distress. And after those little snatches of 
melody she would accuse herself of "ingratitude," and the 
valveless bellows would be brought into requisition, but to very 
little purpose. Yet there was no knowing how it might have ended, 
as Mrs. Kearney was wont to say with a sigh, if young Maurice 
Kearney, of Ballinaclash, had not dropped in with her Uncle Dan 
on their way to the fair of Limerick, and stepped for the night. It 
was rumoured at the time -- but there was no positive evidence of 
the fact -- that a similar proceeding to that of the night after 
Twelfth Night took place on this occasion also; but with a 
precisely opposite result. And the truth of this rumour was strongly 
confirmed by Mrs. Kearney's avowal afterwards that Maurice's 
impudence in those days "went beyond anything."
	Mrs. Kearney thought of all this as she watched the heaving 
of Bob Lloyd's chest, and his languishing looks across the table -- 
across the table, of course, because his face happened to be turned 
in that direction, and not with any reference either to the golden 
ringlets or the wavy tresses of dark brown, with their 
accompaniments, that happened to be straight before him. And as 
Mr. Lloyd continued to get worse, Mrs. Kearney felt quite 
unhappy, and said to herself that she did not "envy her, whoever 
she was," who could cause such suffering as that, particularly in 
the case of such a "fine, gentlemanly-looking man" as Mr. Lloyd.
	Once in the drawing-room Grace emancipated herself from 
the spell that so subdued her during dinner, and instead of 
reflecting the mellow light of the star of her idolatry, sparkled and 
scintillated with her own peculiar brightness. Even Mr. Lloyd 
followed her movements with a plaintive smile; as a mourner over 
a grave might be startled into a momentary forgetfulness of his 
sorrow by the flitting of a humming bird, like a winged gem 
among the tombs. Mary was far more animated than Mr. Lowe had 
ever seen her before. But Eva was shy, and looked as if she would 
hide herself behind the golden ringlets -- which made Hugh 
whisper in Grace's ear while he called her attention to her sister --  

"My Mary of the curling hair,
The laughing teeth, and bashful air."

Whereupon Grace started up from her seat with her hands upon her 
knees, and then sat down again, as if she could scarcely resist 
flying across the room and repeating the strangling process over 
again.
	The entrance of the Miss Hanlys in their new flounced 
dresses created quite a sensation, and even Grace acknowledged 
that Kathleen was gloriously handsome. In fact, the little 
improvised party was as perfect in every detail as if it had been 
planned and pondered over for weeks and months before; and even 
Dr. Kiely, who was somewhat fastidious, was charmed. And when 
Miss Rose Hanly ran her fingers over the keys of the piano, and the 
dancing commenced, it would be difficult to say whether the actual 
performers or the lookers-on were most delighted -- always 
excepting Mr. Lory Hanly, whose ecstasy, in either capacity, like 
Maurice Kearney's impudence when he went a-wooing to 
Ballydunmore, "went beyond anything."
	When, however, the "poetry of motion" was suspended, 
and poetry proper, in the shape of Moore's Melodies, introduced, 
Dr. Kiely began to resume his sway over the company, as he called 
Mr. Lowe's attention to the beauties of each song, occasionally 
repeating a stanza in such a mellow tone and measured cadence, 
that Mr. Lloyd called out at last, "Give it all to us, doctor," to the 
great amusement of every one, for these were the first words 
uttered by Mr. Lloyd since he took to sighing at the dinner-table. 
And when Lory, who was concealed behind the window curtains -- 
with only one eye visible, which he kept steadily fixed upon Grace 
-- blurted out with that "terrible throat" of his, "You took the words 
out of my mouth, Mr. Lloyd; I was just going to ask him myself" -- 
there was a burst of laughter that broke the spell under which the 
doctor was fast bringing them like some powerful necromancer.
	Hugh thought how fortunate it was that Miss Lloyd was not 
present, as the voice from behind the curtain would inevitably have 
necessitated the burning of feathers under her nose.
	Grace suggested that Mr. Hanly himself ought to favour 
them with a recitation; and, with the agility of a harlequin, Lory 
sprang from his hiding-place upon a chair -- for, as he afterwards 
confessed, he'd do anything she'd ask him. Mrs. Kearney took 
advantage of the clap with which he was received to bolt out of the 
room, with her two hands over her ears, as if she were flying from 
a shower of brickbats.
	Doctor Kiely complimented Lory upon his rendering of 
"The Spanish Champion," and prophesied that Mr. Hanly would 
one day be a great orator; by which compliment Grace was as 
gratified as Lory himself. Indeed, she knew his appreciation of 
herself was a proof that Lory had something in him.
	"Well, Grace," said her father, "are we to have any more
songs? It would not be fair to trespass too much on Miss Hanly, so 
I think you ought to sing that beautiful little song of Edward 
Walsh's for us."
	Grace searched for her own music book -- music and words 
copied by herself, as she was wont to remark carelessly to her new 
acquaintance -- and Mr. Lloyd was roused again when she came to 
the words --  

"My girl has ringlets rich and rare,
By Nature's finger wove'

and evinced such admiration of her singing, that Grace requested a 
song from Mr. Lloyd himself. And Mr. Lloyd complied so readily 
and acquitted himself so well that the ladies all exchanged looks of 
wonder. The song was "Norah Creina," and Grace saw plainly 
enough that she was the lady of "the beaming eye" and the "wit 
refined"; but which of the other ladies was Mr. Lloyd's "gentle, 
artless Norah Creina," was not so evident, as they all sat close 
together at the opposite side of the room, and she could not be sure 
for which of them the singer's melting glances were intended.
	"That's an admirable song," said Dr. Kiely; "and I never 
heard it better sung in my life. In fact, I think most of Moore's 
songs are best sung by men. The ladies don't attend sufficiently to 
the sentiment; they think only of the music."
	"That does not apply to Miss Grace's singing," Mr. Lowe 
observed.
	"Oh, you are thinking of the 'cold-hearted Saxon,'" said 
Mary, laughing, "when she sang the 'Coulin' for you the other 
evening."
	"What about the 'cold-hearted Saxon?' "Dr. Kiely asked.
	"Mr. Lowe heard Mr. Flaherty play the air at a wedding," 
returned Mary, "and Grace sang Moore's words to it for him, and 
he says the bitter hatred she threw into her look and voice, as she 
fixed her eyes on himself at those words, quite frightened him."
	"Oh, 'twas dreadful!" exclaimed Mr. Lowe.
	Grace laughed, and ran off to Ellie and Willie, who had 
induced Lory to join them at a game of forfeits in a corner of the 
room.
	Rose Hanly and Eva fell in too, and after a while Hugh and 
Mr. Lloyd joined in time game; and Mr. Lloyd "loved his love with 
an A because she was an angel," but solemnly declared he could 
find no reason for hating her with an A, or any other letter, and 
preferred forfeiting his buckhorn handled knife to attempting such 
an impossibility. But he soon had the satisfaction of seeing Hugh 
"get down" as well as himself; and before long every one had to 
pay a forfeit except Grace, who volunteered to decree what the 
owners of the "very fine things " and the "superfine things" were 
"to do." The releasing of the forfeits created much merriment; but 
while Lory was acquitting himself to admiration in a hornpipe, Mr. 
Lloyd pushed his chair close to Richard Kearney, who was making 
the most of the golden hours that were flying on angel's wings over 
him and Kathleen, and whispered -- 
	"Dick, what the devil am I to do?"
	"Why?" the doctor asked.
	"I never made a rhyme in my life," replied Mr. Lloyd.
	"Oh, any nonsense will do," returned the doctor, turning 
again to Kathleen.
	"But, sense or nonsense," rejoined Bob Lloyd, "I can't do it 
unless you get me out of it while they're not minding us. And I'll 
do as much for you, Dick, another time."
	"Well," said the doctor, rather crossly, "here is a rhyme for 
you:
"The man that's rich may ride in stages --  
Stages, wages, rages, cages -- wait, let me see,"
	Dr. Kiely had just been talking of one of his aristocratic 
patients who had travelled by slow stages from Dublin in order to 
be under his care; and this suggested the line which Dr. Richard 
Kearney repeated for his friend, Bob Lloyd. But to complete the 
couplet was not so easy.
	"Well, Dick?" said Mr. Lloyd, holding his ear close to him.

"The man that's rich may ride in stages --  

"What's to come after that?"

"'But the man that's poor'" --

the doctor continued.

"'But the man that's poor'" -- 

repeated Bob Lloyd.

"Must walk, by jacus" -- 

added the doctor, impatiently.
	"Say it all together for me, Dick," said Mr. Lloyd.

"The man that's rich may ride in stages,,
But the man that's poor must walk, by jacus"

"Now have you it?"
	"Wait a minute," returned Bob. " Is this it? --

"The man that rich may ride in stages.
But the man that's poor must walk, by jacus."

	"That's it. Remember it now, and don't bother us any more 
about it," rejoined the doctor, stroking his moustache and throwing 
his arm on the back of Kathleen's chair.
	"Well, Mr. Lloyd, now for your rhyme," said Grace, when 
Lory had finished his hornpipe, and regained possession of his 
necktie, which Rose snatched from him again, and, after folding it 
carefully, chopped him under the chin, and tied it on in that great 
bow-knot which Grace thought so ridiculous.
Silence for Mr. Lloyd's impromptu," Dr. Kiely called out; and all 
eyes were at once turned upon Mr. Lloyd, who hemmed, and 
looked round upon his audience with a confident smile.
	Silence!" Dr. Kiely repeated.
"The man that's rich -- "

Mr. Lloyd began in a steady sonorous voice, and suddenly 
becoming very serious --  

"The man that's rich may ride in stages,
But the man that's poor -- by jacus, he must walk!"

	And Mr. Lloyd resumed his smiling look again, and gazed 
round upon the company as if quite sure of their applause. For a 
moment there was a dead silence, interrupted only by one or two 
slight coughs. Pocket-handkerchiefs were in requisition, and there 
was some biting of lips; but Grace could not stand it. She threw 
herself upon Hugh's shoulder, and screamed with laughter, which 
exploded again and again, whenever she ventured to glance at the 
poet, who continued to look round upon the company with a 
beaming smile of triumph.
	"Will you decide a very important question, Dr. Kiely," 
said Mary, "which these ladies have been debating for some time 
back?"
	"What is it?" he asked.
	"They are talking about flirting," returned Mary. "Eva says 
it is a shocking practice, that nothing could justify. It is nothing 
less, in her opinion, than downright deceit. But Rose says she likes 
it, and can see no harm in the world in it. 'Tis quite fair, she thinks, 
to humbug the gentlemen, and she has no objection to be 
humbugged in return. She is just after saying that if Eva's notions 
were acted upon, not a soul would she have to pay her a 
compliment from one end of the year to another, but Mr. Johnny 
Wilson, who, it appears, is always quite in earnest."
	"Well, and what is Miss Kathleen's opinion?"
	"Oh, she seems to think the gentlemen should be always in 
earnest, but the ladies need not be so at all. And now I want you to 
pronounce judgment on the case."
	"Oh, it is too serious, too important a subject," returned the 
doctor, "to decide upon without due deliberation. I think --"
	"Poor old Mr. Somerfield is very bad," exclaimed Mrs. 
Kearney, who had just entered the room. "They are after sending 
for you, Mat Donovan says."
	"Indeed! Do they want me immediately?"
	"I don't know," replied Mrs. Kearney. "I'll call in Mat." 
	"Well, Mat, what is this about old Mr. Somerfield?" the 
doctor asked, when Mat was ushered in.
	I was standin' at Phil Morris's gate, sir," Mat returned, "as I 
went home a piece uv the way wud a couple uv girls from the 
dance -- a cousin of mine, an' another young woman; an' just as I 
was afther bidden' 'em good night at ould Phil's gate, I hear a horse 
comin' powdherin' along the road, an' when he come up I knew 
'twas Rody the huntsman, an' called to him, an' axed him where he 
was goin' at that hour uv the night. 'The ould masther that's afther 
gettin' a fit,' says he, 'an' I'm goin' for Docthor Kiely.' 'Begor thin,' 
says I, 'you're turnin' your back to him, for he's over at Misther 
Kearney's,' says I. ' Do you tell me so?' says Rody, 'I'll go back an' 
tell Mr. Sam.' So he wheeled round an' galloped back again; an' I 
said to myse'f I'd step over the short-cut an' tell you, fearin' that 
you might be in bed."
	"Thank you, Mat; you have done quite right. I suppose if I 
am required at once he will be here soon."
	"He often got that fit before," said Maurice Kearney. "He'll 
be out with the hounds to-morrow or after, as well as ever. Sam 
wouldn't be so easily frightened about him only that his life is the 
only hold he has on the place. Do you think Sir Garrett will leave it 
to him when the old fellow drops?"
	"I really don't know," replied Mr. Lowe, to whom the 
question was addressed.
	"Wait, Mat," said Dr. Kiely, who liked to draw Mat 
Donovan out whenever the opportunity presented itself. "I want to 
have your opinion upon a subject those ladies are discussing."
	"What's that, sir?" Mat asked, casting one of his 
"deludering" looks across the room.
	"Well, some of them say it is very wrong for young men to 
be flattering and deceiving young women; while Miss Rose Hanly 
says it is rather pleasant and she sees no harm in it."
	"In the way of coortship, sir?" Mat inquired.
	"Yes, in the way of courtship," replied the doctor, laughing.
	"Begor, sir," returned Mat, rubbing his chin 
contemplatively, " I b'lieve 'tis like puttin' the small whate in the 
bags."
	"How is that?"
	"Somethin' that Father Hannigan said to a friend uv mine, 
sir," Mat replied. "An' faith he'll have a harder dish to wash now 
wud Father M'Mahon, for he's afther runnin' away wud a wife, an' 
Father M'Mahon is mighty hard agin' that soart uv work."
	"I suppose 'tis Tom Cuddehy?" said Mr. Kearney.
	'Tis, sir," replied Mat. "But there's every excuse for him, as 
she was an ould sweetheart, an' her match was made wud a young 
buck from the mountains that she didn't care a straw about, though 
he's milkin' twenty cows."
	"But what did Father Hannigan say about putting small 
wheat in the bags?" Dr. Kiely asked.
	"'Tis what every wan do, sir," replied Mat. "The small 
whate that runs through the screen is put in the middle uv the bag, 
a few fistfuls in each, an' all is passed off on the merchant, 
accordin' to the sample. But the merchant knows 'tis there as well 
as the man that put id in id."
	"Well," said the doctor, "what has that to do with deceiving 
young women 'by way of courtship'?"
	"Well, you see, sir, Tom Cuddehy scrupled id wan time, 
and tuck id into his head that it was a sin, an' tould id to Father 
Hannigan when he went to confession. An' sure Father Hannigan 
was in a hoult, an' didn't know what to say, for he knew the whole 
world used to put the small whate in the bags. But for all, he didn't 
like to say 'twas right, for fear he might be encouragin' fraud, as he 
said. But, on the other hand, if he said 'twas wrong, he should tell 
Tom to make restitution for all the small whate he passed off on 
the merchant all his life. So he was fairly puzzled. But afther 
thinkin' for a start, he says to Tom: 'Well, Tom, sure enough there's 
nothing like fair an' honest dealin',' says he. 'An' 'tis wrong to 
desave any man, Tom -- even a corn merchant. But -- do your best, 
and they'll be up to you,' says Father Hannigan. An' begor, sir," 
added Mat, with another glance across the room, "I'm thinkin' 'tis 
the same way in regard to desavin' the young women. Do your 
best, and they'll be up to you."
	Dr. Kiely leant back in his chair, and laughed loud and. 
long. Every one else laughed, too, except Mr. Lloyd, who looked 
quite lost in astonishment, and averred that "the divil a better thing 
than that he ever heard in his life."
	There was a single knock at the hall-door, and the old 
huntsman's voice was heard asking for Dr. Kiely. And in reply to 
the doctor the huntsman said, with the tears in his eyes, that the old 
master was never so bad before, and that Mr. Sam begged that Dr. 
Kiely would not "lose a minute."
	The gentlemen all came out to the hall to see the doctor off, 
and, when the doctor was off, the gentlemen walked into the 
parlour as if by preconcert, and each commenced brewing a 
tumbler of whiskey punch in silence; to which beverage Mr. Lowe 
had become so reconciled by this time that he never drank wine, 
except a little at dinner to please Mrs. Kearney.
	"Ah! Dick!" Bob Lloyd exclaimed, in a heart-broken tone.
	What's the matter?" the doctor asked, tasting his punchy 
and adding another squeeze of lemon.
	"They're all fine girls," returned Mr. Lloyd. "Your sister is 
more like a queen than a woman."
	"More like a queen than a woman?" the doctor repeated. 
"Hugh, the decanter."
	"Ay, faith," rejoined Mr. Lloyd. "And Kathleen is a dazzler, 
and no mistake."
	The doctor swallowed the glass of punch he had just ladled 
out at a gulp, as if drinking the dazzler's health.
	"But," continued Bob Lloyd with a shake of his head that 
seemed to say that wonders would never cease -- "but the little one 
flogs all!"
	"Faith, she does!" Lory blurted out, holding his glass to his 
lips untasted, as he stared at Mr. Lloyd, who was standing with his 
elbow on the chimney-piece.
	Hugh looked up, too, with surprise; for Mr. Lloyd had all 
the marks and tokens of a man desperately in love, and Hugh could 
scarcely imagine how a mere child could be the cause of so severe 
a fit -- for he as well as Lory thought the "little one" that "flogged 
all," could be no other than Grace.
	"What little one?" he asked.
	Mr. Lloyd replied by putting the tip of his fore-finger to his 
temple, and twisting it round, and round, and round, letting the 
hand down lower and lower, till he could go no further without 
stooping.
	"Oh, I see," said the doctor. "You have got entangled in 
Eva's golden ringlets."
	"There's nothing I'd rather look at than a nice head of hair," 
returned Mr. Lloyd, with another deep sigh; which was echoed 
from the opposite side of the fire-place, where Mr. Henry Lowe sat 
brooding over the thought that this was the "last night," and 
wondering would they have another set of quadrilles. The doctor, 
too, sighed heavily, and thought what lovely arms Kathleen had -- 
for the "dazzler" had the cruelty to come in ball costume. And 
Lory Hanly, as he swallowed his punch, looked all round at the 
three sighing swains, and said to himself that he "wouldn't let it go 
with any of them." By which Lory meant that he was himself as 
bad a case as the best of them. In fact, Hugh seemed the only 
whole-hearted individual among them; for which we do not mean 
to insinuate for a moment that he was at all to be envied.
	Grace came in to ask the gentlemen to come to the 
drawing-room. They jumped to their feet with extraordinary 
alacrity; but every one stopped to finish his punch, standing, except 
Mr. Lowe, who left his tumbler more than half full on the 
chimney-piece. (It was emptied by Kit Cummins, in the kitchen, 
before it was entirely cold -- she having run up to try whether Dr. 
Kiely could do anything for the "Burgundy in her back"; by which 
it is to ho supposed Kit meant lumbago. And Mat Donovan 
remarked that the doctor would be wanted to cure every ailment 
ever known, "from a bone-lock to a galloping consumption," 
before he'd be let sit down to his breakfast next morning.)
	"Dick," said Bob Lloyd, as they were crossing the hall, 
"stop a minute."
	"What's the matter?" the doctor asked.
	"I'm a gone coon," replied Mr. Lloyd. "Go ahead." And he 
waved his hand solemnly towards the drawing-room door.
	"Why, aren't you coming in yourself?" said the doctor.
	"Ay, faith," returned Mr. Lloyd. "Go ahead, Dick." And 
they walked into the drawing-room, like a pair of innocent lambs 
to the slaughter.
	We could sit in a corner of that old room for another hour 
or two, without feeling at all tired. But we must say goodnight -- 
and all the more reluctantly, because it may be many a long day 
before we meet so many happy hearts under Maurice Kearney's 
roof again.



CHAPTER LV.

BILLY HEFFERNAN MAKES DR. KIELY A PRESENT, "AS A 
FRIEND OF PHIL LAHY'S."

	MAT DONOVAN was right. Maurice Kearney's kitchen 
next morning seemed to have been turned into a hospital for 
incurables. But Dr. Kiely was an early riser, and had sent away 
most of the patients, with prayers and blessings on their lips, 
before the family had assembled in the breakfast room. One poor 
man was so ill, it was necessary to carry him into the out-house 
where the workmen slept, and lay him upon one of the beds. After 
examining him, the doctor glanced round the apartment. There 
were several rude bedsteads, and two or three wisps of straw upon 
the ground, with something in the shape of bedclothes flung in a 
heap upon them. A bit of broken looking-glass stuck to the wall 
attracted his attention, and on going towards it he saw that the wall 
above and below and on either side of it was plastered with tallow, 
with bits of burnt wick stuck in it -- proof positive that a 
candlestick was an unknown luxury to Mr. Kearney's workmen 
once they retired to their dormitory.
	"I wonder they don't burn down the house," muttered the 
doctor.
	As many pairs of brogues as ever were seen in a kish at a 
fair, were scattered about in all directions, some new and some old, 
some patched and some ripped and broken beyond all hope of 
mending; while not a few were grey or green with the mould of 
time. More pairs of dirty stockings were flung about, too, than 
would be agreeable either to the visual or olfactory organs of most 
people. A few suits of clothes hung from pegs over a corn bin at 
the farthest end of the room -- the gilt buttons and drab silk ribbons 
at the knees of Jim Dunn's Sunday breeches looking so intensely 
new and brilliant, that people were tempted to come close to them 
and feel them with their fingers, as something very rare and 
curious. And the skin of the fat sheep -- the leg of which Dr. Kiely 
praised so highly at dinner the day before --  dangled from a beam 
over his head; that being a safe and convenient place to keep it 
from the dogs. All this and more the doctor took in at a glance; and 
feeling the air of the place heavy and unwholesome, he pointed to 
the window, which was at the back, opposite the door, and ordered 
Tom Maher to open it.
	Tom Maher looked very much surprised, and felt all round 
the sash, thereby disturbing a whole legion of spiders --  making 
them run wildly over the walls and the window -- and carrying 
away divers layers of cobwebs upon his fingers.
	"Begor, sir," said Tom Maher, as he tried to shake the 
cobwebs from his hand, which they covered like an old glove, "it 
don't open. I remember now wan uv the hinges was broke, an' 'twas 
nailed up, as the horses was althered into the new stable."
	"What has the new stable to do with this place?" the doctor 
asked.
	"Sure this was the ould stable, sir," Tom answered. "An' 
when the new one was built we came to sleep here."
	"Yes, I see," returned the doctor. "Horses, of course, 
require to be better lodged than men. Who sleeps on that heap in 
the corner?"
	"Wattletoes, sir."
	"That's Barney. Where is he? I have not seen him."
	"He went to see his mother yisterday, sir, and didn't come 
back yet."
	The doctor turned up the covering of one of the beds, and 
stooping down seemed to smell the musty straw. He shook his 
head, as he took a last survey of the "den," as he called it, and 
walked out, leaving Tom Maher to look after the poor sick man.
	Dr. Kiely strode into the parlour without even bowing to 
the ladies, which greatly astonished Mary, for the doctor was 
usually a model of politeness.
	"I am really shocked," he exclaimed, turning to Maurice 
Kearney, "to see the way you treat your workmen and servants. It 
is disgraceful. If I had the making of the laws I'd punish such 
conduct."
	Maurice Kearney opened his eyes and rubbed his head as if 
the doctor's words were utterly incomprehensible to him; while 
Mrs. Kearney looked the very picture of amazement and 
consternation. Mary, too, seemed quite frightened, not so much by 
the doctor's words as by his look and the tone of his voice.
	"My workmen never complained of their treatment," said 
Maurice Kearney, when he had collected his wits. "They are well 
fed, and I let them have their own way except in the harvest, or 
when we are in a hurry to get down the seed. And show me the 
man that pays better wages. You're after being told lies."
	"I'm after being told nothing," returned the doctor. "I allude 
to what I have seen with my own eyes. It is shocking Seven or 
eight men huddled together in one of your out-offices, lying upon 
rotten straw, and covered with old blankets and quilts that I verily 
believe were never washed. The place looks as if it were never 
swept out, and not as much as a current of fresh air to carry away 
its impurities. I wonder how you have escaped fever and 
pestilence."
	Mrs. Kearney crossed herself at the mention of the fever, 
and muttered that 'twas "their own fault," as they could get fresh 
straw if they liked.
	"You astonish me," continued the doctor "It should be your 
business to see to it. It would be better if you turned them into your 
barn to sleep upon the ground than leave them in such a nasty den 
as that."
	"Whatever you'd do for them," rejoined Mrs. Kearney, 
"they wouldn't thank you."
	"I don't think that is the fact," the doctor replied. "But you 
should not look for thanks for simply doing your duty. Have you 
never thought of this?" he asked, turning to Hugh.
	"Well, I have," he replied, "but I see so many things that 
require amendment, I left this as I found it."
	"Oh, yes; you would be a reformer on a great scale. But it 
would be much better to attend to small things and be practical. It 
must have a bad effect morally as well as physically. Let the poor 
people about you feel that you respect them. They may have their 
faults; but Heaven knows the wonder is that there is any good at all 
left in them."
	"Well," said Mrs. Kearney, who began to show symptoms 
of shedding tears, "I'll get the place cleaned out and white washed. 
And I'll give them sheets and blankets, and make one of the girls 
keep it in proper order for the poor men; for what time have they to 
attend to it after their day's work? I'm very much obliged to you, 
doctor, for calling our attention to it."
	"I promised to see old Somerfield again on my way home," 
said the doctor, somewhat mollified, as he glanced at his watch. 
"So I think we had better walk down immediately after breakfast," 
he added, turning to Mary, "to see this poor girl that you and Grace 
are so interested in."
	"Oh, yes," said Grace, "we'll all go. I'd like to have one 
more walk through Knocknagow, and see poor Norah Lahy again."
	They found Norah sitting in her straw chair as usual. Dr. 
Kiely had seen her once before, and he remembered how nervous 
and frightened she was when he placed the stethoscope to her 
chest. But now she was quite calm, and looked at Mary and Grace 
with a smile while he was listening to her breathing. A deeper 
sadness fell upon her face for a moment as she fixed her eyes upon 
Grace; and Grace knew that Norah Lahy felt that she would never 
see her again in this world. The doctor spoke kindly to her, and 
said he would send her medicine by Mr. Kearney's man, which he 
hoped would do her good, and desired her mother to keep up her 
spirits and have everything about her as cheerful as possible. 
Honor declared when he was gone that he made her feel "twenty 
years younger"; and Norah thought he "made her better," and said 
he was a good man.
	Then Phil broke in with a full and true account of the 
doctor's speech at the great Repeal Meeting, and how he was the 
finest looking man on the platform, dressed in the green-and-gold 
uniform of the 'Eighty-two Club. All of which Honor drank in with 
eager delight, feeling confident that the man who made a speech at 
a Repeal Meeting in a green-and-gold uniform would surely cure 
her darling.
	Billy Heffernan emerged from his antediluvian domicile, 
and, accosting Dr. Kiely, ventured to present him with an 
archaeological treasure, in the shape of a bronze bodkin found in 
his own turbary.
	"Will you sell it?" the doctor asked eagerly. " I'll buy it 
from you."
	"I won't sell id, sir," he answered. "I don't want any thing 
for id."
	Why, what use can it be to you?" the doctor asked, looking 
quite disappointed. "Perhaps it is worth more than you think."
	I knew you wor always on the look-out for a thing uv that 
soart, sir; an' I made up my mind to give id to you for nothin'; as a 
friend of Phil Lahy's," added Billy after some hesitation.
	The doctor looked inquiringly at Mary; and, with her face 
half turned away, lest Billy should suspect she was talking about 
him, Mary explained the real state of the case.
	"Ha," said the doctor; and he seemed to fall into a reverie 
for a minute or two. " I accept your present," he said at last. "I am 
very much obliged to you, and I'll always be glad to do whatever is 
in my power for you or your friends."
	"Thank'ee, sir," said Billy Heffernan.
	"I never got a fee that gave me so much pleasure," said the 
doctor, as they walked on after Mr. Lowe and Grace, who were a 
little in advance of them.
	"I never saw anything like his affection for Norah," 
returned Mary. "It is wonderful."
	"The Irish peasant is a being of sentiment," said the doctor. 
"The millions of money they have sent from America to their 
relations at home is a wonderful proof of the strength of their 
domestic affections."
	Indeed, yes," returned Mary. "Mrs. Lahy is just after telling 
me that her brother, who has often sent her money, is now offering 
to bring out her son and provide for him. In fact, I do not know a 
single family about here who have not got money from America."
	"I was sorry to see so many houses pulled down since I was 
here last," the doctor remarked. "If it goes on, Ireland is lost."
	"There were only two houses pulled down here," said 
Mary, "and the people gave up possession voluntarily."
	"As for giving up possession, they do so because they see 
no hope before them. But I allude to a place a couple of miles 
further on."
	"Oh, that's the place cleared by Sam Somerfield. He has not 
a single tenant now -- nothing but sheep and cows."
	"What a comfortable, substantial little farm-house that is," 
said the doctor, stopping to admire it. "What a pity 
it is that the people have not security, to encourage them to build 
such houses as that."
	"Every one remarks Tom Hogan's place," returned Mary.
	"And very little encouragement Tom Hogan got," said 
Hugh, who had come to meet them. "His rent is up to two pounds 
an acre now; and if all I hear be true, he must quit."
	"Does he owe much rent?"
	"Not a shilling. But those three farms lower down are about 
to be given up by the tenants, who say they may as well go first as 
last. The three are to be joined into one, and as Tom Hogan's runs 
between two of them, I fear he is doomed."
	"Is it part of Sir Garrett Butler's property?"
	"It is. Notwithstanding all we heard of his kindness of heart 
and his simplicity, things go on just in the old way since he came 
in for the property. He leaves it all to the agent; and, so long as he 
sends him whatever money he requires, Sir Garrett seems not to 
care for his tenants or trouble his head about them. We are very 
awkwardly circumstanced ourselves. He refuses to renew my 
father's lease upon some frivolous pretext or other. It is hard to say 
how it may end. Conceal it as we will," Hugh added, clenching his 
hand, "it is serfdom. It is rumoured now that the greater part of the 
property must be sold to pay off the old debts; and the uncertainty 
is horrible."
	Mary looked frightened, and, on observing it, Hugh 
changed the subject. "Is not that," he asked, "a model peasant's 
cottage?"
	"Oh, yes; I know Mat Donovan's," replied Dr. Kiely.
	"Here is Mat himself coming from the forge with his 
plough-irons," said Mary. "You, too, Mr. Lowe," she added, "are 
admiring Mat's house."
	"Yes; Miss Grace is drawing a pretty picture of love in a 
cottage for me. But why have not all the rest such neat houses as 
this?"
	"Ask Mat Donovan himself," said Hugh.
	"He deserves great credit," Mr. Lowe remarked.
	"I on'y kep' id as I found id, sir," said Mat. "'Twas my 
grandfather done all."
	"But why didn't your neighbours' grandfathers do the 
same?"
	"Well, sir," replied Mat, "I b'lieve 'twas all owin' to the 
freehould."
	"How the freehold?" Dr. Kiely asked.
	"Well, you see, sir," Mat commenced in his somewhat 
roundabout way, and laying down his plough-irons, "he was 
comin' home from the fair of Kilthubber -- 'twas the Michaelmas 
fair, 'tis of'en I heard him tellin' the story when I was a little boy -- 
ridin' a young coult belongin' to Mr. Kearney's father, an' 
happening to meet my grandmother on the road at the Cross uv 
Dunmore, he axed her to get up behind him' an' he'd give her a lift 
home. She was a good-looking lump uv a girl at the time, but my 
grandfather never had any notion uv her, an' 'd as soon think uv 
flyin' as uv gettin' married, he bein' a wild soart uv a young fellow 
wudout house or home, or anything to throuble him. Anyway she 
tucked up her cloak an' got up on the ditch, an' come uv a bounce 
on the coult's back behind my grandfather; an' no sooner was she 
settled on his back, than away wud the coult! An' as he had on'y a 
halther on him, the divil a stop my grandfather could stop him; an' 
every wan thought the two uv 'em would be kilt at the turn near the 
quarry, as the wall wasn't built at that time. But, whin my 
grandfather see that pullin' the ould halther was no use, he let him 
have his own way, an', instead uv tryin' to stop him, laid into him 
wud a hazel stick he happened to have in his hand. My grandfather 
was always for a hazel stick, because, as he said, there was no stick 
handier to knock a man down if occasion required id wudout 
hurtin' him; an', though he was as given for a fight as any man, my 
grandfather was ever an' always for batin' a man wudout hurtin' 
him, an' till the day uv his death no wan ever see a bit uv lead 
melted into a stick uv his, or even a ferl uv any account on id. 
Thim was quare times," added Mat, shaking his head, "whin 
people'd whale at wan another wudout rhyme or reason at fair or 
market."
	"Well, but what about the runaway horse?" Dr. Kiely 
asked; for Mat seemed lost in thought upon those extraordinary 
times he had referred to.
	"Begor, sir," he resumed, "the horse got enough uv id, an' 
stopped uv his own accord at the back gate, an' my grandmother 
slipped down fair an' asy, an' went home. But my poor grandfather 
was done for," added Mat, sadly.
	"How?" the doctor asked.
	"She took such a hoult uv him, sir, when the horse made 
off; he never had an 'asy mind afther, till they wor married," 
returned Mat solemnly.
	"Take care, Mr. Lowe," said Dr. Kiely laughing, "how you 
venture to take a Tipperary girl on horseback behind you, lest she 
should take such a hoult of you as would rob you of your peace of 
mind. But come to the freehold, Mat. Did he get this house and 
garden with the wife?"
	"Neither uv 'em had house or home, sir," returned Mat. 
"An' there was a lough uv wather between the two roads where you 
see the haggart there' now. Sure you see the quare shape uv id, 
wide in the middle, an' narrow at each end. An' where the house an' 
yard is was a soart uv a quarry. So my grandfather built a cabin on 
the dhry part, an' in coorse uv time he made a couple uv dhrains, 
an' began film' up the lough wud road stuff an' bog mowld, an' clay 
from the quarry, an' planted quicks about id, till by degrees he 
turned id into a little haggart, where he could have a few hundred 
uv cabbage, an' a ridge or two uv preates. At last the agent thought 
to put him under rent, but he refused; an' id came out that the two 
estates joined at the cross uv the road there, an' no wan could tell 
which uv the landlords the little spot belonged to. So my 
grandfather was let alone. An' wan day a gentleman happened to 
tell him that he had a freehould while grass grows or wather runs, 
in spite uv law or landlord; an' he got so proud an' had such 
courage that he never stopped till he made the place what you see 
id. An' that's how it was that the freehould made Mat Donovan's 
house an' haggart what every one says it is, the purtiest house an' 
haggart in the county Tipperary, for a poor labourin' man's."
	"It is a remarkable illustration," said the doctor, "of the 
saying, 'Give a man a rock with security, and he'll turn it into a 
garden.' It is a striking argument in favour of a Peasant 
Proprietary."
	"I often thought so," said Hugh.
	"I hope we may live to see the day, Mat," Dr. Kiely 
observed, "when freeholds will be more numerous than they are in 
Ireland."
	"Sure you don't think the English Parliament would do that 
for us, sir?"
	"I'd rather have it done by an Irish Parliament," replied the 
doctor. "But it is getting late," he added, looking at his watch, "and 
I must call at Woodlands."
	The hour of parting came all too soon. Richard and Mr. 
Lowe had driven off in the tax-cart. Dr. Kiely and Eva were 
already seated in the carriage; while Grace had run back to comfort 
Ellie and Willie, who were sobbing violently upon the stairs. Mrs. 
Kearney wiped the tears from her cheeks; and, though Mary 
smiled, it was plain that tears were threatening to suffuse those 
mild blue eyes, as Grace kissed Ellie, and told her somewhat 
reproachfully not to cry, for didn't she know they'd soon meet 
again at the convent. And, in the meantime, wasn't she leaving her 
the jay? But the allusion to the convent, however comforting to 
Ellie, had a precisely contrary effect upon her brother, and changed 
his blubbering into a loud roar.
	"Come, Grace," said her father, "we have no time to lose." 
She had her foot upon the step, when she stopped, looking quite 
sad, with her lips compressed, and her eyes bent on the ground. 
They were all surprised; and her father asked what was the matter. 
But Grace made no reply. Turning round she walked slowly to 
Hugh, who was standing with folded arms beside the door, and 
held out her hand to him. She had forgotten him. She had said 
good-bye, over and over; to every one else, but never thought of 
Hugh. And now he looked at her as if he did not know what she 
meant.
	"Good-bye, Hugh," said she.
	"Oh, good-bye," he replied with a start, taking her extended 
hand. And there was something in his tone that made Mary look at 
him with surprise. She observed, how ever, that he laughed as he 
led Grace back to the carriage, and handed her in.
	They are gone -- Grace, Richard, Mr. Lowe, and all. And 
Mary does feel lonely; and feels, too, that she must try hard to keep 
up her spirits, or they will inevitably break down. Well, that 
intelligence in her sister Anne's letter has removed one indefinite 
uneasiness from her heart at all events. The way is clear before her 
now, and not clouded by hope -- a hope from which she shrank as 
from a sin, and strove to banish from her heart; but which would, 
nevertheless, return again and again to disturb and trouble her. 
Thank God! that is all over now.
	"How I should like to be able to call such noble old trees as 
those my own," Grace observed.
	Eva admired the trees, too, and the undulating lawn, and 
the woods around, but she could not see what good it would do her 
to be able to call them her own.
	"It must be that Mr. Kearney was right last night when he 
said the old gentleman would be out with his hounds to-morrow or 
after. There is the horn sounding," said Mr. Lowe.
	Yes, I can see the pack, and the huntsman mounted before 
the door, from where I am," returned Richard Kearney, who had 
walked on a little further than the rest.
	They were in the avenue at Woodlands, waiting for Dr. 
Kiely, who had walked on to see his patient, leaving his carriage at 
a turn in the avenue not far from the house; though not in view of 
it. Richard and Mr. Lowe walked in from the road, and were now 
chatting with the ladies in the carriage.
	"I wonder, if he be recovered, why papa is delaying so 
long," said Grace. "Can you see papa coming, Richard?"
	"No, he's not coming," returned Richard. "There's some 
thing going on I can't make out. The doctor is standing with several 
others near the hounds; but I see no one mounted but the 
huntsman."
	"I'll walk down and see," said Mr. Lowe. "And perhaps I 
ought to bid Mr. Somerfield good-bye after accepting of his 
hospitality."
	Dr. Kiely was astonished to find his patient in a chair on 
the lawn, propped up with pillows. His son, a tall, cadaverous-
looking man with grizzled hair and beard, stood on one side of the 
chair, and a saintly looking though some what spruce young 
clergyman at the other. Two graceful young ladies stood a little 
apart, looking very sad and interesting, but not altogether oblivious 
of the handsome young clergyman's presence.
	"Blow, Rody, blow," muttered the poor old invalid. And 
the horn sounded, and the woods gave back the echo.
	"O sweet Woodlands, must I leave you?" exclaimed the old 
foxhunter in tones of the deepest grief.
	"You're going to a better place," said the clergyman, 
impressively.
	"Yoix! Tallyho!" cried the invalid, faintly. "Blow, Rody, 
blow."
	"Don't ax me, sir," returned the huntsman, after putting the 
horn to his lips and taking it away again; "my heart is ready to 
burst."
	"O sweet Woodlands, must I leave you? " his master 
exclaimed again.
	"My dear sir," the clergyman repeated, stooping over him 
and placing his gloved hand gently upon his shoulder, "my dear sir, 
you are going to a better place."
	The invalid turned round and looked earnestly into the 
young clergyman's face, as if he had until then been unconscious 
of his presence.
	"You're going to a better place; trust me, you're going to a 
better place," the clergyman repeated fervently.
	"Ah!" replied the old foxhunter, with a sorrowful shake of 
his head, and looking earnestly into the parson's face --  "Ah! by 
G-- , I doubt you!"
	The parson's look of consternation brought a grim smile 
into the hard features of Mr. Sam Somerfield, as he adjusted his 
father's night-cap, which was displaced by the effort to turn round 
to look at his spiritual director.
	The dying foxhunter seemed to drop suddenly into a doze, 
from which a low fretful whine from one of the hounds caused him 
to awake with a start. "Poor Bluebell; poor Bluebell," he 
murmured. The hound named wagged her tail, and coming close to 
him, looked wistfully into his face. The whole pack followed 
Bluebell, waving their tails, and with their trustful eyes appeared to 
claim recognition, too, from their old master. But his head 
drooped, and he seemed falling asleep again. He roused himself, 
however, and gazed once more upon the fine landscape before him, 
and again called upon the huntsman to sound the horn. The 
huntsman put it to his lips, and his chest heaved as he laboured for 
breath; but no sound awoke the echoes again.
	"God knows I can't, sir," he cried at last, bursting into tears. 
The huntsman's emotion moved the two young ladies to tears, and 
they came nearer to their grandfather's chair, and looked anxiously 
into his face. Dr. Kiely laid his finger on the old man's wrist, and 
turned to whisper something to his son, who was still standing by 
the chair. But the doctor drew back, as if the eye of a murderer 
were upon him. Mr. Sam Somerfield's face was ashy pale and his 
lips livid, while a baleful light glared from under his shaggy brows, 
which were dragged together in puckered folds. His daughters, too, 
were terrified, and wondered what could have brought that 
shocking expression into their father's face. But guided by his eyes 
they turned round and saw that Mr. Lowe was standing near them: 
then they understood that terrible look.
	The young girls gazed upon the woods and groves and 
undulating meadows, just as their grandfather had done. And the 
expression in the bright eye of youth and in the dimmed eye of age 
was the same.
	"Ah," said the younger girl, as her sister's eyes met hers "it 
is a sweet place."
	Turn, round, young ladies, and look through that arched 
gateway to yon sloping hillside, speckled with white sheep, upon 
which the sun shines so brightly. There were many happy homes 
along that green slope not many years ago. There is not one now. 
You remember the last of them --  the old farm-house in the trees, 
with its cluster of corn-stacks; and the square orchard, that looked 
so pretty in the spring-time; and the narrow boreen leading to the 
road between tangled wild roses and woodbines! You remember 
the children who peered shyly at you from under their brown arms 
when you rode by upon your pretty ponies! You remember what a 
rage your papa was in when the man who lived there refused to 
give up the old lease; and how he swore when the old lease had 
expired, and the "scoundrel." -- that was the word -- refused to go 
until the sheriff and the police and military drove him away!
	To be sure, his father, and grandfather, and great-grand 
father had lived there before him. He paid your papa fifty gold 
guineas every year, and was willing to pay half as many more if he 
were allowed to toil on there to the end of his days; though old 
people remembered when that productive little farm was covered 
with furze and briers, with patches of green rushes here and there 
in the marshy places. Well, he should go; and the children -- but 
what do you care for such things? We merely meant to remind you 
that, to that poor man and his wife and children, their place, too, 
was "a sweet place."
	"I suppose," thought Mr. Sam Somerfield, "he came here 
purposely to watch till the breath is out of him, in order that I may 
be hunted without an hour's delay." Then fixing his eyes upon the 
old man with a look in which pity and hatred seemed blended, he 
continued, "What right had he to take such a lease? He cared only 
for himself. Why wasn't it my life he got it for? He might have 
died, and died an old man, twenty years ago. And I wish to heaven 
he did die twenty years ago, before my heart was rooted in it."
	An old blind hound, lying on a mat near the door, raised his 
head, and uttered a long dismal howl. The whole pack took up the 
cry; and, as it passed like a wail of sorrow over the hills, the old 
foxhunter fell back in his chair -- dead.
	The huntsman threw himself from his horse; and, with the 
help of two or three other servants, carried his old master into the 
house.
	"O papa, poor grandpapa is gone!" the young girls 
exclaimed, flinging their arms round their father's neck.
	He bent down as they clung to him, looking quite helpless 
and stupefied. But, when he saw the horse from which the 
huntsman had dismounted, walk to a square stone near the end of 
the house, and stand quietly beside it, and thought that "old 
Somerfield" would never mount his hunter from that stone again, 
the tears ran down his hard, yellow cheeks, and fell upon his 
children's hair.
	The doctor and Mr. Lowe walked back to the carriage in 
silence, much affected by what they had seen.
	"Do you think her handsome?" Richard asked.
	"Not very," was Mr. Lowe's languid reply. "I could never 
admire girls like her. The girl that called you to see her father the 
other day is by far a prettier girl."
	"Yes, Nancy Hogan is decidedly handsome. Yet Hugh 
thinks Bessy quite captivating. Curious how tastes will differ."
	They had stopped to send Tom Maher into old Phil Morris's 
for a light, and Bessy came to the door with her sewing.
	"Grace is wondering why we have stopped," said the 
doctor. "She will break her neck trying to look round at us. But I'll 
blow a cloud," he added, as Tom Maher presented him with a bit of 
burning stick, "that will enlighten her."
	Grace had her head out of the carriage, but it was not of 
them she was thinking at all. She caught the outline of a man's 
figure on the hill above the fort, and guessed it was Hugh, 
watching the carriage as long as they were within view.
	"Ah! it came from his heart," said she with a sigh.
	"What are you saying?" Eva asked.
	"Nothing," was the careless reply. She was thinking of 
Hugh's "Good-bye."
	And Hugh did watch the carriage as long as it was in sight; 
but then he had come up the hill to look at the hoggets. And as his 
eye rested upon the little house among the old whitethorns, he 
wished he had another excuse to follow the winding footpath, and 
have a chat with old Phil Morris about the year of the Hill, and 
listen to his speculations on the chances of having "anything droll" 
in the country before he died. And as Hugh thought of the old 
"Croppy," he saw in fancy his bright little granddaughter, as she 
flitted like a fire-fly about the house, when he used to run in for 
shelter from the rain, some years before. And as he went on 
admiring Bessy Morris retrospectively, he happened to put his 
finger and thumb into his waistcoat pocket, and feeling something 
soft and silky, took it out and looked at it in great surprise. It was a 
long shining lock of hair. After thinking for a moment, he laughed; 
but that soft light which his sister Mary sometimes noticed came 
into his dark eyes. And Mr. Hugh Kearney began now to call up a 
vision in the future, as a moment before he had called up one of the 
past. So long as he goes on looking "before and after" in this 
fashion he is safe enough. But if one day he should find "the fancy 
true," how will it be? He tore off the blank leaf of a letter, and after 
counting back wards on his fingers, "Monday, Sunday, Saturday," 
wrote the day of the month and the year upon it.
	"I wonder what sort she will be in a few years more?" he 
thought, looking again at the shining tress which he had playfully 
cut from Grace's head the morning of Ned Brophy's wedding. 
Then,  la the Dean of St. Patrick's, he wrote the words, "Only a 
girl's hair," and, folding it up carefully, placed it in his pocket-
book, and returned home without thinking again of the old rebel 
and his fascinating grand-daughter, who at that moment was just 
after being made miserable by a good-natured friend, who had 
walked three miles for the sole purpose of telling her that she was 
"in a show" on account of the dragoon's visit.
	Poor Mrs. Kearney was so nervous and depressed that day 
that she left even the dinner to Mary's sole superintendence. But 
Mrs. Kearney always wished to have a natural and rational reason 
for her sighs and tears, whenever she felt disposed or constrained 
to indulge in them. And on this occasion the cause of her trouble 
was her favourite son, who was a "very soft boy," and, like her 
poor Uncle Dan, required egg-flip very often to set him all right of 
a morning; and to think that he hadn't a soul to look after him in 
"that Dublin," was enough to break her heart. Honest Maurice, 
who, like the Vicar of Wakefield, found pleasure in happy human 
faces, rushed in desperation into the pantry, and cutting several 
substantial slices from the remains of that glorious leg of mutton 
which Dr. Kiely praised so highly, placed them in a small basket 
with as much bread as there was room for, and walking off to the 
kiln-field, peremptorily ordered Mat Donovan to let the horses rest, 
and "sit down and eat that" -- deriving much comfort and peace of 
mind from Mat's performance as he dutifully obeyed the injunction 
and set to work in a very business-like manner.
	Mary took her sister's letter and read, for the twentieth 
time; " Gretta H --  has just returned from Paris. Arthur O'Connor 
is ordained. She saw him in his vestments, and says he is the 
handsomest priest she ever saw."
	"Thank goodness," thought Mary, "no tongue can ever 
wound me again on that score."
	"What is the matter with you, Mary?" Ellie asked.
	"Why so?
	"If you saw yourself! I thought you were Aunt Hannah."
	"Oh, my goodness," exclaimed Mary, in affected alarm. 
"Am I a faded old maid already?"
	"Well, you had her look," returned Ellie. "And Aunt 
Hannah was crossed in love."
	"And do you suppose that I, too, have been crossed in love?
	"Well, I was thinking how Grace used to be at you about 
Mr. Lowe."
	"I am very sorry after Mr. Lowe," returned Mary. "Are not 
you?"
	"Not much. It is Grace I am sorry after."
	"You'll have Grace with you in the convent."
	"But will I be let bring my goldfinch?"
	"Oh, I fear that would not be allowed."
	"Well, I'll give him back to Tommy Lahy to keep for me till 
I come home. I'd be afraid you would not take care of him."
	"Oh, yes, I'll take care of him. And don't you know Tommy 
will be soon going to America? His uncle is very rich, and his 
mother says Tommy will be a great man yet."
	"Oh, I'm sorry Tommy Lahy is going to America," said 
Ellie. "And what will his poor mother and Norah do?"
	"That's true," returned Mary. " It will be a sore trial to 
them; but it will be for his good, and they will make the sacrifice."
	But Mary could not help smiling, when she remembered 
that the very climax of Honor Lahy's trouble seemed to be the 
thought, that Tommy would surely take to climbing to the top of 
"them masts," which, she understood, were standing in the middle 
of the ship, and would of course be a perpetual temptation to him. 
"The best chance he'd have," Honor added, "would be to stay at the 
top of it always, an' keep quiet, an' not to be peltin' himself down, 
the Lord save us! like a bag from the top loft of the mill, takin' the 
sight uv your eyes from you, an' bringin' your heart into your 
mouth." And as the comparatively reassuring picture presented 
itself of Tommy keeping quiet on the top of the main-mast while 
crossing the Atlantic, Honor brightened up and said, "she'd trust all 
to the mercy of God." Mary smiled as she thought of this. Then she 
began to think of Norah; and Ellie would look in her face in vain 
for the slightest resemblance to Aunt Hannah, who was crossed in 
love.



CHAPTER LVI.

THE WHITE JACKET.

	THE Sunday afternoons were growing longer and longer, 
and Mat Donovan's visits to the little house under the hill were 
more frequent than they had been for a long time before. He saw 
Hugh Kearney's fishing-rod, which he had repaired for him in 
"first-rate style," on the wall with Phil Morris's own old rod, which 
was never taken to pieces, and stretched its tapering length nearly 
the whole cross of the kitchen, with the wheel line wound up till 
the knot on the end just touched the ring on the top of the rod. So 
that, while Hugh Kearney was screwing his rod together and 
passing the line through the rings, old Phil's flies would be 
dropping as natural as life, on the currents and eddies of the little 
stream, and a shout from him would sometimes call Hugh away to 
secure a good-sized trout with his landing-net. But Hugh Kearney's 
rod and landing-net over the old weaver's loom never gave Mat 
Donovan the slightest trouble. We cannot say as much, however, 
concerning the horse which he now sees standing at Phil Morris's 
door. And when the young man from the mountain came out of the 
house and rode away, Mat Donovan felt a sinking of the heart in 
spite of all he could do. And when he walked in with his "God save 
all here" there was Bossy with that killing white jacket, which he 
had not seen since the night of Ned Brophy's wedding, sitting in 
her grandfather's armchair, and looking very grand indeed, as she 
said without rising, and almost without turning her head, "How are 
you this evening?" The white jacket, as Peg Brady afterwards told 
him, had been taken from the box where it had lain for months, and 
hastily put on, when Bossy caught sight of the young man from the 
mountain turning in at the gate; in proof of which Peg produced a 
little bunch of lavender which fell from the folds of the white 
jacket on the floor.
	"I think," says Peg Brady, with that sly look of hers, "you 
may take off your jacket now."
	Bessy reddened and bit her lips; but said, carelessly, "Well, 
I believe so," and walked into her room -- looking handsomer than 
ever, Mat thought when she came back in her brown stuff dress. 
Then old Phil stumped in, and Bessy took his fishing-rod and 
leaped upon a chair to hang it in its usual place. And how graceful 
she looked with her arms raised as far as they could reach, for the 
hooks upon which the rod rested were up near the loft. Though the 
house was a one-storey thatched house, there was a loft to it, upon 
which, in days gone by, yarn, and pieces of flannel and frieze, and 
blankets, to a fabulous amount, used to be stowed away. Then 
Bessy jumped down again, and, looking into the angler's basket, 
said that Mat should bring the trout to Miss Kearney.
	"You have two good red trout there," said old Phil, "but the 
rest are no great things. The river is not what id used to be, any 
more than the people. Everything is goin' to the bad. Hugh lost the 
finest trout I see this many a day, the last day he was over, an' all 
on account of not takin' his time. You'd think 'twas an elephant he 
had, he gave him such a dhrag -- whin he had a right to give him 
line, an' take him 'asy. There's no fear at all uv Hugh, on'y that 
when he don't be mindin' himself, an' is took sudden, he's apt to 
pull too hard an' break his line. An' he depinds too much on the fur 
flies. He thinks a hare's-ear-an'-yallow ud kill the divil."
	Bessy laid the speckled trout into her own basket, having 
first put in some of the fresh green grass the old angler had 
wrapped about them.
	"I know," says she, "she'd like to send a couple of them to 
Norah Lahy. And how is she getting on, Mat?"
	"I'm afeard she's stalin' away unknownst to the world," Mat 
replied "She was never so late in the year before wudout sittin' 
outside the doore. An' though fine an' soft this week was, she was 
not sthrong enough to venture out, Honor tells me."
	"Is id thrue for certain," old Phil Morris asked, "that Tom 
Hogan is to be put out?"
	"No mistake," Mat answered, "an' 'tis afther knockin' the 
good out uv every tenant on the property. The rent is riz again on 
every wan uv 'em except Misther Kearney, an' his laise is not up 
yet. An' they all say, what chance have they when Tom Hogan is 
served."
	"Did them fellows near you pull down their own houses for 
a pound a piece, as 'tis said they did?
	"They did then -- exceptin' Billy Heffernan; an' he towld 
Pender he wouldn't knock the cabin where his mother rocked him 
in the cradle if a fifty pound note was laid in his hand. Billy has 
great sperit though he hasn't much talk. They say Tom Hogan 
would get a thrifle uv money, too, if he'd give up; but I don't think 
he'd take Maurice Kearney's farm this minute for his own little 
spot; for, as he says himself, his heart is stuck in id. An' he's goin' 
on dhrainin' just as if he was as firm as the Rock uv Cashel in id. 
They must bring the sheriff any way. An' I won't plase 'em either to 
give up my garden, till I must."
	"Are you going to be ejected? " Bessy asked, looking 
alarmed.
	"They can't touch the house an' haggart," returned Mat, "id 
bein' a freehould. But they're takin' the garden from me to join id to 
the big farm that's to be med out of Tom Hogan's an' the other 
three. A man has no chance in Ireland, an' I suppose I must cross 
the salt wather myse'f as well as another."
	"What hurry are you in? " said Bessy, as he rose to go. "Sit 
down an' tell us all the news."
	"I was over lookin' at a horse uv Tom Cuddehy's that got a 
hurt," he replied, "an' just walked in on my way back."
	"And how is Mrs. Cuddehy going on?"
	"Very well," Mat replied. "An' her father is givin' every 
penny of her fortune to Tom, when he seen him act so manly, an' 
get married, an' pay the priest, an' all, wudout sayin' a word about 
money. An' ould Paddy is in wud 'em every night in the year, 
they're always so pleasant. An' so is Ned Brophy. An', faith, Ned 
can go where he likes, the wife is so well able to look to 
everything. An' so he walks over to Tom's to have a talk wud the 
neighbours."
	"Is there any truth in the report about Miss Kearney and 
young Mr. Kiely?"
	"I don't say there is. The same talk was about her and Mr. 
Lowe, an' there was nothin' in id. Mr. Edmund is a fine pleasant 
young fellow, an' a right good boy," added Mat, emphatically. "I 
don't know a smarter fellow, to take him at general exercise. The 
masther made me put two big rocks in the kiln-field to mark the 
throw again Captain French, an' Edmund has the pueata stalks all 
thrampled thryin' to put the sledge up to the captain's mark. An' 
faith he's not far at all from id. But as for Miss Mary, I don't say 
they have any notion uv wan another. An' so far as goin' on goes, 
I'd say 'tis Miss Anne an' himself that's pullin' the coard."
	"And how is Nancy Hogan?" Bessy asked.
	"I never see her in betther spirits," he answered, readily.
"On'y for frettin' afther Jemmy an' the way her father is she'd be as 
pleasant as ever she was. I b'lieve her ould sweetheart Tom Carey 
is afther her again."
	"He's a mane dog," Phil Morris exclaimed, "afther her 
father tellin' him a tradesman was no match for his daughter. Bad 
luck to his impudence, the beggar! the crawler, as Phil Lahy called 
him. I'm a tradesman, though 'tis little I do at my trade now, an' 
sorry I'm for id. An' I suppose I could call myself a farmer because 
I have a spot uv land. But I call myself a tradesman, because I'm 
proud uv my trade. I gave her father," turning to his granddaughter, 
"three hundred pounds that I made at my trade. An' if Tom Carey 
wants a wife let him come for her, an' he'll get her before a farmer 
any day."
	"An' would you give her to a labourin' man?" inquired Peg 
Brady, who was sitting on the settle, smelling the bunch of 
lavender that fell from the folds of the white jacket.
	"No, I wouldn't," replied the old weaver, turning sharply 
round, and scowling at her. "What business would a labourin' man 
have wud her?
	Peg Brady bent her head and laughed.
	"You ought not to be so hard against Tom Hogan for his 
prejudices," Bessy remarked, "for you have your prejudices too."
	"But a tradesman is as good as any man," returned old Phil.
	"And why should not a labouring man be as good, if he is 
equally honest and intelligent? " Bessy asked.
	"Faith," said Mat Donovan good-humouredly, "'tis like the 
'Town in danger' in the spellin' book. There's nothin' like leather 
wud the whole uv 'em."
	"I'll go home the short cut, an' give those to Miss Mary," 
said Mat Donovan, when he and Bessy Morris had reached the gate 
without exchanging a word.
	"Tell her I'll call for the basket myself," said Bessy.
	Mat looked up at the old whitethorns, which were now all 
in their glory, filling the air with perfume, and, after another 
interval of silence, held out his hand with a smile.
	"Good evenin'," said he. "Why don't you ever take a walk 
down to see my mother? They all say 'tis too proud you're afther 
gettin'."
	"Mat," returned Bessy, holding his hand, and fixing that 
sad, inquiring look upon him, "are you really thinking of 
America?"
	"Well, I am," he replied. " There's many raisons for id. But 
I have nothin' decided on yet."
	"You won't go without telling me at all events?
	"Well, if I go at all, I b'lieve I'll slip away wudout takin' my 
lave uv any one. 'Twould break my heart."
	"If you do go, you won't forget to write to me, if you hear 
anything about my father?"
	"Begor, Bessy," he replied, "I'd walk from wan end uv 
America to the other if I thought I could find your father for you."
	"Good evening," said she, with her eyes still fixed upon his 
face. He opened the gate, and, bending down her head, with a 
smile and a slight blush, she passed in, and returned to the house 
without looking back.
	Peg Brady was strolling along the road with her hands 
clasped behind her back, looking up at the clouds.
	"Are you comin' down?" Mat asked.
	"No," she replied. "I on'y took a walk out thinkin' I might 
meet some uv the girls goin' the short cut to the dance."
	"Peg," said Mat, after a pause, "is there anything the matter 
wud Bessy? She looks paler and thinner than ever I see' her lookin' 
before."
	"Maybe she has raison," returned Peg.
	"Raison! " he repeated "For God's sake, what do you 
mane?"
	"Oyeh! You needn't be so frightened. Maybe she's thinkin' 
uv changin' her condition."
	"Oh, is that all? " he asked, with a sigh of relief.
	"Did you hear her bachelor is after comin' in for a legacy?
	"Sure I did," he replied. " He tould me himse'f. He's no man 
to be goin' on as he is, when he knows she don't like him."
	"Don't be too sure uv that," returned Peg Brady. "He's not a 
sojer now; he's out uv the army altogether. An' ax Kit Cummins 
about the fistful uv goold he pulled out uv his pocket t'other 
evenin'. Faith Kit has fine times while he's lodgin' wud her. The 
pan is never off uv the fire, an' he sends for a dozen uv porther 
together."
	"He's a fool," returned Mat.
	"You don't know what id is to be fond uv a girl," said Peg.
	"Well, maybe not," rejoined Mat, "but I'd tear the heart out 
uv my body before I'd fret the girl I'd be fond uv, an' makin' her the 
talk uv the counthry, as he's doin'."
	Peg Brady laughed, and, wheeling round, continued her 
stroll back again towards the house.
	"Give my love to Barney," she called out.
	"All right," returned Mat, as he jumped over the fence to 
make a short cut to Maurice Kearney's. He started on seeing a man 
sitting, or rather lying, behind the fence. It was the dragoon. 
However, he walked on without pretending to see him; but his face 
flushed crimson, and, clenching his hand, he muttered
	"The divil a thing I'd rather be doin' than whalin' the mane 
dog. When he knows she hates the sight uv him, what right have he 
to be persecutin' her this way?
	When he reached the hill from which Hugh Kearney 
watched Dr. Kiely's carriage as it disappeared in the distance, Mat 
Donovan turned round to take another look at the "little house 
under the hill," and started on seeing the dragoon in conversation 
with a woman near the gate.
	"Oh!" he exclaimed, after looking at them for some time, 
"she has a light-coloured gown on her. 'Tis Peg Brady."



CHAPTER LVII.

A GREAT EVENT. -- TOMMY LAHY'S 
ACCOMPLISHMENTS. -- ARTHUR O'CONNOR.

	A GREAT event has happened in Knocknagow this still 
summer day. Nearly all the men, and most of the women, are out in 
the meadows mowing and "saving" the hay; or cutting and 
"footing" turf in the bog. There is a drowsy silence over the 
hamlet, only broken by the ring of the blacksmith's anvil, or the 
occasional shrill crowing of a cock, filling the heart with an 
oppressive sense of loneliness, if not with forebodings of evil. Mrs. 
Donovan is sitting at the foot of the cherry tree watching her bees. 
She has had no less than four swarms within the past week, every 
one of them so considerate and accommodating as to lodge within 
the bounds of the clipped hedge, not following the example of the 
earliest swarm this year, which swept away like a cloud over Tom 
Hogan's farm, never stopping till they passed Attorney Hanly's 
grove, and to the great delight of Miss Rose -- who, in common 
with all the world, looked upon such a visit as a sign of good luck -
- precipitated themselves into a rose-bush under the drawing-room 
window. And when Nelly Donovan came up out of breath, making 
a frightful clatter, by means of an old kettle and a poker --  for 
Nelly was keen of eye and swift of foot, and never lost sight of the 
truants till they dipped beyond the fir grove --  Rose ran out to 
show her where they were all in a lump in the middle of the rose-
tree. Joe Russel was despatched for the new hive, which Mrs. 
Donovan had already smeared with honey on the inside, and fixed 
peeled sally switches across it to keep the new combs from falling 
down; while Lory brought a sieve from the barn to place under the 
hive when the bees were shaken into it, and Rose produced a white 
table-cloth to wrap around it; and Nelly Donovan went home 
rejoicing with the swarm, which her mother had given up for lost.
	And now Mrs. Donovan sits under the cherry-tree, 
watching her fifth swarm, hanging like a great sheep's grey 
stocking from the branch of a currant-bush; though when they 
broke away from the parent hive, they whirled round and round in 
the wildest commotion, as if henceforth bent upon leading a life of 
lawlessness and anarchy, but suddenly changed their minds and 
dropped into the currant-bush, clustering about their lawful queen, 
and showing every symptom of spending their days in harmony 
and industry within the four hedges of Mat Donovan's little garden 
-- of course taking frequent excursions to the purple-heather on the 
bog, and to Maurice Kearney's clover-field, and to the yellow 
"bouchelauns" that flourished so abundantly upon Mr. Beresford 
Pender's farm, and even raised their heads at the very threshold of 
cowhouse and barn, to the great delight of old Phil Morris, who 
chuckled over this pleasant prospect when he paid his periodical 
visits to the three poplar trees on the hill.
	Some children have what they call a "cobby" under the
hedge at the roadside. But the place being quite dry, and the grass 
green and fresh, and no mud within reach, a little girl has been 
dispatched for a saucepan of water to manufacture dirt -- without 
which enjoyment is out of the question. The pool outside Kit 
Cummins's door is so dried up, that the pig by the hardest rooting 
and rubbing and crushing, has only been able to bear away a single 
patch of an inky composition about a foot in diameter upon a 
prominent part of his person; so the saucepan had to be filled from 
Kit's wash tub, the contents of which were the most suitable for the 
purpose intended, next to the pool outside the door. And the little 
girl, coming back with her saucepan full, announced to her 
companions the event which we have referred to at the beginning 
of this chapter. Nelly Donovan heard the child's words, and 
flinging down the bee-hive which she was making ready for the 
reception of the swarm in the currant-bush, ran out upon the road, 
and turning the corner of the clipped hedge, looked down the hill. 
And then Nelly Donovan flung up her arms as high as she possibly 
could, and clapped her hands above her head. Her mother rose 
from her seat under the cherry-tree and went out upon the road, 
too, and, looking down the hill, raised her hands, but not in a wild 
way like Nelly, while a smile lighted up her sad face. Kit Cummins 
stopped short in the very middle of an oration, which she was 
delivering for behoof of her next-door neighbour -- to whom she 
could address herself at any moment through the thin partition, 
without interrupting her ordinary avocations. The next-door 
neighbour not possessing the gift of eloquence, usually contented 
herself, when the orator paused for breath, with a "Gir-r-r-out, you 
bla'guard!" in a key more or less shrill according to the sharpness 
of the attack, and rising to a shriek after a home-thrust more 
stinging than usual. On the present occasion, she was in the act of 
drawing a long breath preparatory to throwing an extra amount of 
defiance into the exasperatory response, when she raised her head 
and looked about her in complete and utter bewilderment. Kit 
Cummins had stopped short in the very middle of a scorching 
sentence, having reference to the next-door neighbour's 
grandmother, and there was a dead silence!
	"Is she afther dhroppin' in a fit?" thought the next-door 
neighbour. 
	She ran to the door; and there was Kit Cummins looking 
down the hill, her face radiant with pleasure. The next-door 
neighbour advanced a step or two into the road, and immediately 
seemed to catch the radiant look from Kit, who turned round and 
began talking to her in the most affectionate manner imaginable; 
and both returned to their respective domiciles like turtles. The 
anvil was silent for a moment, and Brummagem's begrimed face 
was seen at the forge door, shining with delight and surprise. In 
fact, there was at least one smiling face at every door of the hamlet 
that had not a padlock upon it, betokening that the inmates were all 
in the meadows or at the bog.
	Norah Lahy was out! That's what the little girl announced 
to her companions under the hedge.
	And Nelly Donovan ran out upon the road and clapped her 
hands; and her mother followed her; and Kit Cummins and her 
neighbour forgot the fierce war they were waging, and exchanged 
friendly words of mutual joy and thankfulness; and Brummagem 
grinned; and every face from the cross to Mat Donovan's was 
lighted up with gladness; and Norah, sitting in her straw chair 
under the beech tree, saw it all, and, bending down her head, wept 
tears -- happy tears -- of gratitude.
	God bless them, every one! Whatever be their faults, the 
want of loving hearts is not one of them.
	And the news has somehow reached Maurice Kearney's 
meadow on the side of the hill; for the sweep of the scythes has 
suddenly ceased, and the row of mowers, with Mat Donovan at 
their head, have turned quickly round, like so many tall pikemen at 
drill, and looked down towards the beech-tree. And three girls who 
were turning the hay threw down their forks, and ran headlong to 
the double-ditch, and standing on the top of it, waved their straw 
bonnets in the air. Then there was a shrill shout of laughter from 
the girls, and a deep roar from the mowers. For Barney Brodherick 
was plain to be seen, on his way from Kilthubber, standing with a 
foot on each shaft of his blue cart, and keeping Bobby at full gallop 
-- there being no occasion whatever for hurry to-day. And on 
coming to the beech tree, Barney uttered that sound with his lips, 
which, when addressed to a donkey, signifies "stand," so loudly 
and so suddenly, that Bobby stopped up as if he had come in 
contact with a stone wall; and Barney executed an involuntary 
somersault out over Bobby's ears.
	"Thanum-on-dioul, Norah!" exclaimed Barney, gathering 
himself up, as if his ordinary and usual mode of alighting was upon 
the crown of his head, "is id there you are!"
	"Yes, Barney," she replied with a smile; " I felt so much 
better to-day I thought I might venture to sit outside for a while, 'tis 
so fine."
	"Begob, I thought I'd never see you there agin, Norah," 
returned Barney. "When May-day, an' all the fine weather passed 
over, an' I never see you out, I gev you up. Would you like pig-
nuts, Norah?
	"I don't think I could eat them, Barney."
	Barney scratched his head, quite puzzled to think what he 
could present her with, or do for her, as a proof of his regard. 
"Begob," he exclaimed at last, "if Tommy was at home I'd show 
him a thrish's nest an' five young ones in id."
	"Ah, poor Tom," said Norah -- and her eyes glistened as 
she looked up at the beech-tree, "I wonder where is he now, or 
what is he doing."
	Her mother, who had just come out, with the book Norah 
had been reading, glanced up through the branches, too, and then, 
sitting down on the bench at the foot of the tree, buried her face in 
her apron, and burst into tears.
	"Och! where is he now," she cried, "an' what is he doin'? 
Where is his rosy cheeks, an' his curly head, an' his laughin' blue 
eyes? I'm afeard I used to scowld him too much, Norah, on account 
uv the climbin'. But, sure, 'twas for his good I was; for, the Lord 
betune us an' all harm, 'tis of'en an' of'en I thought I'd find him in a 
pancake on this flag I'm sittin' on. But what's breakin' my heart is 
the way I used to shut my fist an' hit him on the bare skull, when 
I'd be rightly vexed. I don't mind the wollopin's at all, Norah; 'tis 
the knuckles rappin' on his curly head that's killin' me. Oh, if 1 had 
him now, 'tis I'd be glad to see a piece of his breeches flyin' on the 
top uv every three in the parish; an' 'tis I that wouldn't scowld him, 
or wollup him, or put dead bells in his ears wud a clout, as I know I 
of'en done. An' above all, Norah, I'd never knock cracks out uv his 
curly head wud my knuckles; for nothin' ever med him roar but 
that. An' where is he now? An' what is he doin'? Oh, Norah, 
avoorneen, whatever made me lay a hand on him? For 'twas he was 
the good warrant to have an' eye to the shop, or run uv a message, 
an' to mind his book an' his Catechism. An' 'twould do any wan's 
heart good to hear him whistlin'. Billy Heffernan never played a 
tune that he couldn't whistle afther him. An' I see him wud my own 
eyes bringin' the birds down out uv the sky."
	This recital of Tommy's accomplishments made Norah 
smile through her tears, and she said cheerfully --  "Well, mother, 
sure we ought to be glad that he is landed safe, and that Uncle 
Larry is so good to him."
	"That's thrue, alanna," returned Honor, rising from her seat, 
and drying her eyes with her check apron. "'Tis thankful we ought 
to be to have such fine prospects before him. Is that the right book 
I'm afther bringin' you? Or maybe 'tis the wan wud the goold 
letters on the cover you want?"
	"No, mother, this is the right one."
	"Begob, I must hurry an' tell Miss Mary you're out, Norah," 
exclaimed Barney. "An' 'tis she'll be ready to lep out uv her skin."
	"Thank you, Barney," said Norah. "And tell her I won't be 
sure I'm out at all, or that the sun is shining on me, till I see her."
	"Come, Bobby," shouted Barney. "don't let the grass grow 
ondher your feet"; and he ran on by the donkey's side, blowing an 
imaginary horn, and in as great a state of excitement as if he had 
descried a ballad-singer or a Punch and-Judy in the distance.
	But surely Billy Heffernan must have taken leave of his 
senses! At least his mule must think so. For while she was jogging 
on quietly, with a great pile of bog-stumps heaped upon her car, 
her master rushed at her, and jerked the rein, and told her to "come 
on out of that," just as if she had been setting back into Flanigan's 
Hole, instead of jogging on at a steady pace by the beech-tree 
opposite Phil Lahy's door. And Billy kept hold of the winkers, and 
pulled Kit on till he came to his own door, never giving a second 
look towards the beech-tree, and making believe that he had not 
looked towards it at all. Then taking the key from the hole under 
the thatch, he let himself in, and sitting on the antediluvian block 
by the fireless hearth, buried his face in his hands.
	"Glory be to God! " he exclaimed, with a deep sigh, "I 
thought I'd never see her there again. My heart leaped up into my 
mouth when I see her sittin' in the ould place, an' her hair hangin' 
down over the book she was readin'. I don't know how I can make 
up my mind to talk to her at all. But I'll purtind to nothin', just as if 
I thought she was out every day. But who are those coming down 
the road? " he continued, on reaching the door. "Begor, ay; 'tis 
Miss Mary, an' Miss Anne, an' Miss Ellie, an' Mister Hugh. Ay, 
faith, an' that's Father Carroll an' Misther Edmund Kiely wud 'em. I 
have no business down now, as they'll be sure to stop and talk to 
her. So I may as well haul in the stumps."
	Not only were they sure to stop and talk to her, but they had 
come out for no other purpose. For when Barney announced that 
Norah was sitting under the beech-tree, and that she couldn't be 
sure the sun was shining on her till Miss Mary saw her, Mary 
started up quite in a flurry, and would hardly wait for Anne and 
Ellie, who were tying on their bonnets as fast as ever they could. 
They met Hugh and Edmund and Father Carroll coming from the 
meadow --  where Edmund had jumped over a pitchfork laid on the 
shoulders of Tom Maher and Jim Dunn -- and, as they all felt an 
interest in Norah Lahy, they turned back with Mary when she told 
them where she was going.
	And when Norah looked up from her book and met Mary's 
mild glance, what a picture it was! Poor Norah had a hard struggle 
to keep back the tears; and Mary, in order to give her time to 
recover herself, took up Norah's book and handed it to Edmund 
with a smile. Edmund smiled and nodded his head after looking at 
the title-page; and then Mary handed the book to Hugh. And Hugh 
looked and looked at Norah Lahy's book, while a smile lighted up 
that "strong" face of his, and the soft light came into his dark eyes. 
Norah's name was written in the book, and under it -- "From her 
friend, Grace Kiely."
	Ellie stole into the house for a quiet talk with the old linnet. 
She wanted to know did the old linnet remember Tommy, and 
whispered the question softly through the wires of his cage. And 
the old linnet held his head knowingly on one side, and muttered 
something down his throat, which Ellie interpreted into "To be sure 
I do. Do you think I could forget poor Tommy?" And then Ellie 
fixed a bit of sugar between the wires, and turned round to jump 
down from the chair upon which she was standing, when she saw 
Honor Lahy's face all aglow with pleasure and affection --  
notwithstanding the tears in her eyes -- looking up at her. And 
before Ellie could jump down, she was caught round the waist and 
folded in Honor Lahy's arms.
	"My own darlin' child," exclaimed Honor, "that poor 
Tommy would lay down his life for. For 'twas of'en he said there 
wasn't wan uv 'em like Miss Ellie."
	"The poor fellow!" returned Ellie when she was set free, 
"he was so generous and good."
	"His uncle," returned Honor, "sent him to a great school, 
and he says if he has sinse he has fine prospects before him."
	"He will have sense," rejoined Ellie seriously; "for I don't 
think he ever did anything wrong, except pulling the tails out of the 
robins."
	"Yes, Miss," returned Honor, "an' Father M'Mahon couldn't 
get him down in the General Catechism, though 'the best method' 
was the first question he axed him. But if he was at him for a 
month he couldn't get Tommy down, from 'Who made the world?' 
to 'so be it.' Then he tackled at him wud the 'Christian Doctrine,' 
but Tommy was able for him at that too. An' thin Father M'Mahon 
said he was the best boy in his parish. That was the day they wor 
gettin' their tickets for Confirmation; an' what do you think but I 
went into the chapel afeard uv my life that Tommy might be cast. 
An' more fool I was, for he was the best uv the whole uv 'em. 
Jacky Ryan passed, though he gev a wrong answer. 'What is 
Matrimony?' says Father M'Mahon. An' as bould as you plase, 
Jacky makes answer, 'A place or state of punishment where some 
sowls suffer for a time before they can go to heaven.' Faith I 
thought 'twas the right answer, he spoke up so independent, till I 
see the school master thryin' to keep from laughin'. 'What is 
Matrimony?' says Father M'Mahon agin, very slow an' solemn. 'A 
place or state of punishment where some sowls suffer for a time 
before they can go to heaven,' says Jacky again. 'Give Jacky Ryan 
his ticket,' says Father Hannigan. An' whin Father M'Mahon held 
up his hand to stop the schoolmaster that was writin' the tickets, 
Father Hannigan said the boy was right, that he see no difference 
between Matrimony and Purgatory, and 'tis many a sinsible man 
would agree wud him. So Jacky Ryan got his ticket. I'm afeard," 
added Honor, with a sigh, "the same Jacky will come to no good. 
He put a red poker on Kit Cummins's cat's nose for comin' about 
his maggidy. An' whin Frisky jumped over the half-door wud an 
ould gallon tied to his tail t'other evenin', I said it was Jacky Ryan's 
work -- though indeed I can't say I'm sure uv id."
	Mrs. Lahy was interrupted by Mary, who came in in search 
of Ellie.
	"My goodness, Ellie," she said, "I thought you were lost. 
They are all half-ways home, and I have come back to look for 
you."
	Father Carroll was alone when she came up with him, 
Hugh having gone to the forge to see about the pointing of some 
pitchforks for the haymaking, and Edmund and Anne being wholly 
occupied with what Mat Donovan called "going on."
	"This is a letter I got this morning from Arthur O'Connor," 
said Father Carroll. "I had some conversation with his mother 
about him; but she is very unreasonable."
	"Why does he not come home?" Mary asked.
	"Why should he?" returned Father Carroll, looking at her in 
surprise.
	"Is it not for this diocese he is ordained?"
	"Ordained? He's not ordained at all, nor can he be for some 
time."
	"Why, Anne mentioned to me in one of her letters that he 
was," said Mary. "One of her school-fellows saw him in Paris."
	"Oh, 'tis a mistake," Father Carroll replied.
	Mary called to her sister and asked her for an explanation. 
But Anne could only repeat what her friend had said to her.
	The students wear vestments and assist at some ceremonies 
before they are ordained," said Father Carroll. "That's
how the mistake arose. His health has broken down and though he 
says now he has his mind made up to be a priest, it is still doubtful, 
I think, whether he ever will be one."
	"Oh, I am so sorry," Mary exclaimed, with something like a 
wail of pain. "But hadn't he his mind always made up to be a 
priest?"
	"Well, no," he replied. "He always had doubts and scruples 
about his vocation. His ideas of the mission of a priest are very 
high, and he feared his motives were not the true ones. But why do 
you appear so distressed? He is not the first ecclesiastical student 
who has changed his mind; and surely you don't think there would 
be anything wrong in it?"
	"Oh, but don't you know what they said?" And she put her 
arm in his, as if asking for his support.
	"Yes -- that it was your doing," he replied with a smile. 
"Well, you may set your mind at rest on that point, for he often 
discussed the subject with me before he ever saw you. And 'tis 
only since he went to Paris that he even thought it at all likely that 
he could ever be a priest. He says now his scruples are nearly all 
removed. But I fear his health must have broken down. I am very 
anxious about him."
	It was a relief to her to think that she was not, even 
innocently, the cause of turning any one from what she deemed so 
high and holy a mission. But then came the thought that Arthur 
O'Connor was not a priest, and never might be a priest at all; and 
Father Carroll felt her arm trembling within his. And as he glanced 
at her face, which was deathly pale, and saw the quick heaving of 
her bosom, he was convinced that the happiness of Mary Kearney's 
life -- perhaps her very life -- depended upon either of two 
contingencies -- that Arthur O'Connor should become a priest, or 
her husband. And as her arm pressed more and more heavily upon 
his, Father Carroll resolved that he would be her friend, though he 
did not betray, even by a look that he noticed her agitation.
	"Anne is a great flirt," said he, nodding towards that lively 
young lady, who was keeping up the "going on" at a tremendous 
rate.
	"Oh, she's awful," returned Mary.
	"You are not bad yourself, either."
	"I was obliged to try. People were setting me down as 
stupid. And you know 'tis as good to be out of the world as out of 
the fashion." She spoke quite cheerfully; but immediately fell into 
a reverie again.
	"But has your heart never been really touched?"
	She bent her head, and a carnation flush suffused her pale 
cheek. "Well, I think not," she answered hesitatingly. "Though 
Grace," she added more cheerfully, "was always insisting that I 
was in a sad way about the gentleman we had here at Christmas."
	"I'd rather expect it was Edmund she would be throwing at 
you; and you had him at the same time, I believe."
	"Oh, no; Mr. Lowe was gone before Edmund came. And, 
strange to say, Grace scarcely ever talked about Edmund in that 
way. I suspect she wanted him to be an admirer of mine, and found 
he was thinking of somebody else."
	"Well, I know when I asked him to come here with me be 
jumped eagerly at the offer. So take care that you do not get inside 
Miss Delany."
	"Is there anything serious in that?
	"Well, she is a great prize in every way, but I doubt 
whether Edmund is very anxious to win her."
	"I saw her once or twice, and thought her quite fascinating; 
though I ought to be very prejudiced against her."
	"Why so?"
	"Well," replied Mary, laughing, "she described me as a 
plain country-girl, very shabbily dressed."
	"Oh, she was only jealous. She thought you had designs on 
Edmund."
	"That's the gentleman," said Mary, after returning Mr. Bob 
Lloyd's salute, as he rode past them, "who proposed for Eva. Every 
one was astonished when she refused such a grand offer; and no 
one so much as his own family. They insisted at first that all sorts 
of traps were set for him by us but, strange to say, they were quite 
indignant when he was rejected. It was a real case of love at first 
sight, for he only saw her the evening she and the doctor came for 
Grace. Grace likes him," she added, "and says that a young poet 
has turned Eva's head. But I am almost sure Eva will be a nun. She 
is too good and gentle for the rough world."
	"I saw Grace last week," said Father Carroll, "and was 
surprised to see her so changed. She was a little woman when I 
saw her before; but now she is quite girlish. She blushed and 
seemed quite timid and confused when I reminded her of some of 
her sayings."
	"So Hugh told me," said Mary. "He saw her when he went 
with Ellie to the convent. But he says she is not so pretty as she 
was. Ah, Grace is very good," Mary added, with a sigh. "She kept 
us ail alive; and she did not forget to send the book to poor Norah 
Lahy, though at first she could scarcely bear to think of her. Grace 
is very sensitive. She feels either joy of grief intensely; but she can 
conquer her feelings from a sense of duty."
	"She will never be happy unless she has a mission," said 
Anne, who had waited for them at the gate.
	"Every one can have that," returned Mary. "But who is that 
talking to my father?
	It is that old Mr. Pender, the agent," her sister answered. 
Mary looked grave. She feared that old Isaac's visits, which were 
unusually frequent now, boded no good. She had questioned Hugh 
about them, but he evaded the subject. It was plain to her, however, 
that some heavy trouble was weighing upon Hugh's mind; and at 
times she even feared his health was giving way, he looked so 
weary and worn. In one sense these apprehensions did her good, 
for they kept her from dwelling upon her own unhappiness. But 
when she felt her heart sinking at the thought that a great calamity 
was hanging over them, she would remember Norah Lahy, and be 
strong.



CHAPTER LVIII.

FATHER CARROLL'S HOARDINGS.

	You look dreadfully cut up," said Father Carroll, as he 
looked into Arthur O'Connor's pallid face. "Have you read too 
hard? Or is there anything on your mind?"
	"Dr. Kiely asked me the same questions," Arthur replied.
	"And what does he say about your health?"
	"Well, he says 'tis not gone too far; but that I must take care 
of myself."
	is face, always pale, was now fearfully emaciated, and of a 
wax-like whiteness that contrasted painfully with his long black 
hair and dark grey eyes. But the fretted look --  the "oldness" 
which Grace had remarked -- was gone; and a bright happy look 
had taken its place. The mental struggle that had so long racked 
him was at an end. He was resolved to become a priest; but the 
doctors had insisted upon his suspending his studies, and returning 
for some time to his native air. His mother was filled with remorse 
when she saw him so changed, and now ran into the other extreme, 
and declared that he should never return to college again. But 
Arthur smiled -- a sweeter smile, she thought, than she had seen 
upon his lips for years -- and said he would be all right in a few 
weeks. He had brought a letter from the president of the college to 
an eminent ecclesiastic in Dublin, by whose counsel he was to be 
guided. He delivered the letter, and, after a long conversation, this 
eminent divine said his case was a peculiar one, and that he would 
give him his opinion by letter in a few days. The letter had not yet 
come, and Father Carroll awaited its arrival more impatiently than 
the student himself.
	"Let us have a stroll to the Priest's Walk," said Arthur.
"I feel quite strong this evening."
	Are you not afraid of the opera-glass and the ladies? Father 
Carroll asked.
	"Oh, I don't mind it," replied Arthur smiling. "I can stand 
any amount of 'the light that lies in woman's eyes' without wincing 
now."
	They passed over the weir, through which the clear water 
leaped, with almost the swiftness of light; having suddenly  
changed its gently gliding motion into a bound, as if it feared the 
slanting walls of moss-covered stones would close together like a 
gate, and bar its way to the ocean. They passed through the 
meadow by the river-side and into the Priest's Walk. The rooks 
were cawing in the tall trees over their heads, and a rabbit popped 
now and then from their path into the cover at either side. It was a 
lonely, dreamy sort of place, calculated to fill the mind with 
romantic or religious musings. And the robust, sun-ruddied priest, 
and the pale, sickly student paced up and down for fully a quarter 
of an hour without exchanging a word.
	"A call," said Father Carroll. "Here is Tom Doherty."
	But, to his great relief, Tom Doherty only handed a letter to 
Arthur, and walked back to the weir, without speaking.
	"No bad news, I hope? "said the priest, on remarking the 
troubled look -- the old fretted look -- come into the student's face.
	It is from Dr.  -- ," he replied, handing him the letter.
	"I agree with him," said Father Carroll, after reading it.
	"But I told him my scruples were all gone," said Arthur. 
"No matter; as he says you were driven by the force of 
circumstances to it. You were always hoping for some means of 
escape. If, at any time in your life, you felt a real desire to be a 
priest, independently of circumstances, it would be different. But 
you never did. So, in God's name, give it up, and think of 
something else."
	"But what can I think of now?"
	"Well, the medical profession is the best for you. It is a 
noble profession, and will, at worst, secure you an humble 
competence. But I warn you," he added, laughing, "you will have 
to work hard for your bread. And, perhaps, so much the better."
	"Indolence and pride were always my besetting sins," the 
student replied. "I never could work without an immediate 
motive."
	"And surely the motive is not wanting now?"
	"That's true," he answered, with a weary sigh. "I owe it to 
my mother and family."
	Father Carroll thought of Mary Kearney's pale face and 
trembling hand, and was on the point of asking whether it ever 
occurred to him that there might be even a stronger motive for 
exertion than that he had just mentioned; but any reference to the 
subject yet awhile might, he thought, be premature, and he was 
silent.
	They continued to walk up and down in silence, while the 
rooks crowded thicker and thicker in the trees, and the white tails 
of the rabbits twinkled more frequently among the withered grass, 
as the sun shot his last red rays through the wood.
	There was such a rush and scamper among the rabbits a 
little in front of them that both looked up in surprise. Two beautiful 
girls wearing broad straw hats turned into the walk from a footpath 
through the wood, and as they bowed to Father Carroll, and then 
glanced at his companion, the laughing light in their "eyes of most 
unholy blue," changed suddenly to an expression of mingled 
surprise and sorrow. They had often inquired of Father Carroll for 
the student -- whom they called St. Kevin, he took so much pains 
to avoid them in his walks. It is possible they had come through the 
wood for the sole purpose of seeing him; but the alteration in him 
filled them with pity and sympathy.
	"Those are Major French's daughters," Father Carroll 
observed when they had passed. " It is their pictures Sir Garrett 
Butler painted when they were children, as Mrs. Hayes told you."
	"I remember," returned Arthur, coldly. "But I thought they 
might be the steward's or gamekeeper's daughters."
	"Do you still hold to your old prejudice against farmer's 
daughters? " Father Carroll asked, laughing.
	"Well, not exactly," Arthur answered. "At least I believe 
there are some exceptions to the rule." A slight flush suffused his 
pale face as he spoke, and his friend was about rallying him upon 
it, but again checked himself.
	As they repassed the weir, the trout were leaping at the 
flies, and they loitered for a few minutes to watch them.
	"What an evening this would be for Edmund Kiely," Arthur 
observed. "He is a genuine disciple of Isaac Walton."
	"Or Hugh Kearney," returned Father Carroll. "I have been 
trying to induce him to spend some days with me, but it is 
impossible to pull him away from home. He is like his sister Mary 
in that respect."
	"Does not she go much from home?
	"Scarcely ever. I sometimes wish I had a big parish and a 
big house, and I'd insist upon her spending some time with me 
occasionally."
	"The woman that can be happy in her own home is the best 
woman," said Arthur.
	"That is quite true. But it might be carried too far. I'm 
inclined to think a discontented spirit may keep young people too 
much at home, as well as drive them too much from it. But I'm far 
from suspecting that to be the case with Mary Kearney. She so 
loves every one and everything about her, I am sure she is really 
happy at home. But don't you wonder that so remarkably beautiful 
and superior a girl is not snatched at as a prize? She would adorn 
any station."
	"How do you account for it? " Arthur asked.
	"Well, men generally require some encouragement before 
they will run the risk of being refused; and Mary does not give the 
encouragement. And she really has declined two very good offers. 
I think she is likely to become a nun."
	"I'm told her sister intends going into a convent, too."
	Yes; she always intended it; though she seems fitter for the 
world than Mary. Do you think is Edmund Kiely engaged in any 
way? It has even occurred to me that he is actually married, but 
wants to keep it private."
	"No, he is not," Arthur replied. "But he has some romantic 
business on hands that I can't make out."
	"Come -- the grass is quite wet, and it would not do for you 
to remain out under the dew."
	During the evening they discussed Arthur's plans for the 
future; and, before retiring to his room, he all but had his mind 
made up to take his friend's advice, and commence the study of 
medicine at once.
	"But there is another difficulty in the way," he said, "which 
it is unpleasant to reflect upon."
	"What is that? " Father Carroll asked.
	"Money," returned Arthur. "After the sacrifices my mother 
has made on my account, I don't know how I can encroach farther 
upon her narrow means; particularly as I have disappointed her 
hopes. And you know what importance she attaches to keeping up 
appearances."
	"Well, I have not overlooked that," rejoined Father Carroll. 
"But I think we can manage." He stood up, and, opening the 
mahogany desk with the brass handles, took a small drawer from 
the inside, and emptied its contents upon the table. There were a 
few sovereigns and half-sovereigns and several rolls of bank-notes, 
some worn and faded, and some white and crisp, appearing at first 
sight to represent quite a formidable sum, but being all one-pound 
and thirty-shilling notes, Father Carroll found to his 
disappointment that his hoardings scarcely amounted to one 
hundred pounds. He had not given himself a holiday since his short 
visit to Tramore with Arthur and Edmund Kiely, and had taken to 
hoarding with two objects in view -- the furnishing and fitting-up 
of his cottage, and a visit to Rome. Rolling all the notes into one 
bundle, he tossed them across the table.
	"It is only ninety-three pounds," said he; "but it will do for 
awhile. And before that is spent, Fortune may prove more liberal 
of her favours."
	Arthur O'Connor stared in amazement at his friend. He 
knew Father Carroll was a good fellow, in the best sense of the 
word. But so great a sacrifice as he knew this must be he was 
unprepared for. Arthur O'Connor was particularly sensitive on the 
score of pecuniary obligations, and his whole nature revolted 
against the acceptance of the money. He never could bear to be in 
debt. Even in his boyhood he could not take money from the kind 
old priest with whom he used to spend a few weeks of his vacation 
in that old cottage. He was deeply moved by his friend's 
generosity. But he glared at the bundle of notes upon the table 
before him, almost with a feeling of loathing.
	Father Carroll, guessing his thoughts -- which it was easy 
enough to do -- said, "It is your duty to take it."
	"But I may never be able to repay you," returned Arthur, 
almost angrily.
	"You will. And your desire to get out of debt will be an 
additional incentive to exertion. Don't think so much about it. You 
must sometimes do violence to yourself if you mean to get on. I 
believe over-sensitiveness of that sort has pre vented much good 
from being done in the world -- has been the one fatal obstacle to 
many a useful and brilliant career."
	There was a silence of some minutes; and the student, 
resting his elbows upon the table, clasped his slender hands over 
his pale forehead.
	"Don't think I am merely acting upon impulse," said Father 
Carroll; "on the contrary, if I did not do what I have done, I might 
regret it all the days of my life."
	He took one of the candles and went to bed. The second 
was burning low in the socket when the student raised his head. He 
took the bundle of notes and put them in his pocket. But he said 
nothing about the matter that night, or next day, or for years after. 
Neither shall we.



CHAPTER LIX.

ANOTHER EVENTFUL DAY. -- "MAGNIFICENT 
TIPPERARY."

	ANOTHER eventful day for Knocknagow. But there are no 
smiling faces, and no clapping of hands -- except in grief --  this 
time. The sheriff is out. Darby Ruadh is at the head of the bailiffs, 
crying down tears as he hands out articles of furniture to his 
assistants, telling them to "take 'em 'asy" and not break them; and 
actually obliged to turn away his head and have recourse to a dirty 
cotton pocket-handkerchief, which he carries in his hat, when he 
comes to a cradle with an infant in it, or a sick woman too weak to 
rise from her bed. Honest Darby's grief is only second to that of his 
master, who declares over and over that it is "a very painful duty. 
A very painful duty. A very painful duty. But what can I do? What 
can I do? What, what can I do?
old Isaac asks. And many of the poor victims believe him. Mat 
Donovan was almost the only person who uttered an angry word. 
Mat Donovan's grandfather, as we have seen, pitched his tent on a 
heap of stones and pool of water cut off by the road from two 
adjoining estates belonging to different landlords. And here now is 
Mat Donovan's house, and the little garden with its clipped hedge, 
a warning to Irish landlords to look sharp to heaps of stones and 
pools of water, lest by any chance Irish peasants should convert 
them into houses and gardens, and then have the hardihood to call 
them their own.
	But Mat Donovan's little field which supplied him with 
potatoes and oats, and for which he paid a high rent, was not a 
"freehold," and the sheriff has just handed Mr. Isaac Pender a twig 
from the fence and a bit of stubble from the ground; and old Isaac 
declares how sorry he is to be obliged to deprive Mat Donovan of 
his "little garden." At which Mat loses all patience and denounces 
the agent as a robber and a hypocrite, and gives it as his opinion 
that 'twas all old Isaac's own doing, and not the landlord's. An 
unlucky speech for Mat Donovan, as hereinafter shall appear.
	And now they come to Tom Hogan's. A large force of 
police range themselves in front of the house. The door is open, 
and Darby Ruadh enters, looking flurried and excited, as if he 
expected to be knocked down at any moment. He has never 
forgotten the lesson he received from Bessy Morris's father, and 
has ever since been very gentle in his way of doing business, 
particularly where women and children are concerned. Nancy 
Hogan is looking very pale, but so beautiful that for a moment 
Darby forgets everything else in his admiration of her. Her mother 
is sitting upon a stool, quite calm. The house is soon cleared, and 
mother and daughter walk out quietly. Darby is obliged to have 
recourse to the cotton pocket-handkerchief, he is so much affected. 
He thought he would have been obliged to use violence, and is 
quite moved to find Mrs. Hogan so reasonable and considerate. 
And now Tom Hogan himself walks into the yard, and won't see 
the police drawn up along the barn -- that barn that is as good as 
Attorney Hanly's and better than Maurice Kearney's -- nor the 
party of soldiers on the road. Nancy covers her golden hair with 
her cloak and shades her face from their gaze.
	"God save you, Darby," Tom Hogan says quietly, as he 
walks towards the door.
	Darby places his hand against Tom Hogan's breast, and 
keeps him back.
	"I was fencin' that gap Attorney Hanly's cows broke 
through," Tom Hogan observes, "an' I'm goin' to my dinner."
	Darby Ruadh pushes him out upon the road. The sheriff 
and sub-inspector exchange looks and shake their heads. Poor Tom 
Hogan has that imbecile smile upon his face which is sometimes 
seen on the face of a helpless drunkard.
	"Good luck to you, Darby," he says, "an' let me in; I must 
finish that job to-day, as I'll begin the ploughin' to morrow. There's 
nothin' like early ploughin'."
	Some of those around looked surprised; but Darby Ruadh 
and Wat Corcoran understand the state of the case very well. They 
have had repeated negotiations with Tom Hogan to induce him to 
give up possession, but he laughed at them, as if it were a joke, and 
never lost an hour in the improvement of that little farm in which 
his "heart was stuck."
	"Never lose a day, Darby, whatever work you have on 
hands. That's what stood to me always."
	Poor Nancy could hold out no longer. She flung her arms 
round his neck, and kissed His worn, hollow cheeks over and over.
	"O father! dear father!" she cried, "have courage."
	"Courage!" he repeated, staring vacantly around him, "who 
could ever say that I hadn't courage? Hadn't I courage to build 
them houses? Faith, Nancy, I always had the courage at any rate."
	"O father," she exclaimed, "don't you see what's after 
happening? Let us go away."
	"What's afther happenin'?" he asked, with another vacant 
stare on the crowd around him. "Where's Jemmy?" he exclaimed 
suddenly, as his eye caught sight of the fixed bayonets and red 
uniforms behind him. "Where is Jemmy? Jemmy is the boy that 
wouldn't let any wan lay a hand on me."
	And where is Jemmy?
	He clutches his musket at the command to "charge!" and 
his shout -- clear and thrilling as when the ball was struck to the 
goal and Knocknagow had won -- mingles with the wild hurrah 
that rises even above the cannon's roar. The general, surrounded by 
his staff, watches anxiously for what is to follow. The result of the 
battle hangs upon that charge. For a moment the bayonets flash in 
the hot sun, as they rush through the storm of iron hail that tears 
through their ranks; and then friend and foe are lost in a thick, 
white cloud, and the thunder is hushed. And, as the white cloud 
rolls away, the general's eyes flash fire, as, raising himself in his 
stirrups, and flinging his arm wildly above His head, he shouts --  
"Magnificent Tipperary!"
	The day is won! England is victorious!
	There is hot Tipperary blood gushing out upon the thirsty 
plain; and where the fight was deadliest, Jemmy Hogan lies 
mangled and bleeding. But there is one company of his regiment 
which has not shared in the glories of that famous victory. It is 
drawn up with fixed bayonets before his father's door at old 
Knocknagow; while the house in which Jemmy Hogan was born is 
being levelled with the ground!
	Magnificent Tipperary!
	Tom Hogan looks wildly around him now. He is startled by 
a loud crashing sound that seemed to come from the yard. It was 
the first crush of the crow-bar through the wall of the dear old 
home. And it went right through Tom Hogan's heart, and broke it!
	Tom Carey, the carpenter, caught the poor old man in his 
arms as he fell senseless to the ground.
	"Let us bring him up to my house, Tom," said Mat 
Donovan, "till he comes to himse'f."
	"Wouldn't it be betther," returned Tom Carey, "to bring him 
down, as they're all goin' to stop wud me for a start, an' have him 
settled in the bed before he sees any more uv what's goin' on?"
	"You're right, Tom," said Mat; "that's the best way."
	They lifted poor Tom Hogan upon their shoulders, and bore 
him away, followed by his wife and daughter, weeping bitterly, but 
silently.
	Half of Knocknagow is swept from the face of the earth. 
There is one more house, a little higher up the hill, to be pulled 
down, and then the day's work will be completed. 'Tis easily done. 
The walls are of clay, and the roof of sedge from the bog; and 
nothing to be thrown out but an old wooden bedstead with a 
slanting roof like a house, a table and block of bogwood, a pot and 
an old gallon, two white plates and a yellow jug. The mule's crib 
and the antediluvian elk's horns are fixtures, and he must seek for 
them among the ruins to-morrow if he wants them.
	But he does not want them. He is not thinking of them, or 
of anything else belonging to him; or of himself. He is out in the 
bog "cutting a sod." He has found a smooth, soft patch of green 
among the heath, and carefully marking out what he required -- 
having measured the length and breadth with his feet -- he 
commences cutting it with his spade; rolling it up like a thick 
carpet as he goes on. Heeling his car close to it, he gets in the roll 
of greensward with some difficulty, using his spade as a lever. And 
then, after looking at the brown, spongy turf, which he has stripped 
of its emerald covering, he lies down at full length upon it, with his 
face upon his arms, and wishes with all his heart that a sod might 
grow over him. For the long-dreaded calamity has come at last. 
Norah Lahy is dead.
	This is Tuesday. On Sunday morning Honor Lahy sent for 
him. He had only left the old house with the steep roof an hour or 
two before, to prepare for Mass -- having spent the whole night 
sitting in the chimney corner, on the bench, where he used to sit 
and play "Auld Lang Syne" for her. And now he is prepared for the 
worst as he softly opens her room door.
	Mary Kearney is reading the Litany; and Nelly Donovan 
kneels behind her, kissing a pair of embroidered slippers, upon 
which her tears are falling thick and fast. Norah has "left" her 
slippers to Nelly Donovan. Honor Lahy stands at the head of the 
bed, watching, watching. A faint smile ripples for an instant over 
the dying girl's lips, and the poor mother, bending down, holds her 
ear close to them; and then turning quickly round sees that Billy 
Heffernan is standing in side the door. Norah wishes Billy 
Heffernan to lay his hand upon her forehead, and keep it there. 
Mary Kearney whispers to her sister Ellie, who leaves the room, 
and soon returns with the "blessed candle"; and as she has left the 
door open, Phil Lahy is seen kneeling outside. His wife beckons to 
him -- poor Norah's lips have again moved -- and he stands up and 
timidly approaches the bed, as if he feared to be reproached for all 
the sorrow he had caused her. But he is welcomed with a fond, 
fond look. And dropping upon his knees, Phil Lahy forms the 
resolution to make a promise that shall never be broken or evaded; 
a promise that she never asked him to make, because (he used to 
say) she knew his constitution required "a little nourishment"; but 
he knows now that it was because she feared he would not have the 
strength to keep it.
	Mary places the lighted candle in the dying girl's hand, 
keeping the wasted fingers closed upon it.
	"I b'lieve she is gone," said Honor, in a low tone, and with a 
look of the most intense anguish. "O Norah, Norah, are you gone 
from me at last?" But the eyelids quivered, and again the lips 
trembled for a moment, and then settled into a smile of heavenly 
sweetness. The smile brightened over the whole face, as if a 
sunbeam had fallen upon it. At the moment the old linnet in the 
window began to sing; and they all thought that her soul lingered 
to listen to the low sweet song that had so often made her glad.
	As the song of the linnet ceased, her bosom heaved once; 
and Norah Lahy was among her kindred angels.
	Father M'Mahon "himself" came to say Mass the day of the 
funeral. And how his heart was torn to see the ruined homes of 
Tipperary, on every side, as he dismounted from his horse under 
the beech-tree. And when the wail of the outcasts was heard amid 
the crash of falling roof-trees and the tramp of armed men, Honor 
Lahy said she was glad her darling was gone before that sorrowful 
day; "for 'tis she'd be sorry to see the neighbours in trouble." But in 
spite of all their trouble they attended her wake; and many stood 
round her grave who had to lie by the cold ditch-side that night, or, 
with burning hearts, bend their steps to the hated poorhouse.
	The grave was filled up, and the clay heaped over it and 
beaten into shape by Mat Donovan and Tom Maher. Then Mat 
went to a corner of the churchyard to get some green sods to cover 
it; but Billy Heffernan touched him upon the shoulder, and Mat 
went to the mule's car and thrust the handle of his spade through 
the roll of greensward from the bog; and Billy, taking hold of the 
end of the spade handle, they carry the sod, and lay it gently on one 
end of the grave. Then it is unrolled, and the cold clay is wrapped 
in a mantle of green. Poor Honor Lahy felt happy, and thought her 
darling's sleep would be sweeter for that fresh green mantle.
	"Would I doubt you, Billy!" she murmured, wiping the 
tears from her hot eyes.
	Then the people knelt down, and offered up the customary 
short prayer; and the churchyard was deserted except by four 
mourners.
	"Billy," said Phil Lahy, "she got you to take the pledge?"
	"She did," he replied; "God knows what might become uv 
me on'y for her."
	"Well, she never axed me to do that; because she couldn't 
find id in her heart to be hard on me, Billy. But I'll promise her 
now." He knelt down at the foot of the grave and took off his hat. 
His wife thought to interrupt him, but he motioned her back. 
"Norah, I promise you," said he; and then got up from his knees.
	Billy Heffernan lingered at the stile, and looked back.
	"Come, Billy," said Nelly Donovan, "you may as well 
come -- " She was going to say "home," but checked herself. Billy 
Heffernan had no home.
	"Nelly," returned Billy Heffernan, "I was dead fond uv 
her."
	"Every wan was fond uv her," said Nelly Donovan, putting 
her arm in his and drawing him away.
	There was not a roof for miles around under which her 
name was not mentioned, tenderly and sorrowfully. And the tears 
sprang into the eyes of many a poor exile far away, on coming to 
the words, "Norah Lahy is dead," in the letter from home. But, 
perhaps, nothing spoken of her was more truly pathetic, or showed 
more clearly how much they all missed her, than a remark of 
Barney Brodherick's, as he sat by the turf fire that roared up the 
wide chimney in Maurice Kearney's kitchen.
 "Ah! poor Norah!" exclaimed Barney, raising his head from his 
knees, upon which it had been resting for a full hour before. "Ah! 
poor Norah -- she'll never sit in a chair again."
	"Now, Anne," said Hugh Kearney, encircling his sister's 
waist with his arm, and bending over her, half playfully, and half 
seriously -- "is not this rather a sudden resolution you have taken, 
to go to the convent at once? You really ought to reflect for a long 
time before you take so serious a step."
	"It is not a sudden notion," she replied. "I am a long time 
thinking of it."
	"But is there any particular reason that makes you wish to 
go just now?"
	"Nothing, I trust and believe, but a sense of duty and the 
love of God," she answered calmly and firmly.
	Oh, I'll say no more," he replied, feeling somewhat awe-
struck. "But you don't know how much we all shall miss you, and 
particularly Mary."
	"Oh! I know it very well, Hugh," she exclaimed, the tears 
streaming down her cheeks; and, as she flung her arms round his 
neck, he felt her heart swell as if it were bursting. There was a 
knock at the door, and he was called out.
	Mat Donovan was standing at the little gate.
	"I came in by the stile," said Mat, "as I'd rather not meet the 
boys an' girls. But I couldn't bring myse'f to go wudout seein' Billy 
Heffernan. Nothin' 'd plase him but to put up some soart of a shed 
on his own turbary an' sleep in the bog, where, he says, he can feel 
himse'f independent. I'm runnin' over the short cut to him; an' will 
you tell Barney to have the ass an' car ready about eleven o'clock, 
an' we can slip away."
	"Very well, Mat, I'll see that Barney is ready. I need not tell 
you that I am sorry to part with you."
	"Say no more, sir," returned Mat, grasping his hand. "An' if 
my mother or Nelly is in want of a friend, I know you'll be a friend 
to 'em."
	Before Hugh could reply, he crossed the little garden and 
disappeared behind the laurels. The emigrant girl's words, when 
she ran in to take her leave of them that stormy winter night, "God 
be wud you, Mat, 'tis many's the time we danced together at the 
Bush," occurred to him; and looking carefully around to see that he 
was not observed, he pressed his lips to the trunk of the old 
hawthorn tree. "Ah!" said he, "the grass is growin' all around id 
already; an', I'm afeard, 'tis long till 'twill feel  light foot again. God 
be wud ould times; 'tis terrible to think uv the change."
	The night was not very dark, and, as he crossed the road 
near where the hook-nosed steed came to grief, he encountered Mr. 
Beresford Pender and Darby Ruadh.
	"Is that Donovan? I'd like to know what brings you here at 
this hour of the night?" exclaimed Beresford in his big voice; but 
he seized Darby Ruadh by the arm, and got behind him.
	"I don't see what id is to you," returned Mat; "but, if you 
want to know, I'm goin' down to look for Billy Heffernan at his 
own turbary. I b'lieve you know he hasn't a house now."
	Billy Heffernan was not at the place; and, after waiting for 
some time, leaning against the bank where poor Mick Brien had 
his dream, that never-to-be-forgotten night, when Bessy Morris sat 
for an hour in the little old chair, and he accompanied her home as 
far as the little stream where Billy Heffernan's mule always 
stopped to drink, Mat retraced his steps by the short cut to his own 
house. He found Barney, with his donkey and cart, at the door; 
and, after placing a deal box in the cart, he waved his hand and 
desired him to drive on.
	He came up with the cart at the hill near Phil Morris's, and 
Barney was surprised to see him turn towards the wooden gate 
under the old hawthorns, and rest his forehead upon it. His last 
parting with Bessy was not one which he could re member with 
pleasure, and now he longed for a kind word at least. Bessy had 
received him with studied coldness, and as he was walking away 
with a heavy heart, through the little boreen, Peg Brady overtook 
him, and placed an open letter in his hand. He read it without 
knowing what he was doing till he came to the signature, when he 
started and read it over again. When Peg saw the colour fade from 
his cheek, she got frightened, and said that there might be some 
mistake.
	"No, Peg, no," said he, returning her the letter. "But 'tisn't 
right, I think, to be showin' a girl's letter that way."
	"I'll give id back to him," returned Peg. "I on'y wanted to 
have a laugh."
	Mat Donovan looked around him, seeming quite 
bewildered, like a man that had lost his way.
	"Sure, why wouldn't she meet him, or any wan else she'd 
like to meet," he said. "But to be sayin' she hated the sight uv him, 
an' that he was mane and cowardly to be talkin' uv her as he was! I 
never thought Bessy had the two ways in her before."
	Peg Brady wished that Mat would give up thinking of 
Bessy Morris. She didn't like to see him "making a fool of 
himself." But in the matter of the letter she feared she had gone too 
far. And, in fact, if it were not for that letter Mat Donovan would 
in all probability never have been able to make up his mind to go 
to America. It was a short note to the dragoon, telling him she 
would meet him at the hour and place appointed, and couched in 
rather friendly terms. But Peg -- who with Kit Cummins had got up 
a little party of sympathisers with the dragoon, who pronounced 
Bessy's treatment of him "a shame" -- suppressed the fact that the 
letter was an old one, written when she was in Dublin.
	"Ah! Bessy!" he thought, "you had no right to thrate me 
that way; for well you knew -- though I never tould you so -- that 
I'd lay down my life for you."
	"Is id tired you are, Mat?" Barney asked. "If id is, sit up. 
Don't be afeard uv Bobby; for, be herrins, I'd keep up to the mail 
coach every fut uv the way."
	"No, Barney, no. I'd rather walk. Fire away!"
	And Mat Donovan twirled his stick, and drew himself up to 
his full height, and stepped out, as if his heart were as light as a 
feather.



CHAPTER LX.

BURGLARY AND ROBBERY.--MAT DONOVAN A 
PRISONER. --  BARNEY DISAPPEARS -- MR. SOMERFIELD 
AND ATTORNEY HANLY APPLY FOR LEASES, AND OLD 
ISAAC DREADS THE CONSEQUENCES.

	MR. SAM SOMERFIELD, J.P., with two policemen on his 
car, drove furiously up to Wellington Lodge. Other magistrates 
arrived soon after, and in the course of an hour or so quite a little 
army of police were on the spot. Mr. Beresford Pender described, 
in a tremendous voice, the particulars of a most daring outrage 
which had occurred the night before. Wellington Lodge had been 
entered by a band of armed men. Two of them tied Mr. Isaac 
Pender with ropes, and carried away all the money he had in the 
house. The robbers were so disguised, the old gentleman could not 
recognise them, but he had his suspicions, particularly of the tall 
man, who held a pistol to his head while another was breaking 
open the desk in which he kept his money. And most unfortunately 
he had a considerable sum just received from Maurice Kearney and 
other tenants of Sir Garrett Butler. The police were sent to scour 
the country in all directions; and by some chance the cover of a 
letter directed to Mr. Pender was found on the brink of a deep, 
square hole in the bog. Beresford remembered immediately that he 
had met Mat Donovan near that place at an unseasonable hour the 
night before. The bog-hole was drained, and the box in which the 
money was kept was found at the bottom, empty and with the lock 
broken. The man who handed up the box, feeling something hard 
under his feet, thrust his hand down into the soft mould, and held 
up a long gun, to the great astonishment of Mr. Beresford Pender 
and Darby Ruadh. It was at once re cognised as Maurice 
Kearney's, for whom a policeman was immediately dispatched. 
Mr. Kearney scratched his bead, and in reply to questions put to 
him by the magistrates, said the gun usually hung in the kitchen, 
and was seldom taken down except to shoot crows; that his son the 
doctor broke the stock during the hard frost at Christmas, and that 
he gave the gun to Wattletoes to bring to Mat Donovan to be 
repaired, as he, Mat Donovan, could do it as well as a gunsmith. 
That's the last he saw of the gun.
	"Where is Mat Donovan?" Mr. Somerfield asked.
	To the surprise of all present, Hugh Kearney said he 
believed Mat Donovan was gone to America. He had been seen 
late the night before in the bog. The whole affair looked very 
suspicious, the magistrates said. Then it was asked where was the 
person called Wattletoes? He had gone with Mat Donovan as far as 
Waterford. The magistrates exchanged looks, and retired to consult 
as to what should be done. The country was in a very bad state.
	On the evening of the following day, a policeman led 
Bobby and his blue cart up to Maurice Kearney's hall-door. The 
whole family ran out greatly surprised, and under the impression 
that poor Barney was a prisoner and in jail. But the policeman 
informed them that the ass was found tied to a post on the quay of 
Waterford, and that Barney could not be found, or any intelligence 
of him learned. This was still more astonishing, and Hugh began to 
feel really uneasy. But his mother consoled herself with the 
reflection that. in all probability Barney was in hot pursuit of a 
Punch-and-Judy while the police were searching for him.
	"What do you think, Hugh?" Mary asked anxiously.
	"I really believe there is a plot of some kind," he replied. 
"But as yet I can't imagine what the object of it may be."
	The next Saturday, Billy Heffernan was plodding behind 
his mule after selling the last pen'orth of his creel of turf, when a 
hand was laid upon his shoulder, i. was the dragoon, whom Billy 
had often met since the night he mistook his burnished helmet for a 
crock of gold at old Phil Morris's; and whom he had come to 
despise very heartily.
	"How are ye all in Knocknagow?" he asked, with a mean, 
shame-faced look, as if he felt he was despised, and deserved to be.
	"All well, so far as what's left uv us," Billy observed.
	"Will you tell Kit Cummins that I'll be out before to-
morrow week; I'm only waiting for a new suit of clothes to be 
made." He was dressed in plain clothes now, and not at all the fine, 
soldierly-looking fellow he was when Billy Heffernan first made 
his acquaintance.
	"Kit was at the safe side of the road," returned Billy; "so 
she's there yet. I'll tell her. Yo-up! Kit." And he walked on as if he 
wished to get rid of the ex-dragoon. He pulled up the collar of his 
ratteen riding-coat to shelter himself from the rain, which a keen 
wind was driving straight in his face. "Begob," muttered Billy 
Heffernan, as he breathed upon the tips of his numbed fingers -- 
the weather being unusually cold for the season of the year -- 
"begob, when they wor makin' the winther, they forgot to put these 
days in id."
	"God save you, Billy."
	He started, and opened his eyes in mute amazement.
	It was Mat Donovan, handcuffed between half-a-dozen 
policemen, who as well as their prisoner were dripping wet and 
covered with mud after a long march. Billy left his mule to shift for 
herself, and ran back after them.
	"Let me spake to him," said he to the constable, 
imploringly.
	"What do you want to say to him?"
	"Well," he replied, holding his head close to the con stable's 
ear, as he walked by his side, "just to say a word about a girl he's 
fond uv."
	"Halt," cried the constable, who happened to be fond of a 
girl himself. "Let us stand in the shelter for a minnit to draw our 
breath. Come now, say what you have to say at once."
	But poor Billy Heflernan was so overcome when his eyes 
rested on the iron handcuffs round his friend's wrists, he could say 
nothing at all.
	"They tell me, Billy," said Mat, in a mild, sad tone, "that 
I'm charged wud robbery. I was taken in Liverpool."
	"So we heard last night," returned Billy.
	"But, Billy, do any uv the neighbours suspect me?"
	"The divil a wan," Billy answered with animation. "I was in 
at ould Phil's yesterday, an' if you hear the way Bessy spoke uv 
you. She said she'd depind her life on you, and that you wor the 
sowl uv honour."
	"Did she, Billy?" rejoined Mat Donovan ---and his eyes 
glistened. "Remember me to all the neighbours; an' tell my mother 
an' Nelly not to fret. There's some mistake that I can't make out. It 
must be because I happened to have a few hot words wud ould 
Pender that they pitched on me."
	"But, Mat, where did Barney go?"
	"Didn't he go home?" Mat asked in surprise. "I parted wud 
him on the quay uv Waterford just as the steamer was startin', an' I 
tould him to make no delay."
	"There's no account uv him, high or low," returned Billy.
	"Begor, that's quare!" Mat exclaimed. "I hope no harm is 
afther happenin' to poor Barney."
	"She'd depend her life on me," said Mat Donovan to 
himself, as he lay down upon his bed in Clonmel jail. And he was 
certainly a happier man that night than he would have been if he 
had not met Billy Heffernan and his mule on the road.
	When brought before a magistrate, Mat Donovan was 
startled by the weight of circumstantial evidence against him. He 
declared that Barney had never brought the gun to him; and that he 
and Barney travelled together to Waterford the night of the 
robbery. Hugh Kearney told how Mat had called on him about nine 
o'clock that night and said he was going to the bog to see Billy 
Heffernan. And Nelly Donovan swore that her brother intended 
leaving for America the Sunday before the sheriff came out, hut 
that he remained to attend Norah Lahy's funeral. These 
circumstances were in his favour, but the mysterious disappearance 
of Barney Brodherick, the magistrate said, was a most suspicious 
circumstance, and he must send the case for trial at the next 
assizes. So poor Mat Donovan was marched back to his cold cell, 
the magistrate, at the suggestion of the Crown prosecutor, refusing 
to admit him to bail. He could not conceal from himself that he 
stood in great danger of being transported as a robber and a 
housebreaker unless Barney Brodherick could be found. He knew, 
however, that he had a good friend in Hugh Kearney, who would 
leave nothing undone to get him out of the meshes of the law. And 
Bessy Morris had written him such a kind letter, he was almost 
thankful that he had come back to Ireland, even as a prisoner.
	But those Tipperary homes -- those that the crowbar has 
spared -- among which we have, perhaps, lingered too long and too 
lovingly for the reader's patience, are gloomy enough now. Poor 
Honor Lahy can find little comfort even in Phil's eloquence, 
though he is always sober and industrious. There is a deeper shade 
of sadness in Mrs. Donovan's sad face; and Nelly's ringing laugh is 
never heard now. She even stops her wheel sometimes, and sits 
down to cry over a pair of embroidered slippers. Billy Heffernan 
comes over now and again from his hut in the bog, and sits on the 
bench in the corner. He is every day saying he will "take courage," 
and begin to play his flute again; but week after week passes, and 
he has not yet ventured to blow a single note. Nelly's mind is very 
much troubled on his account. She is afraid that when the flood 
rises, Billy Heffernan and his mule will inevitably be drowned in 
the bog. Billy assures her that the water was never yet known to 
cover the particular spot upon which he has erected his domicile; 
but he admits that coming in and going out will be "no joke" after a 
heavy fall of rain.
	Kit Cummins is mute; and her next-door neighbour has 
been known to sit on the ground inside her own threshold, with her 
back against the open door, for hours together, and so oppressed by 
the unaccustomed silence, that after finishing a "round" of her 
knitting, her hands would drop down languidly by her side, as, 
sighing deeply, she muttered under her teeth, "Gir-r-r-out, you 
bla'guard," and fixed her eyes vacantly upon the pig crunching Kit 
Cummins's stirabout stick in the dung-hole outside the door. The 
ring of jack Delany's anvil is only heard by fits and starts; and 
Brummagem's face is so black that he must have discontinued the 
Sunday ablution in the quarry for some time. Tom Hogan is dying 
at Tom Carey the carpenter's, whom he used to look down upon as 
a "tradesman," who was "no match for a farmer's daughter." Nancy 
nurses him tenderly; and Tom Carey never hints at his old love for 
her, even by a look; but Nancy thinks of it often, and sometimes 
says to herself that Ned Brophy's love was not "the right love."
	Old Phil Morris is becoming more and more cynical, and 
will talk crossly even to Bessy, and ask her what ails her, and why 
she looks so miserable. Even Peg Brady is unhappy, and resolves 
to ease her mind by telling Mat Donovan the truth about the letter; 
for her conscience told her that if it were not for her jealousy and 
duplicity, Mat would not have left for America at all, and would 
not be now a prisoner in the jail of Clonmel, in danger of being 
transported for life. Mary Kearney is doing her best to be strong; 
but since Norah Lahy's death the struggle is harder than it used to 
be; and when she thinks of her light-hearted sister going into a 
convent, she can scarcely suppress a cry of pain. There is a 
rumour, too, that Arthur O'Connor is going to be married to some 
rich lady who fell in love with him in Paris. And Mary sees the 
traces of care growing deeper and deeper in her brother Hugh's 
face, and fears that her father's affairs must be becoming more 
embarrassed. Ellie is at school with Grace, and Mary often thinks 
how Grace's presence would brighten up the old cottage -- and how 
much it wanted brightening up now. Maurice Kearney, however, 
appears as jovial as ever; and the only weight on Mrs. Kearney's 
mind is the fate of poor Barney, who, she fears, must have fallen 
into the river at Waterford, or met with some other equally 
untimely end. "Unless, indeed," she would add, "he has turned 
ballad-singer or showman himself." And Barney's mistress derived 
great consolation from the hope that he had permanently attached 
himself to a Punch-and-Judy.
	Attorney Hanly has got possession of one hundred and fifty 
acres of land adjoining Castleview, at one pound an acre. Besides 
Tom Hogan's little farm, for which Tom Hogan paid two pounds, 
some fifty acres, including Mat Donovan's "garden," and four or 
five other small holdings of from five to ten acres, are in pretty 
good heart. But the rest is so poor and exhausted, that Mr, Hanly 
does not consider that he has got much of a bargain after all. He 
can, however, make it all as good as Tom Hogan's, by deep-
draining, and liming, and fencing, and manuring, as Tom Hogan 
did. But Mr. Hanly is a shrewd man of business, and he knows to 
do this would cost several thousand pounds; and, when 'twas all 
done, he knows also that the rent could be raised on him, as 'twas 
raised on Tom Hogan; or he could, like Tom Hogan, be turned out 
altogether. So he won't mind the draining until he has got a long 
lease. His lease of Castleview will expire the same time as Maurice 
Kearney's lease of Ballinaclash, and as Attorney Hanly looks upon 
his handsome house, and his groves and meadows, he begins to 
feel uneasy and dissatisfied. So he has had a good deal of talk 
latterly with old Isaac; and it has been suggested to Sir Garrett 
Butler that he ought to give a new lease of the whole farm to Mr. 
Hanly, who would then expend a large sum of money in 
improvements, and would not object to paying a reasonable fine. It 
happened that, at the same time, Mr. Sam Somerfield, J.P., applied 
for a new lease of Woodlands. And in both cases the arguments 
brought forward to show that long leases would prove 
advantageous both to the landlord and the tenant were so 
convincing, that the old baronet, with all his simplicity and want of 
experience, could not help wondering why his agent had always 
warned him against giving leases to his tenants -- particularly to 
Maurice Kearney -- and pointed to the practice and example of this 
same Mr. Sam Somerfield in support of his assertion that leases 
would be ruinous to the landlord's interests.
	"And why does he ask me to give a lease to Mr. Hanly 
now?" the landlord thought. "Why should it be for my interest to 
withhold leases from all the rest, if it be for my interest to give a 
lease to him? And why does Mr. Somerfield urge me so strongly to 
give him a lease, though he considered it a crime for landlords to 
give leases to their tenants, and I understand has quite done away 
with leases on the estate over which he is agent? 'Tis very strange. 
There must be something wrong. I'll write to Mr. Pender, and say I 
cannot give the lease till I make further inquiries."
	Old Isaac shambled about in a state of distraction, and had 
a severe attack of midges, when he read this letter. But Beresford 
was not at all sorry: for if Attorney Hanly and Mr. Somerfield had 
got leases, he could not see what excuse there would be for 
refusing to renew Maurice Kearney's lease. And Mr. Beresford 
Pender had set his heart upon getting possession of Ballinaclash by 
hook or by crook. One obstacle was removed; Mr. Lowe -- who, he 
feared, might do something to defeat his scheme -- was gone to 
India. If Hugh Kearney were out of the way now, all would be 
right. Maurice Kearney, he suspected, was in debt; and if he were 
unexpectedly pounced upon for a year's rent he would never 
recover the blow, and could be put out even without waiting for the 
expiration of the lease. But old Isaac regretted that he had urged 
the landlord to give Attorney Hanly a lease.
	"I'm afraid," old Isaac muttered, "Sir Garrett will take some 
notion into his head. I'm sorry now I ever disturbed Tom Hogan. 
Carey the carpenter stopped me on the road when his funeral was 
passing, and said, before all the people, that the coffin was his 
work, but that my work was in the coffin. A farmer dare not talk to 
a gentleman that way. But these tradesmen are very insolent. Phil 
Lahy the tailor never puts his hand to his hat for me. And look at 
that old Phil Morris. I never like to see his eye on me. 'Tis these 
fellows that destroy the country. Only for them the farmers would 
submit to anything."
	"Donovan is sure to be transported," Beresford observed. I 
don't see what good that will do," returned his father, "unless Sir 
Garrett will make some allowance, when he sees it was as his 
agent I was robbed. I never liked that business. I'd rather keep out 
of such things, unless when some thing is to be gained."
	"Slap at Kearney now for a year's rent -- distrain his stock 
and he'll be smashed," said Beresford. "I'm told he's in debt, and 
has a thrashing machine at work night and day, and selling off his 
corn, though prices are low."
	His brother or someone might pay the rent for him," 
returned the old agent; "and then we'd be doing him good instead 
of harm."
	"He owes his brother money," rejoined Beresford, " and 
there's no danger. The brother knows he has no hold of his place, 
and I'm told he always said he was a fool to expend so much 
money in improvements."
	"Well, Dr. Kiely might interfere. He is a dangerous man, 
and if he thought Kearney was harshly treated he'd never stop till 
he got Sir Garrett to look into things. The creditors want the timber 
on Woodlands to be sold, and if matters are stirred at all something 
unpleasant may happen. But if Sir Garrett remains abroad, I think 
there is no danger."
	"'Tis reported Kiely's son has some notion of Miss 
Kearney," said Beresford.
	"Well, that's only another reason why we should be 
cautious," replied his father, "and the longer he's let run the easier 
'twill be to manage him."
	"No surrender!" muttered Mr. Beresford Pender down in 
his chest, as he walked away to have an imaginary conversation 
with the "colonel," and invent a few new oaths.



CHAPTER LXI.

BARNEY IS CAPTURED -- HIS ACCOUNT OF HIMSELF -- 
MAT THE THRASHER IN CLONMEL JAIL, AND THE BIG 
DRUM SILENT.

	IT is Christmas Day again. But the day has dawned, for the 
first time within the memory of the oldest inhabitant, without the 
windows in the old town of Kilthubber being set dancing by the 
famous Knocknagow drum. The drum is silent and forgotten over 
Mat Donovan's dresser; and Mat is a prisoner, awaiting his trial, in 
Clonmel jail. But even if the drum were banged, as of old, at the 
Bush, behind Maurice Kearney's, loud enough to awaken the 
Seven Sleepers, how few would have rallied to the call, compared 
with that day twelvemonth, when Mr. Lowe and his host followed 
the procession over the snow-covered road? For in spite of Father 
Hannigan's encouraging assurance that the landlords thereabouts 
were not exterminators, like some he could name, the crowbar has 
done its work at Knocknagow. Brummagem made an attempt to 
collect some boys to hunt the wren in the afternoon; hut so few 
came, and so little heart did they put into it, that Mary Kearney 
thought it was one of the most melancholy sights she ever beheld. 
It reminded her of poor Mat Donovan and Barney; and she thought 
of Mr. Lowe, and Richard, and Grace, and how happy they all 
were last Christmas. She remembered the tracks in the snow, and 
how Arthur O'Connor had stood, for hours perhaps, in the garden; 
and even yet he did not know that she had not received his note in 
time, and "what must he think of her?" She leant back in her chair 
with a sigh of pain. She asked herself what business she had in the 
world, and would it not be better for her and every one else if she 
were at rest. As her head touched the back of the chair, she started, 
and a faint blush stole over her pale cheeks.
	"Oh," she exclaimed -- drawing back the window curtain, 
that she might have a view of the old castle and the little ruined 
church near it -- "'tis a shame for me!" And Mary gazed towards 
the churchyard with her hand resting on the back of the chair. It 
was a straw chair. It was Norah Lahy's straw chair -- which poor 
Norah had left to her idolised friend. And how could she sit in that 
chair and not be strong?
	She joined her father and mother and Hugh at dinner with a 
smiling, happy face. But still there was a gloom over the little 
circle -- it was such a contrast to all the other happy Christmases 
they had known; and it was a relief to them all when a servant 
came in to say that Billy Heffernan was in the kitchen, and wanted 
to see Mr. Hugh, as he was going to drive Mrs. Donovan and Nelly 
to Clonmel in the morning to visit Mat in jail.
	They found Mat quite calm, and prepared for the worst. But 
a pang shot through his mother's heart when she saw how thin and 
pale he had grown. He had lived so long in the open air, and led so 
active a life, imprisonment was telling fearfully upon his strong 
frame. At times, too, his heart would sink at the thought that he 
must stand before the public gaze accused -- perhaps convicted -- 
of a cowardly and disgraceful crime. But his mother's sad face told 
him, more plainly than words, to be a man, no matter what might 
happen; while Nelly, in spite of all her wild ways, utterly broke 
down, and was supported out of the prison, crying and sobbing 
violently, by Billy Heffernan. They told him all the news, and 
spoke of all his old friends -- except one. He longed to hear of her, 
and yet her name was never once mentioned. He did not ask for her 
-- partly because he dreaded to hear something unpleasant, and 
partly because he thought she would rather not be talked of by him. 
But he felt there was a want of sympathy with him on his sister's 
part when she never told him a word about Bessy. She spoke about 
every one she cared much for herself; and because she did not care 
much for Bessy Morris, she quite forgot that Mat cared more for 
her than for all the world. And to sympathise with him in this 
would, he felt, be a greater proof of affection than the greatest 
sacrifices his sister could have made for him. She told him, over 
and over, what a good friend Billy Heffernan was to them, and 
how he would drive them to Clonmel again the day of the trial; and 
Mat was truly glad to hear this. But why did she not speak one 
word of his darling Bessy? Why did she not love her for his sake? 
Billy Heffernan told him he had a letter from Hugh Kearney to his 
attorney, and that nothing would be left undone to prove his 
innocence.
	"I'm sure uv that," said Mat. "I'd depend my life on him. 
And how is ould Phil Morris, Billy?"
	"As sound as a bell, as he says himse'f," returned Billy.
	"I called in -- "
	"Time is up," said the turnkey. And Mat Donovan was 
alone again in that dreary cell.
	Ah, if Nelly Donovan had "called in" to old Phil Morris's, 
and brought one kind word from Bessy, how much better it would 
have been for her brother than all her sobs and tears!
	A week or two after the visit to the jail, Billy Heffernan 
stopped his mule opposite the little thatched house, where, exactly 
a year before, he sold the twopence-worth of turf while waiting for 
room to pass through the loads of corn that blocked up the street, 
after leaving the dragoon behind him on the road. The woman of 
the house had become a regular customer since, and even when she 
did not want a supply of turf, Billy often stopped to have a chat 
with her. While they were talking this morning, he observed a 
crowd at the corner of the street, around a yellow painted van, built 
on the plan of those houses upon wheels in which a tall lady and a 
dwarf are usually to be seen, but small enough to be drawn by a 
single donkey. Along one side were two rows of lenses, like 
burning glasses, the under row low enough for the smallest urchin 
to peep through, and the upper sufficiently high for a full-grown 
man to view the wonders inside without stooping inconveniently. 
A green baize curtain hung from a frame in front of the glasses, 
and was drawn over the spectators who paid their half-pence, to 
shut them in from the gaze of the crowd. The showman had a loud 
voice, and in a monotonous sing-song tone he solemnly announced 
to the public that he was there by order of her Gracious Majesty, 
Queen Victoria, to exhibit his panorama for the instruction of her 
Irish subjects, especially the warm hearted people of gallant 
Tipperary. He then commenced letting down his pictures one by 
one by means of strings with brass curtain-rings attached to them, 
desiring his patrons to "look to the right" and "look to the left," and 
they would see "Napoleon Bonaparte mounted on a grey horse," 
and "Solomon's Temple," and various other wonders, too 
numerous to mention here; always finishing his description of a 
battle by asking them did they not "hear the cannons roaring."
	"Don't you hear the cannons roaring?" he exclaimed, as 
Billy Heffernan pushed his way quietly through the crowd, and 
stood close to the orator.
	"Oh, I do," responded a voice from under the green baize 
curtain, in accents of the profoundest wonder.
	The showman, surprised and delighted by so strong a 
testimony to the excellence of his exhibition, fought the battle of 
Waterloo over again, and again asked, "don't you hear the cannons 
roaring?"
	"Oh, I do!" responded the voice again, in a tone of still 
deeper wonder and profounder awe.
	There was a broad grin on every face in the crowd, except 
Billy Heffernan's -- he not being much given to mirth. And of 
course the showman himself could not for a moment so far forget 
the dignity of his mission as to allow his features to relax into a 
smile.
	"Don't you hear the cannons roaring?" he repeated, casting 
a look of severe reproof upon his audience, to rebuke them for 
their levity.
	"Oh, I do!" responded the voice.
	The curtain was drawn back, and Billy Heffernan started, 
and, with eyes and mouth wide open, stared at the face, radiant 
with more than human felicity, revealed to his astonished gaze.
	"For God 'lmighty sake," gasped Billy Heffernan, "is id 
yourse'f, Barney?"
	"Begob id is, Billy," replied Barney, with a grin of intenser 
delight -- if that were possible to a man who had been just viewing 
Solomon's Temple, and listening to the cannons roaring at the 
battle of Waterloo.
	"Barney," said Billy Heffernan, "'twas reported you wor 
dead."
	"Billy," returned Barney -- laying his hand on his arm, and 
suddenly becoming very grave -- "don't b'lieve a word uv id."
	Billy Heffernan never took his eyes off him for an instant, 
apparently dreading that if he did Barney might vanish,

"Like him the sprite,
Whom maids by night
Oft meet in glen that's haunted."

Heeling his car suddenly at the door of the thatched house, he 
threw the load upon the ground.
	"Oh, what are you doin'?" cried the woman of the house. "I 
don't want any turf to-day. An' sure if I did idse'f, I couldn't afford 
to buy a whole load together."
	"Never mind," returned Billy Heffernan, excitedly, "you 
can pay me by degrees." And collaring Barney, he pushed him into 
the car, putting up the hind part of the creel and fastening it upon 
him as he would upon a pig of lively propensities.
	"Yo-up! Kit!" And away they went.
	Kit, in the whole course of her life, never made the journey 
from Clonmel to Knocknagow in such quick time. The news flew 
like wildfire that the prodigal had returned, and was safely caged in 
Billy Heffernan's creel; and men, women, and children rushed out 
to see him and to speak to him, before they had reached Mat 
Donovan's. But Billy Heffernan begged of them to keep back, as 
his mind would not be easy till he had delivered up his charge to 
Hugh Kearney, who, he hoped and trusted, would find means to 
secure him, at least till after Mat Donovan's trial. So the crowd 
retired, except Phil Lahy, who walked behind the creel as solemnly 
as if he were following Barney to his last resting-place. The truant 
looked frightened as they approached the house, and showed 
decided symptoms of a desire to bolt, till he saw his mistress throw 
up her arms in surprise, and heard her exclaim, "O poor Barney! 
did you come at last?" And the long unheard "Wattletoes," in his 
master's well-remembered voice, satisfied him that it was old times 
again, and no mistake.
	So that Barney could not keep in a "hurroo!" of exultation, 
which took rather the shape of a screech, as he flung up his left 
arm and assaulted himself with the heel of his right foot, in a 
manner which, from any foot but his own, would have been at least 
insulting. And, then and there, Barney performed one of 
Callaghan's most difficult and complicated steps, with a look of 
intense gravity, which deepened into a scowl, as he finished by 
clapping his foot upon the ground with all his force, remaining 
motionless as a statue in that position for half a minute, and then 
suddenly breaking into another screech, and assaulting himself 
with his heel again. Barney then favoured all present, jointly and 
severally, with his old grin; and Tom Maher exclaimed, "Good 
again, Barney!" which seemed to be the meed for which Barney 
had been labouring, and without which he would have considered 
his efforts thrown away; for Barney took off his hat and drew his 
sleeve across his forehead, with the look of a man who had done 
his duty, thoroughly satisfied with Tom Maher's "Good again."
	"And now, Barney," said Phil Lahy, "will you be good 
enough to give an explanation of your disappearance, and where 
and how you spent your time, since you parted with Mat Donovan 
on the deck of the Liverpool steamer in the harbour of Waterford?" 
And having thus delivered himself, Phil cast a "gentlemen-of-the-
jury" look around upon his audience.
	Barney seemed quite taken aback, and evidently feared that 
his troubles were before him after all.
	"Wait till he gets something to eat first," said Mrs. 
Kearney. "I suppose he's famished with the hunger. Go to the 
kitchen, Barney, and I'll desire them to get you your dinner."
	"Would I doubt you, ma'am!" exclaimed Barney, 
brightening up again. "Thundher-an'-turf, Miss Ellie, is id yourse'f 
at all? Begor, Miss Mary, she'll shortly be able to ate a tuppenny 
loaf over your head. An' Masther Willie! och, Masther Willie, if 
you see the fine pup I had stole for you, but I couldn't brin' him 
wad me. Four months ould, an' as big as a calf. He'd be as big as 
Bobby. I see his father an' mother wad my own eyes dhrawin' 
tember tin mile o' ground. But bad luck to id, I couldn't brin' him."
	"And where did you find him, Billy?" Mrs. Kearney asked.
	"Lookin' at a peep-show, ma'am," returned Billy Heffernan.
	"Oh, that was the peep-show!" exclaimed Barney. "I never 
see the likes uv id. I'd rather give a shillin' to get wan look at id 
than to spind a shillin' at a races."
	"What did you see in it, Barney?" his master asked.
	"The whole world," returned Barney, with a look of 
wonder.
	"But tell us what you saw," continued his master, hugging 
himself in the excess of his glee. "Tell us what you saw in the 
peep-show."
	"Look to the right," exclaimed Barney, in the solemn tones 
of the showman, "and you'll see Solomon's Temple -- mounted on 
a grey horse." And his master immediately ran into the house to 
order a good dinner to be set before Barney Brodherick.
	"Begob, Phil," Barney answered, when be had smacked his 
lips and wiped his mouth after the Ballinaclash bacon, "'tis all like 
a dhrame to me; but I don't much care as Bobby came home safe, 
as that was what was throublin' me." And Barney did look 
contented, and in a very happy frame of mind.
	"But tell us where you went to and what kept you away so 
long."
	"Well, whin the steamer dhrove off wad Mat, I felt so 
down-hearted I didn't know what to do wad myse'f. An' as Bobby 
wanted a rest, I walked up an' down lookin' at the ships. There was 
wan big wan full uv people, an' the sailors shoutin' an' singin' an' 
pullin' ropes, an' women an' childer roarin' an' bawlin' for the bare 
life, till you wouldn't know where you wor standin.' 'Is that 
Barney?' says some wan out from the middle uv 'em. An' who was 
id but a b'y from Ballingarry side that challenged Mat Donovan to 
rise a weight wan day at the colliery; an' begob he put Mat to the 
pin uv his collar the same day. So out he comes an' pulls me in on 
the deck; an' who the blazes did I see sittin' furninst me but 
Patherson the piper playin' away for the bare life. Thin three or 
four more fellows that wor in the habit uv comin' to the dance at 
the Bush med at me, an' you'd think they'd shake the hand off uv 
me. The divil a wan uv 'em that hadn't a bottle, an' I should take a 
small dhrop out uv every wan uv 'em for the sake uv ould times, as 
they said. Thin nothin' 'd do but I should dance a bout; an' 
Patherson changed the 'Exile of Eryin' to 'Tatthered Jack Walsh' 
while you'd be lookin' about you. Well, Phil, you know that's wan 
of Callaghan's doubles, an' if I didn't show 'em what dancin' was, 
my name isn't Barney. But some way or other some wan knocked 
up agin me, an' my fut slipped on the boords, an' down I fell."
	Here Barney scratched his bead and fell into a reverie.
	"Well!" said Phil Lahy. "What happened you when you 
fell?"
	"That's what I'm thryin' to make out, Phil," returned 
Barney, "but I can't. Barrin' that I suppose I forgot to get up; for 
whin I kem to myse'f there I was ondher a hape uv canvas, an' 
Patherson lyin' o' top uv me gruntin' like an' ould sow. 'Twasn't 
long any way till a couple of sailors pulled us out, an' whin I stood 
up the divil a stand I could stand no more thin a calf afore his 
mother licks him. So there I was spinnin' about thryin' to studdy 
myse'f, when the flure slanted down, for all the world like as if a 
cart heeled an' you standin' in id, an' I was pitched head foremost, 
an' was d--n near dhrivin' my head through the captain's 
stummuck.
	Where's your passage-ticket?' says be, shoutin' out loud; for 
you couldn't hear your ears wad the wind, and the say dashin' up 
agin the sides uv the ship, till you'd think we wor goin' to be 
swollied afore you could bless yourse'f. 'Where's your ticket?' says 
the captain again, seein' that I had my arms twisted round a rope, 
an' I houldin' on for the bare life.
	'Arra, what 'd I be doin' wad a passage-ticket?' says I, 'whin 
I'm not goin' anywhere.' 'Come, my good fellow,' says he, 'I want 
none of your humbuggin'. Hand me your ticket an' go below.' 'I'm 
not a coddy at all,' says I. 'Let me go look afther me little ass.' 'He's 
a stole-away,' says the captain, turnin' to the mate. 'That's what 
they'll say at home,' says I, 'an' if you don't let me out, Bobby'll be 
a stole-away, too, God help me,' says I. 'An' where do you want to 
go?' says the captain, an' I see he couldn't help laughin' 'Good luck 
to you, captain,' says I, 'an' let me out on the quay uv Watherford, 
an' that's all I'll ax,' says I. 'We have another here,' says the mate, 
pintin' to Patherson, 'rowlin' hether an' over on the broad of his 
back.' 'That's the piper,' said the captain. 'What are we to do wud 
'em?' 'Let me out, sir,' says I, 'or I'll have no business to show my 
face to the misthress,' says I. 'You're fifty miles from Watherford,' 
says he, 'an' I suspect this is a schame uv yours to chate me,' says 
he. Wud that the b'y from Ballingarry came up a step-laddher out 
uv a place they call the hoult -- an' the divil's own hoult the same 
place is -- an' he explained all to the captain, an' said I'd be handy 
about the cookin', an' as for the piper, if the weather cleared up, 
he'd give 'em a tune, an' keep 'em alive. An' that's the way myse'f 
an' Patherson went to New-found-land. We wor home together, 
too, an' he wanted to keep up the partnership, we did so well in St. 
John's, he playin' an' I dancin'. But, good luck to you, Phil, an' let 
me out to see Bobby, an' I'll tell you all another time."
	"Just tell me, Barney," said Hugh, who had been listening 
unobserved to the latter part of his narration, "what did you do with 
the gun you were desired to bring to Mat Donovan, to have the 
stock mended?"
	"Oh, for God's sake, Misther Hugh," Barney exclaimed -- 
showing such decided symptoms of a desire to run away, that Billy 
Heffernan closed the door and placed his back against it -- "don't 
get me into a hobble about the gun, an' I afther goin' through such 
hardship. Let me go see Bobby an' my poof ould mother. Sure I'm 
bad enough, God help me."
	"I don't want to get you into any trouble about it," said 
Hugh. "But, by telling the truth, you will get your friend Mat 
Donovan out of trouble. Why did you not bring the gun to him, and 
where did you bring it?"
	'Twas all on account uv Peg Brady," Barney answered, 
moodily. "An' see all the throuble I brought on myse'f for wan slob 
uv a kiss."
	"Well, tell me how it happened."
	I see her goin' home by the short-cut, sir," returned Barney, 
looking the very picture of repentance, "an' wint across to meet 
her, thinkin' id 'd be a fine thing to let her see me wad a fire-lock 
on my shoulder. An' thin I wint to help her over the double-ditch 
above the forth. An' as I was comin' back I hear the beagles givin' 
tongue, an' the hare wint poppin' through the nine-acre field, and 
was makin' for the furze over Raheen. Thin the hounds come on, 
keepin' on the thrale elegant, and the fust man I see toppin' the 
doubleditch was yourse'f, and the huntsman after you. So I stuck 
the gun into a brake uv briers, an' cut off to see the fun; an' the 
divil a wan uv me ever thought uv the gun till the day uv the 
hurlin', whim Father M'Mahon tould me 'twas in Billy Heffernan's 
bog-hole; and what use would id be for me to go look for id in a 
hole that's as deep as the top uv the house?"
	"Did he tell you who put it in that hole?" Hugh asked.
	"Not a word, sir," Barney replied, "on'y that 'twas there."
	"All right, Barney," said Hugh. "You may go see Bobby 
and your mother as soon as you like now. Let him out, Billy; he 
won't run away again, never fear," he added, on observing Billy 
Heffernan's look of alarm.
	"Be my sowl, 'tis runnin' enough I'm afther gettin'," 
returned Barney. "An' that I may never die in sin if ever I put a fut 
on a ship again, anyway. Will I ride Bobby to see my mother, 
Misther Hugh?"
	The permission was granted, and in a few minutes Barney 
passed by the side of Knocknagow that was left, at full gallop; in 
his excitement either not seeing or not heeding Kit Cummins, who 
ran to her door holding up a bottle and glass invitingly; nor even 
seeming to notice Peg Brady, who, with the dragoon, stood behind 
her.



CHAPTER LXII.

SAD NEWS FROM BALLINACLASH.

	ANOTHER year has elapsed, and Grace has never once 
visited the old cottage. She shrinks from it now, as she shrank from 
Norah Lahy's pale face. Yet she feels that Norah Lahy has done her 
good, and is glad to think that she won the love of the poor sick 
girl; for Mary Kearney mentioned in her letters that Norah had 
spoken affectionately of her to the last. Grace says to herself that 
she ought to spend some time with Mary in her now lonely home -- 
that it "would be right"; and, as in Norah Lahy's case, she feels it 
would have done her good. But she has such troops of pleasant 
acquaintances now, and so many invitations to all sorts of parties, 
and is so admired and flattered, that she scarcely has time even to 
think of her old friends. She is reminded of them this morning by a 
letter from Mary. Mary tells her they are all well; that Anne writes 
from her convent in her old, cheerful way, but that Ellie did not 
come home at Christmas; that there was a letter from the Cape 
from Richard, who was delighted with the voyage. (He had gone as 
surgeon in an Australian vessel.)
	"Billy Heffernan's house in the bog," the letter went on to 
say, "was swept away by the flood after the heavy rains; and he 
was barely able to save himself and his mule from drowning. But 
he is now hard at work building another house, as Mr. Lloyd has 
given him a lease for ever of twenty acres of his bog, for the yearly 
rent of a creel of turf; and though my father says a single sod 
would be too much for it, Billy thinks himself quite independent, 
and says he has an estate while grass grows and water runs, and no 
landlord can turn him out. Whether grass can be made to grow on 
the 'estate,' however, is doubtful. Nelly Donovan has given her 
heart, to Billy Heffernan; but his heart, I really think, is in Norah 
Lahy's grave. And Mat, too, loves not wisely, but too well: and has 
become quite a grave and thoughtful character, devoting all the 
time he can spare to reading. Old Phil Morris is dead, and Bessy is 
gone to live with her aunt in Dublin. She had been very unhappy 
on account of the unkind things people used to say of her; and that 
foolish dragoon, encouraged, it is said, by Peg Brady, kept 
persecuting her to the last. Peg is our dairy-maid now; and she has 
confessed, with a flood of tears, that she deceived Mat Donovan 
about a letter of Bessy's, and is sorry she had not the courage to tell 
the truth before Bessy went away. As I have said so much of the 
'course of true love' running in the usual way in this part of the 
globe, I must tell you that a little circumstance which accidentally 
came under my notice the other day has convinced me that your 
friend, 'Fionn Macool,' is, after all, in love with somebody; but, for 
the life of me, I cannot guess who she may be, though I could tell 
you the colour of her hair. Strange to say, I thought of Bessy 
Morris, but -- though you will say that is just what might be 
expected from an 'oddity' -- I am sure it is not she. Might it be Miss 
Delany? He praised her beauty and agreeable manners more than 
ever I heard him praise any one else. But, take my word for it, 
Hugh is gone about somebody, as sure as the sun is at this moment 
sinking down behind the poplar trees on the hill -- which trees 
always remind me of you and Bessy Morris, and all the chat we 
used to have about her father, and her anxiety to find him and live 
with him in their old home, after all his wanderings. That's what 
made me like Bessy, and I never could believe her heartless, as she 
had the name of being.
	"The Messrs. Pender are carrying things with a high hand. 
Poor Father M'Mahon is heart-broken at the sufferings of the 
people. The poor-house is crowded, and the number of deaths is 
fearful. Last Sunday, when requesting the prayers of the 
congregation in the usual way for the repose of the souls of those 
who died during the week, the list was so long that poor Father 
M'Mahon stopped in the middle of it, exclaiming with a heart-
piercing cry, 'O my poor people, my poor people!' and then turned 
round and prostrated himself at the foot of the altar convulsed with 
grief, and could not go on reading the list of deaths for a long time. 
Then he got into a rage and denounced the government as a 
'damnable government.' I was quite frightened at the excitement of 
the people. Some faces were quite white, and others almost black. 
But a very affecting incident turned their anger into pity, though 
one would think it ought only to incense them all the more against 
their rulers. When he resumed the reading of the list, a woman 
shrieked out and fell senseless upon the floor. She was one of the 
paupers in the auxiliary workhouse, who are marched to the parish 
chapel every Sunday, as the chapel in the regular workhouse is too 
small even to accommodate the inmates of that house. This poor 
woman was only admitted the week before with her husband and 
children, from whom, according to their infamous rules, she was at 
once separated. She now heard her husband's name read from the 
altar, and with a wild shriek of agony fell down, and was borne 
senseless out of the chapel. They did not even take the trouble to 
inform her that her husband was dead! Were human beings ever 
treated before as our poor people are treated? I often wondered at 
the almost wild looks of the paupers while the list of deaths was 
being read. But I understand it now! Oh! I must drive away the 
thought of such barbarous cruelty, and not distress you with such 
pictures of human suffering. But perhaps it is well to think of these 
things sometimes, Grace, and pray to God to alleviate the misery 
around us. I do my best to keep up my spirits. I sit in poor Norah's 
chair every evening till the light in Mat Donovan's window 
reminds me to go down and read the newspaper or play a tune for 
my father, while mamma is making her favourite slim-cake for tea. 
Hugh, as usual, is nearly always in his own room, where I spend an 
occasional hour with him. He is, however, becoming amiable, and 
comes out of his den when our Castleview friends make their 
appearance. I am always glad to see them, and they cheer us up a 
good deal. Miss Lloyd scarcely recognises them now, and maybe 
she doesn't get it from Rose, with whom Johnny Wilson is again 
'the white-headed boy.' Can you make out this mystery about Hugh 
as you did the tracks in the snow?
	"Ah, we had not so merry a Christmas as that since! But I 
can't realise that idea of the poet you used to quote about a 
'sorrow's crown of sorrow.' I like to remember 'happier things,' and 
would say with our own bard -- 

"'Long, long be my heart with such memories 
filled.'

I take my walk nearly every evening. Great news of Tommy Lahy! 
His uncle, who is very rich, has adopted him. He is in college, and 
from his likeness he must be a fine fellow. Do you remember his 
laughing blue eyes and luxuriant curls? Fancy Tommy Lahy 
coming home a polished gentleman to us. Would he have any 
chance of you? It would be quite romantic. I'm glad I have one 
more pleasant item to relieve the gloom of this tiresome letter. 
Nancy Hogan is married to Tom Carey, the carpenter, and they are 
as happy as the day is long. Tell me all about your great ball. I am 
all anxious to know whether it is the white or the pink you have 
decided on; but as you will have decided before you can get this, I 
won't give you my opinion, though you say you would be guided 
by it. Of course you will be the belle, as Eva would have been the 
beauty. How I should like to go to her profession; but I fear it will 
be impossible for me to leave home. Mr. Lloyd says still he will 
never love again. It is a great loss to Edmund that he is not at 
home, as you have such pleasant parties. I am so thankful to you to 
give me such graphic descriptions of them. Edmund writes to me 
sometimes. He and Arthur O'Connor will soon come to spend a 
few days with Father Carroll, and they all promise to pay us a visit. 
How glad I'd be if you would come. The light is fading. I'll take to 
thinking now, till Nelly Donovan lights her candle. Good-bye, 
dearest Grace, and believe me ever your affectionate friend,
"MARY KEARNEY."

Grace was by no means unmoved by the passages in this letter in 
which Mary glanced at the sufferings of her poor neighbours, and 
the sad change that had come over Knocknagow, where, Grace 
used to say, the idea must have been suggested to her favourite 
poet: --  

"You'd swear they knew no other mood
But mirth and love in Tipperary."

But that allusion to Hugh and Miss Delany put her into a brown 
study. Could it be that matters had gone so far between him and 
Minnie Delany? He had only met her once, but Grace now 
remembered he was quite "taken up with her," and scarcely took 
any notice of herself. Grace was angry, and angry for being angry. 
For, what was it to her? The arrival of the dress for the ball -- 
which fitted to perfection, and looked even more becoming than 
she expected --  put everything else out of her head for an hour or 
two. Then, as she sat down to take breath, after trying the effect of 
all her ornaments, strange to say, she found herself thinking of 
Tommy Lahy, an educated gentleman, handsome and rich -- 
perhaps famous -- crossing the wide ocean to lay all his wealth and 
laurels at her feet. But then it occurred to her that the moustache 
with which, in fancy, she had adorned his lip was not yet a reality, 
and Tommy Lahy was dismissed contemptuously.
	When dressed for the ball she went, as was her custom, to 
her father's study, in order that he might see her in all her glory. 
She was startled, on entering, to see a man standing alone at the 
table wrapped in a great-coat. It was Hugh Kearney. For a moment 
surprise kept her from giving him her hand, which she did give at 
last without speaking. He almost hesitated to touch the dainty 
glove, for he was wet and travel-stained, the rain glistening upon 
his face and beard. She thought the dark eyes glistened, too -- and 
she was not mistaken. How immeasurable seemed the distance 
between them at that moment! She was so bright and so beautiful, 
so fitted for the sunshine, that to draw her towards him, into the 
gloom that hung over his pathway, even if he could do so, would 
(he thought) be almost a crime.
	Recovering from her first surprise, she became quite 
formal, almost haughty in her manner, as she sat upon a chair, at 
the opposite side of the table from him, and said: --
	"I had a letter from Mary to-day, and was glad to see by it 
that ye were all well."
	This was a relief to him; as he feared she might ask a 
question which he would have found some difficulty in answering.
	I'll be back in a moment," said the doctor, entering hastily 
with a letter in his hand. "O Grace!" -- Hugh made a sign and the 
doctor checked himself. "You are already dressed for the ball," he 
added; "I see you are determined to be early in the field."
	Mrs. D --  is to call for me," said she, laughing as she left 
the room.
	"I don't like to bring you out such a night as this," said 
Hugh, "unless you think it absolutely necessary. Dr. Cusack 
assured me there was no immediate danger."
	"Well, I prefer going at once," returned Dr. Kiely. "Will 
you have some refreshment?"
	"No, thank you. I had something at the hotel. And I have no 
time to lose," he added, looking at his watch.
	"Well, I hope you will succeed in the object of your 
journey. If not, don't forget to let me know. Good night."
	As Hugh Kearney sat upon the top of the mail-coach, 
regardless of the cold rain dashing into his face, he could wish that 
the night and his journey were a year long. It galled his proud spirit 
to think that he was going to beg. It would be easier for him to die. 
But he thought of his father and mother, and his sister, his beautiful 
and noble sister, and for their sakes be resolved to make any and 
every sacrifice consistent with honour. He bowed his head and 
covered his face with his hands as the thought occurred to him that 
he might never see his mother alive again. "And if I fail in my 
mission," he said to himself, "I could almost wish it may be so. She 
would feel the blow more keenly than any of us, when the first gust 
of the storm has almost killed her."
	He was roused by the loud bray of the guard's horn, and, on 
looking up, saw a crowd of vehicles blocking up the road in front 
of a suburban mansion, from the windows of which the light 
streamed out upon the throng of smoking horses and shouting 
drivers, as they struggled and jostled one another to get out of the 
way of the mail-coach. Hugh remembered it was at this house the 
ball was to which Grace was going, and fancied he caught a 
glimpse of her crossing the hall as the coach plunged into the 
darkness.
	"There's a ball there, sir," said the guard behind him, who 
thought he meant to inquire what it all meant; for Hugh had waved 
his hand towards the lighted windows.
	But the action was an involuntary "Farewell."
	Grace was not there, however. She ran down stairs on 
hearing Mrs. D -- 's carriage stop at the door, and meeting her 
father in the hall wrapped in his cloak, she asked where he was 
going.
	"To Ballinaclash," he replied. "Mrs. Kearney got suddenly 
ill this morning."
	"Why did not Hugh tell me?"
	"Well, he saw you dressed for the party, and did not like to 
spoil your enjoyment. He is going to Dublin by the night coach."
	She paused for a moment, looking bewildered, and then 
hurried to the hall-door, where a servant was waiting to hold an 
umbrella over her while she got into the carriage. Her father looked 
sad, and shook his head, as he turned into his study for a parcel he 
had forgotten. Mrs. D -- 's carriage was rolling up the street as he 
came out, but to his surprise Grace met him in the hall.
	"I have told Mrs. D --  of Mrs. Kearney's illness," said she, 
in a low, firm voice. "And now will you let me go with you? I'll be 
ready in ten minutes."
	"It is a cold, wet night, for so long a drive," he replied.
	"Oh, no matter. Do let me go."
	"Well, then, lose no time."
	She flew up the stairs, and there was no sadness in his look 
now, and no shaking of the head, as he gazed after her, with all a 
father's love and pride.
	The tears welled into Willie Kearney's eyes when Hugh 
shook him by the hand in his uncle's warehouse.
	"I hope you find Willie a good boy?" said Hugh.
	"No better, no better," returned his uncle. "He'll be a first-
rate business man."
	"Well, Hugh," said the merchant, when he had explained 
the business upon which he had come, "it is a sad business. But I 
must tell you plainly I cannot do what you require. It would be 
only throwing good money after bad, and I owe a duty to my own 
children. Your father was always careless and improvident, and I 
often told him he was a fool to expend so much upon his farms 
when he had no sufficient security. I lent him money before, which 
I never expect to be paid. And you know I never got a penny of 
what I was entitled to by my father's will. I left it all to them, and 
depended on my own exertions. And now I ask you is it just to 
expect more than that from me, particularly in so hopeless a 
business?
	"I agree with every word you say," Hugh replied. "I'd cut 
off my hand rather than ask it for myself. But I can't bear the 
thought of seeing them ruined. And if the rent, now due, were paid, 
I do believe it possible, by care and economy, to pay you after a 
little time. I'll pledge you my honour I'll do my best."
	After a long pause, his uncle filled a cheque, and handed it 
to him.
	"It is not much more than half the sum you want," said he, 
"but I cannot give you more. And mind, it is to you, and not to 
your father, I am giving it. You won't go back without coming out 
to see us? Your cousins would be most happy to meet you."
	"Oh, I cannot lose an hour," replied Hugh. "Good-bye." 
And after shaking hands warmly with the sturdy merchant, who 
had some of his father's brusqueness in his manner, he hurried out 
of the office, his heart somewhat lightened of its load.
	"Dr. Kiely will do the rest," said he, as he hurried through 
the crowded streets. "And if my poor mother has rallied, with 
God's help, all will be well."
	While Hugh Kearney was picturing Grace whirling among 
the dancers at the ball, she was hurrying to his mother's bedside.
	The second day after, she and Mary were sitting together in 
the well-remembered little room up in the steep roof of the old 
cottage. Mrs. Kearney was out of danger, but it was feared she 
would never wholly recover the effects of the shock she had got. 
The cause of the shock was kept a secret from Grace; and she 
candidly told Mary that this made her feel uneasy and 
uncomfortable, for she could not imagine what motive there could 
be for concealing the circumstance, whatever it was, from her. 
Mary flushed scarlet as she answered -- 
	"Well, it is very foolish to be making a mystery of it. But I 
believe people always feel ashamed under such circumstances; 
though I scarcely know why they should. The fact is, we were all 
startled the other morning to find all our cattle, and sheep, and 
horses, and, in fact, all we had, seized upon by the agent for rent, 
and driven away to pound. When poor mamma heard the bailiffs 
shouting, and saw what had happened, she fell down in a fit, and 
we feared for some time she was dying. But, thank God, it is not so 
bad, and if I saw any hope of her being reconciled I'd be happy."
	"I don't see anything to be ashamed of," said Grace.
	"And yet," Mary replied, "people who would fawn upon us 
yesterday would not know us to-day. And if Hugh cannot prevail 
upon my uncle to advance the money to release the cattle before 
they are canted, I don't know what the end will be. How well I can 
now understand what the poor people suffer in being driven from 
their homes every day. I love the very stones of this old place," she 
murmured, with the tears in her eyes, as she leant out of the 
window, and looked round the garden, and out over the fields, and 
down to the little brook, along whose banks she and her brothers 
and sisters used to spend the long summer days in their happy 
childhood. And must they leave it all now to strangers, perhaps, 
who never heard their very names? Her father was standing on the 
"new ditch," looking towards that part of his farm which was a 
quagmire some years before, and she guessed what his thoughts 
were.
	"It was very good of you to come to us, Grace," said she. 
"No one can cheer my father like you."
	"Ah, I ought to have come long ago," Grace replied with a 
sigh.
	"Better late than never," returned Mary, cheerfully. "And 
here is somebody else who wants you to comfort him. I really 
think he will change his mind, and give you Eva's place in his 
heart."
	Grace laughed as Mr. Lloyd rode by on his grey horse; and 
then looked grave.
	"Oh, here are the Hanlys," she exclaimed, brightening up; 
"and the pony coming on quite gaily, and head foremost. I suppose 
we must go down. By-the-by, Mary, what about -- " She stopped in 
the middle of her question, which was suggested by Rose Hanly's 
curls, which fell over her shoulders in ringlets that might almost 
rival those in which Mr. Lloyd's heart got so hopelessly entangled 
the night he distinguished himself as a poet.
	"What were you going to say?" Mary asked.
	"Oh, nothing. Let us go down to them."
	Grace looked very often at Rose's curls during the next 
half-hour; and when she and Mary were again alone, she was about 
asking for an explanation of that passage in her letter about Hugh's 
being in love. But, strange to say, she could not bring herself to ask 
so simple a question.
	Mrs. Kearney was reclining in her arm-chair, propped up 
with pillows.
	"I think, Mary," said she, "I hear the sheep."
	Mary thought it was only fancy, and merely replied that the 
evening was very fine and calm.
	"And the cows," she added.
	Mary looked anxiously at- Grace, for she feared her 
mother's mind was beginning to wander.
	But just then Jim Dunn was heard shouting to Tom Maher; 
and Tom Maher shouting to Barney Brodherick; and Barney 
hallooing to no one in particular -- but in a general way, and for his 
own private amusement. Mary and Grace ran to the window; and 
there were the sheep already spread over the lawn, smelling at the 
grass, and snatching a hasty nibble; and then holding up their noses 
in the air, and looking all round on the groves, and the lime-trees, 
and the elms, and the old cottage itself, as if a dim notion had got 
into their foolish heads that they had seen all that before. Then the 
cows and the heifers and the yearlings came rushing through the 
gate like a routed army; but after a little while subsided into 
tranquillity, and began to low softly in response to Attorney 
Hanly's herd, which Joe Russell was driving to their stalls from 
Tom Hogan's meadow.  And, to crown all, Bobby rushed through 
the open gate, and made straight for the house at a hand-gallop, 
twisting his neck into every possible position, and kicking up his 
heels in a most extraordinary fashion, till he came close under the 
window, and suddenly stood stock still. And raising his head as 
high as possible in the air, Bobby brayed so long and loud, that 
Mrs. Kearney and Mary and Grace were fain to stop their ears. 
Then Grace laughed her old ringing laugh; and when Barney, 
suddenly remembering that "the misthress was sick," stopped 
Bobby's music by clapping his "caubeen" over Bobby's upturned 
nose, Mary laughed quite as heartily as Grace. And poor Mrs. 
Kearney smiled, and fancied she was quite well again; and could 
almost persuade herself that the shock she got the morning 
everything was seized and driven away, and the stillness and 
desolation of the place ever since, were only the effects of a 
troubled dream.
	Dr. Kiely assured them the accustomed sights and sounds 
about the house would tend greatly to Mrs. Kearney's when be 
thought of this, that Grace saw a deeper shade of sadness come 
into his dark eyes as they involuntarily dwelt upon her recovery. 
And after his second tumbler Maurice was himself again, and 
abused old Isaac Pender and his hopeful son in so superlative and 
original a manner that Grace laughed as much as she did that 
Christmas Day we first made her acquaintance, when, between her 
gravity and her vivacity, Mr. Lowe did not know whether to call 
her a woman or a child.
	Hugh sat at the end of the table, with his hand on the head 
of his favourite pointer. Grace thought, as his dark eyes rested 
upon her, without seeming to see her, that she never saw him look 
so sad. Could it be that what Mary alluded to in her letter had 
anything to do with it?
	He was looking into the future -- the near future, and not 
the distant, as was his wont. The blow that he feared must fall, was 
only delayed. The lease would soon expire; and were they to be 
ejected like Tom Hogan, or the rent raised? In either case certain 
ruin would be the result. Then, he was in debt; and until his uncle 
and Dr. Kiely were paid, he could never have an easy mind. And 
how were they to be paid? there was only one way: and it was  
when he thought of this, that Grace saw a deeper shade of sadness 
come into his dark eyes as the involuntarily dwelt upon her. 
Maurice Kearney's "surprises" were exactly in his old style, and 
had for Grace the double charm of freshness --  after the artificial 
manner of life she had for some time been accustomed to -- and of 
recalling her merry childhood. She was asked to sing, too; and the 
songs and the old tunes recalled the dance and the hurling, and 
Billy Heffernan and his flute, and Mat Donovan and the famous 
drum, and the stalwart youths and blooming maidens around the 
Bush on Sunday evenings, when

You'd swear they knew no other mood
But mirth and love in Tipperary."

	Ah, the cattle and the sheep could be brought hack to 
Maurice Kearney's fields. But can these be ever brought back?



CHAPTER LXIII.

EJECTED. -- THE BAILIFFS IN THE OLD COTTAGE. -- 
BILLY HEFFERNAN PLAYS "AULD LANG SYNE" AGAIN, 
AND THE OLD LINNET SINGS IN THE MOONLIGHT.

	HUGH KEARNEY is in Australia, toiling to make money. 
He is resolved to pay the debt due to his uncle, and that for which 
his generous friend, Dr. Kiely, is responsible. He is determined, 
too, to have a home for his father and mother and sisters, if they 
should require it. But he does not know that they require it even 
now. Sir Garrett Butler made a feeble effort to inquire into the 
condition of his tenantry and the conduct of his agent, but his 
health or his energy failed, and he relapsed into his former habits.
	"He can't live long," said Mr. Beresford Pender to his 
worthy father. "Mrs. Lowe mentioned that the doctors ordered him 
to Italy, so we may as well slap at Kearney at once. He will be 
likely to follow his son to Australia; and 'twill be a matter of 
importance to have possession of the place whatever happens."
	Old Isaac had nothing to object against this, and legal 
proceedings were forthwith taken against Maurice Kearney. He 
had been careful to keep his rent paid up since the seizure of his 
stock for the arrears; but that was no use now, and he was ejected 
for non-title. He had to sell off his cattle and sheep at a ruinous 
sacrifice; but when the sheriff came to hand over the possession of 
his houses and lands to the agent, Mrs. Kearney was so 
dangerously ill that it was found necessary to allow them to remain 
in the house till she was sufficiently recovered to be removed, or, 
what seemed more likely, till she was borne to her last peaceful 
home in the churchyard near the old castle.
	Mrs. Kearney was slowly recovering. But they dreaded to 
tell her that the sheep whose bleating she listened to were not her 
own, but Mr. Beresford Pender's. The tears sprang into Mary's eyes 
as she looked into the little garden, and saw  a sow with her 
numerous progeny lying upon one of the flower beds. There was a 
rude straw shed, also, erected near the rustic seat, which was 
broken and laid across the entrance, to keep in half-a-dozen calves, 
whose heads were thrust under it, as if they had been caught there, 
and could not by any possibility be pulled back again.
	"I think, Mary," said Mrs. Kearney, "as the day is so fine, 
I'll sit out in the garden for a while. I know it would do me good."
	"Oh, I'm sure it will," returned Mary, eagerly. "I'll get your 
shawl. You'll find, if you only take courage, you are much stronger 
than you think."
	She induced the invalid, instead of going to the garden, to 
walk in the lawn in the shelter of the fir-grove. After a turn or two 
they sat down on the trunk of a fallen tree, and nearly an hour 
passed unheeded, as they listened to the cawing of the rooks, and 
the thousand dreamy sounds of the summer noon.
	Mary saw her mother's face brighten as she looked round 
on the dear old place, and her heart sank within her as she thought 
the time had now come when the truth must be told -- that it was 
no longer theirs, and they must soon leave it for ever.
	"Oh," thought Mary, as she watched her mother's 
brightening looks, "how are we to break it to her? I fear it will kill 
her. May God direct us for the best."
	Her father had taken a house in Kilthubber; and at her 
request a good deal of the furniture of the cottage was removed to 
it. She heard Beresford Pender ask him when he was to get 
possession of his house, and she wished that her father should not 
be exposed to such insults any longer than it was absolutely 
necessary. That very day she had persuaded him to go into town, 
and superintend the fitting-up of the new house. She dreaded Mr. 
Beresford Pender 's brutal insolence; and now that her mother was 
sufficiently recovered to leave her room, a visit from that 
gentleman might be expected at any moment.
	"I was dreaming of Hugh last night," said Mrs. Kearney, 
"and of my poor Uncle Dan, God rest his soul. 1 hope It was not a 
bad dream. Mr. Butler -- that is Sir Garrett now --  came in with his 
ebony flute under his arm, and, strange to say, Hugh clenched his 
fist and was going to knock him down, till my Uncle Dan caught 
him by the arm. Then, my Uncle Dan got his violin, and he and 
Mr. Butler played the "Coulin" together. I never heard such 
heavenly music, said Mrs. Kearney, holding her hands together, 
and turning up her eyes to the cloudless sky. "I'm sure it can't be a 
bad dream. Grace ran in and flung her arms about Hugh, and he 
looked surprised! Then a whole lot of ladies and gentlemen took 
hands and began to dance. You were dressed in white and Ellie in 
blue, and ye were the beautifullest of them all. But that Barney,"' 
added Mrs. Kearney, indignantly, "wouldn't stop dancing and 
prancing in and out among them all, and jumping upon chairs, and 
standing on his head, and kicking his feet about, till my mind was 
confused, and I couldn't make head or tail of it. But I know it 
wasn't a bad dream, for the music continued even after that young 
Hanly roared, and poor Miss Lloyd was tumbled head over heels. 
Then Richard began to kick Beresford Pender -- poor Richard was 
always too hasty," sighed Mrs. Kearney, pathetically -- " and there 
was nothing but uproar and confusion. But the 'Coulin' could be 
heard through it all; and that's what makes me think it was not a 
bad dream, at any rate."
	Mary laughed as she pinned her mother's shawl more 
comfortably about her, and said it was she herself who was playing 
the "Coulin" last night, but she touched the keys so lightly, she 
thought the sound could not reach her mother's room.
	"I think you may as well come in and have your broth 
now," said she.
	"You may as well bring it to me here, Mary," her mother 
replied. "'Tis such a beautiful day, and this is such a nice place to 
rest."
	"Oh, very well," returned Mary, " I'll go for it."
	She walked quickly back to the house, in better spirits than 
she had known for a long time. She thanked God that her mother 
was so much stronger than ever she hoped to see her again.
	"If she knew that we must go, and could be reconciled to it, 
I'd feel quite happy," she thought, as she pushed against the hall-
door, which she had left unlatched when coming out. But the door 
was fastened, and she knocked loudly, as the old housekeeper's 
ears were not of the sharpest, and there was no one else in the 
house. There was no response to her knocking, and she went round 
to the back-door, a little annoyed, as she expected to encounter 
some of Mr. Pender's people, who occupied one of the out-offices. 
To her surprise the back-door also was fastened, and on looking 
round she started and seemed quite bewildered! Chairs, tables, 
bedsteads, and household furniture of every kind, were strewn in 
heaps about the yard. The truth at once flashed upon her; 
advantage had been taken of her mother's going out to get 
possession of the house. The discovery almost took away her 
breath; but indignation at so cowardly a trick gave her strength, 
and she walked boldly to the office occupied by Pender's bailiffs 
and servants. That, too, was locked, and she asked aloud was there 
any one within. There was no reply; and the silence and desolation 
of the place filled her with an oppressive sense of fear. But this 
was only for a moment. All her anxiety was for her mother.
	"Oh," said she, covering her face with her hands, "it will 
kill her. If Ellie were at home, or even if I had Judy --  but I know 
they have purposely contrived some plan to get the poor old 
woman out of the way -- I might be able to do something." She 
was on the point of giving way to despair, when her eye rested on 
Norah Lahy's chair. Snatching it up between her hands she hurried 
back to her mother.
	"The broth is not ready, mamma," said she, "and Judy is 
gone somewhere. You'd be tired sitting on that hard tree, so I 
brought you this chair."
	"Oh, 'tisn't strong enough for me," said her mother, "I'm too 
heavy for it."
	"Oh, 'tis quite strong. It was Mat Donovan made it, and 
there is a wooden frame inside the straw. You'll find is very 
comfortable; I was often thinking of bringing it to your room."
	"Well, bring it down to the hedge. I saw a wasp going into 
a hole at the root of this tree, and I suppose I there is a nest there. 
I'm always afraid of wasps since my Uncle Dan got the sting in the 
eye-brow, and it swelled up till you'd think he hadn't an eye in his 
head. That's why I was always against keeping bees; though Mrs. 
Donovan  tells me not one in her house ever got a sting, but one 
Mat got when he grabbed at a bee that got entangled in Bessy 
Morris's hair. Oh, I declare 'tis a very nice chair. I think I'll stay out 
till your father comes home, and he'll be surprised. He said he only 
wanted to see Wat Murphy about some sheep he bought, so I 
suppose he won't be long."
	The allusion to Mrs. Donovan suggested to Mary that the 
best thing she could do was to get Nelly to assist her. Mat, she 
knew, was with her father fitting up the house in town.
	Nelly and her mother were quite startled when Miss 
Kearney told them what had happened. Nelly's first suggestion was 
to "choke" old. Isaac without a moment's loss of time. But, 
remembering that this summary proceeding was not practicable 
just then, old Isaac not being in the way, she let down her apron -- 
which she had tucked up as if the choking business were to be 
done on the spot -- and became more calm.
	"Sure I can break in the doore, Miss," said Nelly.
	"Oh, no," returned Mary, and she could not help smiling, 
"that would not do. Darby Ruadh and the rest of them are in the 
house, I am sure. I think the best thing we could do is to get 
mamma over here, until my father comes with the car. And if she 
can bear the shock, Mrs. Donovan could talk to her about old 
times, and that would cheer her. But she is not strong enough to 
walk."
	"I'll run over for Billy and the mule," exclaimed Nelly, 
flinging her cloak on her shoulders. "He's at the big dhrain to-day -
- an' sure 'tis at the same dhrain he is every day a'most for the last 
twelvemonth."
	As Nelly was starting off to the bog for Billy Heffernan, the 
old housekeeper came in, vowing vengeance against "that limb uv 
the divil," Darby Ruadh, who had told her that Honor Lahy wanted 
her in all haste, and off she ran, and never "cried crack" till she 
reached the "barrack," and found Honor did not want her at all.
	"Never mind, Judy," said Mary, soothingly. "Anything such 
people would do need not surprise you. Come with me now, as I 
may want you."
	Mary was quite alarmed to find Mr. Beresford Pender 
standing in front of her mother's chair, while his father shuffled up 
and down behind him, rubbing his face. But, to her surprise, 
instead of bullying and insulting her mother, the worthy pair were 
bowing to her with every sign of the most profound respect, and 
assuring her how much they regretted that she had been put to even 
the slightest inconvenience, while poor Mrs. Kearney looked from 
one to the other quite bewildered.
	"'Twas all a mistake, Miss Kearney," said Beresford, 
turning to Mary. "The rascals acted without my orders. But I am 
after telling them to leave the house, and the furniture will be put 
back again at wance."
	"What is it, Mary?" Mrs. Kearney asked, faintly.
	"Something the bailiffs have been doing, I believe," she 
replied. "But it appears it was a mistake."
	"Making another seizure?" returned her mother, with a 
frightened look. And Mary, thinking she was going to swoon, put 
her arms round her, assuring her again it was all a mistake.
	"All a mistake, Mrs. Kearney," said Beresford.
	"All a mistake, Mrs. Kearney," old Isaac repeated.
	"Good morning, Mrs. Kearney," said Beresford, with a low 
bow.
	"Good morning, Mrs. Kearney," said old Isaac, with. 
another low bow.
	Though somewhat reassured by their obsequiousness, Mrs.. 
Kearney was alarmed, and said she feared they were "bent on some 
villainy."
	Billy Heffernan's services were not required. But Nelly 
Donovan's appearance in his lonely house that day, he afterwards 
confessed, first put the thought into his mind, that it would be 
pleasant, after all, to have some one to welcome him home on 
summer evenings and winter nights. And that same night, as Kit 
sat winking at the moon, after a luxurious tumble on a heap of dry 
turf dust, the remains of last year's rick, certain sounds reached her 
ears to which she had been so long unaccustomed, that she 
wakened up and switched her tail three several times. And though, 
except the tail, not a muscle moved, it was quite evident that Kit 
was going through a. series of very wild gambols in her own mind. 
Her master, for the first time since Norah Lahy's death, took down 
his flute from the elk's horns upon which it hung, and played "Auld 
Lang Syne." Then, putting back the flute, he went out and paced up 
and down through the rushes, feeling uneasy and excited. Was he 
going to forget her, he asked himself. And if she knew his thoughts 
would she not reproach him with her dark eyes? But then he 
recalled her words the evening he ran to tell her that Mat Donovan 
was not killed by the falling of the hay-rick, and remembered bow 
fond she always was of Nelly. He felt he could not sleep in the 
state of mind he was in; and instead of going to bed at once, he 
thought he might as well walk over to Honor Lahy's for his usual 
supply of meal.
	"God save all here! " said Billy Heffernan; "'tis a fine 
night."
	"God save you kindly, Billy!" returned Honor and Phil 
together; "sit down." They were sitting near the window, watching 
the moon as it peeped over the beech-tree. Billy sat down in his old 
place on the bench. And as the moon rose higher and higher above 
the free, the light fell on the place where Norah used to sit, and the 
thought occurred to each of them that she was looking at them 
now.
	"God save ye," said another voice, in a low, subdued tone, 
"'tis a beautiful night." It was Nelly Donovan, who sat down 
exactly where Norah used to sit, and, resting her chin on her hand, 
gazed up at the moon, with a softness in her eyes that Billy 
Heffernan had never noticed in them before. The dreamy sadness 
of their looks changed suddenly to astonishment. The old linnet 
began to sing that low sweet song of his; though his voice had 
never before been heard except in the day-time.
	Honor Lahy made the Sign of the Cross, evidently viewing 
the incident in a supernatural light.
	"There's somethin' goin' to happen that Norah'd be glad 
uv," said she.
	And as Billy Heffernan continued to look into Nelly 
Donovan's eyes, he remembered still more distinctly what Norah 
had said about his leading so lonely a life, without one to care for 
him.
	"There is Mat," said Phil. "I'll run out and ask him is there 
any news."
	"Somethin' is up," was Mat's reply. "'Tis reported the 
Penders forged Sir Garrett's name to a bill in the bank. I don't say 
'tis thrue, for I met Darby Ruadh with his coat off, runnin' to hire a 
car; an' he wouldn't tell me where he was goin' if they wor makin' 
off. But there's somethin' up."
	This rumour created great excitement; and the few of old 
Isaac's victims who still remained in the country indulged in wild 
hopes that the day of retribution had come. Among these, we need 
scarcely say, was Maurice Kearney, who hoped that if the agent 
were proved to be a knave, the landlord would not only give him 
back the possession of his farms, but compensate him for the injury 
he had suffered. And, though by no means so sanguine as her 
father, even Mary felt a presentiment that brighter and happier 
days were at hand, when she looked from her window next 
morning, and missed the sow and the calves from the little garden, 
and saw that all Mr. Beresford Pender's flocks and herds had 
disappeared from the fields.



CHAPTER LXIV.

A CONSPIRACY. -- THE "COULIN. " -- MISS LLOYD WANTS 
TO KNOW ALL ABOUT IT. -- VISIONS OF HAPPY DAYS.

	"COME, Arthur, let us have a walk," said Edmund Kiely.
	"Where shall we go?" Arthur O'Connor asked, laying down 
his book.
	"Oh, to the Priest's Walk," replied Edmund. "That is the 
best place to see the sun setting behind the castle."
	"If you don't hurry, the sun will be gone down," Father 
Carroll observed, looking, not towards the setting Sun, but in quite 
an opposite direction, towards the turn of the road, where a car had 
just come in view.
	It was evident that his reverence and Edmund were deep in 
some conspiracy, of which Arthur was to be kept in ignorance. 
But, quite unsuspicious of the plotting of his friends, he drew on 
his gloves and followed Edmund towards the river.
	He looked stronger and happier now than when last he 
stepped over those moss-covered stones. But, though his face 
lights up now and then, its prevailing expression is gloomy.
	"Strange to say," Edmund remarked, "I have not yet got rid 
of the feeling that we are destined to be rivals."
	"And what reason have you for thinking so?"
	"No reason; it is only a feeling."
	Their eyes met, and in both there was a look of suspicion.
	"A very foolish feeling," Arthur observed, after a pause. 
They passed beyond the Priest's Walk, and into the pleasure-
grounds near the castle; and Arthur stopped short as a strain of 
low, sweet music fell upon his ear.
	"I thought these people were away on the Continent," said 
he.
	Edmund did not reply. He was watching the play of his 
friend's features, which changed from indifference to surprise, and 
then softened into melancholy.
	"That air reminds you of something," said Edmund. "Well, 
it does," returned Arthur O'Connor, and his pale cheek became 
crimson for an instant.
	"Of the day you heard it in Tramore?
	"Yes."
	Edmund dropped into a rustic seat near him, looking quite 
miserable.
	"I suppose it can't be helped!" he exclaimed at last. "And 
the sooner 'tis over the better. But it is a bitter drop in the cup 
which I thought would be unmixed bliss."
	"Is it raving you are?" Arthur asked.
	"Now, Arthur, you know you are thinking of her!"
	"Thinking of whom?"
	"The person of whom that air has reminded you."
	"Well, suppose that is the fact," returned Arthur, reddening 
again, "what then?"
	"'Tis a most extraordinary fatality," said Edmund, quite 
distressed. "Though you only saw her that one time."
	You are most certainly taking leave of your wits," returned 
Arthur. "Of course I saw her often since."
	"You never told me that," exclaimed Edmund, looking up 
in surprise. "And she never gave me the least hint of it."
	"Why, you saw me in her company repeatedly yourself," 
Arthur replied, looking as if he were really anxious on the score of 
his friend's sanity. "Perhaps Father Carroll's whiskey is too much 
for you?"
	"My dear Arthur," cried Edmund Kiely, springing to his 
feet, "I have been making a fool of myself. It is not of the same 
person we are thinking at all. Let us go back. It is getting late, and 
Father Carroll may think we have been spirited away by some one 
of the numerous supernatural visitants who haunt the Priest's Walk 
after nightfall, if Mrs. Hayes is to be believed."
	The candles were lighted in the priest's parlour when they 
reached the cottage. Arthur O'Connor stood still, looking quite 
bewildered, when he opened the parlour door, and saw the most 
gloriously beautiful girl he had ever beheld standing before him 
and smiling through her tears. She advanced as if she found it 
impossible to restrain herself, and clasped his hand in hers, while 
the big tears that sprang into her eyes when she first looked at him 
rolled down her cheeks. He looked to Edmund for an explanation, 
but that gentle man only rubbed his hands gleefully, evidently 
enjoying his friend's bewilderment.
	"She is gloriously beautiful," thought Arthur, as he 
surveyed her splendid figure, and then looked inquiringly into her 
dark lustrous eyes.
	"You don't remember me," she said in a clear, musical 
voice.
	"I must have seen you before," he replied; "but I can't 
recollect when or where."
	An old man, with long white hair and slightly bent figure, 
advanced from behind Father Cleary's high-backed arm-chair, 
where he had been standing unobserved by Arthur, and stood 
beside the lovely girl, holding an ebony flute in the hollow of his 
left arm, and looking at Arthur with a plaintive smile.
	"I remember now," said Arthur, appearing more bewildered 
than ever, as the old gentleman shook him by the hand. At this the 
tears sprang into the young lady's eyes again, and then she and 
Edmund exchanged looks and laughed.
	But all the laughing was not to be on Edmund's side, and he 
looked almost as astonished as Arthur, when Father Carroll led 
forward another lovely girl, of the mild and statuesque and not of 
the glowing sort like the first, who now caught her by the hand; 
though it was plain they had met that evening before. It was the 
first time that she and Arthur had met for years; but each read in 
the eyes of the other what the reader must have guessed by this 
time.
	"My dear Miss Kearney," exclaimed the dark beauty, "how 
much I regret I did not know who you were that day at the seaside. 
And to think that the young abb, as I have always called him, was 
my own cousin! It is like a romance. I never heard the 'Coulin' 
since that I did not think of both of you."
	"I know now," said Edmund, "of whom the 'Coulin' 
reminded you."
	"Yes, and I have some faint notion of what you were 
driving at," returned Arthur. "But who is she?"
	Before he could answer, Edmund felt a little hand glide into 
his, and turning round, he caught his sister Grace in his arms.
	Father Carroll looked on, rubbing his hands in silence, and 
congratulating himself upon the success of his part of the plot, 
when Mrs. Hayes came in and whispered some words to him. He 
went to the white-haired old gentleman, who, buried in the high-
backed armchair, seemed to be quite unconscious of what was 
going on around him, and started as if from a dream when the 
priest addressed him.
	"Tell the servant to come in," said Father Carroll.
	Mrs. Hayes withdrew, and a liveried functionary 
immediately appeared, looking so solemn and dignified that Grace 
asked Mary in a whisper, was he the bishop.
	"Did I not tell you that I could not see that person? said the 
old gentleman. 
	"Yes, sir," returned the dignified personage, with a slight 
bow, and turning his toes more out, "but when I saw he was 
determined to come over after you I thought it right to come and 
tell you." But the dignified functionary said nothing of the half-
crown in the pocket of his plush breeches.
	"You may as well see him," said Father Carroll.
	"Very well," returned the old man, with a helpless sigh, as 
if he were quite incapable of thinking for himself.
	The servant retired; and when the door was again opened, 
the ladies were startled to see Mr. Beresford Pender rush in and 
fling himself upon his knees. 
	"Mercy, mercy, Sir Garrett!" he blubbered. "Don't transport 
me." 
	"I have nothing to do with it; you must see my lawyer," 
returned Sir Garrett Butler, trying to push back his chair, which 
was already against the wall.
	"I'll be transported, I'll be transported -- Ooch! whoo! boo!" 
And Mr. Beresford Pender burst into a hideous howl.
	"I can do nothing. I have allowed myself to be deceived too 
long," said the baronet more firmly. "I fear I have much to answer 
for, for all the wrong that has been done in my name."
	"'Tis forgery, 'tis forgery," cried Beresford, looking one 
after another into the faces around him. "Mercy, Miss Butler, 
mercy!" he blubbered, dragging himself across the room on his 
knees, causing the young lady to take refuge behind a chair, as he 
was about prostrating himself at her feet.
	'Tis all my father's fault; 'tis all my father's fault," he 
whined, dragging himself back again to where the baronet sat; "I'm 
innocent, I'm innocent, Sir Garrett. Ooh! hoo! whoo!"
	"Do you see the face at the window? " Grace asked in a 
whisper. "Who can it be?"
	"Perhaps some one who has been attracted by all this 
roaring," returned Mary. "'Tis a woman's face."
	"Yes; and she has contrived to convert her nose into a badly 
baked pancake against the glass -- oh, my goodness, the window is 
broken! "Grace exclaimed, as the face vanished, and the broken 
glass fell upon the floor. But Mr. Pender's bowls for mercy 
prevented any one else from noticing the accident.
	"I think you bad better withdraw," Father Carroll 
suggested, "or stand up at least." But it was no use. Beresford 
howled and blubbered, till there was nothing for it but to eject him 
by force. Edmund and Arthur advanced for that purpose, but both 
shrank in disgust from touching the grovelling creature, and Tom 
Doherty was called in. Tom quietly flung Mr. Pender on the broad 
of his back, and was pulling him away, when an assistant appeared 
upon the scene in the person of our friend Barney Brodherick, who 
jumped between Beresford's legs, and catching a shin in each hand, 
like the shafts of a wheelbarrow, started off round the table -- that 
being easier than a short turn -- and swept out through the door 
with such speed, that Tom Doherty was left standing on the spot 
where his prisoner was snatched from him, staring in utter 
bewilderment, till Beresford resumed his roaring -- which the 
celerity of his exit had silenced --  outside the hall-door. Then Tom 
Doherty walked out, scratching his head as if even still he thought 
the affair rather puzzling.
	"Begob, Barney," said he, "you made short work uv him."
	"The divil a thing I'd rather be doin' thin whalin' him," 
returned Barney. " But I'll never sthrike a man down."
	"Don't lay a hand on him," muttered a gruff voice; and 
Barney was pushed rudely aside, coming violently into collision 
with a female, who at the moment ran round the corner of the 
house.
	"Oh, my gracious!" she screamed, grasping at Barney as 
both tumbled to the ground. 
	"D--n your sowl, let me go," muttered Barney, "an' I'll 
smash every eye in his head." 
	"Can't you tell me what it is all about?" she gasped, panting 
for breath, and fastening her hands in Barney's shirt front like the 
claws of a kite.
	"Where's his hat?" Darby Ruadh asked, after pulling his 
master to his feet.
	Mrs. Hayes flung out the hat from the hall.
	"Come away out uv this," Darby continued. "Didn't I tell 
you there was no use comin' here? An' you know you have no time 
to lose." 
	Barney forced open the claws that held him in a spasmodic 
clutch, and was rushing headlong to take instant vengeance for the 
insult he had received, when he was stopped by Tom Doherty.
	"Never mind him, Barney," said Tom, "come an' finish 
your supper an' tell us about that letther from Mister Hugh. I'm 
glad he's doin' well."
	"Dear Mr. Pender," exclaimed a voice, just as Beresford 
had got into the covered car that was waiting for him on the road, 
"do tell me what it was all about."
	"Blast your eyes," Darby Ruadh whispered into his master's 
ear, "now is your time; you'll never have a betther chance. Tell you 
all about id? " he continued, turning to the lady. "Av coorse. An' 
why not? Here, come in here, an' I'm the b'y that can tell you all 
about id." And he lifted her into the car and told the driver to drive 
on.
	"Oh, don't drive on -- "
	"Never mind. We'll let you down at the gate. Sure I knew 
you wor at the major's. An' glad I was whin the butler towld me 
Miss Isabella an' the captain wor well, an' doin' well, in Ingy, an' 
that they wor shortly expected home. 'Twas the wondher uv the 
world whin the captain married Miss Isabella instead uv you, until 
we learned how it was, an' that you refused him."
	"Dear Mr. Pender, don't squeeze me so hard. And please 
take care of my nose or 'twill begin to bleed again."
	"Can't you talk?" muttered Darby. "Wan'd think you hadn't 
a word in your gob."
	"No surrender," said Beresford.
	"Oh, please, don't," she said faintly. "I hope we have not 
passed the gate."
	"An' you want to know all about id," continued Darby. "Oh, 
yes. What was it all about? And why was he shouting so 
dreadfully?"
	"Faith an' sure no blame for him to shout, whin that ould 
rascal wanted to make him marry his daughter in spite uv him. 
'No,' says Misther Beresford, 'I'll never marry a woman but the 
wan that I always had the love in my heart for,' says Misther 
Beresford; 'though 'tis little she suspects it,' says he. 'So for God 
'lmighty sake, Sir Garrett Butler,' says Misther Beresford,' don't ax 
me.' Wasn't that enough to make any man roar?"
	"Oh, 'twas dreadful!"
	"'I'll die like the mules, Darby,' says Misther Beresford to 
me, 'if I don't get the on'y wan I ever loved,' says he."
	"Don't hold me so tight, please," said the lady.
	"Don't blame him, Miss," returned Darby. "'Tis little you 
know all he's afther goin' through on your account."
	"On my account!"
	"Oh, bedad I'm afther lettin' the cat out uv the bag," 
exclaimed Darby. "Afther he warnin' me never to tell a word uv id 
to man or mortal."
	"Oh, I'm sure we have passed the gate," said the lady. 
"Never mind, my darling," returned Beresford. "Don't you know 
that I'd die for you. No surrender is my motto." And they drove on 
-- whither the young lady did not inquire.
	"Only think, Miss Kearney, I once almost worshipped that 
man as the most valiant of heroes," said Miss Butler, when 
Beresford's howling had ceased. She looked and spoke so piteously 
that Edmund burst into a loud laugh. "Indeed yes," she continued. 
"My aunt Lowe used to show me his letters. Cousin Henry was in 
the country at the time, and we thought you all -- particularly your 
eldest brother -- very bad people indeed. But Mr. Pender was in my 
eyes a most gallant and chivalrous gentleman."
	"Yes, he and my friend, the abb, were my only dangerous 
rivals," said Edmund.
	"And to think the abb was my cousin!" added Miss Butler, 
with a beaming look at Arthur; "and that he knew my beloved 
mother. And that we should meet in this old cottage where she was 
married. Did you ever read of any thing more romantic in a book?"
	"Really, Edmund," Grace observed, "you ought to make it 
the subject of a drama or a novel. It has every requisite for it."
	"Except the sensational," said Edmund.
	"Oh, that could be easily managed. Suppose you have her 
fall from the cliffs, when you were in pursuit of her along the 
shore, into the angry, roaring waters. Her shrieks bring her father 
to the spot. He gazes down into the deep, dark whirlpool, with a 
gesture and a cry of anguish and despair. She is seen to rise for a 
moment to the surface, and is again engulfed in the remorseless 
waves. He is about flinging himself after her, in the madness and 
agony of the moment, when you appear. You plunge boldly into 
the roaring, raging, seething surges, and, diving to the bottom, you 
are not seen for -- say a minute and a half -- which will be an age, 
of course, to the agonized spectators."
	"You have given me only one spectator," Edmund. 
interrupted.
	"Oh, I am thinking of the readers -- or the pit, boxes, and 
gallery."
	"Well, I bring her up of course," said Edmund.
	"Not the first time, I think," returned Grace, seriously. 
"You must keep them on the rack. You should dive at least three 
times before you bring her up. Then, with one arm encircling her 
waist, you buffet the mad waves with the other, and, after a 
desperate struggle, reach the dark, beetling rock that towers above 
you -- as high as you please -- and as you cling to it, a huge 
fragment gives way and falls with a crash like thunder into the 
whirling billows. You are lost. But no; again you are seen 
buffeting the waves, but instead of struggling against the receding 
tide, you are borne out to sea, and raising your arm aloft, while you 
rise and sink upon the heaving billows, and the lightning flashes 
through the frowning sky above you, you shout for help. The hardy 
fishermen bear your cry. A boat is launched. They pull vigorously 
through the foaming surf -- and so on. Nothing is easier than the 
sensational, to my mind. You might bring in a shark or two if you 
liked, and be met by a mad bull on the way home, or something of 
that sort."
	"And then, I suppose, it would all end in half a dozen 
happy marriages? " said Father Carroll, laughing.
	"As it is likely to do in reality," returned Grace, "at least 
with a couple of happy marriages."
	Mary blushed, and looked so distressed that Grace was 
sorry for what she had said.
	"We'll send for Mr. Lowe, who, of course, will be a rich 
nabob, and give Grace to him," said Edmund.
	"And I suppose," Arthur remarked, "Mr. Beresford Pender 
will be the villain of your novel?"
	"Oh, not at all," replied Grace; "he would not make even a 
respectable villain."
	"You used to say Hugh Kearney would make an excellent 
brigand," said her brother.
	"Papa had a letter from him lately," returned Grace, looking 
grave. " He has had a severe attack of illness, but was recovering."
	"I fear he means to settle down permanently in Australia," 
said Mary. "He wishes to have Willie brought home, but he says he 
would rather be a merchant than a farmer."
	"I hoped to have Hugh for a neighbour," Edmund 
remarked, "and if he does not come home it will be a sore 
disappointment to me. But, after the turn things have taken now, I 
am sure you can prevail on him to come home."
	"It was the case of that poor man Tom Hogan that first 
opened my eyes," said Sir Garrett. "If it were not for that, more 
wrong would have been done in my name. But I'm glad Mr. 
Kearney has escaped."
	"But how did you become acquainted with Sir Garrett 
Butler?" Arthur asked, turning to Edmund.
	"Oh, when you hear it all, it will be an interesting story," he 
replied. "You know the beginning of it in the old flute-player. The 
very day you left for Paris, Annie saw me, and sent a servant to 
learn my name in Kingstown; but I didn't know who she was for a 
long time after. I'll tell you all another time. We must see them 
home now. Will you venture to go back by the Priest's Walk?"
	"Oh, certainly," Miss Butler replied. " It will be delightful 
in the moonlight."
	"Was it Sir Garrett's flute we heard in the evening? Arthur 
asked.
	"Yes, that was a plan of mine," replied Edmund. "I wanted 
to know would it remind you of the incident in Tramore. By 
George, I little thought what good reason you had for remembering 
it," he added, glancing at Mary "I was quite frightened at the 
thought that it was of Annie you were thinking. It is as Grace says, 
really like a novel. And if I should think of founding a story on it, 
what ought it to be called?"
	"I think the 'Coulin' would be a suitable title," returned 
Grace.
	"Is Flaherty the piper alive, and in the country? " Sir 
Garrett asked.
	"Oh, yes," replied Father Carroll. " I met him lately at 
Father M'Mahon's."
	"I am very glad," rejoined the baronet. "I must have him at 
Woodlands. It was he first inspired me with a love of our native 
music."
	"Cousin Henry told me about him," said Miss Butler. "He 
met him at a country wedding. Miss Lloyd reminded me of it to-
day. She wants me to write to cousin Henry, and as much as say 
that she will go back with him to India if he comes for her, and that 
he will get twice as much money as Captain French got with her 
sister."
	"Come, you must be off to bed," said Father Carroll. "Miss 
Butler will be sure to play the siren and these gentlemen won't be 
back for two hours yet."
	"And why are you in such a hurry?" Mary asked.
	"Simply, because I must sleep on the sofa," he answered, 
"and will have to say Mass at seven in the morning."
	"Well, don't forget to close the shutters," said Grace. 
"There is a pane broken in the window."
	Mary did not sleep much that night. She was too much 
agitated to be happy. Grace, too, was restless enough; but she is a 
"mystery"; and we must leave her to unravel herself.
	"We are all quite alarmed about Miss Lloyd. She can't be 
found anywhere," said Miss Butler, who met Mary and Grace on 
their way home next morning. "They are afraid she followed us to 
Father Carroll's and fell into the river."
	"No, Miss," answered Barney Brodherick, who was driving 
the car, "she went home be the road."
	"How do you know?" Mary asked.
	"Sure I see her, Miss," Barney answered, "cuttin' away as 
fast as her legs could carry her. She kem into the kitchen to put 
cobwebs to her nose."
	"Cobwebs to her nose?"
	"Yes, Miss, her nose was bleedin'. 'Twas gettin' the 
cobwebs that delayed me from goin' to help Tom to pull out 
Pendher."
	"Why, Mary, it was she was at the window," exclaimed 
Grace.
	"I must go tell them," said Miss Butler. "They are searching 
the deep pools in the river; and a messenger has been sent to her 
brother's."
	Neither Mary nor Grace was disposed for talking on the 
way.
	"Ah, that 'Good-bye' came from his heart," thought Grace 
as they passed the turn of the road that brought them in view of the 
cottage.
	"Mary," she asked, "do you remember the day I came away 
from Ballinaclash with papa and Eva, and Richard and Mr. Lowe? 
It was the day old Mr. Somerfield died."
	"Indeed I do," replied Mary. "I felt very lonely after you all. 
And you never came after, till mamma got ill. I used to think of 
that day as the last of the old 'happy days.'"
	"The old happy days will come again," said Grace.
	"I hope so," returned Mary. "Things look so bright now, I 
am almost frightened by the visions of happiness I have."
	Maurice Kearney's voice was heard shouting to his work 
men in his old style; which so delighted Barney that he grinned 
from ear to ear, and made up his mind to earn a "ballyragging" as 
soon as possible for himself.
	"My poor father!" said Mary. "It is dreadful to think how 
near he was to being driven for ever from those fields. And there is 
mamma superintending the feeding of the young turkeys. I really 
begin to hope she will be as strong as ever again."
	"You will be as happy as ever," said Grace.
	"I hope so. And yet there is one great drawback. I don't 
think I can ever be happy while Hugh is far away, and among 
strangers."
	"Why did he go at all?" Grace asked.
	"Ah, you don't know him, or you would not ask. He went 
for our sake. He has all the old debts paid off. It is I that know 
what a sacrifice he has made. He is too generous, too noble."
	The tears rushed into her eyes; and Grace clasped her by 
the band, and held it so tight that Mary looked at her in surprise. 
But Grace took no notice.
	"Oh, you're home very early," said Mrs. Kearney. There's a 
letter for you, Mary, from Australia. I was so impatient, I'd open it, 
only for you are home so soon."
	Mary jumped from the car, and ran into the house, followed 
by her mother and Grace; all eager to know the contents of the 
letter from Australia.



CHAPTER LXV.

MAT DONOVAN FOLLOWS GRACE'S ADVICE; BUT BESSY 
MORRIS IS GONE. -- HONOR AND PHIL LAHY IN THEIR 
NEW HOME.

	A YOUNG merchant jumped from an omnibus opposite the 
General Post Office, and, after glancing at his watch, hurried down 
Sackville Street with the air of a man who had no time to spare. 
Before he had got half-way down the street, how ever, he stopped 
short, after passing a tall, broad-shouldered countryman, who was 
standing opposite a shop window. There was something in the fine 
manly figure of the countryman that might well have arrested 
anyone's attention; and the young merchant smiled on observing 
how intent he seemed in examining the newest styles in bonnets 
and artificial flowers. He touched the rustic connoisseur upon the 
shoulder with the end of his umbrella; and, after a start, and a look 
of surprise, there was a warm shake-hands, and mutual expressions 
of pleasure at the meeting.
	"How are they all at home? " the young merchant asked. 
"All well, sir," was the reply. "'Tis younger your father is gettin'. 
I'm afther sellin' two fine stall-fed fat cows for him -- I didn't see 
betther at the market. An' faith, Wat Murphy'll have an argument 
against us; for when all expenses are paid, 'twon't be a crown a 
head more than Wat offered. I sold a fine lot of bullocks for Mr. 
Kiely; no betther. But he spares no expense in buyin' the best 
stock; an' Woodlands is as good fattenin' land as there's in the 
county."
	"I saw in the papers that they had an increase in the family 
at Woodlands, and that it is a son this time."
	"So they had, sir. But they wor all sure you'd be down to 
the christenin' at Docthor O'Connor's."
	"Well, I was not able to go. How is my mother now?
	"She's very sthrong, then; on'y for the lowness o' spirits. 
But Miss Ellie can get great good uv her; an' when Miss Grace 
happens to be at Docthor O'Connor's or at Woodlands she'll send 
for her, an' the misthress'll be as gay as a lark in less than no time."
	"Come down to the warehouse with me," said the young 
merchant. "I want to know all about everybody."
	The countryman looked once more at the window, the 
display of flowers and feathers seeming to possess some 
extraordinary attraction for him, and, after glancing up and down 
the street, as if he would fain linger where he was, could he only 
find a reasonable excuse, walked on with the young merchant.
	"I had my mind made up to call to see ye," said he, "as I 
have the day to myse'f till the six o'clock thrain."
	"This is Mat Donovan, sir," said Willie Kearney to his 
uncle, when they reached the warehouse.
	"Oh, how are you?" said the merchant. "I hope all our 
friends in Tipperary are well."
	"All as well as you could wish, sir," Mat answered.
	"I was very much interested in your case," Mr. Kearney 
observed, "that time you were charged with robbing old Pender. 
Hugh wrote to me about it, and I was glad to have it in my power 
to be of some use to you."
	"I had good friends, sir," returned Mat. "But I suppose you 
heard ould Isaac confessed before he died that it was Beresford an' 
Darby Ruadh that took the money in ordher to have an excuse for 
robbin' Sir Garrett Butler, God rest his sowl."
	"Why didn't Sir Garrett follow up the prosecution against 
them?" the merchant asked. "I was hoping they would be both 
transported."
	"Well, when Beresford made off, the ould father confessed 
all, an' gave up some uv the plunder, an' as he was so near his end, 
they left him so."
	"Where is the son now?
	"In Queensland, or somewhere off in that direction," 
replied Mat. "We heard nothin' about him since Misther Lloyd paid 
the two thousand pound. An' faith, Misther Bob'd be in the coorts 
like Sam Somerfield and the rest uv the landlords down there, on'y 
that Tom Ryan and Ned Brophy, an' a few more uv the tenants, 
made up the money an' lent it to him. He was just afther payin' his 
other sister's fortune to Captain French, when Beresford's attorney 
slapped at him. The tenants'd be sorry to lose Misther Bob, an' 
these new landlords are such screws. Every wan was sorry for poor 
Major French, an' his fine place went for nothin'. But do you think 
will Misther Hugh ever come home, sir?"
	"I think he will. I have written to him to say it would be for 
his own interest as well as for the interest of the whole family."
	"We're sure uv him so," Mat replied with a delighted look. 
"Whatever is for their good he'll do id. Many's the good turn I 
knew Hugh to do; an' 'tis little talk 'd be about id."
	"Hugh Kearney is a man," said the merchant.
	"He wouldn't be his father's son if he wasn't a good fellow," 
returned Mat.
	"He's worth a ship-load of his father," exclaimed the 
mcrchant.
	"Come this way, Mat," said Willie, showing him into his 
office. "You have not told me half the news yet. Has Barney that 
thrush's nest with which he used to cheat me,. still?
	"He coaxed a bull-dog pup from Wat Murphy's son wud the 
same nest a few weeks ago," returned Mat. "Wat came out an' there 
was the divil's row. Peg Brady was rearin' the pup wud the calves 
unknownst to any wan, till Wat came out for him, an' said he 
wouldn't give him for the best fat sheep your father had. We expect 
that Peg and Barney'll be married shortly."
	"I had a letter from Tommy Lahy lately," said Willie, "and 
he reminded me of Barney, and all the old neighbours."
	"I'm tould, like yourself, sir, his uncle is afther takin' him 
into partnership."
	"Yes; their house is one of the most respectable firms in 
Boston. It was about an order for Irish linen he wrote to me."
	"'Twas no later than last Sunday," returned Mat, "that the 
schoolmaster remarked, after readin' Phil's speech, that yourse'f an' 
Tommy Lahy wor the two innocentest boys he ever initiated into 
the sciences, as he said; that ye wor no way crafty, an' could be 
chated out of your marvels wud the greatest facility, an' your 
castle-tops came in for the most hannels; an' now ye are the two 
richest men belongin' to the parish."
	"What's that you said about a speech?"
	"Wan that Phil Lahy made at a great Temperance meetin'," 
Mat answered. "An' the divil a finer speech was made there. He 
sent the paper to Billy Heffernan. An' sure I remember when Phil 
an' Billy wor the two greatest dhrunkards in Knocknagow, except 
Jack Cummins, that used to bate his wife, an' that's what Phil never 
done; an' Billy had no wan to bate but his mule. But it was poor 
Norah done id all."
	"I often think of Norah," said Willie. "I knew her chair in 
Mary's room the moment I saw it."
	"An' Nelly has her slippers," returned Mat, "hangin' at each 
side of the crucifix at the head of her bed, wud her beads in wan 
an' a bit of palm in th' other. An' if you go into the churchyard uv a 
Lady Day in harvest you won't be long lookin' for Norah's grave, 
for not an inch uv id that won't have a flower on id. Nelly an' Billy 
dhresses the grave every Patthern-day as sure as the sun shines. 
But didn't Tommy say anything about his father an' mother?
	"Yes; he said they were well; but that his mother was 
always pining for home. I have no doubt it is that grave you 
mention that makes her wish for home."
	"Poor Honor! she was the heart an' sowl uv a good 
woman."
	"Tom asked how the mocking-bird he sent Ellie was going 
on."
	"He's a fine singin' bird," replied Mat solemnly. "She sent 
him over to Billy Heffernan's to have Nelly take care uv him while 
she was at the wather wud Mrs. O'Connor and Mrs. Kiely, an' he 
picked up the whistle uv the plovers an' the curlews, so that he'd 
bother you sometimes. He frightens the life out uv Mrs. Kearney 
when he screeches like a hawk. She says he's not right; an' faith my 
mother has the same notion, an' thinks the lads in the forth has 
somethin' to do wud him. But is that Lory Hanly wud the bag?" 
Mat asked, looking through the window.
	"Yes; he's going to the Four Courts. I suppose you know he 
is a barrister. He is getting on very well."
	"Oh, I know, sir. He was cheered in Clonmel afther gainin' 
the law for a poor man the landlord thought to turn out. That was a 
fine letther against the land laws his father wrote in the papers. An' 
'twas a hard case to be turned out uv his place afther all he lost by 
id, for no raison but because the new landlord wanted to have a 
residence on his property. But the divil a word he had to say that 
poor Tom Hogan hadn't to say; an' id come out whin ould Isaac 
was dyin' that Hanly bribed him to put out Tom Hogan an' give the 
farm to himse'f."
	"It appears he did not see the injustice of the law till it came 
to his own turn to feel it," said Willie. "His daughter is married to a 
Mr. Wilson, a friend of mine."
	"Maybe 'tis Johnny Wilson, that was in the bank?" Mat 
asked.
	"The same," returned Willie, "and you will be likely to 
have him in Kilthubber, as manager of the same bank soon. His 
wife is very anxious to go there, as she and Mrs. O'Connor were 
great friends."
	"So they wor," said Mat. "An' the other sister was a grand 
girl."
	"Yes, she is still to the good, and looked upon as a great 
beauty."
	"I'll have a bag-full uv news for Miss Grace," said Mat. 
"But I must run an' get a letther uv credit for this money, as I don't 
like to have so large a sum about me. But I'll call in again on my 
way to the railway."
	After getting the letter of credit, Mat Donovan made 
straight for the same window where we found him a few hours 
before, and which had bloomed into brighter and more varied 
splendour in the meantime, as if the flowers there displayed were 
alive and real and felt the influence of the sun. But this would 
scarcely be enough to account for the absorbing interest Mat 
Donovan seemed to take in that shop-window. Could it be that he 
wanted to make a purchase? It would seem so, for, after 
deliberating with himself for some minutes, he walked into the 
shop. But then he seemed to have forgotten what brought him 
there, and looked a little puzzled and embarrassed.
	"What can I do for you?" asked a smiling young lady inside 
the counter, surveying him with a look of kindly encouragement.
	Mat looked about him, and, after a long pause, asked for "a 
ribbon to put in a bonnet." The ribbons were displayed, and one 
selected and neatly folded in white paper; and seeing that the 
young lady laughed in spite of herself Mat, as he put the parcel in 
his pocket, thought fit to set her right and remove an erroneous 
impression, by remarking carelessly that it was for a sister of his, 
who was as fond of ribbons as ever she was, though she had "three 
or four childher at her heels." But Mat evidently wanted some 
thing else, and, in reply to the question whether she could do 
anything else for him, he told her to show him a broad, thick 
ribbon.
	"'Tis for an ould woman's cap -- for my mother I want id," 
said Mat Donovan. And the young lady inside the counter did not 
laugh now, but rather looked pensive and melancholy. Perhaps she, 
too, had an old mother in some Munster valley, who wore a broad 
ribbon over her cap. This purchase was folded up and paid for, too; 
but still Mat Donovan lingered.
	"I think you are from Tipperary," said the young girl.
	"Well, I am," he replied. "Though I don't know how people 
can know I'm a Tip. But you are right; I am from Tipperary."
	"So am I," said she.
	"Well," returned Mat, resting his elbow on the counter, "I 
was tould a neighbour uv mine was employed in this 
establishment, an' if so, I'd like to see her before I go home, as 
some uv her relations would be glad to hear how she is."
	"What's her name?"
	Mat Donovan rubbed his hand over his face, which made 
him look quite flushed, and, after making several unsuccessful 
attempts to pick up a very diminutive pin from the counter, 
answered, "Bessy Morris."
	Yes; she is here; but I didn't see her for the last week. I'll 
inquire." And after much delay, and sending up and down stairs, 
Mat Donovan walked out with Bessy Morris's address written on a 
slip of paper.
	After many turnings and windings, and inquiries, Mat 
Donovan found himself in an out-of-the-way street in a very poor 
neighbourhood.
	"Number seven," said he, glancing at the paper. "It must be 
the small house, wud the hall-doore. An', sure enough, thim white 
curtains is what I'd expect to see wherever Bessy 'd be. 'Tis a clane, 
snug little house, though there's nothin' but dirt an' poverty all 
around id."
	His hand trembled and his heart fluttered, like a very 
coward, as he knocked at the door. Several minutes passed before 
it was opened, and he had his hand on the knocker again, when it 
occurred to him that the house was so small it was impossible that 
the first knock was not heard; and he waited for another minute. At 
last the door was opened, and Bessy Morris stood before him. She 
was very pale and thin, but as captivating as ever. But how calm 
and collected she was; and not in the least surprised to see him! 
And though he felt the pressure of her hand, his reception, he 
thought, was very cold indeed, considering how long it was since 
they had met before. But he did not know that she had seen him 
from the window, and sat down and covered her face with her 
hands for a moment; and then ran to the glass, and hurriedly 
arranged her hair, and tied a ribbon round her neck, before she 
opened the door. He walked in and sat down, and replied to all her 
questions about her friends in the country. And then she told him 
how her aunt's only son, who was a sailor, had been drowned not 
long before, on one of the American lakes, and she feared his 
mother would never recover the shock the intelligence of his death 
caused her.
	"She has been so very ill for the last week," said Bessy, 
"that I am obliged to stay with her continually. If she does not get 
better soon, I must try and procure some work that I can do in the 
house."
	"An' how do you get your health yourse'f? " Mat asked.
	Well, indeed, pretty well; but I am a little worn-out now. I 
am very glad to hear that your mother and Nelly are so well."
	"Will we ever have a chance of seein' you in Knocknagow 
again? " he asked, with his old smile.
	She shook her head sadly, but made no reply. But a dreamy 
look came into her eyes, as if she were thinking of the days that 
were gone.
	"I needn't tell you that we'd be all glad to see you," he said.
	"I don't know that, Mat," she replied with another sad shake 
of the head.
	"Don't know id! "rejoined Mat Donovan; and his broad 
chest heaved -- but he could say no more.
	"Are you as fond of songs and music as ever, Mat?" she 
asked, as he stood up, and held out his hand to say good-bye.
	"Well, I am, then," he replied. "Miss Grace of'en plays a 
tune for me, an' so does Miss Ellie. But nun uv 'em can touch Mrs. 
Kiely. I never hear the like of her!"
	She handed him a little book, and, turning over the leaves, 
he said, "This is an elegant song-book."
	"Keep it for my sake," returned Bessy, with her old 
winning smile, as she clasped his hand with energy, and hurried 
back on hearing her aunt's voice, calling to her.
	The next day Mat Donovan was at Woodlands with the 
price of the cattle he had sold for Edmund Kiely. Grace brought 
him in as usual to play some of his favourite airs for him.
	"Do you remember the day of Ned Brophy's wedding, 
Mat," said she, "when you asked me to play that tune for you?"
	"I do, well, Miss," he replied.
	"Mr. Kearney wanted you to win a wife with a fortune," 
she continued. "But now that you are making money so fast as a 
cattle dealer, why do you not get married?"
	"I was asked the same question in Dublin about yourse'f, 
Miss," returned Mat, "an' I couldn't answer id."
	"Who asked you?"
	"Bessy Morris," he answered. "She warned me not to forget 
to remember her to you and Mrs. O'Connor, an' how ye used to 
have many a talk in the little room in the cottage."
	"So we used," returned Grace, thoughtfully. "I remember 
the day she told me the legend of Fionn Macool and the Beauty 
Race. Is Bessy herself married yet?"
	"No, Miss," he replied. "She's not married." Grace's fingers 
ran carelessly over the keys, as she watched Mat Donovan from the 
corners of her eyes. He had covered his face with both hands and 
leant forward on the table near which he was sitting.
	"I used to say long ago that you were fond of Bessy," said 
she. "Now, tell me candidly, was I not right?"
	"You wor right, Miss," he answered, unhesitatingly; for 
there was something in her manner that invited confidence, and he 
sorely needed sympathy. She went on questioning him with so 
much tact and delicacy, that she got the history of Mat Donovan's 
"whole course of love" from him, even from the time when he used 
to toss the cherries over the hedge to Bessy Morris, on her way 
from school.
	"Mat," said Grace, "you should have told her."
	"I was too poor, Miss," he replied. "An' seem' so many 
respectable young fellows about her, I thought id would be no use. 
An' besides, though she was always nice and friendly, she never 
cared much about me."
	"Take my advice, Mat, and tell her; and you'll find you are 
mistaken."
	"Do you think so, Miss?" he asked eagerly.
	"It is impossible," returned Grace, with emphasis, "that she 
could be indifferent to such love as yours."
	"In the name uv God," said Mat Donovan, after a long 
pause, "I'll take your advice."
	Before many weeks had elapsed, Mat Donovan stood again 
at the door of the small house in the out-of-the-way street. He 
knocked with a firm hand this time, and there was no fluttering of 
the heart as on the former occasion; for he had his mind made up 
for the worst. But there was no answer to his summons.
	"She must be out," he thought, "an' maybe the ould woman 
is keepin' the bed still, an' I believe they have no wan in the house 
but themselves." He glanced at the windows, and it immediately 
occurred to him that the white curtains were gone, and then he saw 
that the shutters were closed.
	"She's dead," said a woman, who came to the door of the 
next house, and found him looking at the windows.
	"Dead!" he exclaimed -- and the colour flew from his cheek 
-- " who is dead?"
	"The old woman," was the reply; "an' she had the 
beautifulest coffin I ever seen leavin' the street. They wor dacent 
people."
	"An' the young woman?" he asked, drawing a long breath.
	"Well, I don't know where she's gone; but she left for good 
the day after the funeral."
	He hurried to the shop in Sackville Street, but could only 
learn from the proprietress that Bessy Morris had given notice that 
she could not return to her employment there; for which they were 
very sorry, as she was an excellent work-woman.
	"Might there be e'er a comrade girl uv hers in the house, 
ma'am, that could tell me anything about her?" poor Mat asked in 
his bewilderment.
	Inquiries were made, and a young girl came down to the 
shop and told him that Bessy was a particular friend of hers.
	"An' could you tell me where she is?" he asked.
	"She's gone to America," was the reply.
	"To America!" he repeated, in so despairing a tone that the 
young woman raised her eyes to his face, and said:
	"You are Mat Donovan?"
	"Well, that is my name," he replied absently.
	"She was thinking of writing to you," returned the young 
woman.
	"Was Bessy thinkin' of writin' to me?"
	"Yes; but she changed her mind. She was thinking, too, of 
writing to Mrs. Dr. O'Connor, somewhere in the County Care, I 
think, but she didn't know the address."
	"I thought I tould her we had Docthor O'Connor, in 
Kilthubber since Father Carroll got the parish," replied Mat. "But 
how long is she gone?"
	"She only left for Liverpool on Monday. The name of the 
ship she was to go by was the 'Ohio.' I was with her getting her 
passage ticket at the agent's."
	"Where was that?" he asked eagerly.
	"Eden Quay," she replied, "but I forget the number."
	The agent told him that unless some delay occurred, he 
would have no chance of catching the "Ohio" in Liverpool, as she 
was to have sailed that same day. But there was a chance, and next 
morning, in the grey dawn, Mat Donovan was hurrying along the 
docks of Liverpool, staring at the forest of masts, and looking 
round for some one who could tell him whether the "Ohio" had yet 
sailed for America.
	"The 'Ohio'?" replied a sailor who was returning to his 
vessel, evidently after being up all night. "Yes, she sailed for New 
York at four o'clock last evening."
	Bessy Morris was gone!
	"But sure 'tis long ago she was gone from me," he thought, 
as he rested his elbows on a pile of timber, and gazed at a vessel in 
the offing. "When is id that she wasn't gone from me? An' for all 
that, I feel as if she was never out uv my sight till now, that she is 
gone for ever. He stood there like a man in a dream, he did not 
know how long, till the noise around him, and the lading and 
unlading of the vessels commenced, roused him, and turning from 
the busy scene he strolled listlessly into an unfrequented street, and 
wandered on, on, merely wishing to pass away the time, and to be 
alone, till one o'clock, when the steamer was to leave for Dublin.
	"Lend me a hand, if you plaze," said a man, with a heavy 
trunk on his shoulder, in an accent which placed it beyond all 
doubt that the speaker was a Munsterman. The trunk was laid upon 
the pavement, and the man dived into an arched doorway, pulling 
off his hat and making the Sign of the Cross. Mat looked up at the 
building, and saw that it was a Catholic church. He entered, and 
kneeling in front of the altar, offered up a short prayer. As he rose 
from his knees, his attention was attracted by a young girl coming 
out of one of the confessionals. She knelt, or rather flung herself 
down upon the stone floor, and with hands clasped almost 
convulsively, raised her streaming eyes to the picture of the 
Crucifixion, over the altar. Her pale face told a tale of suffering, 
and misery, and sore temptation, which there was no mistaking.
	"My God!" thought Mat Donovan, "maybe that's the way 
Bessy will be, afther landin' in a sthrange counthry, wudout a 
friend, an' maybe sick an' penniless. Oh, if I could on'y do 
somethin' for her; if I could know that she was well an' happy, I'd 
be satisfied." Acting on the impulse of the moment, he walked 
towards the priest, who, after looking up and down the church, and 
seeing no other penitent requiring his ministry, was on his way to 
the sacristy. On seeing Mat approaching, he went back to the 
confessional.
	"'Tis to ax your advice I want, sir," said Mat. "Bein' an 
Irishman an' a sthranger in this place, I'd like to get your advice 
about somethin' that's throublin' my mind very much." And he told 
his story from beginning to end; and how "she was always in his 
mind," and how he never thought of any one else as he used to 
think of her -- though he never expected she'd be anything to him 
more than a friend -- they being neighbours and neighbours' 
children. And now what ought he do? He wouldn't mind crossing 
over to America for her sake no more than he'd mind crossing the 
street. And did his reverence think be ought to go?
	"I don't like to give an opinion in such a case," replied the 
priest. "You should not forget your mother and your sister, and it 
may be the young woman would not respond to your feelings, and 
might not require your assistance. But on the other hand she may, 
and probably will have to encounter severe trials, alone and 
friendless among strangers, and you might be the means of saving 
her."
	"That's id," Mat interrupted, fairly sobbing aloud, as he 
glanced at the poor girl on her knees. "'Twould break my heart."
	"In the name of God, then," continued the priest, "do as 
your heart prompts you. You seem to be a sensible man, not likely 
to act rashly or from a light motive. And at the worst it will be a 
consolation to you to think that you did your best for her. And it 
might be a source of much pain to you, if any misfortune happened 
to the young woman to think that you might have saved her and 
neglected to do so."
	"Thank you, sir," replied Mat. "Your advice is good."
	He left the church a happier man than he had been for many 
a day before. On passing a small print-shop within a few doors of 
the church, the well-known portrait of Daniel O'Connell, "the man 
of the people," caught his eye, and Mat stopped short, feeling as if 
he had met an old friend. And, while looking into the "Liberator's" 
face with a smile almost as full of humour and pathos as his own, 
the writing materials displayed for sale in the window reminded 
him of the necessity of communicating his intention of going to 
America to his mother.
	"Miss Grace is the best," said he, after pondering over the 
matter for some time. "I'll tell her as well as I can, an' lave id to 
herse'f to tell my mother, and there's no danger but
she'll manage i d all right," So he wrote to Grace that he would 
start by the first ship leaving Liverpool for the United states -- 
which the man in the print-shop informed him was the "Erin" for 
Boston -- in pursuit of Bessy Morris.
	Mat Donovan counted the hours as the good ship sped upon 
her way across the great ocean. Never before did he think the days 
and the nights so long -- not even when he lay a prisoner in the jail 
of Clonmel. The vessel was crowded with Irish emigrants, and 
many an "o'er-true tale" of suffering and wrong did he listen to 
during the voyage. But as they neared the free shores of America, 
every face brightened, and the outcasts felt as if they had seen the 
end of their trials and sorrows. Alas! too many of them had the 
worst of their trials and sorrows yet before them. But it was only 
now Mat Donovan began to see how difficult, how almost 
hopeless, was the enterprise he had embarked in. He had no clue 
whatever by which he could hope to trace Bessy Morris. And his 
heart died within him at the thought that he might spend a life-time 
wandering through the cities of the great Republic, sailing up and 
down its mighty rivers, or travelling over its wild and lonely 
prairies, without finding her.
	"Where am I to go or what am I to do?" he said to himself 
as he stood alone on one of the principal streets of Boston. 
Suddenly he remembered Tommy Lahy, and it was like a ray of 
hope to think that he had at least a friend at hand to consult with. 
He had no difficulty in finding the extensive concern in which 
Tommy was now junior partner. But when in answer to his 
inquiries he was told Mr. Lahy had sailed for Europe only two 
weeks before, Mat felt more disheartened than ever.
	"Can I see his uncle?" he asked, recovering from his 
disappointment.
	"Yes, come this way," replied the clerk.
	The merchant received him civilly, and when Mat told him 
he was from Knocknagow, and asked, as Mr. Lahy was gone to 
Europe, could he see his father and mother, they being old friends 
and neighbours, the merchant replied of course he could, and very 
glad, he was sure, they would be to see him. "As for Mrs. Lahy -- 
who, I suppose you know, is my sister -- we can't make her feel at 
home in this country at all," he continued. "But she is more 
contented since Tom has got a house in the country, where she can 
keep a cow and fowl, and grow potatoes and cabbages. It is only 
about a mile outside the city, and you will have no trouble in 
finding it."
	Following the directions given him by the merchant, Mat 
soon found himself at the door of a handsome house in the 
suburbs. He knocked, and the door was opened by a smart-looking 
young woman, who looked inquiringly into his face.
	"Is Mrs. Lahy wudin?" he asked.
	"O Mat Donovan!" she exclaimed, the moment she heard 
his voice; and catching him by both hands she pulled him in; and 
Mat found himself sitting in a nicely furnished room before he had 
recovered from his surprise.
	"Is id yourse'f, Judy?" he asked, looking round the room 
and wondering why it felt so hot, seeing that there was no fire -- 
the stove being an "institution" with which Mat had yet to become 
acquainted.
	It was the same Judy Connell who had caused such dire 
confusion, by forgetting to shut the door behind her, in Mat 
Donovan's kitchen, that windy winter's night long ago, when she 
ran in to "take her leave of them."
	Judy told him that Mrs. and Mr. Lahy would be in soon. 
They had only gone to visit a poor woman whose husband had 
broken his arm by a fall from a scaffolding. Mrs. Lahy was always 
finding out poor families in distress. Judy herself had a situation in 
one of the principal hotels in the city, but she always felt unhappy 
among such crowds of strangers, and so she asked Mrs. Lahy to 
take her, and now her mind was easier than ever it was since she 
came to America. Mrs. Lahy was like a mother to her; and besides, 
she had the same wages she was getting at the hotel, which was a 
great advantage, as she was able to send as much as ever home to 
her poor old father -- besides feeling so comfortable and happy.
	And Judy ran on with astonishing volubility, asking 
innumerable questions, and answering them all herself. Her 
intimate knowledge of everything concerning her present 
neighbours was amazing; but Mat opened his eyes in wonder when 
she detailed minutely and correctly every important event that had 
occurred in the parish of Kilthubber, since the day she left it down 
to the eviction of the Hennessys, which happened only three weeks 
before, and the election of poor-law guardians for the division of 
Knocknagow, on the head of which several black eyes were given 
and received in the city of Boston.
	Here Mat managed to edge in a word, as Judy's voice 
subsided into an inarticulate murmur -- she having caught her poll-
comb between her teeth, while twisting up her hair, which had 
suddenly fallen down -- and assured her that the election in 
question passed off quite peaceably at home, Mr. Kearney having 
nearly all the votes. The new landlord, who lived in Attorney 
Hanly's handsome house, set up a candidate in opposition to 
Maurice Kearney, but got no one to vote for him but his own 
tenants, who were few and far between. So that Mat Donovan was 
greatly astonished to hear that there had been a fight on account of 
the election of a poor-law guardian for Knocknagow in the city of 
Boston; and managed to say so before Judy Connell's tongue had 
room to go on again.
	"Here they are," she exclaimed, sticking the comb in her 
poll, and running to open the door.
	And how Mrs. Lahy raised her hands in wonder, and 
welcomed Mat Donovan, as if he had dropped down from the sky!
	Mrs. Kearney going to second Mass on an Easter Sunday 
was never a more respectable-looking woman than Honor Lahy, 
Mat thought. But she was the same Honor Lahy still, for all that. 
And as for Phil, dressed as he was in a suit of superfine broadcloth, 
and carrying a varnished walking-stick in his gloved hand -- why, 
only for the shirt-collar, which was as high and as stiff as ever, Mat 
Donovan would not have believed his own eyes, that that old 
gentleman ever made a blue body-coat with gilt buttons for him.
	"I'm glad to see you, Mat," said Honor. "Proud an' happy I 
am to see you sittin' in that chair. But ye're all lavin' Ireland -- all 
lavin' the ould sod. 'Tis of'en I said to mese'f, when my heart used 
to be breakin', thinkin' how lonesome the ould place was -- 'tis 
of'en I said Knocknagow was not gone all out so long as Mat 
Donovan was there. I used to think uv yourse'f an' your mother 
standin' in your nice little garden, an' lookin' down to the beech-
tree, an' thinkin' of them that was far away; an' of poor Norah; an' 
maybe takin' a walk to the churchyard uv a Sunday evenin' an' 
offering up a prayer at her grave. I always knew," continued Mrs. 
Lahy, who was quite as well-informed as her handmaiden of all 
that had passed in her native place since she left it, "I always knew 
Miss Mary an' Billy Heffernan would have luck. I knew heaven 
would reward them for all their kindness to my sufferin' angel. An' 
glad I am that they are well an' doin' well. An' I know they'll all be 
glad to see Tommy, for he promised me faithfully he wouldn't 
come back wudout payin' a visit to the ould place; an' sure 'tis well 
to have any wan at all left there to welcome him after the scourgin' 
the counthry got." And Honor buried her face in her hands and 
wept silently.
	They were all silent for some minutes. Mat wished to say 
something, but did not know how to begin. Phil tapped the lid of 
his silver snuff-box, and took a pinch. And as for Judy Connell, 
she seemed to have run down like a clock, and could do nothing 
but stare at the window, and pant for breath.
	"Ye're all lavin' Ireland," Honor repeated, as if to herself.
	"If they are," Phil observed, "it is because the invader won't 
allow them to live there. The Celts are gone with a vengeance, says 
the London Times. An' the English Viceroy tells us that 
Providence intended Ireland to be the fruitful mother of flocks and 
herds. That is why our people are hunted like noxious animals, to 
perish in the ditch-side, or in the poorhouse. That is why the 
floating coffins are crossing the stormy Atlantic, dropping Irish 
corpses to the sharks along the way, and flinging tens of thousands 
of living skeletons on the shores of this free country. That is why 
the last sound in the dying mother's ears is the tooth of the lean dog 
crunching through the bones of her infant --"
	O Phil, Phil, stop!" his wife cried; " 'tis too terrible to listen 
to."
	"Woman, it is true," he replied. "And England -- whose 
duty it was not to allow a single man, woman, or child to die of 
hunger -- when this glorious Republic offered to send food to the 
starving Irish if England would send her idle war-ships to carry it -
- England refused, and let the people starve, and now shouts in 
triumph that the Cells are gone with a vengeance. But mark my 
words," continued Phil Lahy, rising to his feet, and gracefully 
extending his right arm, while the left rested on the back of his 
chair -- "a day of retribution will come --

"'The nations have fallen, but thou still art young.
Thy sun is but rising, while others have set;
And, tho' slavery's cloud o'er the morning hath hung -- 
The full noon of freedom will beam round thee yet.'

And I say, Mat Donovan, if you could live in tolerable comfort at 
home, you had no right to desert your country."
	"Well, I'm not desertin' Ireland," replied Mat. " I didn't 
come to this counthry wad the intention of remainin'."
	They all looked at him in surprise; and, after some 
hesitation, he told them the object of his voyage, adding that he 
feared he'd have his journey for nothing.
	Judy Connell mentioned some twenty or thirty different 
places, to which, for one reason or another, Bessy Morris would be 
likely to go. But, after reflecting for a minute or two, Phil Lahy 
said:
	"Lave it all to me, Mat, an' I'll manage it. Don't think of a 
wild-goose chase all over the States. It would be madness. Stop 
here for a few days with us and rest yourself. An' I'll get a few 
lines in the papers that'll be sure to come under her notice 
wherever she is. I needn't give her name in full if you like. But a 
few lines under the head of 'Information Wanted' will be sure to 
make all right. So make your mind aisy, an' let us have a walk 
while supper is gettin' ready, an' we'll drop in to the editor, who is 
a particular friend of mine."
	"That's a good advice, Mat," Honor observed, eagerly. 
"You'd be only losin' your time an' your money for nothin' if you 
went huntin' about the counthry. An' twill do us all good to have a 
long talk about ould times. So make up your mind and stay for a 
week or two wud us, an' you may depend on Phil that he'll find 
Bessy even if he was to go to the bishop himse'f."
	It was so agreed; and Judy Connell and her mistress -- if we 
may use the word -- set about the supper, and so astonished Mat 
Donovan by the display he found spread out before him on his 
return from the city, that he was afterwards heard to declare that he 
"didn't know what he was aitin'."
	About ten days after, Mat Donovan found himself in the 
sitting-room of a private house on the shore of one of the great 
lakes "out West." He had inquired for Bessy Morris, and was 
shown into this room.
	"This is a grand house," said he to himself. "I never see 
such a lot of big lookin'-glasses. I wondher is id in service she is? I 
thought she'd be more likely to go on as she was in Dublin. But 
sure she might be employed that way here, too, I suppose."
	The door opened, and Bessy Morris stood before him! She 
looked surprised, quite startled, indeed, on seeing him. Then her 
eyes sparkled, and the blood mounted up to her forehead; and with 
the old winning smile, she advanced and gave him her hand.
	"My goodness, Mat!" said, she, "what a surprise it is to see 
you so soon. When did you come to America?"
	"I on'y landed in Boston the week before last," he replied.
	"Well, will wonders never cease?" returned Bessy.
	A pretty little girl here came into the room, and Bessy 
desired her go and shake hands with an old friend of hers from 
Ireland. And as she glanced up into his face, Mat said to himself 
that she was the "dead image" of the little girl to whom he used to 
toss the cherries over the hedge, once upon a time.
	"I will be back to dinner at the usual hour " said a 
gentleman, who advanced a step or two into the room. "I'm in a 
hurry, as I ought to be at the store before now."
	"This is Mat Donovan," said Bessy.
	"I'm glad to see you," returned the gentleman, shaking 
hands with him. "You have done well to come out West. Irish 
emigrants make a mistake by remaining in the towns and cities, 
when they ought to try at once and fix themselves in permanent 
homes in the country. Of course you will keep him for dinner, 
Bessy. We'll have a long talk, and I'll be glad to give you all the 
assistance I can. Good-bye for the present."
	He hurried away, and Mat looked inquiringly at Bessy.
	"Don't you know he is my father?" she asked. "He was 
unsuccessful for a long time after coming to America. Then he was 
told that I had died when a mere child, and he put off writing to his 
father from year to year, till he thought the old man must be dead 
too; and having married again, he never wrote to Ireland till, 
reading the account of the loss of the vessel in which my aunt's son 
was a sailor, he learned her address from a letter found upon my 
cousin's body when it was washed ashore. And this prompted him 
to write to my aunt. The letter only arrived the day before her 
death; and in my impatience to meet my long-lost father, I lost no 
time in coming to him. He is very well off, quite rich indeed, and I 
have every reason to be satisfied with his reception of me. The 
little girl is his youngest child."
	"God knows, I'm glad uv id!" exclaimed Mat Donovan, 
thawing a long breath. "I was afeard you might be wudout a friend, 
an' maybe in bad health; for you didn't look sthrong at all that day I 
called to see you."
	"I suffered a good deal while my aunt was sick," replied 
Bessy. "No one knows all I have gone through since poor 
grandfather's death. But, thank God, it is over. And so far as my 
father is concerned, my most sanguine hopes have been more than 
realised. I am the mistress of his house, and he says he must make 
up in the future for his neglect in the past. I am very glad to think 
that he can be of service to you, Mat, if you settle down in this part 
of the country."
	"I'm not goin' to stay," returned Mat. "'Twouldn't do to lave 
my poor mother. An', as Phil Lahy says, no man ought to lave 
Ireland but the man that can't help id."
	She looked at him in unfeigned astonishment; and Mat 
became quite confused, and regretted that he had said so much.
	"You did not come to America with the intention of 
remaining?" she asked.
	"No, I never had any notion of stayin' in America," he 
answered absently. "God be wud you," he added, rising and 
holding out his hand.
	She placed both her hands in his, and continuing to look 
earnestly into his face, said:
	"But you will come back and see my father again?"
	"Well, maybe I would," he replied with a sorrowful smile, 
as he clasped her hands tenderly between his. "An' when ever you 
think uv ould times, an' the ould neighbours, I hope you'll 
remember that Mat Donovan uv Knocknagow was your friend, 
ever an' always, Bessy. Ay," he added, gulping down his emotion, 
"a friend that'd shed the last dhrop uv his blood for you."
	He rushed out of the house, leaving Bessy standing in the 
middle of the room, as if she were spell-bound.
	"Call him back, Fanny," she said hurriedly to her little 
sister. "Tell him I want to speak one word to him."
	The child overtook Mat Donovan before he had gone many 
yards from the house, and brought him back.
	"Mat," said Bessy Morris, speaking calmly and thought 
fully, "was it you got the advertisement in the paper? I thought it 
might be a girl I knew in Dublin, who came out last summer."
	"Well, id was," he answered.
	"And you came to America for nothing else but to find 
me?"
	"I thought you might want a friend," he stammered. "And 
you are going back again?" she continued, coming close to him, 
and laying her hand on his arm, just as she laid the same hand on 
the sleeve of the blue body-coat in Ned Brophy's barn.
	"What else would I do?" he answered, sadly. "And have 
you nothing else to say to me?" she asked, dropping her eyes.
	"O Bessy, don't talk to me that way," returned Mat, 
reproachfully. "Where would be the use of sayin' more?"
	She moved closer to him, and leant her head against his 
broad chest, which heaved almost convulsively as she did so.
	"Mat," she murmured, "I will go with you."
	"Go wad me!" he repeated, with a start.
	"And be your wife," she added, in a whisper that thrilled 
through his whole frame, making him feel faint and dizzy.
	"Do you know what you're sayin'?" he asked, recovering 
himself.
	"I do, well," Bessy replied.
	"Look around you," he continued. "An' then think uv the 
poor thatched cabin on the hill uv Knocknagow."
	"I have thought of it," she replied. "I have often thought of 
that poor cabin, as you call it, and felt that if ever it was my lot to 
know happiness in this world, it is in that poor cabin I would find 
it."
	Both his arms were round her now, and he held her to his 
breast.
	"God bless Miss Grace," said he; "'twas she advised me to 
tell you all."
	"What did she say?" Bessy asked.
	"She said that you couldn't be indifferent to such love as 
mine," Mat answered, with his old smile.
	"And she was right," returned Bessy.
	"But are you sure, Bessy, this is no sudden notion that you 
might be sorry for?" he asked anxiously.
	"As sure as that I am alive," she answered.
	"Oh, you must let me go out to have a walk in the open 
air," Mat exclaimed. "My heart is too full; I'm smotherin'." He 
hurried out to wander by the shore of the lake, and think over his 
great happiness, and thank God for it.
	"And so, Bessy," exclaimed her little sister, who had been a 
wondering spectator of the foregoing scene, "you're going to marry 
a greenhorn. Though Colonel Shiel admires you so much, and 
wants you to go to the hop with him."
	"Yes, I am going to marry a greenhorn," returned Bessy, 
catching the child up in her arms and kissing her. "And who knows 
but you will come to see me to dear old Ireland yet; and find me in 
a pretty thatched cottage, with a fine old cherry-tree in the garden, 
and lots of beehives; and such a dear, kind old mother to take care 
of them."
	"Yes, that will be nice. I shall go to Ireland to see you," 
returned the child, placing a hand on each of Bessy's cheeks and 
looking into her eyes. "I shall like the thatched cottage and the 
beehives very much."
	"And you will like the greenhorn, too, I am sure."
	"Yes, I think so. But it was so foolish for such a big fellow 
to be crying like a child."
	"Was he crying, Fanny?"
	"Indeed yes. When I overtook him at the end of the block 
he was crying. I'm sure he felt real bad. And now you are crying, 
too," added the child.
	"It is because I am so happy, Fanny," Bessy replied. "I am 
so happy that I will go now and kneel down and pray to God to 
make me worthy of the love of that big, foolish greenhorn."
	"I guess you Irish must be always praying."
	It is good to pray, Fanny."
	"Yes, of course, once in a while. But have you got two 
cents? Thank you. I'll go right away to the candy-store; and if I 
meet the greenhorn I'll give him some, and tell him to be a good 
boy and stop crying, and sister Bessy will marry him."
	"Well, there he is under the trees," returned Bessy, 
laughing. "And remind him that twelve o'clock is our dinner hour."



CHAPTER LXVI.

ONLY A WOMAN'S HAIR. -- MORE WEDDINGS THAN ONE 
-- A HEART AS "BIG AS SLIEVENAMON." -- BEAUTIFUL 
IRELAND. -- THE SORT OF A WIFE THAT BARNEY GOT.

	"POSITIVELY, Mary," exclaimed Grace, "Tommy Lahy -- 
as I suppose we may still call him between ourselves -- is about the 
nicest fellow I ever met."
	"And your old weakness for nice fellows is as strong as 
ever, I dare say," returned Mrs. O'Connor, smiling.
	"A strong weakness!" rejoined Grace; "that's not bad. But, 
really, he is so handsome, and so manly and intelligent -- "
	"And rich," Mary added.
	"Well, of course that is worth counting, too. Even papa says 
he never met a more intelligent young man. It is really a treat to 
talk to him."
	"Yes, I have noticed that you think so," returned Mary. "Ye 
seem to like each other's society very well, indeed. But is he in the 
toils in downright earnest?"
	"No," she replied, shaking her head; "he does not seem to 
be very susceptible."
	"And what am I to think of that handsome and expensive 
ring on your finger?"
	"Nothing; only that he admires me."
	"And suppose he more than admired you, how would it 
be?"
	"Well, though I scarcely ever knew any one else so much to 
my taste in every way," returned Grace thoughtfully, "I believe I 
could not love him. In fact I sometimes think I have no heart. And 
only for papa I'd follow Eva."
	"There was a time," said Mary, "when I used to say the 
same of myself."
	Grace bent her head, to hide the blush which she felt 
stealing into her face, and, walking to the window, seemed to take 
great interest in the movements of the magpies in the elm-tree. 
Perhaps she was thinking of the evening long ago, when Tommy 
Lahy peeped into the magpie's nest before throwing down Mat 
Donovan's coat, after he had emerged from under the fallen hay-
rick.
	"I suppose," she observed, "you know we are to have 
Kathleen Hanly at Woodlands to-night, and Lory. I never can call 
him anything but Lory. He protests he admires me as much as ever, 
and if I only have patience till he gets his silk gown, he will lay 
that coveted garment at my feet."
	"I am very glad to have Rose for a neighbour," said Mary.
"I always liked her, and was delighted when Mr. Wilson was 
appointed manager of the bank."
	"Johnny Wilson, an' you love me," returned Grace; "let us 
speak of them all as we used to do in the old times. I wonder does 
Adonis think of Kathleen still? I was greatly amused by Mrs. 
Captain French's account of the tiger hunt. Only to think that 
Richard and Mr. Lowe -- or let me say Adonis and Apollo -- 
figured so conspicuously in it! It is a pity Mr. Lloyd was not with 
them."
	"Hugh was very sorry," Mary observed, "that Richard 
should go into the army. Arthur has written to him, strongly 
recommending him to come home. But I really fear he would not 
be contented."
	"He might if he could retain the uniform," rejoined Grace. 
"He came to see me -- or rather to let me see him --  before he went 
away. And if ever mortal man soared into the seventh heaven upon 
a pair of epaulettes, that man was Surgeon Richard Kearney, of the  
--th Lancers. I asked him did he think Annie handsome, and he 
only stared at me. He could think of nothing but his new uniform."
	"Hugh was greatly struck by Annie," Mary observed. "He 
says she is the most splendid woman he ever saw."
	"Yes, she does strike people at first; but it wears off after a 
while."
	"Edmund does not think so," returned Mary.
	"Well, no; he is as enthusiastic as ever. But Edmund is 
essentially an enthusiast. He is half out of his wits, he is so glad to 
have Hugh at home. I pity the poor snipe and partridges."
	"Why don't you apply the same rule to Hugh as to the 
others, and call him Fionn Macool?" Mary asked. "Do you 
remember giving him that name?"
	"Indeed, yes," returned Grace, pensively. "And how 
distinctly I remember the day in your room when Bessy Morris 
said I could not have given him a grander name, though I by no 
means meant to be complimentary. Were you frightened, Mary, 
when you saw him so awfully thin and worn? I thought he had 
only come home to die. But papa said he would be as strong as 
ever again. And he is wonderfully improved during the last few 
weeks."
	Mary clasped her hands together, and turned her mild blue 
eyes upwards, but made no reply.
	"But where is he now?" Grace asked.
	"Writing in his own room," Mary replied. "He has little 
Grace with him. He is very fond of little Grace."
	"Oh, between little Grace's prattle, and her mother's 
singing," returned Grace, with a frown, "he has no time to devote 
to other people."
	"I'll go tell him what you say," rejoined Mary, laughing.
	"You have kept the old writing desk during all your 
wanderings," she observed, on entering Hugh's room.
	"Yes," he replied; "I have brought it with me everywhere."
	"Oh! and you have kept this, too?" she exclaimed, opening 
a loosely folded paper she had carelessly taken from the desk.
	"Yes, of course," he replied, smiling, on seeing what she 
had discovered.
	"And is it really somebody's that you care for?"
	"Well, it is," he replied, gravely; but he reddened 
immediately, and would have recalled the words if he could.
	"And can't you tell me who it is? Do I know her?"
	"Oh, you must ask no more questions," he replied, 
snatching at the paper.
	But she was too quick for him, and carried it off in triumph.
	"Here is that mysterious lock of hair," said Mary to Grace, 
who was still standing at the window, gazing at the mountains. 
"Can you unravel the mystery, as you did that of the tracks in the 
snow?"
	"I can't imagine who it can be," she said, after looking for a 
moment at the tress of hair.
	"He admits it is somebody he really cares for," said Mary. 
Grace scrutinised the hair again, and as her own hair fell down on 
her hand while she did so, Mary observed:
	"It is very like your own. But what is that written on the 
paper?"
Grace looked sharply at the half-obliterated pencilling, and said, 
"Oh, yes. 'Only a woman's hair ' -- Swift, you know --  

"'The passioned tremble of the heart
That ripples in the little line -- 
"Only a woman's hair."'

But he has made a change which is by no means an improvement. 
He has -- 'Only a girl's hair.'"
	"There is something else written under it," said Mary.
	"Yes, it is the date. 'January 9, 18--.'"
	The words swam before her eyes, and she fell senseless 
upon the floor. Mary caught her up, and placed her upon a low 
chair, by the side of which she had fallen. She was about to cry out 
for assistance when Grace's bosom heaved, and her eyes opened.
	"Oh, what has happened to you?" Mary asked anxiously.
	"O Mary," she replied as if she were just awaking from a 
deep sleep, "it is my hair."
	Mary could only look the surprise she felt.
	"Do you remember," continued Grace, "when Mr. Lowe 
was here, the day Mat Donovan asked me to play the air of the 
song he was to sing at Ned Brophy's wedding? It was the same day 
that Lory Hanly brought me the jay."
	"Yes, I remember," returned Mary. "But what has that to do 
with it?"
	"Look at the date on the paper," said Grace, closing her 
eyes.
	"It is the very same day," replied Mary.
	"And don't you remember," continued Grace, keeping her 
eyes still closed, "how I cut off a lock of Hugh's hair with your 
scissors, and he caught me and cut off some of mine?"
	"Yes, I recollect it all now," Mary answered, looking 
troubled. "I trust in goodness that I have done no harm."
	"And he has kept it all the time," Grace thought. "He has 
always loved me!"
	"This is Grace's hair, Hugh," said Mary, on coming into his 
room again.
	"Well, it is," he replied, as if the earnestness of her manner 
had surprised him into the admission.
	"O Hugh," said she, looking anxiously at him, "I never 
thought of this. I will bring her up."
	"I fear you have been making me ridiculous," he 
exclaimed, getting between her and the door.
	She told him what had just occurred in the parlour; and so 
great was Hugh Kearney's astonishment, that for the moment he 
felt no other emotion. But when Mary asked him would she go for 
Grace, he seemed much agitated.
	"Yes," he answered, with a motion of his hand towards the 
door. He paced up and down the room two or three times, and then 
sat down again at the table where he had been writing, looking 
quite unmoved; save for that light, half fire and half softness, that 
swam in his dark eyes. Grace came in, and those dark eyes met 
hers. She crossed the room with a measured step, and laid her hand 
on his shoulder, still looking into his eyes. There was no need for 
words.
	"I don't know what to say," said he at last. "But Grace, 
when did you first think of me?"
	"I don't know," she replied. "I think always."
	"There must really be a mystery in these things, Grace. I 
never hoped such happiness would ever be mine. Did you know 
bow much I always loved you?"
	"Well, I didn't know -- but, somehow, I believed it."
	They were silent again for a long time; and Grace recalled 
Bessy Morris's words, "If a ship were sinking with you, or a lion 
rushing to devour you, wouldn't you feel safe if his arm were 
around you?" Yes, she felt it was so.
	"Wonders will never cease," exclaimed Mary, flinging the 
door open. "Fionn Macool can make himself agreeable. Do you 
forget that we are all invited to a great ball at Woodlands in honour 
of Fionn's safe return from the Antipodes?"
	Grace, for once in her life, would have forgiven the great 
ball. But she resolved to make herself as "killing" as possible; for it 
was rather provoking that Mrs. Kiely so dazzled her guests on such 
occasions, that even a certain young lady, who was generally 
admitted to possess some attractions of her own, was quite thrown 
into the shade at Woodlands.
	"That dark dress becomes you admirably, Mary," said she. 
"And Ellie looks downright lovely in white. There is something 
fawn-like about her. But which of these shall I wear?"
	"Ask Hugh's opinion," returned Mary.
	"Yes, Ellie; ask him which would he prefer."
	"He doesn't care which," said Ellie, after consulting Hugh 
on this important matter, "as neither is green."
	"I like green, but green does not like me," returned Grace. 
"I must leave that to Annie."
	"Here is Arthur," said Mary, rather impatiently. "Decide at 
once; we have no time to lose. Even mamma has all her bows 
pinned on to her entire satisfaction."
	"Yes, but she had no difficulty in deciding on the colours," 
Grace replied. " Her Uncle Dan settled that long ago. I only wish 
his worthy nephew -- or grandnephew -- would do the same for 
me. But I will have my revenge, and dance all night with Lory."
	"What will your papa say, when he knows?" Mary asked, 
as they drove up the avenue at Woodlands.
	"He will like it," Grace answered, emphatically.
	And he did like it. And said -- and said truly -- that there 
was no man to whom he would rather entrust his daughter's 
happiness than to Hugh Kearney. And yet the patriotic Dr. Kiely 
felt disappointed, though he strove to hide it even from himself. 
For, in spite of his theories, he cherished the hope of seeing his 
darling Grace the wife of a descendant of one of those Norman 
freebooters, who "came to divide, to dishonour," and to whose ill-
omened advent none knew better than the learned and patriotic 
doctor how to trace all the woes of unhappy Ireland. "But then," he 
would say in his grand way, "some of them became more Irish than 
the Irish themselves."
	Is it necessary to add, that there was a wedding soon after?
	Grace wished to have the ceremony performed by Father 
Carroll, as it was he married Arthur O'Connor and Mary, and 
Edmund and his dark-eyed bride. But the democratic Dr. Kiely 
dearly liked eclat; and Grace had the honour of being married by a 
bishop. And never did priest or bishop, or cardinal or Pope of 
Rome, hold his hand over a brighter or a happier little bride.
	But there were more weddings than one.
	"Mat Donovan and Bessy Morris!" the astute reader 
exclaims.
	Of course. But a child would have guessed that.
	And the tall pedlar, who never passed the way without 
taking a draught from the pail under the little window, opened his 
eyes in wonder on seeing a neat square farmyard, with barn, dairy, 
cow-house, and all other requisites, behind the little thatched 
house, to which two rooms with good-sized windows had been 
added. The tall pedlar, as he replaced the cup on the little window, 
rubbed his cuff across his grey beard, and hoped it was not all the 
work of the "good people," and would not have vanished into thin 
air before he came his next round -- as happened to his own 
knowledge to a snug little place one side of Holycross Abbey. And 
the tall pedlar, swinging off his heavy pack, and sitting on the 
corner of the table, gave a full and true account of how he had been 
hospitably received in the snug little house before-mentioned, one 
fine summer evening, and awoke next morning by the side of a 
furze bush, without a house, or the sign of a house, within miles of 
him. At which Mrs. Donovan the elder blessed herself many times, 
and devoutly thanked Providence that her house was not one side 
of Holycross Abbey -- though nearer to an imaginary straight line 
between Maurice Kearney's fort and the quarry than she could 
have wished.
	The little boarded parlour, with its papered walls and 
American clock on the chimney-piece, was just what Grace had 
fancied as suitable for Bessy Morris. There was a bookshelf, too, 
with a goodly number of volumes arrayed upon it, which caused 
Mr. Bob Lloyd to stare the first time he saw it, and furnished Mrs. 
Ned Brophy with a subject for much scornful laughter. Whenever 
Ned did not make his appearance in due time on the nights of 
market-days, he was pretty sure to be found by Mat Donovan's 
fireside. And as he meekly obeyed the order to "get up out of that," 
and staggered homeward, Ned invariably protested that his 
libations during the day did not exceed "a couple uv tumblers uv 
porther." But we fear this did not always save him from a whack of 
his own blackthorn across the shoulders.
	Old Mrs. Donovan, however, preferred the kitchen with its 
snow-white dresser and shining pewter -- not forgetting the old 
spinning-wheel and the straw-bottom chairs -- as, indeed, did Mat 
himself, and Bessy, too. And as for Billy Heffernan, he protested 
that his flute became quite hoarse whenever he attempted a tune in 
the parlour. And when he took his place on the bench, with his 
back against the partition, Nelly always thought of the night when 
she made the discovery that Billy loved Norah Lahy; and how, 
after the first pang of jealousy, she loved Norah herself better than 
ever. Yes, Bessy Morris and Mat Donovan were married; and that 
dear, kind old mother's sad face had a moonlight sort of smile in it 
for ever after. But lest Mat should get credit for more than he 
deserves, we feel bound to admit that if Bessy's father had not 
behaved so handsomely, he could not have built the out-offices 
quite so soon; nor would he have the ten acres at the other side of 
the road.
	But there were more weddings than two.
	"Where is that fellow?" Mrs. Kearney asked, fretfully. "I 
can never find him when I want him."
	No one seemed to pay particular attention to Mrs. 
Kearney's grievance. There was a car at the hall-door, with Mary 
and Grace on one side, and Mrs. Edmund Kiely -- about whose feet 
Hugh was elaborately wrapping the rug -- on the other.
	"She is the only handsome woman," Mary observed, "that I 
ever knew Hugh to care about."
	"Thank you," returned Grace.
	"Did you send him anywhere?" Mrs. Kearney asked from 
the door-step -- addressing her husband, who was pointing out a 
defect in the horse's shoeing to the servant.
	"Yes," he answered, at last. "I sent him to count the sheep."
	"And you knew I wanted to send him to town," returned 
Mrs. Kearney reproachfully.
	"He ought to be back an hour ago," Maurice answered. 
"But I suppose he fell into the quarry and broke his neck; or was 
attacked by the bull in the clover-field. Get that shoe taken off," he 
added, turning to the servant, as if the broken neck or the attack by 
the bull were a matter of little consequence compared with 
Edmund Kiely's chestnut going lame.
	Mrs. Kearney was quite alarmed; but to her great relief 
Barney Brodherick was seen tearing across the lawn mounted on 
Bobby, who snorted and flung his heels in the air at every prick of 
the "spur-sauleen" with which the heel of one of the rider's brogues 
was armed. Flinging himself from his steed, Barney hurried up to 
his master.
	"Are the sheep all there?" he asked.
	"Begob I have 'em all in my hat, sir," Barney answered.
	Mary's laugh was almost as ringing and quite as musical as 
Grace's -- but Mrs. Kiely only looked astonished, with all her great 
black eyes -- as Barney carefully scooped a fistful of sloes out of 
his hat, and presented them to his master, who commenced to 
count them with a look of intense gravity.
	"They're all right," said he, flinging away the sloes, and 
looking quite satisfied.
	"She's after consintin', sir," said Barney with a grin.
	"Oh, very good," returned his master. "One fool makes 
many."
	"But," continued Barney, rubbing his poll, "if Miss Grace'd 
put in a good word for us, I know Father Carroll wouldn't be hard 
on us, an' he gettin' so many jobs all uv a slap."
	"What is it, Barney?" Grace asked.
	"Goin' to be married, Miss," Barney answered, looking 
very solemn. "An' if you would tell him to do id as chape as he 
could, I know he'd do anything for you -- an' not to be too hard 
wud the questions. I have my prayers as pat as A B; an' what more 
do a poor man want? An' I'm purty good at the seven deadly sins, 
an' know what is mathrimony, now, since Miss Ellie put id into my 
head," Barney added with increasing seriousness.
	"And so, Ellie, you have been putting matrimony into 
Barney's head?" said Grace, turning to Ellie, who was romping on 
the grass with two of Mary's children.
	"Yes," she replied, throwing her hair back from her face; 
"because, when he went to get married last winter, the priest sent 
him away. He asked him, 'What is matrimony?' and Barney 
answered, 'The marriage money;' and so Father Carroll refused to 
marry him till he had learned his catechism."
	"An' damn hard work I had makin' up the same marriage-
money," returned Barney, with an injured look. "An' whin I had id, 
'tis little I thought I'd be throubled wud any other money."
	"And what sort of a wife are you going to get?" Mrs. Kiely 
asked, turning round and bending her black eyes on the odd figure 
before her.
	"A good labourin'-man uv a wife, ma'am," Barney 
answered readily. "Peg Brady."
	And so Barney and Peg Brady added one more to the 
"jobs," which happened to be neither few nor far between that 
season -- though very like "angels' visits" to Father Carroll's mind, 
notwithstanding. But one more of these "jobs" concerns us too 
intimately to be passed over.
	Do you recollect the still, summer day when the glad 
tidings that Norah Lahy was sitting out under the beech-tree ran 
like wildfire from end to end of Knocknagow? And how, while 
Miss Kearney stopped to talk to Norah, a shy young girl ran into 
the house to talk to the old linnet? And how she was caught in a 
motherly embrace as she jumped down from the chair?
	Well, that same shy girl was clasped to the same motherly 
heart in the pretty house where Mat Donovan was so warmly 
welcomed and hospitably entertained, near the city of Boston, a 
few months before.
	"Oh, the villain of the world!" exclaimed Honor Lahy, 
"never to tell me a word about it! He said 'twas goin' to see the 
Pope he was."
	"And so I did go to see the Pope," said Mr. Tom Lahy, 
laughing.
	"Oh, yes, Mrs. Lahy," Ellie added, "we were in Rome, and 
saw His Holiness. I have a beads blessed by himself for you. And 
we have got our portraits painted, and have a great many other 
things that you will like."
	"Don't talk to me about anything but yourself," returned 
Honor, with another hug. "Oh, did I ever think my poor ould heart 
would ever feel the joy that's swellin' id up this minute as big as 
Slievenamon? Glory be to God for all His mercies! Wondhers will 
never cease. But, O my darlin' Ellie, will I ever again kneel down 
on the green grave in the ould churchyard where my own darlin' is 
sleepin' -- at home in beautiful Ireland?"
	You will," Phil Lahy answered, emphatically. "There are 
bright days in store for beautiful Ireland, as you call her, and as she 
deserves to be called. There is a spirit growing up among the 
outcast children of beautiful Ireland that will yet cause another 
English monarch to exclaim, 'Cursed be the laws that deprived me 
of such subjects.' The long night of her sorrow is drawing to a 
close. And, with God's blessing, we'll all be in beautiful Ireland 
again."
	"You are right, father," returned the fine young Irish-
American. "We will never forget old Ireland."
	But, however glad we are to have to record these happy 
events, we have not the least notion of attempting a description of 
them. To our mind, Ned Brophy's wedding was worth them all put 
together-- including the bishop, whose presence so turned Mrs. 
Kearney's head that she all but cut the O'Shaughnessys for a whole 
month after. To be sure, Father Hannigan was at Ellie's wedding, 
and did some thing to make it like a wedding. For, if the truth must 
be told, the "grandeur" of the whole affair weighed heavily on the 
spirits of all present. Father Hannigan came all the way from his 
mountain parish where he was looked upon by his flock as an 
oracle in all matters, whether spiritual or temporal -- and gave 
them the news of the week, with his own comments, from the altar 
every Sunday, after the last gospel. Not one newspaper, except his 
own -- and a single copy of the Weekly Catholic Illuminator, 
which two police men and a process-server jointly subscribed for -- 
ever found its way into Father Hannigan's parish. And yet, we 
grieve to say, his parish supplied the London Times with more than 
one text for an article upon the well-worn theme of agrarian crime 
in Ireland. But Father Hannigan had a habit of addressing any 
member of his flock, against whom he happened to have a 
complaint to make, by name, in a manner that was very trying to 
the nerves of the congregation, and kept them upon the rack until 
he had come down from the altar, each dreading to hear his or her 
own name blurted out by the preacher at any moment. Hugh 
Kearney, who visited Father Hannigan the Sunday before his 
marriage, had an opportunity of witnessing this, when, as he rose 
from his knees at the conclusion of the Mass, he was startled by the 
words
	"Mrs. Morrissy, why don't you send your daughter to the 
chapel to teach the children their catechism? 'Twould be come her 
better than dancing 'Follow me down to Carlow,' over there at 
Bosheenacorriga."
	"She'll come every other Sunday, sir," returned Mrs. 
Morrissy, with a reproachful look at a young girl who knelt next 
Hugh, and whose burning cheeks told all too plainly that she was 
the delinquent who preferred the dance at Bosheenacorriga to 
teaching the catechism to the children in the chapel.
	"If ever a man died of a broken heart it was poor Father 
M'Mahon!" was Father Hannigan's remark, as he and Hugh came 
to the turn of the road near Mat Donovan's. "Knocknagow killed 
him. He never raised his head after. And 'tis a terrible change, sure 
enough," he added, as he turned round in the gig, and looked down 
the hill. " 'Tis a terrible change. And 'tis hard to know where 'twill 
stop, or what will be the end of it. Ye had a narrow escape 
yourselves. Only for the new lease Sir Garrett gave you before the 
property was sold ye'd be in a bad way. There's nothing like 
security."
	"That's true," Hugh observed. "And those new landlords are 
raising the rents to the last shilling the land will make. They look 
upon their purchases solely from a commercial point of view, and I 
fear many of them will prove harder masters than their 
predecessors."
	"How is Edmund Kiely getting on with Woodlands?" 
Father Hannigan asked.
	"Oh, first-rate," returned Hugh. "He is becoming a capital 
farmer. But he may thank Mat Donovan, who is his right hand 
man."
	"'Twas a great consolation to the old baronet to die in the 
home of his ancestors," the priest observed. "But I believe he could 
not have saved it from the wreck, only for the doctor's money. But 
I believe the doctor had the best of the bargain after all. What is he 
going to give yourself?"
	"Oh, I never spoke of such a thing," Hugh replied, looking 
displeased.
	"Oh, when the money is there, I don't see why you 
shouldn't get it," returned Father Hannigan. "I'll talk to Kiely about 
it."
	"I request that you will not," said Hugh. "It would be most 
disagreeable to me."
	"Well, very well -- I won't mind it. And, indeed, I believe 
there's no occasion. He won't forget Grace, I'll be bound. But are 
we going to have Flaherty?"
	"Yes," Hugh answered, laughing at the abruptness with 
which his reverend friend changed the subject; "he promised to 
come."
	And Mr. Flaherty kept his promise. And, though the 
crimson-velvet bag was somewhat faded, not so was his music, 
which was as brilliant as ever. Indeed, when, at Father Hannigan's 
request, he commenced to play the "Coulin," there was a little 
scene which surprised many persons present. Mrs. Edmund Kiely 
could not control her emotion; and, pressing her face against her 
husband's breast, she sobbed aloud, and was so overcome by her 
feelings, that Mrs. O'Connor, who was, perhaps, as deeply moved 
as herself -- though you would never guess it by looking at her -- 
led her impulsive friend from the room; the blind musician, as they 
glided by, raising his head with that listening expression, as if an 
invisible spirit were whispering to him what was going on.
	Arthur and Edmund followed them out after a little while.
	"Really, Annie, you surprise me," said Edmund.
	"I couldn't help it, Edmund. It brought poor papa so vividly 
to my mind. The night is very fine. Let us walk for awhile --"
	"I object," said Arthur, touching her shoulder with the tips 
of his fingers. So they remained standing at the window.
	I believe," said Mary, after a silence of several minutes, as 
she raised her blue eyes to the clear sky, "I believe there is no 
happiness in this world without a shadow upon it."
	"And what shadow do you see now?" Arthur asked.
	"Poor Ellie, so far away," she replied sadly.
	"She is a happy girl," remarked Arthur.
	"Yes, I hope and believe so."
	"And surely Grace is happy," Edmund observed.
	"Ye'd be talking of happiness," exclaimed Maurice 
Kearney, who had come into the room unobserved, and somewhat 
startled them by the abruptness of his address. "Ye'd be talking of 
happiness. Wattletoes and Peg Whack" -- Mr. Kearney had a 
genius for nicknames -- "are the happiest pair in Europe. Come, 
Mrs. Kiely; you must come in and give us a song."



CHAPTER LXVII.

GOOD-BYE. -- THE OLD ROOM. -- MRS. HEFFERNAN'S 
TROUBLES. "MAGNIFICENT TIPPERARY." -- A GLEAM OF 
SUNSHINE. -- BUT KNOCKNAGOW IS GONE.

	WE have not counted the years as they stole away like 
visions. of the night. What need to count them? They were here, 
and they are gone! And now we must say good-bye -- and sad 
enough it is to be obliged to say it. God be praised! we see truth, 
and trust, and thankfulness in the eyes raised to ours, and no 
shadow of reproach at all. And, God be praised again, there are 
tears in those eyes, and we feel the clasp of a slender hand! But 
with this the reader has not much to do; so we shall only add -- 
may his or her good-byes, when they must be said, be all like this 
one.
	But, whatever other changes the years have brought, the 
little room up in the steep roof of the old cottage is much the same 
as when Barney Brodherick threw Arthur O'Connor's letter into the 
window in the ivied gable long ago. It is still called "Mary's room," 
and sometimes "mamma's room" by two lovely little ladies, who 
live almost entirely at the cottage, and for whose behoof the little 
room has been turned into a nursery. There is an old straw-chair 
there, which the little ladies regard with something like awe, as 
they talk in whispers of the poor sick girl who was so good and so 
patient, and who gave the straw-chair to their mamma when she 
was dying. These two little ladies are their grandmamma's pets; 
and even "dressing dinners" is not half so important a matter now 
in Mrs. Kearney's eyes as it used to be. But they have been 
observed, latterly, feeling their noses carefully, and climbing upon 
chairs to look at them in the glass; for people are continually 
telling them that the said noses are "out of joint" since the arrival 
of the plump little stranger in the cradle; and they wonder much 
how that can be, seeing that the plump little stranger never touched 
their noses at all, but, on the contrary, seems to devote most of his 
waking hours to vigorously thumping his own nose with his 
dimpled little fist, which, fortunately for him, has no knuckles, and 
therefore cannot hurt him very much. The nose, his grandmother 
avers, is her Uncle Dan's; and the rose-bud of a mouth -- that is 
never done blowing bubbles -- his aunt Mary's; and the double 
chin, his grandfather's "all over." "And," Mrs. Kearney would 
continue, "he'll have his father's eye-brows." "And his mother's 
cheek," Hugh added, one day. At which Grace laughed, and shook 
her fist at him.
	And who so happy as Grace! For a while there was one 
little vexation that used to put her into a scolding humour. Hugh 
was as great a stay-at-home as ever; and Grace was as fond of a 
dance as ever. There was a round of very pleasant little parties at 
Christmas-time among their acquaintances, to not one of which 
Hugh could be induced to go -- except to Woodlands. He was 
ready enough to go there, Grace said. And when her father was at 
Woodlands on these occasions, and he and Hugh and Edmund 
discussed literary or political subjects -- with Dr. Arthur O'Connor 
to contradict everybody and object to everything -- for Arthur was 
nothing if not critical -- Grace used to say it came fully up to her 
idea of what refined and intellectual society ought to be. And the 
old mansion, and the ancestral trees outside -- for the timber at 
Woodlands was not all cut down -- and a certain high-born air in 
the hostess, were not altogether lost sight of; though Grace's 
notions about the "upper ten" were considerably modified since the 
time she used to edify Mary with her views as to what an 
aristocracy ought to be.
	But though Hugh would go nowhere but to Woodlands, he 
wished her to go, saying that her account of all that happened 
would be better than being there himself. And this was quite true. 
But equally true was it that Hugh Kearney found it very pleasant to 
be alone with his books of an evening, reading and thinking. Yet, 
let the page or the vision be never so fascinating, the moment he 
heard her voice or her footstep, his heart leaped to welcome her.
	One night Grace was home earlier than usual. She drew a 
chair close to his, and Hugh shut his book, prepared to listen to a 
lively description of Mrs. O'Shaughnessy's party. But to his 
surprise Grace remained silent and thoughtful. He looked 
anxiously at her, fearing that she might be ill. But there was no 
sign of illness in that bright, bewitching face; for, though 
thoughtful, it was bright, and to him, at least, it was bewitching in 
all moods. It was pleasant, too, to look at her dressed in such 
perfect taste.
	"But why does she not begin to talk?" Hugh asked himself.
	Not a word; she only leant against his arm, and gazed into 
the fire.
	"Do you remember the time when Mr. Lowe was here?" 
she said at last, without moving, and still gazing into the fire.
	"I remember it quite well," he replied. "Indeed, I have been 
thinking of him and Richard to-night. It is a strange coincidence 
that they should be together again in another quarter of the globe."
	"This very night," continued Grace, still gazing into the fire 
-- "I can't think of the year just now, but it was this very night -- 
they were in this room. Richard sat in the old arm-chair, and Mr. 
Lowe was standing there with his elbow on the chimney-piece. Do 
you remember?"
	"Yes; they used to come in here to smoke."
	"Richard asked you whether you thought a person could 
love more than once." Here Grace seemed lost in thought for some 
minutes. "And you said yes," she continued, as if unconscious of 
the pause; "that a person might really love more than once; but that 
you believed it was the fate of some to love one as they never 
could love another. Do you remember?"
	"Not exactly. But I dare say I said so, for I have always 
thought so."
	"Do you think so still?"
	"Yes, I certainly do."
	"And you said, if it ever happened that a man or a woman 
could never love but once, it was when two spirits rushed together 
in this way, and were parted by death or some other cause that did 
not involve blame to either."
	"That has been a theory of mine," Hugh replied.
	"Is it still?"
	"Well, yes. It is," he answered, thoughtfully.
	She was silent again, gazing into the fire.
	"Hugh."
	He bent over her, and looked into her eyes.
	"Tell me--"
	"What am I to tell you?" he asked, smiling; for she had 
relapsed into silence.
	"Was it of me you were thinking when you said that?" She 
bent back her head, and raised her eyes to his with a confident 
smile.
	He was on the point of answering seriously "Yes," when he 
recollected himself, and, leaning back in his chair, laughed 
heartily.
	She looked up in surprise, and even appeared troubled.
	"Why do you laugh?" she asked.
	"Just remember how old were you at that time," he replied.
	"Ah, no matter," said Grace; "can't you say it was of me 
you were thinking?"
	"Well, perhaps I had some sort of a prevision of what was 
to come -- 

'And now I find the fancy true,
And fairer than the vision made it.'

But how did you remember all this?"
	"I don't know. I was passing the door while you were 
saying it. I didn't mind it at all at the time, but it occurred to me 
afterwards. That and Bessy Morris's story about the Beauty Race, 
and Fionn Macool, and 'the one little girl that he'd rather have than 
any of them,' were constantly in my mind."
	"How much I owe Bessy Morris," said Hugh, half 
laughingly, half dreamily, laying his hand upon her head. "She and 
Mat Donovan are the happiest couple in all Tipperary this 
moment."
	"No; not the happiest," said Grace. "I sometimes fear we 
are too happy, Hugh."
	"Not too happy, so long as we do not forget the Giver."
	She made no reply, but continued gazing into the fire.
	"Now, Grace, do you think I can allow this? Where is the 
use in your being home early if you stay up this way? Here, drink 
this while 'tis hot. I thought you were in bed an hour ago."
	It was Mrs. Kearney, who roused them from their dreaming 
a full half-hour after Hugh had last spoken. She came into the 
room with a posset for Grace; who, Mrs. Kearney would have it, 
required all sorts of nursing just then.
	This was in the winter -- the "dreary winter" some people 
call it. But no one in that old cottage ever thought of calling it 
"dreary."
	It is now autumn, towards the end of September.
	"I can't help feeling a little discontented," said Grace. 
"Whenever Edmund makes his appearance Hugh is never home till 
long after nightfall. And if they chance to go near Woodlands, I 
may give him up till eleven o'clock or later."
	"What would you do if you were like me?" Mary asked.
	"Well, I suppose," Grace replied, "I'd console myself with 
the idea that we were getting rich. Arthur seems to have great 
practice."
	"Practice enough," returned Mary. "But scarlet-runners are 
more plenty than fees."
	"What are they?"
	"I thought you knew everything. They are the red 
dispensary tickets which require the medical officer to attend at the 
residence of the patient. Arthur said this morning, when he saw 
those young ladies in the garden, that if times did not mend, he did 
not know what to do with them. But I told him he need not give 
them fortunes at any rate." And Mary's mild eyes beamed with all a 
mother's pride as she looked into the garden where her two lovely 
little girls were playing among the formal flower-beds.
	"You meant that, like their mother, they would require no 
fortune."
	"Yes," Mary replied innocently. But seeing Grace 
beginning to laugh, she added with spirit -- "I am proud that I had 
no fortune. But, on the other hand," she continued, somewhat 
sadly, "I wish I had ten thousand pounds."
	"Well," returned Grace, thoughtfully, "I have not that to be 
proud of. But I think I may be quite sure my fortune did not 
influence Hugh, even in the slightest degree. On the contrary, the 
very fortune I was always wishing to have might have been a bar 
to my happiness. I think if I were poor Hugh would not have 
concealed his love for me as he did. It is appalling to think I might 
never have known it only for an accident. And it would have been 
a just judgment to punish me for my mercenary notions."
	"I remember I used to be shocked at your notions," returned 
Mary. "But I knew you would see things in a different light, if once 
your heart was touched. But look at mamma with the children. Oh, 
here is Arthur!" she exclaimed with a start of delight. "I did not 
think he'd be back for hours."
	"Yes, he knows that stile behind the laurels," Grace 
observed. "But where are those shots from? If we could intercept 
the sportsmen before they get to Woodlands it would be well."
	"I see them," said Mary. "They are in Billy Heffernan's 
turnips. Let us all walk round by the village, and they will see us 
when we reach the bridge."
	Dr. O'Connor agreed to this arrangement; and, after a glass 
of wine, and a kiss from each of his little daughters, went with 
Mary and Grace to prevent Hugh's escape to Woodlands.
	Old Mrs. Donovan was among her bee-hives; and it was 
pleasant to catch a glimpse of her white cap and her sad tranquil 
face through an opening in the clipped hedge. Mary always liked to 
see old Mrs. Donovan when ever she passed by the neat little 
thatched house. Grace liked a chat with young Mrs. Donovan; they 
were con genial spirits. And so, perhaps, were Mary and old Mrs. 
Donovan.
	"Aren't you afraid to have the child so near the bees?" 
Grace asked.
	"I am, then, and very uneasy," Bessy replied. "But his 
grandmother only laughs at me."
	"Oh, he's a tremendous big fellow," Grace exclaimed, as 
she lifted Mat the Thrasher's son and heir up in her arms. "I 
thought my young Maurice was a 'bully,' as Barney calls him. But 
this lad is once and a half as heavy."
	"Mat says he'll be a stone-thrower," returned Bessy, 
laughing, as she took the infant athlete from Grace's arms, and laid 
him upon the ground; to roll and tumble, or lie still upon his chest, 
or his back, or to make short excursions upon all-fours -- ever and 
anon stopping suddenly, propped up by his fat arms, to stare at a 
white head of cabbage with all his eyes -- at his own sweet will.
	"Do you ever wish to live at the Three Trees now?" Grace 
asked. "Oh, never," returned Bessy. "Mat wanted to take the farm 
when my father sent us some money; but I would not let him."
	"Is it the same place?" said Mary, sadly, as she looked 
down the hill. There was a low stone wall at each side of the road, 
the mortar of which looked very new and unpleasant to the eye. 
Perhaps the mortar looked all the more fresh because of the dark 
stones that seemed to thrust themselves through it here and there, 
in order that the traveller might read the story of quenched hearths 
and scattered households in their soot-browned faces. An odd tree, 
a perch or two in from the road, marked the boundary of a 
"haggart"; for where an ash or an elm sheltered the peasant's cabin 
the tree was allowed to stand. The beech-tree escaped in this way; 
and the pointed gable of Phil Lahy's old house, now roofless and 
crumbling to decay, seemed to regard the change wrought by the 
rule of the Stranger with a grim smile -- such as Phil himself might 
have worn while emptying the vials of his sarcasm upon the head 
of "that poor crawler," Tom Hogan. No smiling faces now as they 
went on; no children's voices; no ringing of the anvil. Mary even 
regretted Kit Cummins's shrewish tongue, and the next-door 
neighbour's "G-i-r-rout, you bla'guard -- of which she was 
reminded by seeing a cat run across the road, and over the wall at 
the other side, pursued by a small red terrier that always 
accompanied Grace in her walks.
	"It is an awful change," Mary observed.
	"It really is," returned Grace. "I thought of it when you said 
we would go through the village."
	"And think of the happy crowd that used to follow the big 
drum to the Bush," continued Mary. "And where are they all now? 
Not one, I may say, left."
	"There is one melancholy relic of the crowd you speak of," 
Grace observed, pointing to a man in the field a little further down.
	"And what a handsome young fellow he was
	"And for what is he rolling that stone from the wall into the 
field?" Arthur asked.
	"Surely," said Mary, "it cannot be that he is in Mr. 
Cummins's employment? Though it was not he ruined them."
	She alluded to the purchaser of a portion of Sir Garrett 
Butler's property -- a brother of the redoubtable Kit Cummins, who 
had made a fortune by a peculiar mode of dealing with the 
struggling farmers in hard times. And it may be mentioned that Mr. 
Cummins's conduct as a landlord completely upset Maurice 
Kearney's favourite theory about "good Catholics," for Mr. 
Cummins was a most exemplary Catholic. And Billy Heffernan 
was hopelessly bewildered on the subject of "gentlemen," when be 
remembered that Kit Cummins's brother was a magistrate and a 
landlord, and, in fact, as great a man as ever Sam Somerfield was, 
to say nothing of Bob Lloyd, or Beresford Pender.
	"There they are," Grace exclaimed; "and if you don't stop 
them before they cross the road, we won't see them again for the 
day."
	Arthur hurried on in pursuit of the two sportsmen, followed 
more slowly by Mary and Grace. He got within hailing distance on 
the bog-road, and when they heard his shout to them, they changed 
their course and came towards him.
	Grace could see nothing but Hugh for some time, but Mary 
had eyes for other objects. Observing a goodly crowd around a 
stack of oats in the next field, and hearing the words, "Norah, 
throw up that bruckish to me," she laughed and made her way to 
them. It was Nelly Donovan, or we should rather say, Mrs. Billy 
Heffernan, and her whole family -- from Norah, a black-eyed gipsy 
of nine years, to the "bruckish," of about the same number of 
months. Their mother, who was kneeling on the stack, the top of 
which Billy Heffernan had just taken to the barn in his mule's car, 
wanted to give the "bruckish" his afternoon draught, while waiting 
till his father returned for the next load. But Norah found some 
difficulty in lifting him so high, and Mrs. O'Connor laughingly 
came to her assistance.
	"This is the third fat boy I have taken in my arms to-thy," 
she observed, as she pressed the bruckish against her bosom. "I'll 
begin to feel quite jealous and discontented; every body has boys 
except myself."
	"Faith, then, maybe 'tis too many uv 'em you'll have yet, 
ma'am," replied Nelly, pulling up the child with one hand. "There's 
more bother wud wan uv 'em than a house-full of girls. Look at 
that fellow beyand now, an' nothin' will do him but to ketch a hoult 
uv that heifer be the tail; an' wan kick from her would knock the 
daylights out uv him. Run, Norah, an' brin' him over here. Oh!" 
cried Mrs. Billy Heffernan, at the top of her voice, "look at him, 
look at him!"
	The heifer had set off at full speed, the young hopeful 
holding on to the tail, till, the pace becoming too fast for him, be 
was flung headlong upon his face and hands -- the stubbles 
scarifying his sun-burnt visage till it looked like a tulip.
	"Lord help us!" exclaimed his mother, flinging the infant 
on the oat sheaves, and tumbling herself off the stack. But 
remembering, before she had run many yards, that the olive branch 
on the stack would be sure to creep out to the edge and fall down 
directly on his skull, thereby breaking his neck or causing 
concussion of the brain, Nelly ran back and pulled him from his 
couch; and letting him drop upon the stubbles almost with as much 
violence as if he had descended on his own hook, but in a less 
dangerous position than upon the crown of his head. She was 
starting off again, when a great flock of geese, coming along the 
car-track, gabbling and picking up the oats that had been shaken 
from the load, attracted her attention; and as it occurred to her that 
the old gander, who was of a vicious and misanthropic turn of 
mind, might take a fancy to the bruckish's eyes, Mrs. Heffernan 
looked wildly from one to the other of her olive-branches, quite at 
a loss how to proceed; but, seeing that the elder had got upon his 
legs, and was now swinging from the tail of the mule's car, never 
minding his scratched countenance, Mrs. Heffernan heaved a sigh 
of relief.
	"'Tis little you know what bother they are, ma'am," said 
she, twisting up her abundant black hair, which had fallen about 
her shoulders. "When Mister Hugh an' Misther Kiely fired at the 
birds in the turnips a while ago, that fellow was makin' off over the 
ditch to get himse'f shot. An' there he is now, an' if the rope 
chances to get round his neck, he'll get himse'f hung. An' look at 
his father walkin' on, an' never lookin' back, or throublin' his head 
about him. This is the way my heart do be broke from mornin' till 
night. No, ma'am; 'tis harder to rear wan boy than twenty girls."
	"You'll have twenty barrels to the acre here, Bill," Hugh 
Kearney observed, looking round at the stacks, after feeling the 
weight of a sheaf of the oats.
	"About that, sir," returned Billy, in his old solemn way. 
"You're a wonderful man," continued Hugh. "This is the very spot 
Richard stood in the day he left the leg of his trousers in the bog-
hole; and look at that crop of oats!"
	"And all because the land is his own for ever," observed 
Dr. O'Connor.
	"While grass grows an' wather runs, sir," rejoined Billy 
Heffernan. "Misther Lloyd laughed at me whim I axed a lase for 
ever of such a spot. But Sam Somerfield wanted him to go to law 
wud me an' break the lase whin he see the good I was gettin' uv id. 
He said 'twas a bad example to the counthry, an' that 'twould put 
dangerous notions into the people's minds. An' there is Sam 
himse'f wudout a sod of ground now; an' Misther Bob is there yet."
	'Tis really remarkable," Hugh observed, "that Bob Lloyd is 
the only landlord for miles around here who has escaped the 
Incumbered Estates Court."
	"Because his tinants had the land for the value, an' long 
lases," returned Billy. "An' they wor always able to meet their 
rints, and to make up money for him whin he was in a hoult. An' 
there is Yallow Sam, that hunted every tinant he had, an' I'm tould 
his property was sould agin' t'other day for three times as much as 
it was bought for the first time."
	"That's a fact," said Edmund. "And it does look a little 
hard, that, after all their devotion to England, this law should have 
been introduced just when the value of landed property was at the 
lowest ebb. In fact, it looks very like robbery."
	"The Irish landlords were encouraged to exterminate the 
people," said Dr. O'Connor, "and when the work was done, many 
of themselves were exterminated. England cares just as little for 
them as for the people."
	"Mr. Somerfield's friends, however," Hugh remarked, "did 
not quite forget his services. You know he is a stipendiary 
magistrate."
	"He whined frightfully," said Edmund, "at being obliged to 
give up Woodlands. It is strange that the most callous and 
merciless tyrants are the most abject hounds when it comes to their 
own turn to meet the fate which it was their glory to inflict on 
others. Poor Sir Garrett might have been moved to give him a lease 
only for those gables." And Edmund pointed to several gables that 
stood like large head stones, scattered over a great sheep-walk 
along the side of a hill within view of where they stood. Mr. 
Somerfield had left a solitary gable standing, of every roof-tree he 
had swept from the face of the land, and these he was wont to point 
to with the pride of an Indian warrior displaying the scalps of his 
foes.
	"If we had the bogs itse'f," said Billy Heffernan, "some uv 
us at any rate might do some good. But they'd rather lave 'em to the 
cranes than give 'em to the Christians. What have I but the fag-end 
uv a bog? An' begor, I wouldn't give id this minute for the best 
farm in the parish wudout security."
	"You are right," said Hugh Kearney.
	'Tis of'en I thought uv ould Phil Morris's words," continued 
Billy Heffernan, "that there was nothin' like security to give a man 
courage. Look at Mat Donovan, an' becase he had them few 
perches that his grandfather fenced in betune the two roads, when 
'twas on'y a hape uv stones an' a lough uv wather, an' see how he 
kep' his grip. An' Tom Hogan an' the rest uv 'em swep' away like 
that," added Billy, taking a handful of chaff from the bottom of his 
cart and letting it fly with the wind. "Wo! Kit! Come, Nelly, up 
wud you on that butt uv a stack an' throw me the shaves. 'Twill be 
tight enough on us to have id all in afore nightfall."
	"No more shooting to-day," said Grace, putting her arm in 
her husband's. "Arthur and Mary are staying for dinner; so, 
march!"
	Two gentlemen on horseback pulled up suddenly as they 
were passing "Tom Hogan's gate," as it was still called.
	"That is Mr. Lloyd," said Grace. "But who is that with 
him?"
	"I don't know," Hugh replied. "They are calling to 
someone."
	It was to the man who had rolled the stone into the field. He 
raised his head listlessly, on hearing Mr. Lloyd's voice, and looked 
towards the gate, as if waiting to know what he wanted. He had 
been sitting on the stone with his face buried in his hands, and 
must have remained motionless for some time, as the sheep were 
grazing quite close to him, one or two looking curiously at him, 
and almost touching him with their noses. But the moment he 
observed Mr. Lloyd's companion, he stood up quickly, and, after 
touching his cap, dropped his arms by his side and stood at 
attention.
	"How are you, Hogan?" said the gentleman. "I hope you're 
well, captain," was the reply, "What fancy have you taken to sitting 
there?" Mr. Lloyd asked. "We saw you from the top of the hill, and 
didn't know what to make of you till we came to the gate here
	Jemmy Hogan's eyes moistened; but his cheek flushed, and 
he seemed ashamed of being detected in giving way to such 
weakness.
	"'Twas a foolish notion," he replied at last, smiling 
somewhat grimly.
	"I was going to ask you why you rolled that heavy stone 
into the field," said Dr. O'Connor, for they had all come up by this 
time, and were shaking hands with the two horsemen.
	Jemmy Hogan walked, or rather stumped, to the gate -- for 
he had a wooden leg -- before he replied. He grasped the top of the 
gate, and rested his forehead upon his hands, just as his father had 
done the night he told Phil Lahy that "his heart was stuck" in that 
little farm.
	"He is fainting," Mary observed in an anxious whisper to 
her husband, who approached the gate, and asked the young man if 
he were ill.
	"No, sir," he answered, recovering himself; "I'm not to say 
very strong, but I'm not ill."
	His lips were quite pale, and his yellow cheeks looked 
hollow and worn. What a contrast to the handsome youth who 
leaped to Mat Donovan's side at the words, "Come here, Jemmy 
Hogan," that Sunday long ago in Maurice Kearney's kiln-field, 
when Tom Cuddehy's desertion of his party changed the hurling of 
the "two sides" into what Phil Lahy called a "promiscuous match!"
	"You exerted yourself too much rolling that heavy stone," 
said the doctor.
	"No, sir, no; 'twasn't that," returned Jemmy Hogan. "I was 
tryin' could I make out the exact spot where the ould house stood. 
An' then I took a fancy to sit down where I used to sit when I was a 
little boy, in the corner beside my mother. So I rowled over that 
stone an' sot on id, till I thought I felt the hate uv the fire an' my 
mother's hand on my head. I b'lieve 'twas the breath uv the sheep 
that made me think I felt the hate; for I was someway half asleep. 
An' when the thruth came back sudden on me, an' I see the grass 
an' the sheep, instead uv the blazin' fire an' my mother's smile, id 
gave me a change, I b'lieve," said Jemmy Hogan, as he took off his 
cap and wiped the drops of perspiration from his forehead.
	"O Arthur!' Mary exclaimed, as, overcome by her emotion, 
she rested her forehead against his shoulder, "it is awful!"
	Grace grasped Hugh's arm with both her hands, and fixed 
her eyes pityingly on Jemmy Hogan's face, but did not speak.
	Captain French's horse, at the moment, began to plunge 
violently, and the ladies were about running down the road in their 
terror, when they saw a wild-looking cow running towards them.
	"Stop her!" was shouted in a loud voice, but in a manner 
which would lead to the belief that the speaker considered the 
party at Tom Hogan's gate were there for the special purpose of 
stopping runaway cows. Hugh disengaged himself from the little 
hands that clutched his arm so firmly, and, going a few yards to 
meet the cow, brought her to stand with little difficulty.
	"I'm afther buyin' her from Mat Donovan," said Wat 
Murphy the butcher, in a quiet way, "an' she turned at the cross and 
med off for home. I was thryin' to buy another from him, but he's 
axin' too much."
	"She's a nice cow," Hugh remarked, "and in good 
condition."
	Mat himself appeared at this juncture, and at the same time 
his wife was seen running down the hill to meet him. But, on 
seeing the gentleman on horseback, she stopped short and turned 
back again. She had been wondering what was keeping Mat out so 
long beyond his usual dinner-hour, but Wat Murphy and the cow 
was a sufficient explanation, and she hastened home, blushing at 
being observed by the gentle men.
	"Why," said the captain, "that is the girl poor Sergeant 
Baxter lost his senses about."
	"She is Mat Donovan's wife now," returned Mr. Lloyd.
	"Well, Mat," said the captain, "I can never have a cast of a 
sledge with you again."
	"I'm sorry for it, sir," Mat replied; and his heart smote him 
for having beaten the captain that day in the kiln-field. "I'm sorry 
for it, sir," he repeated, looking at him, almost with the tears in his 
eyes. For Captain French had only one arm now.
	"Do you have a hurling still?" he asked. "We got some 
smart fellows from about here."
	"The hurlers are gone," replied Mat, looking around upon 
the great pasture fields with scarcely a house within view.
	"By George," said the captain, "if this sort of thing goes on, 
there will be an end of 'magnificent Tipperary' in the English 
army."
	"I was just going to remark," Edmund Kiely observed, "that 
you and Jemmy Hogan would make a very suggestive picture in 
illustration of that same 'magnificent Tipperary.'"
	"How is that?" Captain French asked.
	"Why," Edmund replied, "he has come home with one leg, 
after shedding his blood in the service of England, to find the 
sheep grazing on his father's heath. And you come home with one 
arm, to find a stranger in your father's halls."
	"An' his property sowld for one-sixth uv the value," added 
Wat Murphy, who was a privileged person. "The divil's cure to the 
landlords. An Irish Parliament wouldn't thrate 'em that way. An' 
still they're agin their counthry."
	"By G--," the captain muttered, absently, as if he were 
talking to himself, "that's just what they tell me my poor father said 
when he was dying of a broken heart."
	"Come and dine with us," said Bob Lloyd to Edmund -- for 
the rest of the party had moved on towards home. "We have a leg 
of mutton, and everything elegant."
	"I'm after promising Mrs. Kearney to take an early dinner 
with her," returned Edmund. "And, by the way, I must send a 
messager to tell my wife, or she will think I have been swallowed 
up in a bog-hole."
	"Not shot from behind a hedge?" the captain observed.
	"No," Edmund answered, as he walked on to overtake his 
friends. "She is too long now in Tipperary for nonsense of that 
sort."
	They had stopped to wait for him at Mat Donovan's clipped 
hedge.
	"What is the matter with you?" Arthur O'Connor asked, 
seeing the tears in his wife's mild eyes.
	"It is such a sad picture," she replied, looking along the 
lonely road. "So different from what it used to be."
	"There are gleams of sunshine in it," he answered.
	"Where are they?"
	He pointed to Billy Heffernan and his wife and children, in 
the cornfield, which, a few years before, was a profitless moor.
	"It is an omen," said Hugh Kearney. "The Irish people will 
never be rooted out of Ireland. Cromwell could not do it; the 
butchers of Elizabeth could not do it."
	"But there is a more deadly system at work now," returned 
the doctor. "The country is silently bleeding to death."
	"Not to death," rejoined Hugh Kearney. "Those of her 
people who are forced to fly are not lost to Ireland. And those who 
cling to her are advancing in knowledge and intelligence. The 
people are becoming an educated and a thinking people. When 
Billy Heffernan's sons grow to manhood, they will in many 
respects be different men from their father."
	And would you say he will be a superior man to his 
father?" Grace asked, pointing over the clipped hedge.
	Mat Donovan stood under the cherry-tree, holding the 
young "stone-thrower" high up among the branches, while his 
mother glanced up at him -- with the identical smile of the little 
Bessy Morris of old, when she used to glance at the cherries on her 
way from school; and his grandmother clapped her hands to attract 
the attention of the delighted youngster, who crowed and kicked 
and plunged so vigorously that Mat declared 'twas like holding a 
little bull.
	"Yes," said Hugh, in reply to Grace's question, "he, too, 
will be ahead of his father -- at least of what his father was in his 
early youth. For Mat is now a really intelligent man, and is adding 
to his stock of knowledge every day."
	"That is another gleam of sunshine," said Mary, her face 
lighted up now, and her eyes almost dancing with pleasure, as she 
contemplated the group under the cherry tree.
	And when she turned to the dear old cottage, and saw the 
blue smoke gliding up above its sheltering trees, and her father, 
hale and ruddy, coming to meet them, and her mother at the door, 
"wondering" what was keeping them so long, and her own fair 
children gambolling upon the soft grass, and her generous brother 
with his bright little wife clinging so lovingly to him -- that was a 
gleam -- nay, a very flood -- of sunshine, too. And in Mary's home 
and in her heart there was sunshine, bright, warm, and unclouded.
	"Whack!" Maurice Kearney called out, "didn't I tell you 
never to milk that cow without putting the spancel on her?"
	"O father, why don't you call her by her right name?" said 
Mary, appearing a little shocked.
	"You may call her Mrs. Barney Brodherick if you like," 
returned Maurice Kearney, "but I'll call her Whack."
	Grace and Mary sat in the drawing-room, feeling somewhat 
lonely, they could not tell why, when they were startled by a 
ringing knock at the hall-door, which was quickly followed by a 
ringing laugh, and Mrs. Edmund Kiely had administered a kiss and 
a hug to each, before they could recover from their surprise. Of 
course it was just like her to set off for Ballinaclash, when Barney 
announced to her that Edmund was staying there for dinner. She 
flung her cloak on one chair, and her hat on another; and not a soul 
under the old cottage roof -- from Barney sucking his "dudheen" in 
the kitchen chimney-corner, to young Maurice, blowing bubbles 
and thumping Uncle Dan's nose in his cradle in the nursery  -- that 
did not feel the influence of her presence. Old Maurice rubbed his 
hands and shrugged his shoulders in a perfect ecstasy of delight, 
and lost no time in asking her to play his favourite tunes and sing 
his favourite songs -- which she did till the tears ran down his 
cheeks.
	And the old cottage was "filled with music"; and their 
hearts overflowed with deep and tranquil happiness.
	Mary saw the light shine out from Mat Donovan's little 
window, and thought of the dream of the Past from which it had 
awakened her long ago, as she sat there in the cold moonlight. And 
what a bright future was in store for her after all!
	There was another dreamer awakened by the light from 
Mat Donovan's window that same moonlight night. And now, 
almost from the very spot where he lay in the black, lonesome 
moor, the light from Mat Donovan's window is seen by a happy 
household, basking in the ruddy glow of a bogwood fire. The 
change is like what we read of in fairy tales. If poor Mick Brien 
could revisit the glimpses of the moon, he could scarcely believe 
that it was the dreary spot where he lay for hours meditating a deed 
of blood.
	"Come," says Nelly, "I promised Bessy we'd go up to night. 
An' brin' the flute."
	Billy Heffernan took down his hat from the elk's horns and 
meekly obeyed.
	"I'll go," exclaimed young Matty Heffernan, independently.
	"No, you won't," returned his mother. "Stay wud Norah, an' 
help her to mind your little brothers. Give him the fife," she added, 
on seeing Matty showing symptoms of rebellion.
	"I'll go see grandmother," he persisted. "She'll give me 
honey."
	"You can stay all day o' Sunday at your grandmother's." 
said Nelly. "But you must stop an' mind the house to night. An' 
there is the fife, an' you can play till you're tired."
	"Well, Billy," said Mat Donovan, "did you hear any 
sthrange news yestherday?"
	"Not a word," he replied. "But I never see a town that's
gone like Clo'mel. I remember when I could hardly get through the 
streets wud loads uv corn; an' now there's nothin' doin' there. The 
mills nearly all idle, an' the stores an' half the shops shut up. 'Twas 
well Phil Morris used to say 'twas the corn made a town uv 
Clo'mel."
	"Nelly, you must bring in the kettle and fill out the tea," 
said Bessy. " This fellow won't go to sleep for me."
	Nelly prepared the tea, of which all present partook, except 
Billy Heffernan, before whom his mother-in-law placed a huge 
mug of milk.
	"Have you the flute?" Mat asked, as the American clock on 
the chimney-piece struck eight.
	"Let us come out to the kitchen," returned Billy Heflernan.
	"Arthur, stop for a moment," said Mary, an hour later, as 
they reached the top of the hill on their way home. "Can it be that 
Annie's voice could reach this? The drawing-room windows are 
open, and I really think I can hear her singing."
	Dr. O'Connor reined in the horse, and listened with some 
curiosity.
	"Oh, it is from Mat Donovan's," Mary observed. "And I am 
much mistaken if it is not Billy Heffernan's old flute."
	"Why," said Arthur, when they had driven on a little 
further, "there is nothing but music to-night. Do you hear the fife 
from Billy Heffernan's own house, too!"
	"It is very pleasant," returned Mary. "Thank God, there are 
happy homes in Tipperary still! But "-- she added,  sadly, as she 
turned round, and looked along the two low whitish walls that 
reached from "the cross" to Mat Donovan's -- "but 
KNOCKNAGOW IS GONE!"


THE END.
