Love and Business
By
George Farquhar

First published 1702.
Published by the Ex-Classics Project, 2021
Public Domain

Bibliographic note

Love and Business was first published in 1702. The text of this Ex-
Classics version is taken from an edition of the Works of George
Farquhar, Volume 2, published by the Nonesuch Press in 1930.
Spelling and capitalization have been standardized. The notes have
been added by the Ex-Classics Project. The Introduction by Edmund
Gosse is taken from Gossip in a Library, 1892.



Introduction by Edmund Gosse


There are some books, like some people, of whom we form an indulgent
opinion without finding it easy to justify our liking. The young man
who went to the life-insurance office and reported that his father
had died of no particular disease, but just of "plain death," would
sympathise with the feeling I mention. Sometimes we like a book, not
for any special merit, but just because it is what it is. The rare,
and yet not celebrated, miscellany of which I am about to write has
this character. It is not instructive, or very high-toned, or
exceptionally clever, but if it were a man, all people that are not
prigs would say that it was a very good sort of fellow. If it be, as
it certainly is, a literary advantage for a nondescript collection
of trifles, to reproduce minutely the personality of its writer,
then Love and Business has one definite merit. Wherever we dip into
its pages we may use it as a telephone, and hear a young Englishman,
of the year 1700, talking to himself and to his friends in the most
unaffected accents.

Captain George Farquhar, in 1702, was four-and-twenty years of age.
He was a smart, soldier-like Irishman, of "a splenetic and amorous
complexion," half an actor, a quarter a poet, and altogether a very
honest and gallant gentleman. He had taken to the stage kindly
enough, and at twenty-one had written Love and a Bottle. Since then,
two other plays, The Constant Couple and Sir Harry Wildair, had
proved that he had wit and fancy, and knew how to knit them together
into a rattling comedy. But he was poor, always in pursuit of that
timid wild-fowl, the occasional guinea, and with no sort of
disposition to settle down into a heavy citizen. In order to bring
down a few brace of golden game, he shovels into Lintott's hands his
stray verses of all kinds, a bundle of letters he wrote from
Holland, a dignified essay or discourse upon Comedy, and, with
questionable taste perhaps, a set of copies of the love-letters he
had addressed to the lady who became his wife. All this is not very
praiseworthy, and as a contribution to literature it is slight
indeed; but, then, how genuine and sincere, how guileless and
picturesque is the self-revelation of it! There is no attempt to
make things better than they are, nor any pandering to a cynical
taste by making them worse. Why should he conceal or falsify? The
town knows what sort of a fellow George Farquhar is. Here are some
letters and some verses; the beaux at White's may read them if they
will, and then throw them away.

As we turn the desultory pages, the figure of the author rises
before us, good-natured, easygoing, high-coloured, not bad-looking,
with an air of a gentleman in spite of his misfortunes. We do not
know the exact details of his military honours. We may think of him
as swaggering in scarlet regimentals, but we have his own word for
it that he was often in mufti. His mind is generally dressed, he
says, like his body, in black; for though he is so brisk a spark in
company, he suffers sadly from the spleen when he is alone. We can
follow him pretty closely through his day. He is a queer mixture of
profanity and piety, of coarseness and loyalty, of cleverness and
density; we do not breed this kind of beau nowadays, and yet we
might do worse, for this specimen is, with all his faults, a man. He
dresses carefully in the morning, in his uniform or else in his
black suit. When he wants to be specially smart, as, for instance,
when he designs a conquest at a birthday-party, he has to ferret
among the pawnbrokers for scraps of finery, or secure on loan a
fair, full-bottom wig. But he is not so impoverished that he cannot
on these occasions give his valet and his barber plenty of work to
do preparing his face with razors, perfumes and washes. He would
like to be Sir Fopling Flutter, if he could afford it, and gazes a
little enviously at that noble creature in his French clothes, as he
lounges luxuriantly past him in his coach with six before and six
behind.

Poor Captain Farquhar begins to expect that he himself will never be
"a first-rate Beau." So, on common mornings, a little splenetic, he
wanders down to the coffee-houses and reads the pamphlets, those
which find King William glorious, and those that rail at the watery
Dutch. He will even be a little Jacobitish for pure foppery, and
have a fling at the Church, but in his heart he is with the
Ministry. He meets a friend at White's, and they adjourn presently
to the Fleece Tavern, where the drawer brings them a bottle of New
French and a neat's tongue, over which they discuss the doctrine of
predestination so hotly that two mackerel-vendors burst in,
mistaking their lifted voices for a cry for fish. His friend has
business in the city, and so our poet strolls off to the Park, and
takes a turn in the Mall with his hat in his hand, prepared for an
adventure or a chat with a friend. Then comes the play, the
inevitable early play, still, even in 1700, apt to be so rank-lipped
that respectable ladies could only appear at it in masks. It was the
transition period, and poor Comedy, who was saying good-bye to
literature, was just about to console herself with modesty.

However, a domino may slip aside, and Mr. George Farquhar notices a
little lady in a deep mourning mantua, whose eyes are not to be
forgotten. She goes, however; it is useless to pursue her; but the
music raises his soul to such a pitch of passion that he is almost
melancholy. He strolls out into Spring Garden, but there, "with
envious eyes, I saw every Man pick up his Mate, whilst I alone
walked like solitary Adam before the Creation of his Eve; but the
place was no Paradise to me; nothing I found entertaining but the
Nightingale." So that in those sweet summer evenings of 1700, over
the laced and brocaded couples promenading in Spring Garden, as over
good Sir Roger twelve years later, the indulgent nightingale still
poured her notes. To-day you cannot hear the very bells of St.
Martin's for the roar of the traffic. So lonely, and too easily
enamoured, George has to betake himself to the tavern, and a
passable Burgundy. There is no idealism about him. He is very fit
for repentance next morning. "The searching Wine has sprung the
Rheumatism in my Right Hand, my Head aches, my Stomach pukes." Our
poor, good-humoured beau has no constitution for this mode of life,
and we know, though happily he dreams not of it, that he is to die
before he reaches thirty.

This picture of Farquhar's life is nowhere given in the form just
related, but not one touch in the portrait but is to be found
somewhere in the frank and easy pages of Love and Business. The
poems are of their age and kind. There is a "Pindarick," of course;
it was so easy to write one, and so reputable. There are compliments
in verse to one of the female wits who were writing then for the
stage, Mrs. Trotter, author of the Fatal Friendship; there are
amatory explanations of all kinds. When he fails to keep an
appointment with a lady on account of the rain–for there were no
umbrellas in those days–he likens himself to Leander, wistful on the
Sestian shore. He is not always very discreet; Damon's thoughts when
"Night's black Curtain o'er the World was spread" were very
innocent, but such as we have decided nowadays to say nothing about.
It was the fashion of the time to be outspoken. There is no value,
however, in the verse, except that it is graphic now and then. The
letters are much more interesting. Those sent from Holland in the
autumn of 1700 are very good reading. I make bold to quote one
passage from the first, describing the storm he encountered in
crossing. It depicts our hero to the life, with all his
inconsistencies. He says: "By a kind of Poetical Philosophy I bore
up pretty well under my Apprehensions; though never worse prepared
for Death, I must confess, for I think I never had so much Money
about me at a time. We had some Ladies aboard, that were so
extremely sick, that they often wished for Death, but were damnably
afraid of being drown'd. But, as the Scripture says, 'Sorrow may
last for a Night, but Joy cometh in the Morning,'" and so on. The
poor fellow means no harm by all this, as Hodgson once said of
certain remarks of Byron's.

The love-letters are very curious. It is believed that the sequel of
them was a very unhappy marriage. Captain Farquhar was of a loving
disposition, and as inflammable as a hay-rick. He cannot have been
much more than twenty-one when he described what he desired in a
wife. "O could I find," he said–

O could I find (Grant, Heaven, that once I may!)
Nymph fair, kind, poetical and gay
Whose Love should blaze, unsullied and divine.
Lighted at first by the bright Lamp of mine.
Free as a Mistress, faithful as a wife.
And one that lov'd a Fiddle as her Life,
Free from all sordid Ends, from Interest free,
For my own Sake affecting only me,
What a blest Union should our Souls combine!
I hers alone, and she be only mine!

It does not seem a very exacting ideal, but the poor poet missed it.
Whether Mrs. Farquhar loved a fiddle as her life is not recorded,
but she certainly was not free from all sordid ends and unworthy
tricks. The little lady in the mourning mantua soon fell in love
with our gallant spark, and when he made court to her, she
represented herself as very wealthy. The deed accomplished, Mrs.
Farquhar turned out to be penniless; and the poet, like a gentleman
as he was, never reproached her, but sat down cheerfully to a double
poverty. In Love and Business the story does not proceed so far. He
receives Miss Penelope V––'s timid advances, describes himself to
her, is soon as much in love with his little lady as she with him,
and is making broad demands and rich-blooded confidences in fine
style, no offence taken where no harm is meant. In one of the
letters to Penelope we get a very interesting glance at a famous,
and, as it happens, rather obscure, event–the funeral of the great
Dryden, in May 1700. Farquhar says:

"I come now from Mr. Dryden's Funeral, where we had an Ode in Horace
sung, instead of David's Psalms; whence you may find that we don't
think a Poet worth Christian Burial; the Pomp of the Ceremony was a
kind of Rhapsody, and fitter, I think, for Hudibras than him; because
the Cavalcade was mostly Burlesque; but he was an extraordinary Man,
and bury'd after an extraordinary Fashion; for I believe there was
never such another Burial seen; the Oration indeed was great and
ingenious, worthy the Subject, and like the Author [Dr. Garth], whose
Prescriptions can restore the Living, and his Pen embalm the Dead.
And so much for Mr. Dryden, whose Burial was the same with his Life,–
Variety, and not of a Piece. The Quality and Mob, Farce and Heroicks,
the Sublime and Ridicule mixt in a Piece, great Cleopatra in a
Hackney Coach."
From Gossip in a Library



Title Page

LOVE
&
BUSINESS
IN A
COLLECTION
OF
Occasionary VERSE
AND
Epistolary PROSE
Not hitherto Publish'd.
=======================================
A Discourse likewise upon COMEDY in Reference
to the English STAGE. In a Familiar Letter.
=======================================
En Orenge il n'y a point d'oranges.<1>
=======================================



Dedication


To Edmond Chaloner, Esq;

SIR,

As it is the business of writing to transmit virtue to posterity, so
'tis the policy of the pen to make a party for its productions, by
engaging in their cause some worthy person universally honoured and
beloved, whose admired and established character may add a value to
the work, and take off all imputation of flattery from the author.

These advantages I had designed myself before, in a piece of another
nature, had not your modesty cautioned me the contrary; but I think
it injustice that one part of your character should obscure the
rest; and though I must despair of your consent for what they call a
dedication, yet I must beg your excuse, if at present I consult what
shall turn most to my own honour, and the interest of my book,
before your approbation and allowance but I hope you will come to
pardon the presumption, when I assure you, that my intention is not
so much a panegyric upon you, as to compliment myself, and my own
modesty, not yours, should take the offence.

The great and virtuous actions of progenitors look with a twofold
aspect upon their posterity, for when the vices of the latter appear
in the same degree of opposition with the merits of the first, the
praise of the father becomes a satire upon the son, and that coat of
arms which was the glory of one, turns to a severe libel upon the
t'other. But when the blood runs in the same channel of virtue, as
of consanguinity, when the course of the stream is as pure and lucid
as the fountain-head, then may the memory of the past, and the
practice of the present age come boldly face to face, where, by a
just resemblance of features, the forefather may joyfully own his
legitimate posterity.

This advantage, sir, is yours in perfection, being sprung from an
ancient and honourable family, of which merit laid the foundation,
and virtue has cemented the structure The known bravery of your
famous ancestor Sir Thomas Chaloner added more value to the order,
than he received by the knighthood, not meanly dubbed by a court-
favourite, but on the field of battle, where the voice of war
declared him noble, before the general made him a banneret. Add to
this, the politic and prudent discharge of his honourable embassy
from Queen Elizabeth to the King of Spain, and it will evidently
appear how Minerva had an equal share with man in his education, and
that his character left us by a great statesman, and his intimate
friend, the illustrious Cecil, was just to his merit.

--Pietas, Prudentia, Virtus
Quae divisa aliis, Chalonero juncta fuere.<2>

This encomium, sir, is lineally descended to his posterity, but with
all its circumstances appears most visibly entailed upon you. In
vindication of which I shall only appeal to the judgment of mankind,
and the actions of your life; and though your modesty may quarrel
with the world for doing you justice, yet you cannot give your own
behaviour the lie.—Sir, there is not a day of your life but will
rise up against you, and produce in legible characters the constant
actions of your piety, your generosity, your loyalty, honour and
integrity, to convince you of your merit whether you will or not.

So that you must give me leave to apply the great Burghley's
Versification to the present Opportunity, with the alteration only
of a word.

--Pietas, Prudentia, Virtus
Quae divisa aliis, Chalonero juncta supersunt.<3>

Another part of your great ancestor's character I remember is thus
described by Mr. Malim—Nam quamvis ???????? [polyixos] at variae
lectionis fuerat Chalonerus, utilitatem tamen potius verae, quam
ostentationem variae eruditionis mihi quesivisse videtur.<4> These
colours, sir, present you with your own picture drawn to the life,
your application to books is qualified by an universal knowledge in
mankind, and your acquisitions by study are as far removed from
pedantry, as your experience in the world from the foppery of a
traveller, The qualifications of foreign countries are so
naturalized in you, that they seem rather a genuine transmigration
from your ancestors, than the effects of your own industry, and the
temperance of your life, with the modesty of your conversation,
makes not to inform us that you have seen so much, but may convince
the world that you have chosen the best.

But we need not have recourse to France or Italy for your
improvements, your alliance and daily conversation with so many of
the most noble families in England is sufficient to authorise your
merit, and finish your character, being equally related to their
blood, and their virtues.

And now, sir, I come about to my first position, inferring from this
a compliment upon myself, I have the honour sometimes of sharing
some few hours of that conversation, which is so much courted by my
superiors, and consequentially do plume my vanity in this occasion
of acquainting the world with my happiness.

From the mentioning of the Honourable Sir Thomas Chaloner, I deduce
this advantage, that I make the most courtly address imaginable, to
poetry, by informing the world, in defence of that art so much
vilified by some, that this great statesman and soldier, the
trustiest minister to the greatest of queens, and the intimate
friend to the wisest of politicians, was at the same time one of the
greatest poets that ever England produced his ten books De Republica
Anglorum Instauranda<5> are sufficient proofs that the
qualifications of Virgil are consistent with those of Cato, and that
a poetical genius has accompanied the greatest abilities both in
court and camp.

Thus, sir, you see that I have avoided the current form of pieces in
this nature, not loading the modesty of my patron, but heightening
the vanity of the author, and by commending you, I have flattered
myself

As the form is new, pray sir, let me entreat you to believe the
design of it novel, it being only sent in the capacity and character
of a familiar letter, and therefore refuses to be received with the
usual formalities of a mercenary dedication. I am,

SIR,

Your most faithful, and

Most humble servant,

G. Farquhar.



To The Reader

SIR,

IN this collection of letters, 'tis but reasonable that you should
have one among the rest; and though I may want the honour of your
acquaintance, yet be assured, there is no person in the world more
willing to oblige you at present than your humble servant. I have
heard such a character of your honour, your wit, your judgment, your
learning, and your candour, that I'm in a perfect rapture to think
how happy I shall be in your hands.

It was a good ancient custom with our forefathers, to begin their
prefaces with Kind reader. I would have revived that fashion with
all my heart, and called you courteous or gentle reader, as you very
well deserve; but I thought the style a little too obsolete for a
book that I design should be a beau; for you must understand, sir,
that this gentleman is span-new from top to toe, talks of everything
but religion, admires himself very much, and his greatest ambition
is, to please the ladies. But to finish his character, he is
perfectly civil to everybody he meets, and with a more particular
and profound respect does he run to kiss your hands. He's none of
those bully-books that come bluff into the world, with Damme,
reader, you're a blockhead if you don't commend me. No, no, sir—if
you like him, why you have all the sense that he thought you had—if
you dislike him, you have more sense than he was aware of, that's
all.

Besides all this, he has more manners than to come among gentlemen
with his tailor's bill in his hand, and to entertain the company
with a long preface or inventory of his equipments, as, such a thing
cost so much, and such a thing is worth so much, the work of such a
part is excellent, the fashion from Paris, and the tailor a
Frenchman, you must pardon him for that, Sir, if you like the suit,
taking it all together, approve his fancy, and allow it becomes him,
he's your very humble servant.

Moreover, sir, I would have you to know, that this gentleman is of
some circumstance and condition, and has not been engaged in the
shifts that some late sparks are put to for their habiliments, who
ferret all the wit-brokers in town, taking up from several places,
and strut in a second-hand finery, patched up of the scraps and
remnants of the eminent men of the age. For I will tell you, sir,
though his clothes be but plain, yet they are his own, taken up
handsomely at one place, where he may have credit for as much more,
when these are worn out.

And now, dear sir, let me entreat you to receive him with the usual
forms of civility; if you be a courtier, you will show your
breeding, receive him with a sincere smile, swear to do him all the
service you can, and you will certainly keep your word—as you used
to do. From the city he expects a more than ordinary reception,
because he is become one of their honourable society, he is bound to
Mr. Lintott, and ten to one may serve seven years in his shop, if
the town don't club to purchase his freedom, he expects good quarter
from the wits, and critics, because he sets up for neither, besides,
he has scattered some little nonsense here and there, that they
might not be disappointed of their prey. But his greatest concern is
for his entertainment with the ladies, resolved however not to
complain, thinking it a greater honour to fall a sacrifice to the
resentment of the fair, than to live by the approbation of men.
Though he has some grounds for a more moderate fate at their hands,
because a great part of the work was first designed for one of that
sex, without any farther consideration of pleasing the world, and
the beauties of the book, if there be any, was brought from a lady's
cabinet to the press, and if it can but from the press get back
again into the ladies' closets, there may it rest, and peace be with
it.

Now, sir, as we met good friends, pray let us part so; I hate
quarrelling mortally, and especially with a person of your present
character and condition, and as you like my epistolary clothes, we
shall settle a farther correspondence.



Advertisement

In the discourse upon comedy, I must beg the reader's excuse for
omitting to mention a certain fragment of poetry, written by
Aristotle. I thank Scaliger for his timely discovery, but should be
much more obliged to anybody that could show me the piece.


On the death of general Schomberg killed at the
Boyne.

A Pindaric.



(1)
What dismal damp has overspread the war?
The victor grieves more than the conquered fears, 
The streams of blood are lost in floods of tears,
And Victory with drooping wings comes flagging from afar.



(2)

The British lion roars

Along the fatal shores,
The Hibernian harp in mournful strains,
Mixed with the echo of the flood, complains.
Round whose reflecting banks the grieving voice,

Shakes with a trembling noise,

As if afraid to tell
How the great, martial, godlike Schomberg fell.




(3)

Gods! How he stood,

All terrible in blood
Stopping the torrent of his foes, and current of the flood.
He, Moses-like, with sword, instead of wand,
This redder sea of gore could straight command,
But not like Moses, to secure his flight,
But spite of waves and tides to meet, and fight.



(4)
The labouring guns opposed his passage o'er

With throws tormented on the shore,
Of which delivered, they start back, and roar,
As frighted at the monster which they bore.
The furious offspring swathed in curling smoke,

And wrapped in bands of fire,

Hot with its parent's sulphurous ire,
And winged with death, flies hissing to the stroke



(5)

Like some great rugged tower,

The ancient seat of power,

Bending with age its venerable halls,

With old and craggy wrinkles on its walls,
The neighbours' terror whilst it stands, and ruin when it
falls.

Thus mighty Schomberg fell—
Spreading wide ruins o'er the ground,

With desolation all around,
Crushing with destructive weight

The foes that undermined his seat,
Whilst victory, that always sped,
With towering pinions o'er his army's head,
Making his banner still her lure,
Like Marius's vultures, to make conquest sure,
Seeing the spacious downfall so bemoaned,
Perched on the ruins, clapped her wings, and groaned.



(6)
Thus Israel's hero<6> 'twixt the pillars sat,
The ne plus ultra of his fate
These columns which upheld his name,

Much longer by their fall,
Than those erected strong and tall,
The standing limits of Alcides' fame

He sat deprived of sight,
Like a black rolling cloud involved in night
Conceiving thunder in its swelling womb
Big with surprising fate, and rushing doom.
No flash the sudden bolt must here disclose;
The lightning of his eyes extinguished by his foes
His foes, industrious in their juggling fate,

Him slavishly enchained we see,

To what must set him free,
And them his cheated keepers captivate.
He shook his chains with such a noise,

The trembling rout,

Amidst their joys,

Gazed all about,
And heard the real Sampson in the voice:

They saw him too, 'twas Sampson all,

Who by his thundering fall

Gave the loud dread alarm,
Dragging a train of vengeance by each giant arm.
Their chilling fears did such amazement frame,
They seemed all stiff and dead before the ruin came
The ruin! Only such unto his foes,
From thence his glorious monument arose,
But Time's corroding teeth in spite of stone
Has eat through all, and even the very ruin's gone
But Schomberg's monument shall ne'er decay,

The gliding Boyne

Time never can disjoin,
Nor on its floods impose his laws,
They slide, untouched, from his devouring jaws,
And always running, yet must ever stay.



(7)
Hark! How the trumpets hollow clangours sound,
The army has received an universal wound,

The death of Schomberg hung

On every faltering tongue,
While pallid grief did place
A sympathizing death in every soldier's face.

But hold, ye mighty chiefs,

Suspend your needless griefs,
And let victorious joy your arms adorn,

The mighty warrior's ghost

Upon the Stygian coast
Your sorrows, more than his own fate, does mourn.

He scorns to be lamented so,
Moving in stately triumph to the shades below.
Behold the sprites that lately felt the blow

Of his commanding warlike arm,
They shivering all start wide, and even more fleeting grow

As if the powerful hand
That could their grossest shapes alive command,
Had power to dissolve their airy form.



(8)
Then let not funeral plaints his trophies wrong;
Let spoils and pageants march his hearse along,
And shout his conclamatum in triumphal song.
All baleful cypress must be here denied,
But laurel wreaths fix in their blooming pride
For as he conquered living, so he conquering died.



Written on Orinda's poems, lent to a Lady, in
imitation of Ovid.

Me Damon sends his amorous cause to plead,
Orinda must for Damon intercede.
Me has he chose to move your angry mind,
Me the soft favourite of the softer kind.
Me has he chose your rigorous breast to move,
He knows my force in poetry and love
Me has he chose to tell his anxious pain,
Read me, and read the passion of the swain.
Whatever power of love my lines can show,
It falls far short of what he feels for you.
Where'er Orinda melts in moving strains,
Think, Caelia, think, that Damon thus complains.
Whene'er I grieve, think Damon grieves for you,
Pity the swain that does so humbly sue:
This Damon begs, Orinda begs it too.



To the ingenious lady, author of the Fatal
Friendship, designed for a recommendatory copy to her
play.

Let others call the sacred nine to aid,
Their moving thoughts, in moving numbers laid,
Invoke the fiery god with all the throng
That ancient bards implore to guide their song,
Whilst I for nobler inspiration sue,
Scorning their weaker helps, invoking you
You, who alone have power our thoughts to raise,
And wing our fancy to attempt your praise
Naught but your charming beauty can dispense
A flame sufficient to describe your sense.
While so much beauty in your form is shown,
No pen on earth can reach it, but your own.
Go on then Daphne, Phœbus will pursue,
His chaster fires are all enjoyed by you;
You are his fairer nymph, you bear his laurel too.
Go on, thou champion for thy sex designed,
And prove, the muses are of female kind,
Let distant nations English beauties prize,
As much for charms of wit, as power of eyes
Your moving scenes the ravished audience drew,
Raptures we felt, as when your eyes we view;
Such arts were used to mix our hopes and fears,
You made grief pleasing, and we smiled in tears.
Thus lovers view a mistress's disdain,
And love to look, though sure to look in pain
Th' effects of laboured art your work reveals,
Yet a superior art, that art conceals
Here nature gains, though naked, thus displayed,
Like beauty most adorned, when least arrayed.
Go on then, doubly armed, to conquer men,
Phœbus his harp and bow, you boast your eyes and pen
All to the fire without reluctance yield
But your victorious pen has forced the field.



Epigram, on the riding-house in Dublin, made into a
chapel.

A chapel of the riding-house is made,
We thus once more see Christ in manger laid,
Where still we find the jockey trade supplied,
The laymen bridled, and the clergy ride.



To a lady, being detained from visiting her by a
storm.

So poor Leander viewed the Sestian shore,
While winds and waves opposed his passage o'er,
More moist with tears, because by floods restrained,
Than, in these floods had he his wish obtained,
So drowned, yet burnt within, upon the banks he leaned,
Leaned begging calms, and as he begging lay,
Implored with sighs the winds, with tears the sea. 
One would have thought by all these mixtures sent,
To raise a second greater storm he meant.
Just so whilst kept from you by storms,
I weep, the winds my sighs, my tears augment the deep;
With flowing eyes I view the distant side,
The space that parts us doth myself divide.
Here's only left the poor external part,
Whilst you, where'er you move, possess my heart
Deprived of love, and your blessed sight, I die,
Whilst you the first, and storms the last deny.



The Lover's Night.
The night's black curtain o'er the world was spread,
And all mankind lay emblems of the dead,
A deep and awful silence void of light,
With dusky wings sat brooding o'er the night,
The rolling orbs moved slow from east to west,
With harmony that lulled the world to rest
The moon withdrawn, the oozy floods lay dead,
The very influence of the moon was fled,
Some twinkling stars, that through the clouds did peep,
Seeming to wink as if they wanted sleep,
All nature hushed, as when dissolved and laid
In silent chaos e'er the world was made,
Only the beating of the lover's breast
Made noise enough to keep his eyes from rest;
His little world, not like the greater, lay
In loudest tumults of disordered day,
His sun of beauty shone, to light his breast
With all its various toils and labours pressed,
The sea of passions in his working soul,
Raised by the tempests of his sighs did roll
In towering floods, to overwhelm the whole,
Those tyrants of the mind, vain hope and fear,
That still by turns usurp an empire there,
Now raising man on high, then plunging in despair.
Thus Damon lies, his grief no rest affords,
Till swelling full, it thus burst out in words.
Oh! I could curse all womankind, but one,
And yet my griefs proceed from her alone.
Was not our paradise by woman lost?
But in this woman still we find it most:
Hell's greatest curse a woman if unkind,
Yet heaven's great blessing, if she loves, we find.
Oh! If she loved, no god the bliss could tell,
She would be heaven itself, were she not so much hell.
Thus our chief joys with most allays are cursed,
And our best things, when once corrupted, worst.
But heaven is just, ourselves the idols framed,
And are for such vain worship justly damned.
Thus the poor lover argued with his fate,
Emilia's charms now did his love create;
That love repulsed, now prompted him to hate.
Sometimes his arms would cross his bosom rest,
Hugging her lovely image printed on his breast,
Where flattering painter fancy showed his art,
In charming drafts, his pencil Cupid's dart.
The shadow drawn so lively did appear,
As made him think the real substance there
Then was he blest, all rapture, stunned with joy,
Excess of pleasure did his bliss destroy;
He thought her naked, soft, and yielding waist
Within his pressing arms lay folded fast;
Nay, by the gods, she really there was placed,
Else how could pleasure to such raptures flow?
Th'effect was real—then, the cause was so
What more can most substantial pleasures boast
Than joy when present, memory when past?
Then, bliss is real which the fancy frames,
Or these called real joys are only dreams.



A Journey to Holland.

I
The Brill,
August the 10th, 1700
New style.

Dear Sam,

To give you a short journal of my short voyage, on Wednesday I got
to Harwich about four in the afternoon, and alighted at one of the
cleanest, best-furnished inns in the kingdom. My warrant for the
packet-boat coast me half a piece, and to the officers for not
executing their duty half a crown. This place, like most sea-ports,
we found extravagantly dear; but to ease that inconvenience, we were
advised to get aboard by eleven at night, here I met a gentleman,
whose company I was very happy in, though extremely concerned for
the occasion of his voyage, which was an express to the King, of the
Duke of Gloucester's death. This was the first news I had of this
public loss, which I had not much time to reflect upon, being so
nearly touched on the score of my private concern by a violent storm
that immediately came upon us; you may guess at our circumstances,
when I assure you, that out greatest comfort was the lightning that
showed the seamen their business, which otherwise they must have
groped for, all intercourse of speech being broken off by the
loudness of the thunder: we had such warm work, that I sometimes
allowed it a just thought, that Satan should be entitled Prince of
the Air, and again, why the Devil should command the artillery of
heaven, I could not so well comprehend. I supported myself with the
thought, that providence had no design upon me, but that this tumult
of the elements was their manner of expressing their grief for the
loss of his Highness; or that they were angry at Mr. L——r for
bringing such unwelcome news into their dominions, and for making a
property of them to spread it abroad. By this kind of poetical
philosophy I bore up pretty well under my apprehensions, though
never worse prepared for death, I must confess, for I think I never
had so much money about me at a time; we had some ladies aboard,
that were so extremely sick, that they often wished for death, but
were damnably afraid of being drowned, but, as the scripture says,
sorrow may last for a night, but joy cometh in the morning.<7> The
weather cleared up with the day, the wind turned westerly, and in a
few hours, I was going to say, we saw England out of sight, all
Thursday we had a fresh gale, and cold chickens, our wine went about
at a strange rate, for our stomachs ebbed and flowed like the
element. On Friday morning we made the coast of Holland, a stiff
gale, and the sea runs high. I was mightily pleased to view the
continent, you may be sure, but as I stood upon the poop perusing
its first appearance with my perspective, I had such a rebuke for my
curiosity, by a great sea, that took us fore and aft, that I was
seasoned for a Dutchman immediately. Whether this be a compliment of
salutation usually paid to strangers, or that the Batavian out-
guards took me for a spy upon their frontiers, I shall leave the
skipper to determine. In short, by working of a staunch ship, and
the influence of a staunch proverb in favour of the Old Bailey bar,
we got over the bar at the Maas; and the Dutch wave has cleared my
eyesight of an error that we Britons  are very fond of, that the
Thames is the finest river in the universe; for I can assure you,
Sam, that the Rhine is as much beyond it, as a pair of oars before a
sculler, let all the tritons between Chelsea and Richmond argue
never so loud to the contrary, though in one sort of traffic upon
that part of the Thames we exceed the whole world, both for the
quantity and cheapness of the commodity; and I believe the store-
house for this kind of staple, including the Playhouse and the Rose,
may contend with most marts in Europe.

This day at eleven we landed at the Brill, and here I have a small
talk of this republic, that makes such a noise in the world—my fancy
in respect of expectation has generally been so fruitful, that the
dearest part of my hopes have frequently ended in disappointments,
and I have seldom found things come up to answer the idea that I
have usually framed of their excellence, but here I must confess the
reality exceeds the shadow, and I am pleased once in my life to find
a thing that can afford me substantial pleasure in the enjoyment. I
have read much of this place, fancied more, yet all falls short of
what I see.

At my first entrance into this town, I made one discovery, which I
believe has hitherto escaped most travellers, viz. That the Dutch
are the greatest beaux in the world, only with this difference from
the gentlemen at White's, that their finery is much more noble, and
substantial; I never knew the fairest, finest, full-bottom wig, most
nicely fixed on the most beautiful block in the side-box, look half
so genteel as a Dutch canal with a stately row of flourishing trees
on each side, and some twenty beautiful bridges laid across it,
within sixty or seventy paces one of another. I never knew a valet
and a barber with razors, tweezers, perfumes, and washes, work half
so hard upon a gentleman's face, that designed a conquest on a
birth-night, as I have seen a lusty Dutch woman with a mop and warm
water scrub the marbles and tiles before the door, till she has
scoured them brighter than any fop's complexion in the universe. No
first-rate beau with us, drawn by his six before and six behind,
lolling incuriously in his coach, appears half so gallant, as a
jolly skipper at the stern of his barge, with a furred cap like rays
about his head, the helm in his hand, and his pipe in his mouth,
with liberty seated in one whisker, and property on t'other, and in
this splendour making the tour of half a dozen fine cities in a day,
without either qualm of the spleen, or twinge of the gout. Such a
person I take for a beau of the first magnitude, who scorning to be
lugged by beasts as fellows are to Tyburn, can harness the winds and
waves for his equipage, and improving on the works of providence,
makes the universal elements, (air and water) submit to his private
composition of advantage and diversion, to see the wind work in his
sails, and play with his pendants, must certainly afford more
substantial and pure satisfaction, than the whinny of a horse, or
the crack of a coach-whip.

In short, dear Sam, I am not so bigoted to domestic customs, as not
to approve what is admirable here, and you must pardon me that I
have thrown up the prejudice of nativity with my beef and pudding as
I came over; and 'tis no small part of my present wonder, why we
should call the Dutch a slovenly sort of people, since to the eye,
which must determine that circumstance, they are much more gaudy
than that nation we so mimic and admire, and with this advantage
that they are gay without levity, and fine beyond foppery. Why we
should mention the Dutch with contempt, and the French with
admiration, is a severe satire upon the English judgment, when the
bravery of the former attract the admiration of men, and the
pageantry of the latter draw only the eyes of women: but our English
ladies are so very fine, that we are very willing to please them,
and thus are drawn into this unreasonable prejudice; but we ought to
take care, that by being thus particular slaves to our respective
mistresses, we be not drawn at last into universal bondage to a
master. The French have taken no small pains of late years to render
themselves agreeable; they treat us like a mistress, do everything
that they fancy will please us, till they bring us at last to act
whatsoever shall please them, but this is no news, and I think it a
little improper to tell you an English story from a place where you
may expert some foreign entertainment. I have no more to say at
present, but that I am just going for Rotterdam, and departing from
a Scotch house here, where nothing of that country is to be found
but the landlord, for the rooms are a paradise for cleanliness, but
the host is a rogue for his reckoning. I have got such a heap of
silver out of a pistol, as upon a handsome counter might give credit
to a banker, and I can assure you that while I have a brother to
that pistol left, you shall not see

Your friend and servant.

II

Leyden
October the 15th 1700

Dear Sam,

The usual excuse of gentlemen abroad for neglecting their friends at
home, is, that new sets of different objects continually
entertaining us with changes of admiration, the idea of our old
acquaintance is by degrees worn out by the accession of the new. But
this kind of forgetfulness were too severe a charge upon the merit
of my friends and my own gratitude, both which I will choose to
maintain, and leave it to your charity to make me an excuse for my
silence: the truth is, I have had a very tedious fit of sickness,
which had almost sent your friend a longer journey than he was
willing to undertake at present, but now being pretty well
recovered, I can only inform you in general, that every day
surprises me with some agreeable object or other; and I find very
much to my wonder, that the accounts I have had of this country are
very different from the observations that may be made upon the
place. Some general remarks there are indisputably certain, as that
nothing can parallel the Dutch industry but the luxury of England,
and that the money laid out in the taverns in London, in purchasing
diseases, would victual the whole United Provinces very plentifully
at their wholesome course of diet, that the standing army maintained
by the Dutch for their security against a foreign force, are not
half so expensive, as the fifty thousand lawyers kept up by our
civil factions in England, for no other use but to set us
continually by the ears; people, like the Jews, that are tolerated
in all governments for the interest of the public, while their main
drift is to enrich themselves, and who by their gettings and cunning
have brought their riches and practice into a proverb. The lawyers
here put the question only, whether the thing be lawful, and, upon
application to the statutes, the controversy is immediately
determined. But our casuists at Westminster dispute not so much upon
the legality of the cause, as upon the letter of the law, and make
more cavils on the meaning of words that should determine justice,
than upon the equity of the allegations contended for by the
parties; and the bulk of our laws have loaded justice so heavily,
that 'tis become a burthen to the people, who in regard of their
sufferings in this kind should borrow an appellation from physic,
and be called patients rather than clients.

Another thing worth consideration in respect of the laws in Holland,
is this, none but honest men make estates by their practice, for the
siding with the wrong party brings the lawyer into contempt, and
lays him under a severe reprehension, either of ignorance in his
business, or knavery to the people. Hence it comes to pass, that
injustice, not finding a patron to support its cause, is forced to
remove to a neighbouring country, where the wrong side was never
known to make its assertor blush, where the eloquence of S—re, and
the impudence of S—n are plausible pretences for patronising
injustice, and abusing the client. But there are bravos in all parts
of the world, that will take money for cutting of throats, whether
there be grounds or not for the resentment.

So much for the Law, now for the Gospel, Sam. I think Holland may
contend for the Catholic church with any part in Europe, because
'tis more universal in its religion, than any country in the
universe. 'Tis a pleasant thing to see Christians, Mahometans, Jews,
Protestants, Papists, Armenians and Greeks, swarming together like a
hive of bees, without one sting of devotion to hurt one another.
They all agree about the business of this life, because a community
in trade is the interest they drive at, and they never jostle in the
way to the life to come, because everyone takes a different road.
One great cause of this so amicable a correspondence and agreement,
is, that only the laity of these professions compose the mixture,
here are no ingredients of priest-craft to sour the composition;
pulpits indeed they have, but not like Hudibras's ecclesiastic
drums, that are continually beating up for volunteers to the
alarming of the whole nation. Here is no interest of sects to be
managed under the cloak of gaining proselytes to the truth, nor
strengthening of parties, by pretence of reclaiming of souls; every
shepherd is content with his own flock, and Mufti, Levite, Pope, and
Presbyter, are all Christians in this, that they live in unity and
concord.

'Tis a strange thing, Sam, that among us people can't agree the
whole week, because they go different ways upon Sundays. This is to
make the Lord's day a sower of dissension, and religion, (which is
called the bond of peace) to be the brand of discord and combustion.
But we have some preachers that think themselves inspired with the
spirit, when they are really possessed by the Devil, the fervency of
whose zeal dismisses congregations with heats and heart-burnings of
spirit, and blows up the coals on the altar to set their neighbours
houses on fire, the efficacy of the pulpit is sufficiently shown in
the practice of the congregations. No people in the world are so
full of national principles of faith, and to what purpose the
following instance shall show you two gentlemen of my acquaintance,
one a devout hearer at Common-Garden Church, and the t'other a
violent zealot for Doctor Burgess's meeting, met one evening at
Tom's Coffee-house, and would adjourn to the Fleece Tavern, to
discourse upon some point of doctrine managed that Sunday by their
respective ministers. The drawer brought in a bottle of new French,
and the dissenter introduced predestination. After two or three
hearty glasses, the dispute grew pretty warm, and the quotation of
the fathers and the texts of scripture made such a noise, that two
wenches that usually ply upon those stairs, overhearing the bustle,
took them for a couple of Levites, and so made account to bolt in,
and sell their mackerel. The fervency of the argument was presently
abated upon the appearance of the ladies, and a topic of a more
familiar nature assumed, till both being pretty well convinced of
their opponent's fire and fancy, the whores were dismissed, and
predestination reassumed, the argument grew warmer, as the
disputants grew fuddled. In short they disputed themselves stark
drunk, drew their swords to decide the controversy, and, had not Mr.
Fern come in, 'twas great odds that predestination had sent one to
the Devil, and t'other to the gallows. But they parted friends at
last, and said one to t'other, I'm sorry all my heart, dear friend,
that you won't go to heaven my way. And so away he reeled to a
bawdy-house. Now the moral of the fable is this. If the divines,
instead of their speculative theology, had preached that day a
thundering sermon against drunkenness and fornication, 'tis probable
that the faith of these gentlemen had been ne'er the less fortified,
and their good works much more improved.

But I beg your pardon for this digression, I was going to say that,
excepting a few general remarks, some of which I have mentioned, the
accounts we have of this people are very lame, and sometimes exactly
opposite to the truth. I shall mention one or two particulars that I
found very obvious.

We have a notion in England, that the Dutch are very great
drunkards, whether this aspersion arise from some people's
confounding the high Dutch with the low, or that there is a
sottishness in their miens and complexions, I can't determine, but
this I can assure you, that the report is as false, as should I
aver, that the people in London are the most chaste and sober
gentlemen in the world. 'Tis true indeed they will take off a toping
glass of brandy, but that is only what is absolutely necessary to
moderate the moisture and coldness of their constitution, and used
in such quantity by the meaner sort only, who living continually in
the water, must require an allowance to fortify themselves against
the chillness of their habitations, for you must know, that whole
families, men, women, and children, live continually in boats, and
have no more tenement on dry land than a Thames salmon, but
notwithstanding this incumbent necessity of their taking a cup of
the creature, I never have seen since I came into this country but
one Dutchman drunk, and although his impertinence was no more than
is naturally incident to anybody in his condition, yet the whole
boatful of people, to the number of sixty persons, showed the
greaten aversion imaginable to his circumstances, except two or
three jolly English men that made very good sport with his humour;
and had not we, with some French gentlemen, protected his carcass,
his countrymen would have soused him in the canal very heartily for
his debauch.

As the laborious life of the inferior sort requires an exhilarating
glass, so the same necessity both as to time and charge secures them
from excess. And for the gentry, they are indeed sociable in their
own houses; but were it not for strangers, all places of public
entertainment must consequently fall, which is the greatest argument
imaginable for the sobriety and temperance of a people, whereas 'tis
very well known, that if the very taverns in London, with seven or
eight handsome churches, and one or two of our inns of court, (all
which we could well enough spare) were but handsomly seated on the
banks of a river, they would make a figure with some of the most
remarkable cities in Europe. This indeed is a noble argument of the
riches of England, but whether our luxury sprang from plenty, or the
temperance of Holland the effect of necessity, be the happier state,
is a question that I want leisure now to determine.

Another account we have very current among us, that there are no
beggars in Holland; that they are very careful in employing their
poor, and that their manufactures require a great many hands is most
certain, but ocular demonstration is too strong a proof against all
their industry; and I'm apt to believe, that the order of mendicants
is of a very late institution, else so visible a falsity could never
have put this trick upon travellers. Whether their late expensive
wars have ruined more people than their manufactures can employ, or
that the poverty of the Spaniards in the neighbour Netherlands, have
by degrees infected the meaner sort, I shan't be positive; but
nothing is more certain, than that a well-disposed Christian may
find as many objects of charity here as in any part of England, if
we may judge of their wants by the fervency of their cries.

I do believe that the charity of the Dutch is no great encouragement
to beggars; which is the reason (I conceive) why the poor flock all
to the highways and track-scouts,<8> where the opportunity is good
for application to strangers.

From these, and some other such-like particulars I found it matter
of some speculation, how the generality of the English nation being
so near neighbours to this state, should be so very short in their
knowledge of the manners and constitution of this people, but this I
may presume to proceed upon the following accounts.

Most of our English that visit this place, are either young
gentlemen that come abroad to travel, or merchants that make a short
trip upon their own private concerns.

'Tis the usual way with the first of these to take Holland en
passant, either going or coming, and being youthful sparks, are so
fond of the finery at Paris and delicacy of Rome, that they han't
leisure, forsooth, to dwell upon the solidity of this place. France
and Italy are their provinces, and Holland is only their inn upon
the road, they lie for a night, and away the next morning

They can tell you, perhaps, that the Dutch manner of travelling is
very commodious, that the Hague is a pretty village, Amsterdam a
fine city, and that the people are a parcel of heavy, dull,
unconversable creatures, and so they leave them. Nothing can relish
more of old England than this peremptory declaration, I would
understand how gentlemen can make a true estimate of the wit and
ingenuity of a people, when they don't stay to make one acquaintance
in the country, nor can speak one syllable of their language.

Most of our young nobility and gentry travel under the tuition of
French governors, who however honest in their intentions of serving
their pupils, are nevertheless full of their moi-même, and from the
prejudice of birth and education, like all other people, are most
inclinable to the manners, language, dress, and behaviour of their
own nation; and though perfectly skilled perhaps in the
accomplishments that compose what we call a fine gentleman, yet 'tis
probable they may fall short in those qualifications that are
absolutely necessary to an Englishman in respect of the interest of
his country, and of these I take the Dutch language to be none of
the most trivial for at the present juncture, which renders it not
only ours, but the interest of Europe, that we should be well with
these people, it were not unnecessary that our amity should be
linked with private friendships and correspondence, as by public
leagues and alliances. An instance of which is very visible to our
prejudice in the habitudes and familiarity contracted by our young
gentlemen at Paris, which, without all dispute, is one great reason
for the influence retained by that court, not only over our fashions
and behaviour, but which is extensive also to matters of more
weighty consequence, including even our councils, laws and
government.

The second sort of people that make a turn into this country, are
our merchants, whose speculation is limited by a few particulars,
their affairs not extending to the policies of state, nor the
humours of the people, they are satisfied to mind their business
only, and to understand the encouragement of trade, the prices and
customs upon goods, the value of stock, and the rates of exchange.
Their conversation lies chiefly between the store-house and the
board-side, and that in one or two cities at most, where their
correspondents are resident, so that all the account we must expect
from these persons, must only relate to their trade in general, or
to some particular branch of it, which is universally understood
already through the intercourse of our dealing, and neither so
improving to our polity, nor satisfactory to the curious. But even
among their encouragement of trade so universally known and admired,
as the advantageous situation of their country, their natural
propensity to navigation, the lowness of their imposts, &c., yet by
an odd accident I came to understand one policy in their trading
constitution, which I have never hitherto met with in any verbal or
written account whatsoever the matter was thus in all its
circumstances.

One day upon the exchange at Rotterdam I casually met a gentleman
who some time ago lived one of the most considerable merchants in
Ireland, and about some four years since by great losses at sea was
forced to fly his country in a very mean condition. I put him in
mind of his misfortunes by a favour he once conferred upon me of a
bottle of claret and a neat's tongue at launching of a new ship that
he had built in Dublin, which vessel, (bottom and goods all his own)
was unfortunately lost the very first voyage. The gentleman seemed
very sensible of his misfortunes, but withal told me, that he still
had a glass of wine and a tongue at my service, if I would come and
see him at his house that evening. I made him a visit, and found, to
my no small surprise, a handsome house, neatly furnished, excellent
meat, and as good burgundy as ever joyed the heart of man. I took
the freedom to ask my merchant how a bankrupt should come by all
this, in answer to which he gave me the following account of his
affairs.

The Dutch, sir, (said he) have a law, that whatever merchant in any
part of Europe, who has had any considerable traffic with this
country, whose honesty is apparent by his former accounts, and can
prove by sufficient testimony, that his losses and misfortunes are
not chargeable upon his ignorance nor extravagance, but purely those
of unfortunate chance, above the reach of human prevention, that
then such a merchant may repair to them, have the freedom of any
sea-port in the state, have a supply of whatever money he's willing
to take up out of the public revenue, upon the bare security of his
industry and integrity; and all this upon the current interest,
which is seldom above four percent.

Pursuant to this (continued the gentleman) my qualifications for
this credit being sufficiently testified, I took up here two
thousand pound sterling, and in two years have gained fifty percent.
So that by God's assistance, and my own diligent endeavours, I
question not but in a few years I shall be able to show my face to
my creditors, return to my country, and there live statu quo.

Here are two points remarkable enough. A charitable action to
relieve distressed strangers, and a policy of state for the interest
of the republic, which you may soon discover by repeating the
conditions. His honesty must be manifest from his former accounts,
his sufficiency in business apparent from his precedent manner of
dealing, his misfortunes such as were above human prevention, as by
storms, pirates, or the like, but above all, he must have some
considerable traffic with this country, there's the clincher, the
utile, the greatest encouragement imaginable for all foreigners to
traffic with this nation, and for the most ingenious traders, who
are not always the most fortunate, to seek a residence among them,
and what a life and vigour these two circumstances may add to the
trade of a nation, the flourishing condition of this people is the
most sufficient witness.

Now, Sam, I have tired you most certainly, for I am weary myself,
and we are seldom the soonest tired with our own, the gravity of my
style you must impute to the air of the country, and the length of
my letter to a very rainy day that has kept me within, and to excuse
the matter, it shall cost you nothing, for I send it by a gentleman,
who can assure you that what I have said is true. I shall at least
conclude with a truth, that I am,

Dear sir, yours, &c.



An epilogue, spoken by Mr. Wilks at his First
Appearance upon the English stage.

As a poor stranger wrecked upon the coast,
With fear and wonder views the dangers past,
So I with dreadful apprehensions stand,
And thank those powers that brought me safe to land.
With joy I view the smiling country o'er,
And find, kind heavens! an hospitable shore.
'Tis England—this your charities declare,
But more the charms of British beauties there
Beauties that celebrate this isle afar,
They by their smiles, as much as you by war
True love, true honour, here I can't fail to play,
Such lively patterns you before me lay
Void of offence, though not from censure free,
I left a distant isle too kind to me.
Loaded with favours I was forced away,
'Cause I would not accept what I could never pay.
There I could please, but there my fame must end,
For hither none must come to boast, but mend.
Improvement must be great, since here I find
Precepts, examples, and my masters kind.



A Prologue on the Proposed Union of the Two Houses.

Now all the world's taken up with state affairs, 
Some wishing peace, some calling out for wars
'Tis likewise fit, we should inform the age,
What are the present politics of the stage
Two different states, ambitious both, and bold,
All free-born souls, the new house and the old,
Have long contended, and made stout essays,
Which should be monarch, absolute in plays.
Long has the battle held with bloody strife,
Where many ranting heroes lost their life.
Yet such their enmity, that even the slain
Do conquer death, rise up, and fight again.
Whilst from the gallery, box, the pit and all
The audience looked, and shook its awful head,
Wondering to see so many thousands fall,
And then looked pale to see us look so red.
By force of number, and poetic spell,
We've raised the ancient heroes too from hell
To lead our troops; and on this bloody field,
You've seen great Caesar fight, great Pompey yield.
Vast sums of treasure too we did advance
To draw some mercenary troops from france,
Light-footed rogues, who when they got their pay,
Took to their heels—allons—and run away
Here have you seen great Philip's conquering son,<9>
Who in twelve years did the whole world overrun,
Here has he fought, and found a harder job
To beat one playhouse, than subdue the globe
All this from emulation for the bays,
You liked the contest, and bestowed your praise.
But now, (as busy heads love something new)
They would propose an union—oh, mort-dieu.<10>
If it be so, let Caesar hide his head,
And fight no more for glory, but for bread
Let Alexander mourn, as once before,
Because no worlds are left to conquer more
But if we may judge small from greater things,
The present times may show what union brings,
You feel the danger of vowed kings
If we grow one, then slavery must ensue
To poets, players, and, my friends, to you
For to one house confined, you then must praise
Both cursed actors, and confounded plays
Then leave us as we are, and next advance
Bravely to break the tie 'twixt Spain and France.



On the Death of a Lady's Sparrow, in Iimitation of
Catullus, for his Lesbia's.

Mourn all ye muses, mourn ye nymphs and loves,
Mourn all ye woods, mourn all ye trees and groves.
Weep all ye streams, ye forests fade and mourn,
Your well-loved bird must ne'er again return.
Let the dull air ne'er be serene again,
Let all the winds with loudest sighs complain.
The once blest winds, whilst they could bear away
His charming notes, and with his feathers play.
How shall I grieve, or how bewail his death?
None fit to sing that wants his tuneful breath.
Like the melodious swan prepared to die,
He should himself have sung his elegy
Ye winged choristers, come here, and sing,
Lament his death, sweet flowers and blossoms bring,
To strew his grave with beauties of the spring.
Sweet was his voice, well were his notes beloved;
His careful mistress with his tunes he moved;
Oft has he sung upon the flowery plain,
But ne'er, alas! Like wretched me, in vain.
Round her alone the pretty bird would fly,
Chirp to the fair, and in her bosom lie,
Her bosom, fairer than the silver sky
There did the wanton play, and there was blest,
And there alone he made his downy nest,
All her discourse to him he understood,
And kindly answered with what voice he could.
Upon her head oft would he fluttering move,
And spread a living canopy above,
Ten thousand pretty things showed his officious love.
Oft as she walked, when she began to sing,
With her own breath he fanned her from his wing;
Then would he pluck the daisies here, and there,
And to her hands the blushing presents bear.
The woods he scorned, and chose with her to dwell,
Her fingers did all boughs by far excel
Ye winged choristers, come here, and sing,
Lament his death, sweet flowers, and blossoms bring,
To strew his grave with beauties of the spring.
For ah! He's gone, his pleasing sports must cease,
He's gone, alas! And now no more can please,
Still in his voice, and still his stiffening wing,
He ne'er again must to his mistress sing.
See his deep grave by mournful cupid made,
Himself close by in a sad posture laid,
Breaking his golden arrow, late his spade.
Around his grave let circling fairies play,
Dance the whole night, and scarce depart by day,
Let all things grieve, Selinda's sparrow's gone;
Selinda's sparrow, so beloved alone,
For him the tender virgin mourns and cries,
For her dear sparrow she laments and sighs,
Sworn to be buried there, whene'er she dies.
Then shall the winged choir flock here and sing,
Lament her death, sweet flowers and blossoms bring,
To strew her grave with beauties of the spring.



On the Death of the late Queen.

<11>Whilst heaven with envy on the earth looked down,
Saw us unworthy of the royal pair,
And justly claimed Maria as its own,
Yet kindly left the glorious William here:
The heaven and earth alike do in the blessing share.
He makes the earth, she heaven our great allies,
And though we mourn, she for our comfort dies,
Nor need we fear the rash presumptuous foe,
Whilst she's our saint above, and he our king below.



A Song



(1)
Tell me Aurelia, tell me pray,
How long must Damon sue,
Prefix the time, and I'll obey,
With patience wait the happy day,
That makes me sure of you.



(2)
The sails of time my sighs shall blow,
And make the minutes glide,
My tears shall make the current flow,
and swell the hastening tide.



(3)
The wings of love shall fly so fast,
My hopes mount so sublime,
The wings of love shall make more haste,
Than the swift wings of time.



The Assignation, a Song.



(1)
The minute's past appointed by my fair,
The minute's fled
And leaves me dead
With anguish and despair



(2)
My flattered hopes their flight did make
With the appointed hour,
None can the minutes past o'ertake,
And naught my hopes restore.



(3)
Cease your plaints, and make no moan,
Thou sad repining swain;
Although the fleeting hour be gone,
The place does still remain.



(4)
The place remains, and she may make 
Amends for all your pain;
Her presence can past time o'ertake,
Her love your hopes regain.



An Epigram.

Dans vitam panis, nobis dans gaudia vinum
Omnia dans aurum, sunt pretiosa nimis
Nil commune bonum est, at res est flebilis altera,
Dans, est communis fœmina ubique, nihil.

In English, thus:

Nature's chief gifts unequally are carved;
It surfeits some, while many more are starved:
Her bread, her wine, her gold, and what before
Was common good, is now made private store
Nothing that's good we have among us common
But all enjoy the common in—a woman.



To a Gentleman, that had his Pocket Picked of a Watch
and some Gold by a Mistress. A Burlesque Letter.

I'm sorry, Sam, thou'rt such a ninny 
To let a wench rob thee of guinea,
And thus to spend and lose your cobbs
By lavish opening both your fobs
You're fairly fobbed, to let her get all, 
Both one, and also t'other metal. 
Your work was on a pretty score,
You dug the mine, she found the ore;
The Devil take the cunning whore!
You slyly laid her down to rest her,
And on the bed she found a tester.
Your watch too, Sam, (those men of power
Must lie with doxies by the hour)
A minute's time did that command,
Then hers, it seems, was minute hand
She wound you up to her own liking,
Then stole the watch, while you were striking
Then think not, sir, that you are undone
What's wound so high, must next be run down.
In revelling timeg you thought no sin,
To play a game, at in and in
I wonder though you did not win for't,
Since that you were so fairly in for't
But what destroyed you in a trice,
She held the box, you shook the dice:
The Devil was in the dice then surely,
To lose when you played so securely,
And three to one was laid so purely
But what's the worst of all mishaps
You dread, they say, some after-claps:
If that be so, my dearest Sammy,
You'll curse, and bid the Devil damn ye
The fruit of wild oats which you scatter,
Is nothing else but barley-water.
The seed-time's good, you know my meaning,
But faith, the harvest's only gleaning
Take heart howe'er, 'tis my desire,
You will revive, the p—x expire,
Then rise like phoenix from the fire.
The metal's stronger that's well soudered,
And beef keeps sweeter once 'tis powdered.
So farewell, Sam, and may you ne'er want
Such a true faithful humble servant.
May the 4th, from Temple Inner,
The post's going out, I in to dinner


A collection of Letters and other Miscellanies.

I

Gray's-inn, Wednesday.

'Tis a presumption to imagine, that you have thought my letters
worth the keeping, and yet a greater presumption to expect you
should now return them if you have kept them so long, but I hope.
The design will partly excuse my request. I have promised to equip a
friend with a few letters to help out a collection for the press,
and there are none I dare sooner expose to the world than those to
you, because your merit may warrant their sincerity, and because
your ladyship was pleased to commend them. This makes me imagine,
Madam, that they have still secured a place in your cabinet, though
the unworthy author could merit no room in your heart, whence I may
infer that they may be as acceptable to you in print as in my
manuscript, but if you have a mind to secure trophies of so poor a
conquest, I shall be proud to return them as soon as ever they are
transcribed, for which I now pawn my word and honour, as sincerely,
as I once did the heart of,

MADAM,

Your most humble servant.

II

Tuesday morning, one stocking on,
and t'other off

I have had your letter, Madam, and all that I understand by it, is
that your hand is as great a riddle as your face, and 'tis as
difficult to find out your sense in your characters, as to know your
beauty in your mask, but I have at last conquered the maidenhead of
your writing, as I hope one day I shall that of your person, and I'm
sure you han't lost your virginity, if the lines in your complexion
be half so crooked as those in your letter. I return your compliment
of advice in the same number of particulars that you were pleased to
send me. First, if you are not handsome, never show a face that may
frighten away that admirer, which your wit has engaged. Secondly,
never believe what a gentleman speaks to you in a mask, for while
the ladies were double faces, 'tis but justice that our words should
bear a double meaning—lastly, you must never advise a man against
wandering, if you design to be his guide. You tell me of swearing to
a known lie, I don't remember, Madam, that I ever swore I loved you,
though I must confess that a little lady in a half mourning mantua
and a deep morning complexion, has run in my head so much since
Monday night, that I'm afraid, she will soon get into my heart. But
now Madam, hear my misfortune.

The angry fates and dire stage-coach
Upon my liberty encroach,
To bear me hence with many a jog
From thee my charming dear incog
Unhappy wretch! At once who feels
O'erturns of hack, and fortune's wheels.
This is my epitaph, Madam, for now I'm a dead man, and the stage-
coach may most properly be called my hearse, bearing the corpse only
of deceased F—r; for his soul is left with you whom he loves above
all womankind, by which you may judge of the height of his passion,
for he cares not one farthing for your whole sex, as I hope to be
saved.

III

Thursday, 11 o'clock.

Bo-peep is child's play, and 'tis time for a man to be tired of it;
I went yesterday to Bedlam upon your mad assignation, stayed till
seven like a fool, to expect one, who, unless she were mad, would
never come. I begin to believe that they are only wise that are
there, and we possessed that put them in, they at least have this
advantage over us lunatics at liberty, that they find pleasure in
their frenzy, and we a torment in our reason. I was so tired with
walking there so long, that I could not bear the fatigue of putting
off my clothes, but sat up all night at the tavern, so that your
letter is but just come to my hands, when, like Prince
Prettyman,<12> I have one boot on and t'other off. Love and Honour
have a strong battle, but here comes my friend to claim my
engagement, so love is put to the rout, and away for Essex
immediately. But a word of advice before we part. Pray consider,
Madam, whether your good or ill stars have usually the most
ascendant over your inclinations, and accordingly prosecute your
intentions of corresponding with me or not, would you be advised by
me, you would let it alone, for by the uneasiness that my small
converse has already raised in me, I guess at the greater
disturbance of being farther exposed to your charms, unless I may
hope for something which my vanity is too weak to ensure. Fortune
has always been my adversary, and I may conclude that woman, who is
much of her nature, may use me the same way, but if you prove as
blind as she, you may, perhaps, love me as much as she hates me. My
humble service to your two sister fairies, and so the Devil take you
all.

If you will answer this—you may.

IV.

Essex, Friday morning.

I have been a-horseback, Madam, all this morning, which has so
discomposed my hand and head, that I can hardly think or write
sense. The posture of my affairs is a little extraordinary in some
other parts about me, for my saddle was very uneasy, the hare we
hunted put me in mind of a mistress, which we must gallop after with
hazard of breaking our necks, and after all our pains, the puss may
prove a witch at the long run. I have had no female in my company
since I left the town, or anything of your sex to entertain me, for
your Essex-women, like your Essex-calves, are only butcher's meat,
and if I must cater for myself, commend me to a pit partridge, which
comes pretty cheap, and where I have my choice of a whole covey. How
well I love this kind of meat, you may guess, when I assure you,
that I have purely fed upon your idea ever since, which has stuck as
close to me, as my shirt, which by the way I han't shifted since I
came to the country, for clean linen is not so modish here as a
lover might require. I received just now an impertinent piece of
banter from an angry fair, she says, I pawned my soul to the Devil
for the great success of my play. But her ladyship is thus angry,
because I would not pawn my body to the Devil for another sort of
play, of which I presume the lady to be a very competent judge; I
shall disappoint her now, as formerly, for I will set her raging mad
with the calmness of my answer. Besides, Madam, there is nothing can
put me out of humour, that comes by that post which brings me a line
from you, though I must tell you in plain terms, that I begin to
have but a mean opinion of your beauty, for were it, in the least,
parallel to your wit, the number of your other conquests would raise
your vanity above any correspondence with a person, whose chief
merit, is his indifference

V

Grays-inn, Wednesday morning.

The arguments you made use of last night for still keeping on your
mask I endeavoured to refute with reason, but that proving
ineffectual, I'll try the force of rhyme, and send you the heads of
our chat in a poetical dialogue between you and I.




You.
Thus images are veiled which you adore,
Your ignorance does raise your zeal the more.




I
All image-worship for fake zeal is held,
False idols ought indeed to be concealed




You
Thus oracles of old were still received,
The more ambiguous, still the more believed.




I
But oracles of old were seldom true,
The Devil was in 'em—sure he's not in you




You
Thus masque in mysteries does the godhead stand,
The more obscure, the greater his command.




I
The godhead's hidden power would soon be past,
Did we not hope to see his face at last.




You
You are my slave already, sir, you know,
To show more charms would but increase your woe,
I scorn to insult a conquered foe.




I
I am your slave, 'tis true, but still you see
All slaves by nature struggle to be free
But if you would secure the stubborn prize,
Add to your wit the fetters of your eyes.
Then pleased with thraldom would I kiss my chain,
And ne'er think more of liberty again.

VI

Sunday, after sermon.

I came, I saw, and was conquered, never had man more to say, yet I
can I say nothing, where others go to save their souls, there have I
lost mine; but I hope that divinity which has the justest title to
its service has received it, but I will endeavour to suspend these
raptures for a moment, and talk calmly.

Nothing upon earth, Madam, can charm beyond your wit, but your
beauty, after this not to love you, would proclaim me a fool, and to
say I did, when I thought otherwise, would pronounce me a knave: if
anybody called me either I should resent it, and if you but think me
either, I shall break my heart. You have already, Madam, seen enough
of me to create a liking or an aversion; your sense is above your
sex, then let your proceeding be so likewise, and tell me plainly
what I have to hope for. Were I to consult my merit, my humility
would chide any shadow of hope, but after a sight of such a face,
whose whole composition is a smile of good nature, why should I be
so unjust as to suspect you of cruelty? Let me either live in London
and be happy, or retire again to my desert to check my vanity that
drew me thence, but let me beg to receive my sentence from your own
mouth, that I may hear you speak, and see you look at the same time,
then let me be unfortunate if I can.

If you are not the lady in mourning that sat upon my right hand at
church, you may go to the Devil, for I'm sure you're a witch.

VII


Madam,

If I han't begun thrice to write, and as often thrown away my pen, I
may I never take it up again, my head and my heart have been at
cuffs about you these two long hours—says my head, you're a coxcomb
for troubling your noddle with a lady, whose beauty is as much above
your pretensions, as your merit is below her love. Then answers my
heart, good Mr. Head, you're a blockhead, I know Mr. F—r's merit
better than you, as for your part, I know you to be as whimsical as
the Devil, and changing with every new notion that offers, but for
my share, I am fixed, and can stick to my opinion of a lady's merit
for ever, and if the fair she can secure an interest in me, Monsieur
Head, you may go whistle. Come, come, (answered my head) you Mr.
Heart, are always leading this gentleman into some inconvenience or
other, was't not you that first enticed him to talk to this lady?
Your damned confounded warmth made him like this lady, and your busy
impertinence has made him write to her, your leaping and skipping
disturbs his sleep by night, and his good humour by day. In short,
sir, I will hear no more on't, I am head, and I will be obeyed—you
lie, sir, replied my heart, (being very angry) I am head in matters
of love, and if you don't give your consent, you shall be forced,
for I'm sure that in this case all the members will be on my side.
What say you, gentlemen hands? Oh! (says the hands) we would not
forego the tickling pleasure of touching a delicious, white, soft
skin for the world.—Well, what say you, Mr. Tongue? Zounds, says the
linguist, there's more ecstasy in speaking three soft words of Mr.
Heart's suggesting, than whole orations of Signor Head's, so I am
for the lady, and here's my honest neighbour Lips will stick to't.
By the sweet power of kisses, that we will, (replied the Lips) and
presently some other worthy members standing up for the heart, they
laid violent hands, (nemine contradicente<13>) upon poor Head, and
knocked out his brains. So now, Madam, behold me as perfect a lover
as any in Christendom, my heart purely dictating every word I say,
the little rebel throws itself into your power, and if yet I don't
support it in the cause it has taken up for your sake, think what
will be the condition of the headless and heartless

Farquhar.

VIII

Monday, twelve o'clock at night.

Give me leave to call you, dear Madam, and to tell you that I am now
stepping into bed, and that I speak with as much sincerity as if I
were stepping into my grave. Sleep is so great an emblem of death,
that my words ought to be as real, as if I were sure never to waken,
then may I never again be blest with the light of the sun, and the
joys of Wednesday, if you are not as dear to me as my hopes of
waking health tomorrow morning, your charms lead me, my inclinations
prompt me, and my reason confirms me,

Madam,

Your faithful and humble servant.

My humble service to the lady, who, next to my saviour, must be
chief mediator for my happiness.

IX


Madam,

In order to your ladyship's commands I have sent you my thoughts
upon your two weighty maxims of amorous policy,—if we fly, they
pursue, and, enjoyment quenches love. But I shall run a greater
hazard of your displeasure by my obedience, than I should by the
neglect of your commands, these subjects leading me into more
gravity than is well consistent with my own inclinations, or the
perusal of a fair lady. But to the business.

To examine rightly how far these female maxims are in force, we must
dispose mankind into a division, which I think hitherto has escaped
the logicians, to wit, the Men of Idleness, and Men of Business,
under the first branch of which distinction is reducible a great
share of the world, and especially that which composes the character
of what we call the beau monde, for to make them all of a piece, we
must give them a French name too.

The practice of these gentlemen, I must confess, has gone a great
way to pass these maxims for authentic, and have sufficiently
authorised the ladies to stick so firmly to their principles, but
would they consider a little upon what a scurvy foundation these
topics are grounded, they would damn the doctrine for sake of the
adorers.

These idle gentlemen (begging their pardon for so familiar an
epithet) should show the ladies what a difference there is between
modish intriguing, and true love, for these sparks make intriguing
their business, and love only their diversion. They visit their
mistress as they go to the park, because it is the mode, and
continue to solicit her favour, not through the impulse of passion,
but because they have nothing else to do; some other motives there
are to engage these sparks in the pursuit of a fair lady, as for
instance, upon the survey of his rent-roll the lover finds two or
three thousand a year still unmortgaged, sends down immediately to
his steward to screw up his tenants to due payments, and concludes
with Money conquers all things, a potent proverb, I must confess, to
back his resolution. But here consider, Madam, what it is that
pursue you, not the gentleman, but fiddlers, masquerades, jewellers,
glovers, milliners, hired poets, with the confused equipage of all
their respective trades, the devil a dart of love is in the whole
bundle, no more than there is in the straw and oats that keeps a
horse for Newmarket, here are only two beasts to be backed, one for
pleasure and t'other for profit, I will feed one for the plate, and
pamper the t'other for my own riding

A second life to his pursuit is his vanity, the beau having received
a repulse overnight, steps to his glass in the morning, and
surveying his charming shape, 'Sdeath, (says he,) why should I
despair of success? Blood, I'm as pretty fellow as another, but I
think my calves are a little of the largest. Ay, that's it, she did
not like my dress yesterday—here boy, reach my blue coat, I'll tie
my cravat with a double knot today, and wear the buckles of my
garters behind. Thus while his foppish fancy can invent any
particular change or whimsy in his dress, his hopes are nourished by
an abusive presumption, that the ladies are smitten by such
bagatelle impertinence. Here indeed, Madam the first maxim, If we
fly, they pursue, is in force; but upon scurvy terms, for the
continuation of such a coxcomb's address is the greatest satire upon
the sex, and a woman of true sense rather than be plagued with such
a follower, if there were no other way, should give him her person
to be quit of his company, for here I dare be sworn your second
maxim will hold, that Enjoyment quenches love. For these gentlemen
love as they hunt, for diversion, as I said before, and no sooner is
one hare snapped up, but they beat about for another. Besides,
Madam, 'tis but a modest presumption that these men of pleasure and
idleness must have an ingredient of the fool in their composition,
which cannot relish the true and lasting beauties of a fine woman,
they cannot make a true estimate of her sense, her constancy, her
several little kind and endearing offices, which can only engage the
affections of a man that truly understands their value.

This brings into my consideration how far these maxims may be
applicable to your corresponding with the latter part of the
distinction, which I called the men of business, by which understand
men of sense, learning, and experience, and call them men of
business, because I would exclude a parcel of flashy, noisy,
rhyming, atheistical gentlemen, who arrogate to themselves the title
of wit and sense, for no other cause but the abuse of it. Such must
be ranked with the first sort of lovers, for they are the idlest of
mankind; neither do I confine the character of a man of business to
the law, the church, the court, trade, or any particular employment,
I intend it a farther latitude and inclusive of all those, who
deriding the fop, and detesting the debauchee, have laid down to
themselves some certain scheme of study, in any lawful art or
science, for the benefit of the public, or their own private
improvement.

Upon this foundation we may rationally conclude the actions of such
men to flow directly from the operations of their reason but here,
Madam, without doubt the ladies will interrupt me—Hold, Sir, (say
they) we absolutely deny that love and reason are consistent. From
which it follows, that your men of business have no business here.

I am very sorry, Madam, in the first place, that the qualification
which must recommend a man to a fair lady, must debase him so near
the level of a brute, and deprive him of that divine stamp by which
he is distinguished from the beasts of the field, what an affront is
this to your sex, that one must no sooner begin to admire a woman,
but he must cease to be a man, and that the glory which a lady
receives by the plurality of her adorers, should depend only upon
the esteem of so many irrational creatures! No, no, Madam, I am too
much a courtier to let this vulgar calumny and severe reflection
upon your sex pass unexamined.

I shall therefore make bold to say, that this very opinion touching
the inconsistency of love with reason has cost the fair sex more
tears, and have subjected men to more curses, than the worst
circumstances of falsehood and perjury, for depending upon this
principle of the ladies, the greatest rascals have appeared the most
passionate lovers because the greatest knaves make the best fools;
and the most usual cloak for natural villainy is an artificial
simplicity.

But granting such follies and absurdities to be the results of a
real passion, such love ought not to gain one grain the more weight
in the balance of true sense; for if the lover be a fool, this
extravagance is but what's natural to his temper, and exposes itself
as wildly in the effects of his other ordinary passions, as in
anger, fear, joy, grief, and the like, and must not properly be
called the strength of his love, but the weakness of his reason, and
the same pitch of passion that may make a Wittol<14> appear lunatic,
would scarcely be discernible in a Dorimant,<15> but if the force of
love raise a man of true sense to the pitch of playing the fool,
'tis then, if not more ridiculous, at least much more dangerous in
the consequence, for be assured, Madam that the bout of his desire
must be too violent to last long, and once it begins to decline
'twill prove as violent in the fall as in the rise, and the constant
result of a sober reflection, is the hatred and detestation of
anything that had made him guilty of extravagance, and debased him
below the dignity of his reason, and there is no medium in this case
between the extravagant lover and the inveterate enemy.

But begging your ladyship's pardon for this digression, I shall
return to my man of business, and see how far your principle, If we
fly they pursue, is applicable to a person of this character.

To the examination of this point, 'twill not be amiss to consider,
the several paces and proceedings of such a lover in his amour. A
man of business and study has his thoughts too round and compact
within himself to have his fancy sallying out upon the appearance of
every beauty that his daily conversation may throw in his way, but
if once it lights upon that fair, which can rouse him from his
indifference, raising a pleasure in his eyes when she's present, and
an uneasiness in his heart in her absence, 'tis no imprudence to
indulge the thought, love (he considers) is a blessing, and since it
depends so much upon a sympathy of natures, why mayn't I expect that
the fair creature, who has raised such emotions in me, may in time
perhaps be brought to have a mutual concern upon her? The happiness
that I may expect from her love, if her other qualities be
proportionable to her beauty, will infinitely reward the pains of my
inquiring into her life and conversation. Here is the foundation of
love fairly laid, and now my gentleman goes to work upon the
structure; he first enquires into the lady's character, but that as
a man of sense ought to do, without trusting the malice of some that
may be her enemies, nor yet consulting the partiality of her
friends; his reason may make a tolerable good balance between both,
and if perhaps some slip in her conduct has made the scale of her
accusation the heaviest, he has some grains of love to throw into
the other to counterpoise it. His next business is to gain
admittance to her company, here he may find a thousand beauties to
augment, or as many failings perhaps to destroy his passion; and to
his examination he must refer his judgment upon the different
characters he might have heard of her before, for no reasonable man
will peremptorily conclude from the mouth of common fame, 'tis a
notorious liar, and generally in extremes. If he believes it to the
lady's prejudice, he may wrong her innocence past redress, and if he
trusts flying report in her favour, he may be imposed upon himself,
for the vulgar (by which I mean the laid coat as well as the
hobnail) cannot enter into the nice secrets of female behaviour,
they sometimes mistake levity for freedom, ill humour for gravity,
noise and tattle for wit and sense, sometimes they change hands, and
call an air of good breeding, coquetry, they brand affability and
good nature with the name of looseness, and, in short, there can be
no such thing as a woman in their estimate, all must be angels, or
all devils. Now my lover shall find out all these distinctions, he
shall, in spite of female dissimulation, smell to the very bottom,
and discover the least paint upon the mind, as he does that upon the
face. Having found the lady's temper conformable to his own, or
being at least assured that he can frame his own humour to square
with hers, having known her sense and understanding sufficient for a
prudent conduct, at least pliable to good advice, he stands fixed in
his resolution, and resolved upon his affection.

Thus the beautiful edifice of love is gradually and firmly raised,
whereof reason is still the corner-stone, not like the trifling pomp
of a fop's preparation, which like a lord-mayor's pageant, is built
in a night, glitters, and is gazed at for a day, and the next
dwindles into nothing. The building thus finished, the next business
is to invite the fair guest, 'tis impossible to confine the rules of
his address to any particular observation, because they may be so
diversified by the circumstances of the lover, the accidents of
time, place, or according to some humours and inclinations in the
lady's temper, which last have always proved the most effectual
means of gaining a heart. If the lady's disposition be inclinable to
gaiety, he makes the muses speak a good word for him, he can
dispense in an evening with a very dull play, to have the pleasure
of acting the lover himself, nay, he can comply so far, as to
commend a very dull thing, if his mistress is pleased to approve it,
he can take a turn in the Mall with his hat off, though the weather
be very cold, and join with her in railing at my lord such-a-one, or
mistress such-a-one, though perhaps he understands the quarrel to be
no more than a pique, or a piece of malice. If the lady's temper be
more grave and sedate, he can sit an hour or two condemning the
vices of the town, and extolling the pleasures of a country life;
nay, sometimes perhaps he may have a fling at the government, and be
a little Jacobitish to please her, he can wait on her to church, and
hear a Levite thump dust and nonsense out of a pulpit cushion for an
hour, and call it an excellent sermon, to humour her approbation;
with a thousand other little foolish fancies, which because they are
not very hurtful in themselves, and that custom has brought them
into play, must be born with upon this occasion, and when all is
done, ceremony looks as decently in love, as in religion and a clown
in an intrigue makes as awkward a figure as a Quaker in church. Our
lover therefore writes, visits, sighs, declares his passion with all
demonstrations of submission and sincerity, all which is often
repeated, to save the lady's modesty, and to soothe a little
pleasing vanity, incident to the female sex of seeing themselves
admired. He is satisfied also that the world should know it, and
submits to the censure of a whining coxcomb, to favour the lady's
yielding by the plausible excuse of a hard siege, but if after all
this he finds his pretensions to no purpose, your maxim, Madam, If
we fly, &c. will not be of force to detain him longer, he has the
same thread of reason to guide him out of the labyrinth that led him
in, he has not perhaps the same supports to his hope, that every
glittering spark, with a coach and six, can pretend, but were his
fortune ever so considerable, he would not affront the lady's
honour, nor his own judgment so far as to suppose her of a mercenary
temper, neither can he imagine that the charming fair, whose sense
he has so much admired, should be captivated with the tying of his
cravat, or the fancy of his snuffbox. No, no, he is rather
convinced, that there is something disagreeable to the lady in his
person, behaviour, or conversation, which being a defect of nature,
or education, he must patiently submit to, without cutting his
throat, and he's the more willing to take up with his failings,
because time may perhaps produce some other lady that may value him
upon these very circumstances, that made the first disdain him, so
that in spite of your celebrated maxim, he betakes himself to his
business, has the good manners to free the lady from his
impertinence, and the prudence to disengage himself of the trouble,
neither is he much distressed to withdraw his affections, for as the
prospect of happiness was the first foundation of his love, so the
progress of his passion must have been nourished with favours to
keep it alive, and as naturally without this fuel will the fire go
out of itself.

I have already, Madam, so far transgressed the bounds of a billet-
doux, that I'm afraid to meddle with your second maxim. But give me
a moment's patience, Madam, and I'll make quick work with Enjoyment
quenches love: one simile, Madam, and I take my leave. What a
strange and unaccountable madness would it appear in a subject of
England, a gentleman that enjoys peace and plenty, ease and luxury,
if he, discontented with his happy state, should raise a combustion
in his country, turn ambitious rebel, make a party against his
prince, and by force and treachery lay hold upon the government, and
all this for the bare pleasure of being called King. I can assure
you, Madam, did the pleasures of a monarch consist in nothing more
than being placed in a throne, with a crown upon his head, and the
sceptre in his hand, we should have the upstart prince use his
government as a fool does a fair lady after enjoyment, he would soon
be cloyed with his desire, and uneasy till he got quit of it. But if
our Noll<16> understood the policy of government, the many glories
that attend a crown, the pomp of dependencies, the sweets of
absolute power, with the many delights and joys that attend his
royalty, he would maintain his station to the last drop of blood.
This is easily applicable to a man of sense gaining the crown of
beauty, he can judge the charms of his possession, and values
enjoyment only as the title to his greater pleasures, there are a
thousand Cupids attending the throne of love, all which have their
several pretty offices and serviceable duties to exhilarate their
master's joy, and contribute to his constant diversion, if he but
understands how to employ them.

How far, Madam, I have recommended to you the addresses of an
ingenious man I dare not determine, but I'm afraid I have said so
much against the passion of fools, that I have ruined my own
interest, though you can't reckon me among the idle part of men,
being so happily employed this morning by the commands of so fair a
lady.

Your ladyship's most humble servant.

X

Friday night, 11 o'clock.

If you find no more rest from your thoughts in bed than I do, I
could  wish you, Madam, to be always there, for there I am most in
love. I went to the play this evening, and the music raised my soul
to such a pitch of passion, that I was almost mad with melancholy. I
flew thence to Spring Garden, where with envious eyes I saw every
man pick up his mate, whilst I alone walked like solitary Adam
before the creation of his Eve; but the place was no paradise to me,
nothing I found entertaining but the nightingale, which methought in
sweet notes like your own pronounced the name of my dear Penelope—as
the fool thinketh, the bell chinketh. From hence I retired to the
tavern, where methought the shining glass represented your fair
person, and the sparkling wine within it, looked like your lively
wit and spirit: I met my dear mistress in everything, and I propose
presently to see her in a lively dream, since the last thing I do,
is to kiss her dear letter, clasp her charming idea in my arms, and
so fall fast asleep.

My morning songs, my evening prayers,
My daily musings, nightly cares.

Adieu.

XI.


Here am I drinking, Madam, at the sign of the Globe, and it shall go
hard but I make the voyage of old Sir Drake<17> by tomorrow morning.
We have a fresh gale and a round sea, for here is very good company
and excellent wine; from the orb in the sign I will step to the
globe of the moon, thence make the tour of all the planets, and fix
in the constellation of Venus. You see, Madam, I am elevated
already. Here's a gentleman though who swears, he loves his mistress
better than I do mine, but if I don't make him so drunk that he
shall disgorge his opinion, may I never drink your health again, the
generous wine scorns to lie upon a traitor's stomach, 'tis poison to
him that profanes society by being a rogue in his cups. I wish dear
Madam, with all my heart that you saw me in my present
circumstances, you would certainly fall in love with me, for I am
not myself, I am now the pleasantest foolish fellow that ever gained
a lady's heart, and a glass or two more will fill me with such
variety of impertinence, that I cannot fail to pass for agreeable.
You, drawer,<18> bring me a plate of ice—Ha! How the wine whizzes
upon my heart, Cupid is forging his love-darts in my belly—Ice, you
dog, ice—the son of a whore has brought me anchovies. Well! This is
a vexatious world, I wish I were fairly out of it, and happy in
heaven, I mean your dear arms, which is the constant prayer of your
humble servant, drunk or sober.

I design tomorrow in the afternoon to beg your pardon for all the
ill manners of my debauch, and make myself as great as an emperor by
inviting your ladyship to the entertainment of Diocletian.

XII


In pursuance to your order, Madam, I have sent you here enclosed, my
picture, and I challenge Vandyke or Kneller to draw more to the
life. You are the first person that ever had it, and if I had not
some thoughts that the substance would fall to your share, I would
not part with my likeness. I hope the colours will never fade,
though you may give me some hints where to mend the features, having
so much power to correct the life.

The picture.


My outside is neither better nor worse than my creator made it, and
the piece being drawn by so great an artist, 'twere presumption to
say there were many strokes amiss. I have a body qualified to answer
all the ends of its creation, and that's sufficient

As to the mind, which in most men wears as many changes as their
body, so in me 'tis generally dressed like my person, in black.
Melancholy is its every day apparel, and it has hitherto found few
holydays to make it change its clothes. In short, my constitution is
very splenetic, and yet very amorous, both which I endeavour to
hide, lest the former should offend others, and the latter might
incommode myself, and my reason is so vigilant in restraining these
two failings that I am taken for an easy-natured man with my own
sex, and an ill-natured clown by yours.

'Tis true, I am very sparing in my praises and compliments to a
lady, out of a fear that they may affect myself more than her, for
the idols that we worship are generally of our own making, and
though at first men may not speak what they think, yet truth may
catch them on t'other hand, and make them think what they speak. But
most of all am I cautious of promising, especially upon that weighty
article of constancy, because in the first place, I have never tried
the strength of it in my own experience, and, secondly, I suppose a
man can no more engage for his constancy than for his health, since
I believe they both equally depend upon a certain constitution of
body, and how far, and how frequently that may be liable to
alteration, especially in affairs of love, let the more judicious
determine.

But so far a man may promise, that if he find not his passion
grounded on a false foundation, and that he have a continuance of
the same sincerity, truth, and love to engage him, that then his
reason, his honour, and his gratitude may prove too strong for all
changes of temper and inclination.

I am a very great epicure, for which reason I hate all pleasure
that's purchased by excess of pain, I am quite different from the
opinion of men that value what's dearly bought, long expectation
makes the blessing always less to me, for by often thinking of the
future joy I make the idea of it familiar to me, and so I lose the
great transport of surprise, 'tis keeping the springs of desire so
long upon the rack, till at last they grow loose and enervate,
besides, any one of a creative fancy by a duration of thought, will
be apt to frame too great an idea of the object, and so make the
greater part of his hopes end in a disappointment.

I am seldom troubled with what the world calls airs and caprices,
and I think it an idiot's excuse for a foolish action, to say, it
was my humour. I hate all little malicious tricks of vexing people
for trifles, or teasing them with frightful stories, malicious lies,
stealing lapdogs, tearing fans, breaking china, or the like. I can't
relish the jest that vexes another in earnest, in short, if ever I
do a wilful injury, it must be a very great one.

I am often melancholy, but seldom angry, for which reason I can be
severe in my resentment, without injuring myself. I think it the
worst office to my nature to make myself uneasy, for what another
should be punished.

I am easily deceived, but then I never fail at last to find out the
cheat; my love of pleasure and sedateness makes me very secure, and
the same reason makes me very diligent when I'm alarmed.

I have so natural a propensity to ease, that I cannot cheerfully fix
to any study, which bears not a pleasure in the application, which
makes me inclineable to poetry above anything else.

I have very little estate, but what lies under the circumference of
my hat, and should I by any mischance come to lose my head, I should
not be worth a groat, but I ought to thank providence that l can by
three hours' study live one and twenty with satisfaction myself, and
contribute to the maintenance of more families than some who have
thousands a year.

I have something in my outward behaviour, which gives strangers a
worse opinion of me, than I deserve, but I am more recompensed by
the opinion of my acquaintance, which is as much above my desert.

I have many acquaintance, very few intimates, but no friend, I mean
in the old romantic way. I have no secrets so weighty, but what I
can bear in my own breast, nor any duels to fight, but what I may
engage in without a second, nor can I love after the old romantic
discipline. I would have my passion, if not led, yet at least,
waited on by my reason; and the greatest proof of my affection, that
a lady must expect, is this: I would run any hazard to make us both
happy, but would not for any transitory pleasure make either of us
miserable.

If ever, Madam, you come to know the life of this piece, as well as
he that drew it, you will conclude, that I need not subscribe the
name to the picture.

XIII


Well! Mrs. V— and my charming Penelope are to lie together tonight,
what would I give now, to be a mouse, (god bless us) behind the
hangings, to hear the chat. You don't know, Madam, but my genius
which always attends you; may overhear your discourse, therefore not
one word of George, I'm resolved to have a friend to lie with me
tonight, that I may quit scores with you, and it shall go hard but I
prove as kind to my companion, as you are to yours; though I must
confess, that I had rather be in Mrs V—'s place, with all the little
pillows about me, or in that of Monsieur Adam's upon the chair.

My rival is a dog of parts,
That captivates the ladies' hearts;
And yet by Jove, (I scorn to forge)
Adonis' self must yield to George
I am a dog as well as he,
Can fawn upon a lady's knee;
My ears as long, and I can bark,
To guard my mistress in the dark
I han't four legs, that's no hard sentence,
For I can paw, and scrape acquaintance
I am a dog that admires you,
And I'm a dog, if this ben't true.
And if Adonis does outrival me,
Then I'm a greater son of a bitch than he
Reach my waistcoat—but ne'er trouble it,
I am already a dog in a doublet.


Was ever such a poetical puppy seen? But when my mistress is sick,
'tis then dog days with me, though 'tis but a cur's trick, I must
confess, but I would be content to bark at this rate all my life, so
I might hunt away all rats and mice from my fair angel, whose
fearful temper is the only mark of mortality about her. The
remembrance of the water-rat last night has inspired me with the
following lines.

Fair Rosamond did little think
Her crystal pond should turn a sink,
To harbour vermin that might swim,
And frighten beauties from the brim
Henceforth, detested pond, no more
Shall beauties crown your verdant shore,
Your waves so famed for amorous league,
Are now turned ratsbane to intrigue.

Now good morrow, my fair creature, and let me know how you are
recovered from your fright

XIV


Why should I write to my dearest Penelope, when I only trouble her
with reading what she won't believe, I have told my passion, my eyes
have spoke it, my tongue pronounced it, and my pen declared it; I
have sighed it, swore it, and subscribed it; now my heart is full of
you, my head raves of you, and my hand writes to you, but all in
vain; if you think me a dissembler, use me generously like a
villain, and discard me for ever, but if you will be so just to my
passion, as to believe it sincere, tell me so, and make me happy,
'tis but justice, Madam, to do one or t'other.

Your indisposition last night when I left you, put me into such
disorder, that not finding a coach, I missed my way, and never
minded whither I wandered, till I found myself close by Tyburn. When
blind love guides, who can forbear going astray? Instead of laughing
at myself, I fell to pitying poor Mr. F—r, who, whilst he roved
abroad among your whole sex, was never out of his way, and now by a
single she was led to the gallows. From the thoughts of hanging, I
naturally entered upon those of matrimony. I considered how many
gentlemen have taken a handsome swing to avoid some inward
disquiets, then why should not I hazard the noose, to ease me of my
torment? Then I considered, whether I should send for the ordinary
of Newgate, or the parson of St. Ann's, but considering myself
better prepared for dying in a fair lady's arms, than on the three-
legged tree, I was the most inclinable to the parish priest,
besides, if I died in a fair lady's arms, I should be sure of
Christian burial at least, and should have the most beautiful tomb
in the universe. You may imagine, Madam, that these thoughts of
mortality were very melancholy, but who could avoid the thoughts of
death, when you were sick? and if your health be not dearer to me
than my own, may the next news I hear be your death, which would be
as great a hell as your life and welfare is a heaven to the most
amorous of his sex.

Pray let me know in a line, whether you are better or worse, whether
I am honest or a knave, and whether I shall live or die.

XV


I can no more let a day pass without seeing, or writing to my dear
Penelope, than I can slip a minute without thinking of her. I know
nobody can lay a juster claim to the account of my hours than she,
who has so indisputable a title to my service, and I can no more
keep the discovery of my faults from you, than from my own
conscience, because you compose so great a part of my devotion. Let
me therefore confess to my dearest angel, how last night I sauntered
to the Fountain, where some friends waited for me. One of 'em was a
parson, who preaches over anything but his glass. Had not his
company and Sunday night sanctified the debauch, I should be very
fit for repentance this morning, the searching wine has sprung the
rheumatism in my right hand, my head aches, my stomach pukes. I
dreamed all this morning of fire, and waken in a flame. To complete
my misery I must let you know all this, and make you angry with me.
I design though this afternoon to repair to St. Ann's prayers, to
beg absolution of my creator and my mistress, if both prove
merciful, I'll put on the resolution of amending my life, to fit me
for the joys of heaven and you.

XVI


Dear Madam,

Now I write with my aching hand the dictates of my aching heart, my
body, and my soul are of a piece, both uneasy for want of my dear
Penelope. Excuse me, Madam, for troubling you with my distemper, but
my hand is so ill, that it can write nothing else, because it can go
no farther.

XVII


Misfortunes always lay hold on me, when I forsake my love, or fall
short of my duty. Your coach was full, and Mr. C—r was vanished, so
I had no pretence left to avoid some sober friends, that would haul
me into a cellar to drink cider, a dark, chilly, confounded hole,
fit only for treason and tobacco. Being warm with the throng of the
play-house, I unadvisedly threw off my wig, the rawness of this
cursed place, with the coldness of our tipple, has seized upon me so
violently, that I'm afraid I shan't recover it in a trice. I have
got such a pain in my jaws, that I shan't be able to eat a bit, so 
now, Madam, I must either live upon love, or starve, for heaven's
sake then, dear Madam, send me a little subsistence, let not a
hungry wretch perish for want of an alms. Your charity, for the
lord's sake. Kind words is all I crave, and the most uncharitable
prelate will afford a beggar his blessing—Pity my condition, fair
charmer, I have got a cold without, and a fire within, love and
cider do not agree, so I'll have no more cellars. If you don't send
me some comfort in my afflictions, expect to have a note to this
purpose—Be pleased to accompany the corpse of an unfortunate lover,
who died of an aching chops, and a broken heart.

XVIII


Your verses, Madam, I have read, scanned, and considered over and
over. I must still complain of the difficulty of your characters,
but your sense is like a rich mine, hard to come at, but when found,
an infinite treasure. I would answer you in verse, but for the
reason that follows:

Of all the specious wiles and formal arts
Used by our young intriguing men of parts,
None can their ignorance in love express
So much, as whining words on fawning verse.
The nymph, whose softer breast soft numbers gain,
Must have a soul celestially serene,
Seraphically bright, and sparkling as her mien.
But women now that character disown,
They are all mortal, very mortal grown.
By verse was beauty's empire first ordained,
And stubborn man to love, by verse, was chained
Verse gave to love his quiver and his bow,
Nay even from verse he had his godhead too.
And now ungrateful beauty scorns that aid,
By which its greatest triumphs first were made.
A sordid blockhead with an empty skull
Shall have access, because his pocket's full.
Curse on thee, gold—why charmer, tell me why
Should that which buys a horse, bright beauty buy?
O could I find (grant heaven that once I may)
A nymph fair, kind, poetical, and gay,
Whose love should blaze, unsullied, and divine,
At first by the bright lamp of mine
Free as a mistress, faithful as a wife,
And one that loved a fiddle as her life,
Free from all sordid ends, from interest free,
For my own sake affecting only me.
What a blest union should our souls combine!
I hers alone, and she be only mine
Free generous favours should our flames express,
I'd write for love, and she should love for verse
In deathless numbers should my fair one shine,
Her love, her charms should blazon every line,
And the whole page be, like herself, divine
Not Sacharissa's self, great Waller's fair,<19>
Should for an endless name with mine compare
My lines should run so high, the world should see
I sung of her, and she inspired me.
Vain are thy wishes, wretched Damon, vain,
Thy verse can only serve thee to complain
Wealth makes the bargain, love's become a trade,
Blind love is now by blinder fortune led.
Who then would sing, or sacred numbers boast,
Since love, the just reward of verse, is lost?
Of the soft sex why were the muses made,
If on soft love they can't afford us aid?
No, Cupid, no, you have deceived too long,
My muse and love have ever done me wrong,
Farewell, ungrateful love, farewell ungrateful song.


You see, Madam, that my rhyme has argued me out of love, but I'm
violently suspicious that my reason will convince me, that I am
still as much your captive, as ever; for I have the greatest
inclination in the world to entreat the favour of meeting your
ladyship in the park tomorrow by six, if you tarry till seven, you
may find me at the end of the lover's walk, hanging upon one of the
trees, which will be the readiest way, for aught I see, to bring our
amour to a conclusion. I am an impudent fellow, that's to prevent
your reflection upon my presuming to appoint you a place of
assignation.

XIX


If anything should come to your hands, Madam, that I writ last I
night, I humbly beg that you would pardon its impertinence, for I
was so fuddled, that I hardly remember whether I writ or not, you'll
think perhaps that my excuse needs as much an apology as my fault,
but you ought to forgive me, when I assure you, that I shall never
forgive myself. I have vowed this morning never to taste wine till I
can recover that opportunity of seeing you, that wine made me lose.
I went to the Royal Exchange at two, and stayed in the city till
twelve at night, I dined with Mr. B—x, who (by the way) is a pretty
gentleman, but has a confounded wife, such stories have I heard of
her persecution, and his long suffering, that he deserves to go to
heaven, and she to hell for sending him, and so much for a citizen's
wife. I come now from Mr. Dryden's funeral, where we had an ode in
Horace sung, instead of David's psalms, whence you may find, that we
don't think a poet worth Christian burial, the pomp of the ceremony
was a kind of rhapsody, and fitter, I think, for Hudibras than him,
because the cavalcade was mostly burlesque, but he was an
extraordinary man, and buried after an extraordinary fashion, for I
do believe there was never such another burial seen, the oration
indeed was great and ingenious, worthy the subject, and like the
author, whose prescriptions can restore the living, and his pen
embalm the dead. And so much for Mr. Dryden, whose burial was the
same with his life, variety, and not of a piece. The quality and
mob, farce and heroics, the sublime and ridicule mixed in a piece,
great Cleopatra in a hackney coach.

And now, Madam, for the application; let us consider, that we are
all mortal, that neither wit can protect a man, nor beauty a woman
from the impertinence of a burial: there is but one way, let us join
our forces to disappoint it, as thus, beauty causes love, love
inspires poetry, and poetry makes wit immortal: so in return, wit is
fired with gratitude, that extols your charms, and so makes beauty
immortal. Now, Madam, if your beauty can make as mad work in my head
as it has in my heart, I will show the world such a copy of your
countenance, that you shall be as fair a hundred years hence as you
are at this instant, all the worms in the churchyard shall not have
power to touch one feature in your face, and, for my part, if I am
not more a poet a hundred years hence, than I am now, I'll be
damned. And I can assure you that Mr. Dryden had never died, had he
not grown too old to please the ladies; and if that be my case
already, the lord have mercy upon me.

XX


Your strange and unexpected declaration of your unkind thoughts of
me, has cast a damp upon my spirits that will break out either in
melancholy or rage, I wish it prove the latter, for then I shall
destroy myself the shorter way, in the fervency of my passion, and
diligence of courtship, which has alarmed part of the world. To be
accused of coldness and neglect, is—but I'll say no more upon that
subject, 'tis too warm; and if I touch it, will set me in a blaze. I
remember the cause of my uneasiness t'other day, and I remember that
cause was repeated last night, and in short, I remember a thousand
things that make me mad; and since you have taken so opportune a
time of telling me of the coldness of my love, give me leave to tell
you, that my passion is so violent, that 'twill give me cause to
curse your whole sex, nay, even you, though at the same time I could
stab myself for the expression, now, Madam, I'll endeavour to sleep,
for I han't closed my eyes since I saw you.

XXI

Hague,
October the 23d. New style.

This is the second post, dear Madam, since I have heard from you,
which makes me apprehensive that you are not well, or that you have
forgot the person, whose health and welfare so entirely depends upon
yours. I am proud to say, that all my words, my letters, and
endeavours, have unfeignedly run upon the strain of the most real
passion that ever possessed the breast of man, and if, after all
this, they should all prove vain, I leave you to judge how poor an
opinion I should have of my understanding, which must be a very
mortifying thought for a person who is very unwilling to pass for a
fool. 'Tis true, I have laid out all the little sense I had in your
service, and if it should be cast away, I should turn bankrupt in my
understanding, and run stark mad upon the loss. For god's sake,
Madam, let me know what I have to trust to, that I may once more set
up for a man of some parts, or else run away from my senses as fast
as I can, my thoughts begin to be very severe creditors, and I am
perfectly tired of their company. The King came hither last night
about eleven from Loo, and if the weather prove fair, designs for
England next Wednesday. Providence has designed my staying so long,
out of his great mercy to secure me from the violence of a terrible
storm, which has lasted here this fortnight past, to that degree,
that Holland is no more at present than a great leaky man of war,
tossing on the ocean, and the mariners are forced to pump night and
day to keep the vessel above water. I can assure you, without a
jest, that the cellars and canals have frequent communication, and
happy is he that can lodge in a garret. There are fellows planted on
all the steeples, with a considerable reward to him that can make
the first land, though they had more need to look out for a rainbow,
for about that I shall believe that God almighty, in his articles
with Noah after the flood, has excluded the Dutch out of the
treaty.<20> I have transcribed your letter to my lord A—le, and will
consult with captain L—oe about your affairs, whether it be proper
to mention matters now, or defer it till we come over. My Lord West—
nd treated us yesterday with a pot of English venison sent him by
his mother. But never was poor buck so devoured by hungry hounds, we
hunted him down with excellent burgundy—could this place afford as
good toasts as it does wine, 'twere a paradise. But we made a shift
to call you all over, every beauty in London, from the D—ss of G—n
to Mrs. B—le, and when we got drunk, we toasted the Dutch ladies,
and by the time we got through the whole assembly, we were grown as
dull and sottish as if we had lain with them. You must pardon my
breeding, Madam, and consider where I am, but I do blush a little,
and can't say a word more, but that I am,
Madam,
Your faithful and humble servant.

XXII


I received your letter, Madam, with the strange relation of your
being robbed. I can't tell whether my grief or amazement was
greatest, it suspended the pain of the rheumatism for some hours,
though I gained little by that; for it only gave place to a greater.
All the consolation I can afford in your sorrow, is, that you have a
companion in your afflictions that sympathizes in every particular
of your grief. I consider myself a lady robbed of my fine things,
striped of my best clothes, and what is worse, of all my pretty
trinkets that have cost me some years in purchasing, though this be
the greatest misfortune a fine lady can sustain, yet am I still more
troubled at the manner of the action, than at the greatness of my
loss, that in a house so well peopled as mine, in an hour so early,
when all the world was awake, that all my good stars should then be
asleep, is very provoking.

By this, Madam, you may judge, whether my heart be not tuned to the
very same notes of sorrow with yours, and as I have the same reasons
of my grief, so perhaps I shall agree with your ladyship as to the
thoughts which may afford you most consolation.

Religion teaches me, that nothing in this world is properly our own,
but borrowed; and since I am obliged to resign even my very life
without murmuring, when he that lent is pleased to recall it, why
should I repine at parting with things of so much less importance;
but to comfort myself after a more worldly manner, I consider that
my clothes had been worn out in a year or two, that my fine things
had been out of fashion in a year or two more, so that I have only
lost the use of those things which four or five years would have
robbed me of without breaking a lock, or opening a window. Besides,
another thing which gives me no small comfort is, a reflection on
the mercies of providence in matters of greater moment, as in
relation to my life, my honour, &c., one instance of which is pretty
fresh in my memory I recollect that some few months ago, I was in a
foreign country, far from my relations to comfort me, or friends to
assist me, a stranger to the place, more to the language, like a
child among savage beasts, I had no companion but a brute more
savage than they, who betrayed me into the hands of a villain, that
would have ruined me past redemption, had not providence sent a
gentleman to my rescue, who is now at Richmond dying for love of me.
This deliverance, I think, may make sufficient amends for the
present loss.

Now, Madam, that I have guessed at your thoughts upon the matter,
give me leave to present you with my own sentiments upon this
affair, and in the first place I think that if the rogues had
stripped you of all that you enjoy in the world, even the white
covering to your fair nakedness, I would catch you in my arms before
any Duchess in Christendom set out in brocade and jewels.

I think, secondly, that a lady without a husband lies very much
exposed to all abuses from the rude world, that the weakness of
their constitution n is a sufficient proof, that their maker
designed man for their guard. Now if a lady will neglect the
protection which providence has designed her, when there is one that
begs so very earnestly, and has so long solicited for the honour of
the place, 'tis but just, I think, that she meet with some small
rubs to mind her of her insufficiency. I know, Madam, that your
ladyship has a very good and worthy gentleman very near you; one,
who is both a friend and a father to you, but yet a husband is still
the best garde-du-corps,<21> and there are some privileges annexed
to his place, which would make rogues more cautious how they invaded
your bed-chamber. In the third place, Madam, give me leave to ask
you one question. Don't you think this thief that robbed you to be a
very barbarous fellow? And would you not be very severe upon him, if
he were taken? Most certainly you would. Then what must I think of a
person that has robbed me of a jewel, much more precious than any
they have taken from you, I mean, my ease and quiet? A little thief
has stole my heart out of my very breast, the loss of which has cost
me more sighs and uneasiness than all the wealth in the world could
have done. I have pursued this charming bandit from place to place,
from town to country, from kingdom to kingdom, yet all in vain—I beg
you now, Madam, to consider this, and be not too severe upon the
poor rogues, though they should be taken.

This is the first service, my hand has done me since I left London,
and were not the air too piercing for me to venture abroad after so
much bleeding, I would move told you all this personally, but happen
what will, three or four days shall be the utmost confinement I can
lay upon my desire of waiting on you, and that you have been so long
released from my company, you are more beholden to the force of my
illness, than the  strength of my resolution, which is always too
weak to encounter the passion of,

Madam

Your most sincere, and humble servant

XXIII


Madam,

'Tis a sad misfortune to begin a letter with an adieu, but when my
love is crossed, 'tis no wonder that my writing should be reversed.

I would beg your pardon for the other offences of this nature, which
I have committed, but that I have so little reason to judge
favourably of your mercy, though I can assure you, Madam, that I
shall never excuse myself my own share of the trouble, no more than
I can pardon myself the vanity of attempting your charms, so much
above the reach of my pretensions, and which are reserved for some
more worthy admirers. If there be that man upon earth that can merit
your esteem, I pity him, for an obligation too great for a return,
must to any generous soul be very uneasy, though still I envy his
misery.

May you be as happy, Madam, in the enjoyment of your desires, as I
am miserable in the disappointment of mine, and as the greatest
blessing of your life, may the person you admire love you as
sincerely, and as passionately, as he whom you scorn.



A Discourse upon Comedy, in reference to the English
Stage, in a letter to a friend.


With submission, sir, my performance in the practical part of poetry
is no sufficient warrant for your pressing me in the speculative. I
have no foundation for a legislator, and the two or three little
plays I have written, are cast carelessly into the world, without
any bulk of preface, because I was not so learned in the laws, as to
move in defence of a bad case. Why then should a compliment go
farther with me, than my own interest? Don't mistake me, sir, here
is nothing that could make for my advantage in either preface or
dedication, no speculative curiosities, nor critical remarks, only
some present sentiments which hazard, not study, brings into my
head, without any preliminary method or cogitation.

Among the many disadvantages attending poetry, none seems to bear a
greater weight, than that so many set up for judges, when so very
few understand a tittle of the matter. Most of our other arts and
sciences bear an awful distance in their prospect, or with a bold
and glittering varnish dazzle the eyes of the weak-sighted vulgar.
The divine stands wrapped up in his cloud of mysteries, and the
amused laity must pay tithes and veneration to be kept in obscurity,
grounding their hopes of future knowledge on a competent stock of
present ignorance (in the greater part of the Christian world this
is plain.) With what deference and resignation does the bubbled
client commit his fees and cause into the clutches of the law, where
assurance beards justice by prescription, and the wrong side is
never known to make its patron blush. Physic and logic are so
strongly fortified by their impregnable terms of art, and the
mathematician lies so cunningly entrenched within his lines and
circles, that none but those of their party dare peep into their
puzzling designs.

Thus the generality of mankind is held at a gazing distance, whose
ignorance not presuming perhaps to an open applause, is yet
satisfied to pay a blind veneration to the very faults of what they
don't understand.

Poetry alone, and chiefly the drama, lies open to the insults of all
pretenders. She was one of nature's eldest offsprings, whence by her
birthright and plain simplicity she pleads a genuine likeness to her
mother, born in the innocence of time, she provided not against the
assaults of succeeding ages, and, depending altogether on the
generous end of her invention, neglected those secret supports and
serpentine devices used by other arts that wind themselves into
practice for more subtleand politic designs. Naked she came into the
world, and 'tis to be feared, like its professors, will go naked
out.

'Tis a wonderful thing, that most men seem to have a great
veneration for poetry, yet will hardly allow a favourable word to
any piece of it that they meet, like your virtuosos in friendship,
that are so ravished with the nicety of the virtue, that they can
find no person worth their intimate acquaintance. The favour of
being whipped at school for Martial's Epigrams, or Ovid's Epistles,
is sufficient privilege for turning pedagogue, and lashing all their
successors, and it would seem by the fury of their correction, that
the ends of the rod were still in their buttocks. The scholar calls
upon us for decorums and economy, the courtier cries out for wit and
purity of style, the citizen for humour and ridicule, the divines
threaten us for immodesty, and the ladies will have an intrigue. Now
here are a multitude of critics, whereof the twentieth person only
has read quae genus,<22> and yet everyone is a critic after his own
way, that is, such a play is best, because I like it. A very
familiar argument, methinks, to prove the excellence of a play, and
to which an author would be very unwilling to appeal for his
success. Yet such is the unfortunate state of dramatic poetry, that
it must submit to such judgments, and by the censure or approbation
of such variety it must either stand or fall. But what salvo, what
redress for this inconvenience? Why, without all dispute, an author
must endeavour to pleasure that part of the audience, who can lay
the best claim to a judicious and impartial reflection. But before
he begins, let him well consider to what division that claim does
most properly belong. The scholar will be very angry at me for
making that the subject of a question, which is self-evident without
any dispute: for, says he, who can pretend to understand poetry
better than we, who have read Homer, Virgil, Horace, Ovid, &c. at
the university? What knowledge can outstrip ours, that is founded
upon the criticisms of Aristotle, Scaliger, Vossius, and the like?
We are the better sort, and therefore may claim this as a due
compliment to our learning, and if a poet can please us, who are the
nice and severe critics, he cannot fail to bring in the rest of an
inferior rank.

I should be very proud to own my veneration for learning, and to
acknowledge any compliment due to the better sort upon that
foundation, but I'm afraid the learning of the better sort is not
confined to college studies, for there is such a thing as reason
without syllogism, knowledge without Aristotle, and languages
besides Greek and Latin. We shall likewise find in the court and
city several degrees, superior to those at commencements. From all
which I must beg the scholar's pardon, for not paying him the
compliment of the better sort, (as he calls it) and in the next
place, inquire into the validity of his title from his knowledge of
criticism, and the course of his studies.

I must first beg one favour of the graduate—"Sir, here is a pit full
of Covent-Garden gentlemen, a gallery full of cits,<23> a hundred
ladies of court education, and about two hundred footmen of nice
morality, who, having been unmercifully teased with a parcel of
foolish, impertinent, irregular plays all this last winter, make it
their humble request, that you would oblige them with a comedy of
your own making, which they don't question will give them
entertainment." "O, sir," replies the square cap,<24> "I have long
commiserated the condition of the English audience, that has been
forced to take up with such wretched stuff, as lately has crowded
the stage, your jubilees and your foppingtons, and such irregular
impertinence, that no man of sense could bear the perusal of 'em. I
have long intended, out of pure pity to the stage, to write a
perfect piece of this nature, and now, since I am honoured by the
commands of so many, my intentions shall immediately be put in
practice.

So to work he goes, old Aristotle, Scaliger, with their
commentators, are lugged down from the high shelf, and the moths are
dislodged from their tenement of years. Horace, Vossius, Heinsius,
Hedelin, Rapin,<25> with some half a dozen more, are thumbed and
tossed about, to teach the gentleman, forsooth, to write a comedy,
and here is he furnished with unity of action, continuity of action,
extent of time, preparation of incidents, episodes, narrations,
deliberations, didactics, pathetics, monologues, figures, intervals,
catastrophes, choruses, scenes, machines, decorations, &c.: a stock
sufficient to set up any mountebank in Christendom, and if our new
author would take an opportunity reading a lecture upon his play in
these terms, by the help of a zany, and a joint-stool, his scenes
might go off as well as the doctors' packets,<26> but the misfortune
of it is, he scorns all application to the vulgar, and will please
the better sort, as he calls his own sort. Pursuant therefore to his
philosophical dictates, he first chooses a single plot, because must
agreeable to the regularity of criticism, no matter whether it
affords business enough for diversion or surprise. He would not for
the world introduce a song or dance, because his play must be one
entire action. We must expect no variety of incidents, because the
exactness of his three hours won't give him time for their
preparation. The unity of place admits no variety of painting and
prospect, by which mischance perhaps, we shall lose the only good
scenes in the play. But no matter for that, this play is a regular
play, this play has been examined and approved by such and such
gentlemen, who are staunch critics and masters of art, and this play
I will have acted, look'ee, Mr. Rich,<27> you may venture to lay out
a hundred and fifty pound for dressing this play, for it was written
by a great scholar, and fellow of a college.

Then a grave dogmatical prologue is spoken, to instruct the audience
what should please them, that this play has a new and different cut
from the farce they see every day, that this author writes after the
manner of the ancients, and here is a piece according to the model
of the Athenian drama. Very well! This goes off humdrum, so, so.
Then the players go to work on a piece of hard knotty stuff, where
they can no more show their art, than a carpenter can upon a piece
of steel. Here is the lamp and the scholar in every line, but not a
syllable of the poet. Here is elaborate language, sounding epithets,
flights of words that strike the clouds, whilst the poor sense lags
after like the lanthorn in the tail of the kite, which appears only
like a star, while the breath of the players' lungs has strength to
bear it up in the air.

But the audience, willing perhaps to discover his ancient model, and
the Athenian drama, are attentive to the first act or two, but not
finding a true genius of poetry, nor the natural air of free
conversation, without any regard to his regularity, they betake
themselves to other work, not meeting the diversion they expected on
the stage, they shift for themselves in the pit, everyone turns
about to his neighbour in a mask, and for default of entertainment
now, they strike up for more diverting scenes. When the play is
done, and though the play be regular as Aristotle, and modest as Mr.
Collier could wish, yet it promotes more lewdness in the
consequence, and procures more effectually for intrigue than any
rover, libertine, or old bachelor whatsoever. At last comes the
epilogue, which pleases the audience very well, because it sends
them away, and terminates the fate of the poet, the patentees rail
at him, the players curse him, the town damns him, and he may bury
his copy in Paul's, for not a bookseller about it will put it in
print.

This familiar account, sir, I would not have you charge to my
invention, for there are precedents sufficient in the world to
warrant it in every particular; the town has been often disappointed
in those critical plays, and some gentlemen that have been admired
in their speculative remarks have been ridiculed in the practice.
All the authorities, all the rules of antiquity have proved too weak
to support the theatre, whilst others who have dispensed with the
critics, and taken a latitude in the economy of their plays, have
been the chief supporters of the stage, and the ornament of the
drama, this is so visibly true, that I need bring in no instances to
enforce it; but you say, sir, 'tis a paradox that has often puzzled
your understanding, and you lay your commands upon me to solve it,
if I can.

Look'ee, sir, to add a value to my complaisance to you, I must tell
you in the first place, that I run as great a hazard in nibbling at
this paradox of poetry, as Luther did by touching
transubstantiation, 'tis a mystery that the world has sweetly slept
in so long, that they take it very ill to be wakened, especially
being disturbed of their rest, when there is no business to be done
but I think that Bellarmine<28> was once as orthodox as Aristotle,
and since the German doctor has made a shift to hew down the
cardinal, I will have a tug with ipse dixit,<29> though I die for't.

But in the first place, I must beg you, sir, to lay aside your
superstitious veneration for antiquity, and the usual expressions on
that score, that the present age is illiterate, or their taste is
vitiated, that we live in the decay of time, and the dotage of the
world is fallen to our share. 'Tis a mistake, sir, the world was
never more active or youthful, and true downright sense was never
more universal than at this very day. 'Tis neither confined to one
nation in the world, nor to one part of a city, 'tis remarkable in
England as well as France, and good genuine reason is nourished by
the cold of Swedeland as by the warmth of Italy, 'tis neither
abdicated the court with the late reigns, nor expelled the city with
the play-house bills, you may find it in the grand jury at Hicks
Hall,<30> and upon the bench sometimes among the justices; then why
should we be hampered so in our opinions, as if all the ruins of
antiquity lay so heavily on the bones of us, that we could not stir
hand nor foot no, no, sir, ipse dixit is removed long ago, and all
the rubbish of old philosophy, that in a manner buried the judgment
of mankind for many centuries, is now carried off, the vast tomes of
Aristotle and his commentators are all taken to pieces, and their
infallibility is lost with all persons of a free and unprejudiced
reason.

Then above all men living, why should the poets be hoodwinked at
this rate, and by what authority should Aristotle's rules of poetry
stand so fixed and immutable? Why, by the authority of two thousand
years standing, because through this long revolution of time the
world has still continued the same—by the authority of their being
received at Athens, a city, the very same with London in every
particular, their habits the same, their humours alike, their public
transactions and private societies à la mode France; in short, so
very much the same in every circumstance, that Aristotle's
criticisms may give rules to Drury Lane, the Areopagus<31> give
judgment upon a case in the King's Bench, and old Solon<32> shall
give laws to the House of Commons.

But to examine this matter a little farther, all arts and
professions are compounded of these two parts, a speculative
knowledge, and a practical use, and from an excellency in both these
any person is raised to eminence and authority in his calling. The
lawyer has his years of student in the speculative part of his
business, and, when promoted to bar, he falls upon the practice,
which is the trial of his ability. Without all dispute the great
Coke<33> has had many a tug at the bar, before he could raise
himself to the bench, and had made sufficiently evident his
knowledge of the laws in his pleadings before he was admitted to the
authority of giving judgment upon the case.

The physician, to gain credit to his prescriptions, must labour for
a reputation in the cure of such and such distempers, and before he
sets up for a Galen or Hippocrates, must make many experiments upon
his patients. Philosophy itself, which is a science the most
abstract from practice, has its public acts and disputations, it is
raised gradually, and its professor commences doctor by degrees, he
has the labour of maintaining theses, methodising his arguments, and
clearing objections, his memory and understanding is often puzzled
by oppositions couched in fallacies and sophisms, in solving all
which he must make himself remarkable, before he pretends to impose
his own systems upon the world. Now if the case be thus in
philosophy, or in any branch thereof, as in ethics and physic, which
are called sciences, what must be done in poetry, that is
denominated an art, and consequently implies a practice in its
perfection?

Is it reasonable that any person that has never writ a distich of
verses in his life, should set up for a dictator in poetry, and
without the least practice in his own performance, must give laws
and rules to that of others? Upon what foundation is poetry made so
very cheap, and so easy a task, by these gentlemen? An excellent
poet is the single production of an age, when we have crowds of
philosophers, physicians, lawyers, divines, every day, and all of
them competently famous in their callings in the two learned
commonwealths of Rome and Athens, there was but one Virgil, and one
Homer, yet have we above a hundred philosophers in each, and most
part of 'em, forsooth, must have a touch at poetry, drawing it into
divisions, sub-divisions, &c., when the wit of 'em all set together,
would not amount to one of Martial's epigrams

Of all these I shall mention only Aristotle, the first and great
law-giver, in this respect, and upon whom all that followed him are
only commentators among all the vast traits of this voluminous
author, we don't find any fragment of an epic poem, or the least
scene of a play, to authorise his skill and excellence in that art.
Let it not be alleged, that for aught we know he was an excellent
poet, but his more serious studies would not let him enter upon
affairs of this nature, for everybody knows, that Aristotle was no
Cynic,<32> but lived in the splendour and air of the court, that he
loved riches as much as others of that station; and being
sufficiently acquainted with his pupil's affection to poetry, and
his complaint that he wanted an Homer to aggrandize his actions, he
would never have slipped such an opportunity of farther ingratiating
himself in the king's favour, had he been conscious of any abilities
in himself, for such an undertaking, and having a more noble and
copious theme in the exploits of Alexander, than what inspired the
blind bard in his hero Achilles. If his epistles to Alexander were
always answered with a considerable present, what might he have
expected, from a work like Homer's upon so great a subject,
dedicated to so mighty a prince, whose greatest fault was his
vainglory, and that took such pains to be deified among men.

It may be objected, that all the works of Aristotle are not
recovered; and among those that are lost, some essays of this kind
might have perished. This supposition is too weakly founded, for
although the works themselves might have escaped us, 'tis more than
probable that some hint or other, either in the life of the
conqueror, or philosopher, might appear, to convince us of such a
production: besides, as 'tis believed, he writ philosophy, because
we have his books; so, I dare swear, he writ no poetry, because none
is extant, nor any mention made thereof that ever I could hear of.

But stay—without any farther enquiry into the poetry of Aristotle,
his ability that way is sufficiently apparent by that excellent
piece he has left behind him upon that subject—by your favour, sir,
this is petitio principii,<35> or, in plain English, give me the
sword in my own hand, and I'll fight with you—have but a little
patience till I make a flourish or two, and then, if you are pleased
to demand it, I'll grant you that and everything else.

How easy were it for me to take one of Doctor Tillotson's sermons,
and out of the economy of one of these discourses, trump you up a
pamphlet, and call it, the Art of Preaching. In the first place I
must take a text, and here I must be very learned upon the etymology
of this word text, then this text must be divided into such and such
partitions, which partitions must have their hard names and
derivations, then these must be spun into sub-divisions, and these
backed by proofs of scripture, Ratiocinati Oratoris, Ornamenta
Figurarum Rhetoricarum, and Authoritas Patrum Ecclesiae,<36> with
some rules and directions how these ought to be managed and applied;
and closing up this difficult pedantry with the dimensions of time
for such an occasion, you will pay me the compliment of an excellent 
preacher, and affirm, that any sermon whatsoever, either by a
presbyter at Geneva, or Jesuit in Spain, that deviates from these
rules, deserves to be hissed, and the priest kicked out of his
pulpit. I must doubt your complaisance in this point, Sir, for you
know the forms of eloquence are divers, and ought to be suited to
the different humour and capacities of an audience. You are
sensible, sir, that the fiery choleric humour of one nation must be
entertained and moved by other means than the heavy phlegmatic
complexion of another; and I have observed in my little travels,
that a sermon of three quarters of an hour, that might please the
congregation at St. James's, would never satisfy the meeting-house
in the City, where people expect more for their money, and having
more temptations of roguery, must have a larger portion of
instruction.

Be pleased to hear another instance of a different kind, though to
the same purpose. I go down to Woolwich, and there, upon a piece of
paper I take the dimensions of the Royal Sovereign,<37> and from
hence I frame a model of a man of war, I divide the ship into three
principal parts, the keel, the hull, and the rigging; I subdivide
these into their proper denominations, and by the help of a sailor,
give you all the terms belonging to every rope, and every office in
the whole ship. Will you from hence infer, that I am an excellent
shipwright, and that this model is proper for a trading junk upon
the Volga, or a Venetian galley in the Adriatic sea?

But you'll object, perhaps, that this is no parallel case, because
that Aristotle's Ars Poetica was never drawn from such slight
observations, but was the pure effect of his immense reason, through
a nice inspection into the very bottom and foundation of nature.

To this I answer, that verity is eternal, as that the truth of two
and two making four was as certain in the days of Adam as it is now,
and that, according to his own position, nature is the same apud
omnes gentes.<38> Now if his rules of poetry were drawn from certain
and immutable principles, and fixed on the basis of nature, why
should not his Ars Poetica be as efficacious now, as it was two
thousand years ago? And why should not a single plot, with perfect
unity of time and place, do as well at Lincoln's Inn Fields, as at
the play-house in Athens? No, no, sir, I am apt to believe that the
philosopher took no such pains in poetry as you imagine. The Greek
was his mother tongue, and Homer was read with as much veneration
among the school-boys, as we learn our catechism. Then where was the
great business for a person so expert in mood and figure, as
Aristotle was, to range into some order a parcel of terms of art,
drawn from his observation upon the Iliad, and these to call the
model of an epic poem. Here, sir, you may imagine, that I am caught,
and have all this while been spinning a thread to strangle myself,
one of my main objections against Aristotle's criticisms, is drawn
from his non-performance in poetry. And now I affirm, that his rules
are extracted from the greatest poet that ever lived, which gives
the utmost validity to the precept, and that is all we contend for.

Look ye, sir, I lay it down only for a supposition, that Aristotle's
rules for an epic poem were extracted from Homer's Iliad, and if a
supposition has weighed me down, I have two or three more of an
equal balance to turn the scale.

The great esteem of Alexander the Great for the works of old Homer,
is sufficiently testified by antiquity, insomuch that he always
slept with the Iliad under his pillow. Of this the Stagirite<39> to
be sure was not ignorant, and what more proper way of making his
court could a man of letters devise, than by saying something in
commendation of the king's favourite? A copy of commendatory verses
was too mean, and perhaps out of his element. Then something he
would do in his own way, a book must be made of the art of poetry,
wherein Homer is proved a poet by mood and figure, and his
perfection transmitted to posterity, and if Prince Arthur had been
in the place of the Iliad, we should have had other rules for epic
poetry, and Doctor B—re had carried the bays from Homer, in spite of
all the critics in Christendom, but whether Aristotle writ those
rules to compliment his pupil, or whether he would make a stoop at
poetry, to show that there was no knowledge beyond the flight of his
genius, there is no reason to allow that Homer compiled his heroic
poem by those very rules which Aristotle has laid down.

For granting that Aristotle might pick such and such observations
from this piece, they might be mere accidents resulting casually
from the composition of the work, and not any of the essential
principles of the poem. How usual is it for critics to find out
faults, and create beauties, which the authors never intended for
such, and how frequently do we find authors run down in those very
parts, which they designed for the greaten ornament how natural is
it for aspiring ambitious schoolmen to attempt matters of the
highest reach, the wonderful creation of the world, (which nothing
but the almighty power that ordered it, can describe) is brought
into mood and figure by the arrogance of philosophy but till I can
believe that the vertigos of Cartesius,<41> or the atoms of Epicurus
can determine the almighty fiat, they must give me leave to question
the infallibility of their rules in respect of poetry.

Had Homer himself by the same inspiration that he writ his poem,
left us any rules for such a performance, all the world must have
owned it for authentic. But he was too much a poet to give rules to
that, whose excellence he knew consisted in a free and unlimited
flight of imagination, and to describe the spirit of poetry, which
alone is the true art of poetry, he knew to be as impossible, as for
human reason to teach the gift of prophecy by a definition.

Neither is Aristotle to be allowed any farther knowledge in dramatic
than in epic poetry. Euripides, whom he seems to compliment by rules
adapted to the model of his plays, was either his contemporary, or
lived but a little before him. He was not insensible how much this
author was the darling of the city, as appeared by the prodigious
expense disbursed by the public for the ornament of his plays, and
'tis probable, he might take this opportunity of improving his
interest with the people, indulging their inclination by refining
upon the beauty of what they admired and besides all this, the
severity of dramatic rage was so fresh in his memory in the hard
usage that his brother soph<42> not long before met with upon the
stage, that it was convenient to humour the reigning wit, lest a
second Aristophanes should take him to task with as little mercy as
poor Socrates found at the hands of the first.

I have talked so long to lay a foundation for these following
conclusions, Aristotle was no poet, and consequently not capable of
giving instructions in the art of poetry, his Ars Poetica are only
some observations drawn from the works of Homer and Euripides, which
may be mere accidents resulting casually from the composition of the
works, and not any of the essential principles on which they are
compiled. That without giving himself the trouble of searching into
the nature of poetry, he has only complimented the heroes of wit and
valour of his age, by joining with them in their approbation, with
this difference, that their applause was plain, and his more
scholastic.

But to leave these only as suppositions to be relished by every man
at his pleasure, I shall without complimenting any author, either
ancient or modern, inquire into the first invention of comedy, what
were the true designs and honest intentions of that art, and from a
knowledge of the end, seek out the means, without one quotation of
Aristotle, or authority of Euripides.

In all productions either divine or humane, the final cause is the
first mover, because the end or intention of any rational action
must first be considered, before the material or efficient causes
are put in execution. Now to determine the final cause of comedy we
must run back beyond the material and formal agents, and take it in 
its very infancy, or rather in the very first act of its generation,
when its primary parent, by proposing such or such an end of his
labour, laid down the first sketches or shadows of the piece. Now as
all arts and sciences have their first rise from a final cause, so
'tis certain that they have grown from very small beginnings, and
that the current of time has swelled 'em to such a bulk, that
nobody, can find the fountain, by any proportion between the head
and the body, this, with the corruption of time, which has debauched
things from their primitive innocence, to selfish designs and
purposes, renders it difficult to find the origin of any offspring
so very unlike its parent.

This is not only the case of comedy, as it stands at present, but
the condition also of the ancient theatres, when great men made
shows of this nature a rising step to their ambition, mixing many
lewd and lascivious representations to gain the favour of the
populace, to whose taste and entertainment the plays were chiefly
adopted. We must therefore go higher than either Aristophanes, or
Menander, to discover comedy in its primitive institution, if we
would draw any moral design of its invention to warrant and
authorise its continuance.

I have already mentioned the difficulty of discovering the invention
of any art in the different figure it makes by succession of
improvements; but there is something in the nature of comedy, even
in its present circumstances, that bears so great a resemblance to
the philosophical mythology of the ancients, that old AEsop must
wear the bays as the first and original author, and whatever
alterations or improvements farther application may have subjoined,
his fables gave the first rise and occasion.

Comedy is no more at present than a well-framed tale handsomely
told, as an agreeable vehicle for counsel or reproof. This is all we
can say for the credit of its institution; and is the stress of its
charter for liberty and toleration. Then where should we seek for a
foundation, but in AEsop's symbolical way of moralizing upon tales
and fables, with this difference, that his stories were shorter than
ours: he had his tyrant Lion, his statesman Fox, his beau Magpie,
his coward Hare, his bravo Ass, and his buffoon Ape, with all the
characters that crowd our stages every day, with this distinction
nevertheless, that AEsop made his beasts speak good Greek, and our
heroes sometimes can't talk English.

But whatever difference time has produced in the form, we must in
our own defence stick to the end, and intention of his fables. Utile
dulci<43> was his motto, and must be our business, we have no other
defence against the presentment of the grand jury, and for aught I
know it might prove a good means to mollify the rigour of that
persecution, to inform the inquisitors, that the great AEsop was the
first inventor of these poor comedies that they are prosecuting with
so much eagerness and fury, that the first laureate was as just, as
prudent, as pious, as reforming, and as ugly as any of themselves.
And that the beasts which are lugged upon the stage by the horns are
not caught in the city, as they suppose, but brought out of AEsop's
own forest. We should inform them besides, that those very tales and
fables which they apprehend as obstacles to reformation, were the
main instruments and machines used by the wise AEsop for its
propagation, and as he would improve men by the policy of beasts, so
we endeavour to reform brutes with the examples of men.
Fondlewife<44> and his young spouse are no more than the eagle and
cockle, he wanted teeth to break the shell himself, so somebody else
run away with the meat,—the Fox in the play, is the same with the
Fox in the fable, who stuffed his guts so full, that he could not
get out at the same hole he came in; so both Reynards being
delinquents alike, come to be trussed up together. Here are
precepts, admonitions, and salutary innuendos for the ordering of
our lives and conversations couched in these allegories and
allusions. The wisdom of the ancients was wrapped up in veils and
figures, the Egyptian hieroglyphics, and the history of the heathen
gods are nothing else; but if these pagan authorities give offence
to their scrupulous consciences; let them but consult the tales and
parables of our Saviour in holy writ, and they may find this way of
instruction to be much more Christian than they imagine. Nathan's
fable of the poor man's lamb had more influence on the conscience of
David,<45> than any force of downright admonition. So that by
ancient practice, and modern example, by the authority of pagans,
Jews, and Christians, the world is furnished with this so sure, so
pleasant, and expedient an art, of schooling mankind into better
manners. Now here is the primary design of comedy, illustrated from
its first institution, and the same end is equally alleged for its
daily practice and continuance—then without all dispute, whatever
means are most proper and expedient for compassing this end and
intention, they must be the just rules of comedy, and the true art
of the stage.

We must consider then, in the first place, that our business lies
not with a French or a Spanish audience, that our design is not to
hold forth to ancient Greece, nor to moralize upon the vices and
defaults of the Roman commonwealth. No, no—an English play is
intended for the use and instruction of an English audience, a
people not only separated from the rest of the world by situation,
but different also from other nations as well in the complexion and
temperament of the natural body, as in the constitution of our body
politic. As we are a mixture of many nations, so we have the most
unaccountable medley of humours among us of any people upon earth,
these humours produce variety of follies, some of 'em unknown to
former ages, these new distempers must have new remedies, which are
nothing but new counsels and instructions.

Now, sir, if our utile, which is the end, be different from the
ancients, pray let our dulce, which is the means, be so too, for you
know that to different towns there are different ways, or if you
would have it more scholastically, ad diversos fines non idem
conducet medium, or mathematically, one and the same line cannot
terminate in two centres. But waiving this manner of concluding by
induction, I shall gain my point a nearer way, and draw it
immediately from the first principle I set down. That we have the
most unaccountable medley of humours among us of any nation upon
earth; and this is demonstrable from common experience: we shall
find a Wildair<46> in one corner, and a Morose<47> in another, nay,
the space of an hour or two shall create such vicissitudes of temper
in the same person, that he can hardly be taken for the same man. We
shall have a fellow bestir his stumps from chocolate to coffee-house
with all the joy and gaiety imaginable, though he want a shilling to
pay for a hack; whilst another, drawn about in a coach and six, is
eaten up with the spleen, and shall loll in state, with as much
melancholy, vexation, and discontent, as if he were making the tour
of Tyburn. Then what sort of a dulce, (which I take for the
pleasantry of the tale, or the plot of the play) must a man make use
of to engage the attention of so many different humours and
inclinations. Will a single plot satisfy everybody? Will the turns
and surprises that may result naturally from the ancient limits of
time, be sufficient to rip open the spleen of some, and physic the
melancholy of others, screw up the attention of a rover, and fix him
to the stage, in spite of his volatile temper, and the temptation of
a mask? To make the moral instructive, you must make the story
diverting, the splenetic wit, the beau courtier, the heavy citizen,
the fine lady, and her fine footman, come all to be instructed, and
therefore must all be diverted; and he that can do this best, and
with most applause, writes the best comedy, let him do it by what
rules he pleases, so they be not offensive to religion, and good
manners.

But hic labor, hoc opus,<48> how must this secret of pleasing so
many different tastes be discovered? Not by tumbling over volumes of
the ancients, but by studying the humour of the moderns. The rules
of English Comedy don't lie in the compass of Aristotle, or his
followers, but in the pit, box, and galleries. And to examine into
the humour of an English audience, let us see by what means our own
English poets have succeeded in this point. To determine a suit at
law we don't look into the archives of Greece or Rome, but inspect
the reports of our own lawyers, and the acts and statutes of our
parliaments, and by the same rule we have nothing to do with the
models of Menander or Plautus, but must consult Shakespeare,
Johnson, Fletcher, and others, who by methods much different from
the ancients, have supported the English stage, and made themselves
famous to posterity. We shall find that these gentlemen have fairly
dispensed with the greatest part of critical formalities, the
decorums of time and place, so much cried up of late, had no force
of decorum with them, the economy of their plays was ad libitum, and
the extent of their plots only limited by the convenience of action.
I would willingly understand the regularities of Hamlet, Macbeth,
Harry the Fourth, and of Fletcher's plays, and yet these have long
been the darlings of the English audience, and are like to continue
with the same applause, in defiance of all the criticisms that ever
were published in Greek and Latin.

But are here no rules, no decorums to be observed in comedy? Must we
make the condition of the English stage a state of anarchy? No, sir—
For there are extremes in irregularity, as dangerous to an author,
as too scrupulous a deference to criticism, and as I have given you
an instance of one; so I shall present you an example of the other.

There are a sort of gentlemen that have had the jaunty education of
dancing, French, and a fiddle, who coming to age before they arrive
at years of discretion, make a shift to spend a handsome patrimony
of two or three thousand pound, by soaking in the tavern all night,
lolling a-bed all the morning, and sauntering away all the evening
between the two play-houses with their hands in their pockets. You
shall have a gentleman of this size upon his knowledge of Covent
Garden, and a knack of witticising in his cups, set up immediately
for a playwright. But besides the gentleman's wit and experience,
here is another motive: there are a parcel of saucy impudent fellows
about the playhouse, called doorkeepers, that can't let a gentleman
see a play in peace, without jogging, and nudging him every minute
sir, will you please to pay—Sir, the act's done, will you please to
pay, sir. I have broke their heads all round two or three times, yet
the puppies will be troublesome. Before gad, I'll be plagued with
'em no longer, I'll e'en write a play myself, by which means, my
character of wit shall be established, I shall enjoy the freedom of
the house, and to pin up the basket, pretty Miss — shall have the
profits of my third night for her maidenhead. Thus we see, what a
great blessing is a coming girl to a play-house. Here is a poet
sprung from the tail of an actress, like Minerva from Jupiter's
head. But my spark proceeds—my own intrigues are sufficient to found
the plot, and the Devil's in't, if I can't make my character talk as
wittily as those in The Trip to the Jubilee<49>—but stay—what shall
I call it first? Let me see—The Rival Theatres<50>—very good, by
gad, because I reckon the two houses will have a contest about this
very play—thus having found a name for his play, in the next place
he makes a play to his name, and thus he begins.

Act I. Scene: Covent Garden.

Enter Portico, Piaza and Turnstile.

Here you must note, that Portico being a compound of practical rake,
and speculative gentleman, is ten to one, the author's own
character, and the leading card in the pack. Piaza is his mistress,
who lives in the square, and is daughter to old Pillariso, an odd
out-o'the-way gentleman, something between the character of
Alexander the Great, and Solon, which must please, because it is
new.

Turnstile is maid and confident to Piaza, who for a bribe of ten
pieces, lets Portico in at the back door; so the first act
concludes.

In the second enter Spigotoso, who was butler perhaps to the Czar of
Muscovy, and Fossetana his wife; after these characters are run dry,
he brings you in at the third act, Whinewell, and Charmarillis for a
scene of love to please the ladies; and so he goes on without fear
or wit, till he comes to a marriage or two, and then he writes—
Finis.

'Tis then whispered among his friends at Will's and Hippolito's,
that Mr. Such a one has writ a very pretty comedy, and some of 'em
to encourage the young author, equip him presently with prologue and
epilogue, then the play is sent to Mr. Rich<27> or Mr. Betterton<51>
in a fair legible hand, with the recommendation of some gentleman
that passes for a man of parts, and a critic, in short, the
gentleman's interest has the play acted, and the gentleman's
interest makes a present to pretty Miss — she's made his whore, and
the stage his cully, that for the loss of a month in rehearsing, and
a hundred pound in dressing a confounded play, must give the liberty
of the house to him and his friends for ever after.

Now such a play may be written with all the exactness imaginable in
respect of unity in time and place, but if you inquire its character
of any person, though of the meanest understanding of the whole
audience, he will tell you 'tis intolerable stuff, and upon your
demanding his reasons, his answer is, I don't like it. His humour is
the only rule that he can judge a comedy by, but you find that mere
nature is offended with some irregularities; and though he be not so
learned in the drama, to give you an inventory of the faults, yet I
can tell you, that one part of the plot had no dependence upon
another, which made this simple man drop his attention and concern
for the event, and so disengaging his thoughts from the business of
the action, he sat there very uneasy, thought the time very tedious,
because he had nothing to do. The characters were so uncoherent in
themselves, and composed of such variety of absurdities, that in his
knowledge of nature he could find no original for such a copy, and
being therefore unacquainted with any folly they reproved, or any
virtue that they recommended, their business was as flat and
tiresome to him, as if the actors had talked Arabic.

Now these are the material irregularities of a play, and these are
the faults, which downright mother-sense can censure and be offended
at, as much as the most learned critic in the pit. And although the
one cannot give me the reasons of his approbation or dislike, yet I
will take his word for the credit or disrepute of a comedy, sooner
perhaps than the opinion, of some virtuosos, for there are some
gentlemen that have fortified their spleen so impregnably with
criticism, and hold out so stiffly against all attacks of
pleasantry, that the most powerful efforts of wit and humour cannot
make the least impression. What a misfortune is it to these
gentlemen to be natives of such an ignorant, self-willed,
impertinent island, where let a critic and a scholar find never so
many irregularities in a play, yet five hundred saucy people will
give him the lie to his face, and come to see this wicked play forty
or fifty times in a year. But this vox populi is the devil, though
in a place of more authority than Aristotle, it is called vox
dei.<52> here is a play with a vengeance, (says a critic) to bring
the transaction of a year's time into the compass of three hours, to
carry the whole audience with him from one kingdom to another, by
the changing of a scene: where's the probability, nay, the
possibility of all this, the Devil's in the poet sure, he don't
think to put contradictions upon us.

Look'ee, sir, don't be in a passion, the poet does not impose
contradictions upon you, because he has told you no lie, for that
only is a lie which is related with some fallacious intention that
you should believe it for a truth, now the poet expects no more that
you should believe the plot of his play, than old AEsop designed the
world should think his Eagle and Lion talked like you and I; which I
think was every jot as improbable, as what you quarrel with, and yet
the fables took, and I'll be hanged if you yourself don't like 'em.
But besides, sir, if you are so inveterate against improbabilities,
you must never come near the play-house at all, for there are
several improbabilities, nay, impossibilities, that all the
criticisms in nature cannot correct, as for instance, in the part of
Alexander the Great, to be affected with the transactions of the
play, we must suppose that we see that great conqueror, after all
his triumphs, shunned by the woman he loves, and importuned by her
he hates, crossed in his cups and jollity by his own subjects, and
at last miserably ending his life in a raging madness, we must
suppose that we see the very Alexander, the son of Philip, in all
these unhappy circumstances, else we are not touched by the moral,
which represents to us the uneasiness of humane life in the greatest
state, and the instability of fortune in respect of worldly pomp.
Yet the whole audience at the same time knows that this is Mr.
Betterton, who is strutting upon the stage, and tearing his lungs
for a livelihood. And that the same person should be Mr. Betterton,
and Alexander the Great, at the same time, is somewhat like an
impossibility, in my mind yet you must grant this impossibility in
spite of your teeth, if you han't power to raise the old hero from
the grave to act his own part.

Now for another impossibility, the less rigid critics allow to a
comedy the space of an artificial day, or twenty-four hours, but
those of the thorough reformation, will confine it to the natural or
solar day, which is but half the time. Now admitting this for a
decorum absolutely requisite: this play begins when it is exactly
six by your watch, and ends precisely at nine, which is the usual
time of the representation. Now is it feasible in rerum natura,<53>
that the same space or extent of time can be three hours, by your
watch, and twelve hours upon the stage, admitting the same number of
minutes, or the same measure of sand to both. I'm afraid, sir, you
must allow this for an impossibility too; and you may with as much
reason allow the play the extent of a whole year, and if you grant
me a year, you may give me seven, and so to a thousand. For that a
thousand years should come within the compass of three hours is no
more an impossibility, than that two minutes should be contained in
one. Nullum minus continet in se maius,<54> is equally applicable to
both.

So much for the decorum of time, now for the regularity of place. I
might make the one a consequence of t'other, and allege, that by
allowing me any extent of time, you must grant me any change of
place; for the one depends upon t'other, and having five or six
years for the action of a play, I may travel from Constantinople to
Denmark, so to France, and home to England, and rest long enough in
each country besides: but you'll say, how can you carry us with you?
Very easily, sir, if you be willing to go. As for example. Here is a
new play, the house is thronged, the prologue's spoken, and the
curtain drawn represents you the scene of Grand Cairo. Whereabouts
are you now, sir? Were not you the very minute before in the pit in
the English play-house talking to a wench, and now Presto, you are
spirited away to the banks of the River Nile. Surely, sir, this is a
most intolerable improbability, yet this you must allow me, or else
you destroy the very constitution of representation. Then in the
second act, with a flourish of the fiddles, I change the scene to
Astrakhan. O this is intolerable! Look'ee sir, 'tis not a jot more
intolerable than the other, for you'll find that 'tis much about the
same distance between Egypt and Astrakhan, as it is between Drury
Lane and Grand Cairo; and if you please to let your fancy take post,
it will perform the journey in the same moment of time, without any
disturbance in the world to your person. You can follow Quintus
Curtius all over Asia in the train of Alexander, and trudge after
Hannibal like a cadet through all Italy, Spain, and Africa, in the
space of four or five hours, yet the devil a one of you will stir a
step over the threshold for the best poet in Christendom, though he
make it his business to make heroes more amiable, and to surprise
you with more wonderful accidents and events.

I am as little a friend to those rambling plays as anybody, nor have
I ever espoused their party by my own practice, yet I could not
forbear saying something in vindication of the great Shakespeare,
whom every little fellow that can form an Aristus primus will
presume to condemn for indecorums and absurdities; sparks that are
so spruce upon their Greek and Latin, that, like our fops in travel,
they can relish nothing but what is foreign, to let the world know,
they have been abroad forsooth: but it must be so, because Aristotle
said it, now I say it must be otherwise because Shakespeare said it,
and I'm sure that Shakespeare was the greater poet of the two. But
you'll say that Aristotle was the greater critic—that's a mistake,
sir, for criticism in poetry, is no more than judgment in poetry;
which you will find in your lexicon. Now if Shakespeare was the
better poet, he must have the most judgment in his art; for
everybody knows, that judgment is an essential part of poetry, and
without it no writer is worth a farthing. But to stoop to the
authority of either, without consulting the reason of the
consequence, is an abuse to a man's understanding, and neither the
precept of the philosopher, nor example of the poet, should go down
with me, without examining the weight of their assertions. We can
expect no more decorum or regularity in any business, than the
nature of the thing will bear, now if the stage cannot subsist
without the strength of supposition, and force of fancy in the
audience, why should a poet fetter the business of his plot, and
starve his action, for the nicety of an hour, or the change of a
scene, since the thought of man can fly over a thousand years with
the same ease, and in the same instant of time, that your eye
glances from the figure of six, to seven, on the dial-plate, and can
glide from the Cape of Good Hope to the Bay of St Nicholas, which is
quite across the world, with the same quickness and activity, as
between Covent Garden church, and Will's coffee-house. Then I must
beg of these gentlemen to let our old English authors alone—if they
have left vice unpunished, virtue unrewarded, folly unexposed, or
prudence unsuccessful, the contrary of which is the utile of comedy,
let them be lashed to some purpose. If any part of their plots have
been independent of the rest, or any of their characters forced or
unnatural, which destroys the Dulce of plays, let them be hissed off
the stage. But if by a true decorum in these material points, they
have writ successfully, and answered the end of dramatic poetry in 
every respect, let them rest in peace, and their memories enjoy the
encomiums due to their merit, without any reflection for waiving
those niceties, which are neither instructive to the world, nor
diverting to mankind; but are like all the rest of critical
learning, fit only to set people together by the ears in ridiculous
controversies, that are not one jot material to the good of the
public, whether they be true or false.

And thus you see, sir, I have concluded a very unnecessary piece of
work, which is much too long, if you don't like it, but let it
happen anyway, be assured, that I intended to please you, which
should partly excuse,

Sir,

Your most humble servant.

Finis



Notes

1. En Orenge il n'y a point d'oranges: "In Orange (a city in France)
there are no oranges."
2. Pietas, prudentia, &c.: "Piety, prudence, virtue, divided among
others, they were joined in Chaloner." William Cecil, 1st Baron
Burghley, In memoriam Thomas Chaloner, l. 31-2. Sir Thomas Chaloner
(1521–1565) was an English statesman and poet, ancestor of the
Edmond Chaloner to whom this book is dedicated.
3. As in previous note, except ". . . they remain joined in
Chaloner."
4. Nam quamvis, &c.: "For although he read very much and widely, he
did so for the love of truth and learning and not to show off his
erudition."
5. De Republica Anglorum instauranda: "Of the institution of the
English Realm," a posthumously published work in Latin verse by
Thomas Chaloner.
6. Israel's hero: Sampson. See Judges Ch. 13-16.
7. Sorrow may last for a night, but joy cometh in the morning:
Psalms, 30:5.
8. Track-scout: A kind of canal boat drawn by horses.
9. Philip's conquering son: Alexander the Great.
10. Mort-dieu: "God's death."
11. The late queen: Mary II, d. 1692. Survived by her husband,
William of Orange.
12. Prince Prettyman: A character in The Rehearsal, a satirical play
by George Villiers, first staged on December 7, 1671.
13. Nemine contradicente: "No-one disagreeing."
14. Wittol: A husband who knows and tolerates his wife's adulteries,
also the name of a character in The Old Bachelor by Joseph Congreve,
1693.
15. Dorimant: The name of a notorious libertine and man-about-town
in The Man of Mode, a play by George Etherege, 1676.
16. Noll: Nickname of Oliver Cromwell, who deposed and beheaded King
Charles I, and ruled Britain for a decade after.
17. Sir Francis Drake sailed around the world in 1577-80.
18. Drawer: A tavern waiter.
19. Sacharissa . . Waller: Edmund Waller, (1606 – 1687) wrote a
number of poems addressed to "Sacharissa", his name for Dorothy
Sidney, with whom he was in love, but who rejected him and married
another man.
20. The treaty: See Genesis 9:11-17.
21. Garde-du-corps: Bodyguard.
22. Quae genus: Literally "of what kind." A tag used to classify the
declension of Latin nouns, encountered at the very beginning of
learning the language.
23. Cits: Tradesmen, shop-keepers, and similar townspeople of a
social rank between the common masses, and the landed gentry and
professionals.
24. Square cap: A university graduate.
25. Vossius: Name of a large family of Dutch scholars; probably
Isaac (1618-1689) author of De poematum cantu et viribus rhythmi
("On the Music of Poetry and Power of Rhythm"). Heinsius: Dutch
scholar (1580-1655), author of De tragica constitutione ("How to
make a tragedy"). Hedelin: François Hédelin (1604-1676,) French
priest and playwright, author of several plays and Pratique du
theatre, a theoretical examination of the drama. Rapin: René Rapin
(1621–1687) French Jesuit, author of several works of criticism of
classical writers.
26. The analogy here is to a mountebank's show, at the end of which
packets of quack medicine are sold.
27. Mr. Rich: Christopher Rich, owner and manager of Lincoln's Inn
Fields theatre, and father of John Rich, producer of The Beggar's
Opera.
28. Bellarmine: Cardinal Robert Bellarmine (1542–1621), leading
theologian of the counter-reformation.
29. Ipse dixit: The fallacy of defending a proposition by baldly
asserting that it is "just how it is", without any other evidence or
argument.
30. Hicks Hall: The magistrate's court for Middlesex and
Westminater.
31. Areopagus: A place in Athens, and the court which sat there to
try serious crimes.
32. Solon: 7th/6th Century BC Athenian orator and lawmaker, credited
with codifying the laws and constitution of Athens.
33. Coke: Sir Edward Coke (1552 – 1634) English barrister, judge,
and politician, author of Coke upon Littleton and other legal
textbooks long regarded as an authoritative interpretation of
English common law.
34. Cynic: A follower of the philosopher Diogenes, who rejected
striving for power, wealth and comfort, living a simple natural life
instead.
35. Petitio principi: The logical fallacy of assuming what is to be
proved.
36. Ratiocinati Oratoris: The reasoning or logic of oratory.
Ornamenta Figurarum Rhetoricarum, "Rhetorical ornaments and figures
of speech." Authoritas Patrum Ecclesiae: "The authority of the
fathers of the Church."
37. Royal Sovereign: The name of several ships of the British Navy.
The one referred to was a line-of-battle ship of 100 guns, being
built at Woolwich dockyard when this was written, and launched in
1701.
38. Apud omnes gentes: "Among all peoples."
39. Stagirite: A person from Stagira, a Greek city: Aristotle was
the most famous of these.
40. Prince Arthur: An Heroic Poem in Ten Books by Sir Richard
Blackmore, 1695. See
http://spenserians.cath.vt.edu/TextRecord.php?action=GET&textsid=337
08
41. Cartesius: René Descartes.
42. His brother soph: (soph = sophist, a philosopher) This refers to
Socrates, who was lampooned by Aristophanes in his play The Clouds.
43. Utile dulci: "Useful and sweet things"
44. Fondlewife: A character in The Old Bachelor by Joseph Congreve,
first performed 1693.
45. Nathan's fable: See 2 Samuel 12:1-4.
46. Wildair: a character in the plays The Constant Couple and Sir
Harry Wildair by George Farquhar himself.
47. Morose: a character in the play Epicene, or The Silent Woman, by
Ben Jonson.
48. Hic labor, hoc opus: "This is the work, this is the task" i.e
this is the job before us.
49. The Trip to the Jubilee: or The Constant Couple, a play by
Farquhar himself.
50. The Rival Theatres: A play by George Stayley, a farce about the
antagonism of the two main Dublin theatres, Smock Alley and Crow St.
51. Betterton: Thomas Patrick Betterton (1635 – 1710), manager of
the Drury Lane Theatre and the leading London actor of the first
decade of the 18th Century.
52. Vox populi, vox dei: "The voice of the people is the voice of
God."
53. Rerum natura: "The nature of things."
54. Nullum minus continet in se magus: "The smaller thing cannot
contain the greater."

2

