Memoirs of Mrs. Margaret Leeson

Published by the Ex-Classics Project, 2016

This E-text is in the Public Domain. You may make any use of it
you wish without any further formalities

INTRODUCTION
Peg Plunkett, or Mrs. Margaret Leeson as she liked 
to call herself, was the leading courtesan and 
brothel-keeper of late 18th-Century Dublin. She was 
born in 1727 (or 1742 according to some sources) 
into modest prosperity in Co. Westmeath.  A 
headstrong girl from the start, she bitterly 
resented her brother's domination and rejected the 
elderly shopkeeper chosen to be her husband. After 
one savage beating too many, she left home and took 
up with the first of her many lovers. He abandoned 
her in due course, and, there being no place for a 
woman other than virgin, wife or whore, she 
embarked on her career as an "impure." After a 
series of lovers, heartbreak, abandonment and the
 birth and death of several children, she set up as
 the keeper of a very high-class brothel. She and 
her "nymphs" did business first in Smock Alley, and 
then in Pitt St. (now Balfe St.) in a very 
fashionable area of Dublin. Her clients included 
Lords, Members of Parliament and (alas!) also con 
men who swindled her out of much of the money she 
had earned. When she grew too old, she took up 
religion, and to relieve her poverty wrote these 
memoirs, which are sprightly, witty and full of 
remarkable anecdotes of the last flowering of the 
old pre-Union Ascendancy. 



Bibliographic Note.

This Ex-Classics Edition of  The Memoirs of Mrs. Margaret Leeson, 
is taken from a facsimile of the first edition published in three 
volumes in 1795-97. Spelling has been modernised. The division of each
volume into books and chapters has been replaced by a uniform chapter
numbering. For volume 3, which was not divided into chapters, our scheme
is based on that of Ms. Mary Lyons in her no out of print edition 
(Lilliput Press, Dublin, 1995)


TITLE PAGE of VOLUME I.

MEMOIRS
OF
MRS. MARGARET LEESON
WRITTEN BY HERSELF;
AND
INTERSPERSED WITH SEVERAL INTERESTING AND
AMUSING ANECDOTES
OF SOME OF THE MOST STRIKING
CHARACTERS
OF
GREAT-BRITAIN AND IRELAND
=======
VOL. I
=======
REASON prescribes strict laws for giddy youth
But the warm temper leaps o'er cold decree
And when once past the bounds that should refrain,
Rambles at large, though conscious it should not
Yet, let not Censure, with its brow austere,
Too heavy fall upon the erring Fair.
He is a choice divine, who practices
That which he preaches others.—'Tis by far
More easy to tell twenty what to do,
Than be the one of twenty who will do it.
            ========================
DUBLIN:
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHORESS
AND SOLD BY THE PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS
MDCCXCV


CHAP. I.

'Tis not in Empires and in States alone
That Power enslaves th' attendants on a Throne;
In Families too oft we see its sway,
Where petty Tyrants will their Power display.
Intoxicated with a sudden rise,
They haughtily dissolve the dearest ties,
Wives, Children, Brothers, Sisters, all must bow,
To the imperious bending of the brow.
Kind Nature's tenderest feelings, stifled all,
Though ruin follows, still they will enthrall,
To satiate an arbitrary pride
And vent a spleen, Justice and Truth decide.

MANY WERE, doubtless, the opinions of the public, when the
appearance of this work was first announced; and most of them will
possibly be found groundless. The Voluptuary perhaps expected to
find here constant food for his inordinate desires, and fresh
excitements to his passions—The Prudish were fearful that my
memoirs would be totally unfit to be read by any female of
delicacy—The Gay thought they might contain nothing but musty
morals, grave declamation, dolorous lamentations and puling
penitence—The solemn Pedant, was sure a woman's writings must be
so void of erudition as to be unworthy the notice of the Literati—
The prudent Parent declared they should be kept out of sisters'
nieces' and daughters' sight, lest they should prove infectious—
Whilst the antiquated Maidens, frequenters of the Tea and Card-
tables, hinted they might take a peep in private, for they were
sure my Book must offer some nice tit bits, and delicious morsels
of scandal.

I dare presume to say that each of these conjectures will appear
unsubstantial. Whilst I am careful not to pen a single line or use
a single expression that can excite a blush on the most refined
and delicate cheek; I shall yet endeavour to dimple it into a
smile. Moral sentences have now lost their desired effect. Whilst
Vice and Folly are best attacked by Ridicule, I shall not be any
wise sparing of it, and I promise that my gravity shall not be so
great as to set my readers asleep.—As to my style and diction—why—
I must e'en leave them to the mercy of the Critics; only observing
that my frequent conversations with some of the most learned and
scientific of the College, must have rendered it above contempt.

A Female, so much acquainted with men and manners as myself, and
so often the subject of public and private conversation, cannot
sit down to fill the ever-open ears, and feed the ever-gaping
mouth of Curiosity without some reflections. If she intends to be
candid, she must necessarily expose some characters to Censure—but
then their own conduct has drawn it upon them, and she stands
acquitted at the Bar of Justice. She must portray her own faults
and condemn her own errors—but if thereby she cautions others
against falling into the like, she extends a public benefit. The
Mariner is really indebted to the publisher of the Chart which
points out the rocks, shoals and sands on which others have been
wrecked; as thereby he may steer his vessel clear of them all, and
attain the desired harbour of peace and safety. These
considerations, joined to a wish of preventing sundry falsehoods
being propagated (perhaps published) concerning me, were the
motives of setting forth the truth; and from it I shall not swerve
one tittle.

CHASTITY I willingly acknowledge is one of the characteristic
virtues of the female sex. But I may be allowed to ask—Is it the
only one? Can the presence of that one, render all the others of
no avail? Or can the absence of it, make a woman totally incapable
of possessing one single good quality? How many females do we
daily see, who on the mere retention of chastity, think themselves
allowable in the constant exercise of every vice. One woman may
indulge in frequent inebriation, she may ruin her husband,
neglect, beggar, and set an evil example to all her children—but
she arrogates to herself the character of a virtuous woman—truly,
because she is chaste. A second female is a propagator of scandal,
sets families together by the ears, destroys domestic peace, and
breaks the nearest and dearest connections—but all this is but a
trifle—She is chaste, and the most reputable and most pious will
visit this virtuous woman. A third cheats at cards, robs her
unsuspecting and dearest friends of their health and time by her
midnight routs, and of their money by her frauds,—yet as she may
be chaste, she is a virtuous woman, and the wife of the parson of
the parish will take her by the arm and appear with her in public.

But, after all, it is more than possible that most females of the
above-mentioned classes, may be only chaste by chance, and may be
totally ignorant whether they are so, or not—What! some modern
Lucretia may cry out, What! do I not know whether I am chaste or
not? I answer, no!—Have you ever been tried? Have you resisted
importunity and opportunity with a man you loved (for there can be
no merit in resisting one you disliked) and resisted from
principle? If you have, I will allow you a just claim to that
appellation, but on no other terms—but enough of these reflections
for the present—let me commence my narration.

I drew my first breath at Killough, in the county of Westmeath,
where my father Matthew Plunket possessed a handsome property near
Corbet's-town. My mother was Miss A. O'Reilly, of a family related
to that of my father, and also of the Earl of Cavan. The fruits of
their marriage were twenty-two children, of whom eight only
survived, three brothers, four sisters and myself, who all
received the best education the county could afford. Whilst I was
yet young, my eldest sister was married to Mr. Smith of Kinnegad,
who then established a Malt-house and Brewery at Tullamore, in the
King's County; and my next eldest, married Mr. Beatty, who kept a
China shop in Arran-street, Dublin. The family then consisted of
only my father and mother, three brothers and as many sisters; and
living in an elegant style, with every amusement of music,
dancing, and rural diversions; happy in a close intimacy with the
two sons and daughter of Mrs. Darcy, of Corbet's-town (our nearest
neighbour) life glided on in the paths of innocence and content.

But alas! a period was soon put to those Halcyon days, and sorrow,
anxiety and death approached our door. My dear mother was attacked
with a spotted fever, which carried her to the grave. At the first
approach of this fatal disorder, my father, anxious for the lives
of his children, sent us away from the infection, one of my
sisters went to Mrs. Smith at Tullamore, another to Mrs. Beatty in
Dublin, myself to an uncle in the county of Cavan, and my two dear
youngest brothers were dispersed in the neighbourhood. My dear,
worthy and tender eldest brother, preferring his duty to his
safety, remained at home to attend his dying mother; but he caught
the disorder, and died on the tenth day—Ah fatal death! the dire
cause of all my wanderings, and the source of all my misfortunes.

After some months we all returned to our sorrowing father, our
tears ceased to follow; we again lived in elegance, and a short-
lived content; for my father was so desolate with the loss of his
old partner, and his dearly loved eldest son; and so affected with
the rheumatism, that finding himself unable to manage his affairs,
he gave up the whole to his then eldest son, Christopher, on
condition of his securing to his brother and sisters, the
provisions that my father's paternal care had provided for each.

From that disastrous moment, what a change! the house having lost
its mild and indulgent ruler by my father's surrender of his
power, fell under the direction of one, who intoxicated with his
newly acquired authority, knew not how to exercise it. Extravagant
in the pursuit of his own pleasures, and penurious to the most
innocent of those of his brother and sisters, he grudged them a
shilling whilst he squandered pounds. The rein of parental control
being taken from his neck, he became like a head-strong wild colt.
And in short, sunk into a harsh, unfeeling cruel tyrant. My eldest
unmarried sister, unable to bear his constant ill-usage, besought
her father's permission to go to Dublin, and reside a while with
her sister Beatty. The old gentleman whose greatest happiness
consisted in procuring that of others consented, and she left a
scene of discontent, oppression and misery. My brother Christopher
thus lost one object, whereon to vent his tyrannic waspishness and
over-bearing temper, but as the total sum of those ill qualities
remained the same, he continued to exercise them on those who were
left behind; so that each of us came in for a proportionably
greater share than before.

It is highly probable that the ill-usage we all received from
Christopher, did not arise merely from the natural, unrestrained
badness of his temper; but sprung also from another source. He had
been constantly so indulgent to his own irregularities that the
honest income of the house, but barely sufficed for the expenses
they drew upon him. His vices had made him extravagant, and his
extravagance had rendered his receipts inadequate to his idle
disbursements. When the property was made over to him, he was
charged with certain provisions for his brother and sisters. The
first was indeed, too young to become an immediate claimant, but
he knew the girls were at, or nearly approaching to that period
when a settlement in life might be required. When their marriage
should take place, their portions must be paid, and this he
studied to avoid; he having doubtless sunk deep into their
property. He therefore artfully resolved to set his face against
any proposal of that kind; and with a malignant cunning redouble
his ill-treatment, in hopes it might drive them to a desperation,
which might bring them to take steps, that might warrant his
refusal of their property, that it might all centre in himself. At
least his conduct demonstrated plainly that such a motive might be
justly ascribed to him—of this we had soon a very striking
instance.

Whilst my eldest unmarried sister resided in Dublin (whither his
ill-usage had driven her) her accomplishments and person were too
striking to be overlooked by several youths of equal, nay,
superior rank. She had many admirers, amongst whom was a Mr.
Brady, a citizen of fair character in trade, and in an affluent
situation. As my sister had permitted Mr. Brady to make his
proposals to my father, they came down to the country for that
purpose. From every enquiry and examination, my father and all his
neighbouring friends thought the match highly eligible; but Mr.
Christopher could not be prevailed on by any means to give his
consent; which, as he stood in the light of a Guardian, was
necessary for the payment of her fortune. Mr. Brady quickly
suspected the cause of his refusal was his wish to retain the
property; and therefore to remove that obstacle, told him that her
portion was no object to him; he wanted only an amiable woman for
his wife, such as his heart approved, and with whom he might live
happy and contented; he therefore would relinquish every pecuniary
demand, and requested his consent to their union on those terms.

Mr. Christopher doubtless was inwardly rejoiced at a proposal that
met his wishes: But he was too cunning to make his satisfaction
apparent. Had he done so he would have stood unmasked to the
public: he therefore persisted in his refusal, declared he had
very strong objections to the match, and he would never sanction
it by his approbation. His father and they might settle the matter
how they pleased, but for himself, he washed his hands of the
business.

My sister, justly irritated at her brother's conduct, took the
opportunity of speaking to him with greater spirit and asperity
than she had ever done before. She declared that from the cruel
and tyrannical treatment she had experienced from him since her
mother's death, and her father's surrender of his affairs in
consequence of his illness, she was resolved rather to earn her
support by her own industry, nay even by servitude, than remain
any longer subjected to his savage behaviour, and therefore his
reign over her was at an end. At the same time she cautioned him
that if he did not change his conduct, her sisters would soon be
of her mind, let the consequences be what they may. They were
daily advancing to maturity, would, from ill-usage, imbibe a
proper spirit, and neither would, nor ought to endure a twentieth
part of what she had suffered. So saying, happy in her father's
consent, and taught by Mr. Brady to disregard that of her brother,
the nuptials took place, and now the happy couple returned the
next day to Dublin, taking me with them, to my great satisfaction;
as I knew my brother Christopher too well to entertain even a
distant hope, that he would be in the least amended by the
spirited rebuke my sister had given him.

Whilst I was in Dublin, my time passed in pleasing scenes of
delight; a constant round of company and amusements occupied the
three months I stayed there, which appeared to me but as so many
days. At the end of that period I received a summons to return
home. I was forced to obey, but I leave the reader to judge with
what reluctance. I called to mind my past ill-usage, which I
foresaw was about to be renewed. I contrasted that with the
tranquillity in which I had passed my time in town; and the result
was a great and manifest depression of my spirits.

But I had another cause for my dejection, beside those above-
mentioned. Young as I then was, I had attracted the notice of a
gentleman who was frequently at Mr. Brady's, his person was quite
unexceptionable, and I began to feel emotions in my youthful
breast, to which I had been hitherto a total stranger. I was to
leave behind me him who had engaged much of my attention, and the
very idea was distressing. However, soon after Mr. O'Reilly (for
that was his name) sent down proposals for me to my father; but 
they were rejected by prudent Mr. Christopher, whose chief
argument was that I was too young by five years at least, to enter
into such an engagement; though to say the truth, in my own mind,
I was of a contrary opinion, and thought myself old enough to be
married—few girls of fifteen think otherwise!—However here ended
this affair, the gentleman did not renew the attack, and as the
wound I had received had not penetrated very deep, absence and a
little time so completely healed it, that it did not leave even a
scar behind, and I soon forgot him.

But such is the frame of the female mind, that when it has once
received an impression, though that it may be effaced, it becomes
more susceptible of another. So it was with me. Whilst I was in
Dublin, Mr. O'Reilly was not the only person who had beheld me
with a favourable eye. Mr. L—y, an amiable young gentleman of an
independent fortune of four hundred pounds a year, had entertained
an affection for me. He did not think writing would be so
effectual to obtain his wishes, as a personal application;
therefore, soon after the former lover had received his final
dismission, he followed me into the country, and applied to my
father. His character and fortune were favourable motives in the
old gentleman's sight, but not so in the jaundiced eye of my
brother Christopher, who had a thousand objections, and seemed
determined neither to let me be happy or make any other person so,
and brought my father over to his sentiments. My lover stayed at
my father's above a fortnight, and as he conceived a great and
just dislike to my elder, he constantly attached himself to my
younger brother, Garret, who was of a very opposite character.
With him he frequently went on hunting and shooting parties; and
in the latter I frequently joined. My presence was a spur of
emulation to them, my lover wishing to please me and prove himself
a good marksman; and my brother desirous of showing his superior
skill.

Although I would have willingly consented to an union with this
gentleman (who was really amiable, and had made considerable
progress in my favour) yet there I was disappointed; my brother
had artfully brought my father into his scheme of positive
refusal; and Mr. L—y, finding it useless to make farther
application, took his last leave, and I heard of him no more.

The effects of Christopher's tyrannic temper manifested themselves
daily. It was natural to wish for every temporary relief from the
sufferings we underwent, and therefore we gladly accepted every
invitation of neighbouring friends to pass a few days with them.
My brother indeed, as if unwilling to lose any opportunity of
exercising his cruelty, constantly refused every effort of the
worthy Darcys and Fetherstons of Dardistown, to get me and my
sister with them. They therefore, addressed their invitations to
my father, who never denied, and always sent us comfortably and
genteely to the parties to which we were asked. But alas! we
frequently paid dear for our pleasures on our return; for
Christopher would seize every pretence to quarrel with us when we
came back, and frequently horse-whipped and beat us in a most
savage manner, so that our bodies were often covered with wheals
and bruises; and I have been for days together confined to my bed
from the exertions of his barbarity.

This treatment, constantly repeated, joined to the disappointment
of every proposition of marriage, and the mocks, jeers and
sarcasms cast upon me by my brother on that account, made me very
low-spirited, I had no comfort in life but what arose from the
melancholy, mutual condolements of my sister, and the tenderness
of my good father: of that I could enjoy but little, as his age
and infirmities generally confined him to his room, if not to his
bed; and Christopher took care to keep us almost always employed.
In this state of uneasiness, suffering, and discontent, I was
lingering on; and my poor sister whose spirits were not so
animated as mine, daily wasting away, when I happily got an
invitation from my sister Smith, to spend some time in Tullamore
with her. I eagerly embraced the opportunity of a temporary relief
from ill-usage; and, having obtained permission, went to her. To 
this even, my tyrant Christopher was not then averse. Perhaps, he
thought the time I should be from home would be something saved in
the expense of my maintenance, little as it was; and here the
passion of avarice (which was daily increasing in him)
counteracted his passion for cruelty, and he suffered one of his
constant victims to be a while out of his reach.


CHAP. II.
HAVING NATURALLY a good flow of spirits, I was ever very lively
when not under the immediate pressure of ill-treatment, or the
dread of its approach. I therefore gave way to cheerfulness, and
enjoyed much pleasure in Tullamore. The change of scene, and
variety of company, speedily restored me from the languor into
which I had fallen. Our frequent walking parties were delightful,
and some of the military in the garrison constantly mixing with
us, and showing a politeness for which they are generally
remarked, increased the pleasure of our promenades. I had not been
long in Tullamore, when a proposal for me was made to my brother-
in-law, Smith. The inamorato was not an object calculated either
to flatter my pride, or engage my attention. He was a grocer, of a
disgusting person, being ill made, hard-featured, with the
countenance of a baboon, shabbily dressed, and to complete my
dislike, wore a wig. This circumstance alone would have been
sufficient to confirm a thorough dislike; for as I had been
accustomed to view the smart, well powdered toupees of the
officers, I could not separate the ideas of clownishness and a
wig, however incongruous they might appear to others. But what
gave my admirer merit in his own eyes, and emboldened him to a
proposal for me, was that he was rich. But that was no charm to me
when connected with so many ill qualities. It was in vain that my
friends constantly extolled his goodness of heart, his great
humanity, and his mild and gentle disposition: All this might be
true, but he was a grocer, he was ugly, and—he wore a wig—
insuperable objections.

But, to say the truth, I had another ground for my refusal of the
periwigged grocer—namely, a dawning attachment to another, and, in
my youthful and giddy mind a preferable object. There lived in
Tullamore, near to my brother, a Mrs. Shannon, whose husband had
been dead but a few months. With her dwelt a young man, who having
served his time with her husband, now managed and conducted her
business. He was really of a most engaging person and winning
address, and from my first coming to town, had showed me every
possible mark of attention and respect, which, whilst it attracted
my notice, did not escape the observation of the widow. She had
sat him down as her own, and it seems only waited till decency
would permit her to make him master of the business and of
herself. She began to find that in proportion as his attention to
me increased, it diminished with respect to her. She watched our
looks with the eyes of jealousy; and being experienced in the
silent language of Love, soon construed their real meaning. I also
soon found how she was affected, and my pride was agreeably
flattered at the preference that was so visibly given to me. In
her person, she had indeed some pretensions to beauty, but I had
greatly the advantage over her, in two capital points, namely,
youth and vivacity. I enjoyed my conquest, and could not avoid
secretly rejoicing at my triumph over her, and felt the greater
pleasure in proportion to her apparent uneasiness. This attached
me still more to my lover; and in spite of all Mrs. Shannon's
vigilance, we found frequent opportunities of conversing together
in private.

Whilst matters were thus depending, Mr. Smith had conveyed the
proposals of the grocer to my father. They had been duly
considered in every point of view, and his formal consent was
returned; with the proviso indeed, that I would give mine, and
cordially agree to the match. Upon this reply my persecution, as I
called it, was redoubled; but my aversion hourly augmented. My 
uneasiness at the constant solicitations of Mr. Smith, and Mrs.
Shannon; my vexation at the unceasing application of the grocer;
my dread of my brother's ill-usage when I should return to
Killough, which I doubted not would be soon, in consequence of my
obstinate refusal; together with the affection I had conceived for
Mrs. Shannon's man of business, so wrought all together on my
mind, and threw me into such a perturbation, that I thought I
could avoid all these evils by no better means than by acceding to
my lover's proposal, of going off to Mullingar, and there being
married.

Having come to this determination, and acquainted my inamorato
with my resolves, we were not long before we began to put them
into practice. He, therefore, procured horses, and as soon as it
grew dusk, we mounted and set off, accompanied by a friend of his.
We never alighted till we came to Kilbeggan, where we stopped,
only to take a slight refreshment of wine and cake, and bait the
horses.

But alas! we had not taken our measures so secretly, but we were
soon missed. Mrs. Shannon's piercing eyes had discovered what my
brother-in-law had not once perceived. She, with little less rage
than that of tigress robbed of her whelps, ran to Mr. Smith, 
acquainted him with her well founded conjecture, and urged him to
a pursuit before the fatal knot should be tied, that would rob her
for ever of the completion of what she had been so long
endeavouring to accomplish. Strongly pressed by her, incited by
the clamours of the grocer, his friend, and earnestly wishing to
save me from what he thought an inadequate match, Mr. Smith,
attended by two friends, sat out after us; and we had not been a
quarter of a hour in the Inn, at Kilbeggan, when our pursuers came
to the door, and with pistols in their hands, broke into the room
where we were.—I was thrown into the greatest consternation, and
utterly unable to reply to the reproaches of my brother-in-law,
who insisted on my instant return, offering to tie my hands, and
threatening to shoot me if I showed the least reluctance. My lover
had made his escape out of the back-window immediately on Mr.
Smith's entrance, and I was instantly brought like a condemned
criminal, to the place from whence I came.

What short-sighted mortals we are! How frequently do we run into
the very evils, we wish to shun, by the very steps we take to
avoid them! My dread of returning to the control of a harsh
unfeeling brother, had been my principal motive for the
inconsiderate step I had taken; and that elopement hastened what I
so much dreaded; for I was sent home to Killough the next morning.
Indeed, Mr. Smith had the generosity not to inform my father, or
brother of my misconduct, and I thereby escaped any censure on
that account. At my return home, I experienced a renewal of my
brother's barbarity, the bitterness of which was aggrevated by
contrasting it with the comfort I enjoyed from home. My poor
sister made a dreadful recital of what she had undergone in my
absence. Her gentle spirit was entirely broken, a settled gloom
hung upon her, she had become quite emaciated, and she soon after
took to her bed and died, an absolute victim to her brother's
cruelty and the unassisting weakness of my poor father, who
severely lamented her death.

My brother Garret and myself then remained the sole victims of
Christopher's tyranny; and indeed we severely felt it. My father,
confined to his bed, saw little of it, and we were loth to grieve
him by a recital of our misery. If I was invited out by any
neighbour, and pressed to stay to supper, Christopher would order
the doors be locked sooner than usual; and on my return, I have
been frequently suffered to remain for a full hour in the midst of
snow or rain, till benumbed with cold, before Mr. Christopher
would deign to let me be admitted within the door; and then not
infrequently, he would banish the cold by warming me with his
horse-whip. At length, one Sunday I had gone to prayers, when I
returned he asked me how I had dared to take the horse on which I
rode. I answered, that I had my father's permission; with no other
provocation, he beat me with his horse-whip so vehemently that the
sleeves of my riding-habit, could not be got off my swelled arms
till they were slit open: and I kept my bed ten days from the
bruises I had received.

The measure of my sufferings was now filled to the brim, I
resolved to endure no more. As soon as I was able to crawl from my
bed, went to that of my father, and with a flood of tears, told
him my sorrowful condition; that let what would betide, I would
live no longer under the same roof with a savage, who forgot every
tie of nature and humanity, and with whom my youth, my sex, and
the near relation in which I stood to him, could be no pleas for
decent and humane treatment. I added, that if I were forced to
continue, I felt I should soon follow my unhappy sister; and
therefore, I earnestly besought him to send me to my sister in
Dublin, where I could dwell with comfort, and avoid a fate that
must be grievous to him, and which otherwise must inevitably fall
upon me.

My father was shocked so much at my relation, that in
consideration of his grief and infirmities, I really repented I
had said so much—but my poor heart was so full of grief, that it
would have burst had I not given it vent. He wept bitterly, and
consented I should go to my sister; but desired I would stay till
he could procure some money for me, of which at present he had no
command, since he had given the property over to Christopher.

My father kept his word, and taking the first opportunity of his
son's absence, got as much money from the tenants as enabled me
not only to bear my expenses to Dublin, but left some in my
pocket, and I arrived at my sister's house, which I regarded as a
safe haven after a dreadful storm.

In my absence, my brother having no one on whom he could wreak his
habitual malice, but his younger brother Garret, he frequently
beat him with great severity. This the young lad bore with
patience for some time; till at length, the strokes became too
frequent to be borne; and though but a stripling, and several
years younger than his persecutor, he resolved to pluck up a
spirit; and the next blow he got from Christopher he hazarded a
return. A conflict ensued, the contest was severe, long, and for a
while doubtful. But Garret, deriving strength and courage from
resentment, gave his elder brother such a drubbing, that he never
after ventured another combat, but suffered him to live in peace.
Of this I was informed by a letter from the victorious combatant,
which at the same time acquainted me that my father's increasing
infirmities made him desirous to see me; and that I might return
in safety, for Christopher had not only given his word that he
would treat me kindly; but that he himself would be my protector
and defender against his brother's oppression, if he should break
his word.

Tenderly loving my father, pleased with this assurance, and eager
to embrace my brother Garret, I hastened home; and never did
Andromeda behold her deliverer Perseus; nor the wife of Hector,
see her husband return victorious from a well-fought field, with
greater joy than I viewed, my young hero, Garret; and for three
whole months, peace and tranquillity inhabited our dwelling.

I here would apologize to my readers for dwelling so long on the
evil qualities of my brother Christopher; were it not that I
conceive it somewhat necessary to lay before them events, which
they have too much sameness to be amusing, are yet necessary, if
not for an entire excuse at least for some alleviation of censure
on my subsequent conduct in life. It must be obvious to everyone
that my wanderings, and every occurrence that may appear blameable
in me, were originally owing to his behaviour. Had I been treated
with the same humanity and tenderness that other girls of like
condition experienced, my youth had glided pleasantly along. I
might have been honourably married, and settled in life; might
have made some deserving man happy, and received from him mutual
content. Had slid into the vale of years without reproach, and
have adorned, not debased a respectable name and family. But what
was the alternative? My rising prospects rendered gloomy—every
suitable proposal rejected—my temper soured, my resentments
roused, and my spirits agitated by ill-treatment. Frequently
driven to desperation by savage cruelty, and reckless what became
of me. Every relaxation of my misery, was beheld in such a
pleasurable light, that my mind, like a bow too long and too
harshly bent, was no sooner loosed than it sprang wider than its
pitch, and became almost masterless. My inexperienced youth, left
without any friendly guidance, to ramble wild, and fall a prey to
the artifices of designing men: every door shut against a return
from errors, caused by unrestrained passions, roused by nature,
heated by flattery, and kept alive by gratification—reflect on
this, ye stern inquisitors for virtue! and then condemn as truth
and justice bids—but to return to the last narrative I shall give
respecting my brother Christopher.

For three months after I came back from Dublin, as I have said, we
lived in tranquillity—happy had it been for me, had it continued.
But the AEthiop cannot change his hue, nor the Leopard his spots.
My wretched brother, tired with the long restraint over his
inherent barbarity, let it break forth with redoubled fury. The
family of Dardistown, continuing their attention to me, sought
every opportunity of being in my company—one while, they would
come and spend a day at Killough—that is, when Christopher was
from home—and at other times, they would have me with them. They
gave a ball to a few select friends, and I was invited. As it
continued till it was too late—or rather too early for my return
home, Mrs. Fetherston insisted on my taking a bed with her. The
next morning before I went home, she dispatched a servant to my
father, to acquaint him that she had kept me, and to request he
would not be displeased at my stay. Secure then, as I thought
myself from any anger, I went home; but alas! I had no sooner
entered the door, than my brother Christopher fell on me with his
horse-whip, and beat me so cruelly that I vomited blood, and kept
my bed near three months with the bruises he had given me: being
several times at the point of death, and nothing but my youth and
the natural strength of my constitution could have brought me
through it.

Whilst this abominable exercise was going on, my shrieks and cries
reached the ears of my poor father, who, as soon as a servant
could help him on with his clothes, came down to my assistance;
though he was so much debilitated by the rheumatism, that he could
scarce feed himself without help. When he appeared, my brother
left off beating me, rather from his arm being tired from the
length and excess of his exertions, than from any awe at the
presence of his infirm parent. He could do nothing more than scold
my inhuman tyrant, which he did in the strongest terms he could
utter. He ordered me to be put to bed, and then was carried,
shedding a torrent of tears, to his own.

This last proof of the unconquerable cruelty of Christopher,
confirmed me in the opinion that no peace could be obtained for
me, in that house. Whilst I was confined by my ill-usage, my dear
father would frequently cause himself to be brought to my room,
where he would mingle his tears with mine, sympathize with my
sufferings, and console me with the assurance, that as soon as I
was able to be removed I should go to Dublin. For however grievous
to him the parting with his dear child must be, he could not bear
to expose me any longer to ill-usage, which he was too weak and
powerless to prevent. This promise acted as a cordial to me, and
contributed greatly to my recovery; but I was too impatient to
wait for its being perfectly completeed, and my father having
procured some money from the tenants, as soon as I was able to sit
upright in a carriage (which, as I said before, was not till the
end of three months) I bade adieu to my sorrowing father, and sat
out once more for Dublin. My brother and sister Smith, had quitted
Tullamore, and occupied the house and carried on the business of
the China-shop, in Arran-street, with my sister Beatty; and beside
their natural affection, the knowledge I had acquired of the China
trade whilst I had been in Dublin twice before, rendered me a
welcome guest. I was received in the most cordial manner. They
lamented the miseries I had suffered, deplored the weak and
emaciated condition in which I came to town, and assured me of
every comfort in their power to bestow to render my life happy.
They most religiously kept their word, until I forfeited their
esteem by my own imprudence.


CHAP. III.

If Love the Virgin's heart invade
How, like a Moth the simple Maid
Still plays around the flame.
If soon she be not made a Wife
Her honour's sing'd, and then, for life,
She's—what I dare not name.
GAY

MY LIFE, since the death of my dear mother, had hitherto been an
alternative of pain and pleasure; the one constantly rendering the
other the more poignant. At home, continually exposed to the
harshest of treatment; abroad, soothed with every amusement that
the sisters with whom I had occasionally resided, or my friends
could procure. In my father's house—alas! his no more!—I was sunk
in despondency, and my mind, wedded to sorrow and despair, could
find no opportunity for laudable exertion. At the dwellings of
others, I gave loose to pleasure, and banished every thought but
of diversions that might recompense me for the evil hours I had
spent at Killough. Thus I had neither time nor inclination for
improvement, or laying a solid foundation for happiness, by an
increase of useful knowledge. Hence my natural genius was cramped,
and my heart became filled only with frivolity. The attachments I
had shown to some of my admirers, were quite transient: and if I
yielded a moment to any desire for marriage, it was more than from
a wish, thereby to get rid of oppression than from any love of
either of the men. Nay the mortification I received from being
disappointed, rather sprung from my defeated hopes on that ground,
than from having my affections crossed, therefore, they lasted no
longer than whilst their immediate impressions continued. But
alas! I was soon to experience love as a passion, and to yield to
its fascinating power.

For some time after I came to Dublin, my body was weak, my health
very precarious, and my spirits heavily oppressed. Pleasures
seemed to have lost their exhilarating effect, and I experienced a
kind of lethargy of the mind. In short, I fell into a state, the
most destructive to virtue that possibly can be. It is when the
heart is replete with sorrow and languor, that is most susceptible
of love. In the midst of a round of amusements, each equally
engaging, and a train of admirers the giddy female gives neither a
preference, and has not leisure to attach herself to either. But
when softened, and inactive, the tender passions find easy
admission, and the comforter, and consoler soon becomes the
favoured lover—such was my case.

My brother-in-law had a very intimate friend, a Mr. Dardis. He
beheld my languid state with a sympathetic eye of compassion. He
frequently conversed with me, and all his study seemed to be to
console and comfort me. His mind appeared humane and generous. His
address was soft and pathetic, though rather distant and reserved.

Not warm as a Lover, but cool as a Friend.

I felt a kind of new-born delight in his conversation. Whilst it
lasted my sorrows seemed lulled into a calm, and my mind soothed
into content. I forgot my past grief in the satisfaction of his
soothings, and thought the hour lost in which he was not present.
His visits became more frequent, his attachment to me more visible
and pointed, he appeared more affable and gay, and I more
cheerful. Still he only spoke the language of friendship; and
under that form I had no reserve, I entertained no suspicion. The
pains he had taken to bring me back from despondency demanded, I
thought, at least my gratitude. His pains were not lost, I
recovered my spirits, and my looks testified a complete return of
health. This was visible to all my friends, who attributed it to
every cause but that which was the real one. He now was seldom
absent, he doubtless observed a change in my heart, before I
perceived it myself; and when I did, I was unwilling to believe
it. I beheld him as a true friend, and such a one is a real
treasure, a comfort in sorrow, and a refuge in distress. He
redoubled his assiduities. He, at length, spoke the language of
love, and I listened to it with pleasure. His proposals were
honourable; but we agreed, that at that time the state of his
affairs and my own situation rendered the accomplishment of our
wishes, by a marriage, totally impracticable; therefore, we
determined to wait the favourable opportunity, which we hoped a
little time would produce. This point being settled, we mutually
acknowledged our love, and solemnly engaged ourselves to each
other. I looked upon him as my future husband, and as such
permitted his visits by night as well as day, that we might give
vent to the effusion of our passion unobserved by others.

Every interview gave birth to the following; for some time he
totally forebore from any freedom that could alarm virtue, or
arouse suspicion. Lulled into security by this apparently
honourable reserve, I apprehended nothing. Our expressions of
affection gradually became more fervent; our confidence in each
other, more confirmed; our dalliances less confined; our passions
more inflamed; I felt a tumult in my blood, which I scarce wished
to restrain, at length—to use the language of Lothario.

Hot with the Tuscan grape, and high in blood,
Haply he stole unheeded to my chamber.
He found the soft, believing love-sick maid
Loose, unattir'd, young, tender, full of wishes.
Fierceness and Pride, the guardians of her honour,
Were all asleep—and none but Love was waking;
He snatch'd the glorious, golden opportunity,
And with prevailing youthful ardor press'd her.

Here then was my first failing—the first indeed, but the fatal
foundation of all that followed. Learn hence my young female
readers, cautiously to guard against the first approaches of vice—
learn to keep firm the barriers of virtue, and know that if the
smallest breach is made in the mounds of Chastity, vice rushes in
like a torrent.

At length the morn, and cool reflection came.

I saw the greatness of my fault, I saw my seducer had triumphed,
yet how could I call him seducer, when I met the seduction half
way; and whatever compunction I then felt at my offence, I could
not hate the offender. I saw that I had been imprudent, yet the
flatterer, Hope was at hand, that that imprudence might be amended
by his marrying me, which I did not doubt but his honour would
prompt him to do. Yet what reliance could I justly have on his
honour, when I had weakly given up my own. This indeed, Mr. Dardis
continued to promise, as soon as circumstances would permit; and
this assurance reconciled my mind to repetitions of our guilty
joys, and lulled both conscience and remorse asleep.

I then wrote to my father for money, which my mind foreboded would
be the last I should ever receive from him. But it was difficult
for him to procure me any, as his son had warned all the tenants
not to pay any more rents to my father, and they could not be
persuaded to act contrary to the orders they had received.
However, my indulgent parent, ignorant of the false step I had
taken, and which had really made me unworthy of his attention,
resolved to leave no effort untried to serve me. An uncle of mine
had come up to Dublin, to fetch one of his daughters home, who had
boarded in the nunnery in Channel-row; and when I was in doubt
from the long delay, whether my father could comply with my
request, he sent me a draft upon that uncle for forty pounds,
which was accepted and paid. I received the money with a kind of
compunction, as it made me reflect on the old gentleman's paternal
fondness, and how little I deserved it. However, as by the receipt
of such a considerable sum I thought myself as rich as a queen,
and that I should never want money any more; and as I was not of a
temper to give gloomy ideas any long habitation in my breast, when
I could entertain others more lively and agreeable, my repentance
and compunction were of no long duration.

My spirits continued to be lively, Mr. Dardis constantly repeated
his visits, both public and private. He did not drop his
assurances of his honourable intentions, and gave me incessant
marks of his esteem, and unabated love; nay he seemed (as
Shakespeare says)

As if increase of appetite had grown
By what it fed on.

Thus we went on, enjoying the pernicious sweets of an illicit
amour, and priding ourselves in the prudent secrecy with which it
was carried on, until, at length an event ensued that mocked our
secrecy, and threatened to divulge it to the world; to expose me
to the resentment of my family; and plunge me into disgrace. In
short, I found myself in a state that could not be long hidden,
but would soon produce a living witness of my indiscretion.

This tell-tale circumstance ensuing, roused me at once from the
lethargy into which guilty pleasure, and false security had
plunged me. I beheld in a moment all the horror of my situation. I
saw myself on the eve of shame, reproach and detestation, and knew
not how to ward off either. I appreciated the value of the world's
estimation and an unspotted character, when I was about to lose
both; and had only one single twig to break my fall adown the dark
abyss, into which I was sinking; and that was by Mr. Dardis
fulfilling his promise. I took the first opportunity that offered
to acquaint him, in a flood of tears, with my condition; the
impossibility of concealing it for many days longer from the eyes
of my sister and the family, and the ruin that the discovery must
inevitably draw upon me. He appeared deeply struck with this
event, which had not both him and I been greatly infatuated, we
must have forseen would naturally be the consequence of our
conduct.

Mr. Dardis agreed to the necessity of guarding against censure;
but at the same time, he very forcibly urged that the making his
intentions known to my family, especially to my brutish brother,
would induce them to desire an immediate compliance, which would
thereby be rendered unattainable by the opposition that his
relations would give to the completion of his wishes. To marry me
in private might indeed, silence any scruples of conscience, but
would not stop the clamours of the world; and a public marriage
would deprive him of the countenance of his friends, and of all
the hopes of the benefits of succeeding to his family fortune: and
of even his present income; which would involve us both in poverty
and distress. The best method he saw in our present circumstances,
was, that I should leave my sister's house and go to genteel
lodgings, which he would provide for me, where I should want for
nothing, and when I had lain in, it would be perhaps in his power
to make good his engagements to me, which he wished as cordially
as I did, and would do the moment he was able. It was true indeed,
that my sudden departure, and the uncertainty where I was might
cause some conjectures, but then they could not amount to any
certainties, and whenever I should emerge into the world again my
character would be secure.

Although I was not altogether satisfied with this plan, yet, as I
could not offer any better I acquiesced in it. He then took
apartments for me in Clarendon-street, at the house of a Mrs.
Butler. The lodgings were genteel and convenient, but in the most
improper house to which chance could have directed him; for
although the mistress of it had a very respectable appearance, she
was one of the impure ones, and therefore, not a fit habitation
for the recovery of character; but this I did not know till after
I had left her.

Here I was, for the first time in my life, absent from all my
relations, and from every friend and former acquaintance. It is
true, I enjoyed as much as I desired of Mr. Dardis's company, in
which I was somewhat cheerful; but when alone I was oppressed with
anxiety, and could neither look back without remorse, nor forward
without apprehension of what might follow. My mind was continually
tormented with the thoughts of what my sisters, and especially my
poor father must feel at my sudden elopement. It was possible they
might not divine the real circumstance, but they could figure none
to themselves but what must he to my disadvantage. In this state
of mind I entreated my lover, to make every inquiry into what they
thought, and what they said of me. He did so, and in about a
fortnight brought me the following intelligence.

My whole family was in the greatest possible consternation about
me; as my clothes were left behind, they imagined that in some fit
of discontent, though they knew not for what, I had put an end to
my life in some manner or other; my brother and sister had gone
down the North-wall, to make some enquiries about me, and in
sorrowful expectation of seeing my body either floating on the
water, or driven ashore. My brother Smith, then recollected that
the driver of the coach, in which I had left his house, as on a
visit, drove with his left hand. After searching all the coach-
stands, he found this man, who informed him that he had sat me
down at such a house in Clarendon-street. My two brothers-in-law
then went to a public-house, the very next door to that in which I
lodged, and in answer to their inquiries, heard that the house in
which I was, was a very improper one. Distracted at this news,
they gave me up as an abandoned woman, and went away without
condescending, or indeed wishing to see me.

Of this circumstance I was ignorant for some time, but the news
that Mr. Dardis brought me of the uneasiness my absence had
caused, filled me with the deepest concern. He compassionated my
anxiety, and advised me to write word to my sister, where I was,
that she might no longer continue in her fears for my personal
safety. I eagerly followed his advice, and wrote to my sister
Brady, to request she would call on me the next day. She did not
fail, but conscious of my situation and willing to hide it, when
she came I enveloped myself in my cloak, that my increase of bulk
might not be apparent. Her visit was long, and the time was
chiefly spent in interrogatories, of the manner and motives of my
elopement, and in my returning such answers as seemed the most
proper either to excuse, or palliate my conduct. The result of our
conversation was her offer of receiving me into her house (as she
assured me that in which I was, would destroy my character if I
stayed longer in it), and my promise to dine with her next day.

When Mr. Dardis came at night, anxious to know the event of our
interview, I told him all that had passed, and my intention of
going to Mrs. Brady. This did not meet his approbation. He very
forcibly represented to me, that it would be totally impossible to
conceal my condition, if I went to reside with my sister; nay, if
even I stayed in Dublin, now my family knew where I was. He urged
the absolute necessity of a retreat, at least till I had lain in.
He offered to take me to England, but my dread of the sea, and my
imagination that I should be drowned if I ventured upon it,
prevented my compliance with that plan. He next proposed that I
should go to some country place; I consented, and he went
immediately to take a place in the Drogheda stage. The next
morning he went and put me into the coach; but how great was my
surprise, when I found sitting there a near relation of my own, a
Mrs. Drumgoold, of Drogheda, who having been in Dublin on some
business was returning home. She was as much struck at seeing me,
as I was at beholding her. I was so depressed that I could scarce
make any rational answer to her civilities, but sat a few moments
revolving in my mind what falsehoods I should invent to conceal
the truth. At length I told her that I was going to Drogheda to
receive some money for my brother Smith. This assertion passed
current, as she could not know anything to the contrary. But it
involved me in another embarrassment, she had very politely
obliged me to accept her invitation of staying in her house whilst
my business demanded my presence in Drogheda. But this promise I
did not intend to keep, as it would not only discover the
falsehood of my assertion, respecting my coming to that town, but
would also betray the condition which I was most interested to
hide. O sacred Truth! what does one single deviation from thee,
cost us to support! how many falsehoods must be uttered to screen
the first?

Whilst I remained in the coach my mind was employed in framing
some plan of evading my promise to Mrs. Drumgoold, and getting
farther from Drogheda. When the coach stopped at the Inn, I said I
would make some enquiries after the persons I wanted, and would be
with her in half a hour. Instead of which, as soon as she was gone
home I procured a man and horse to take me to Dunleer, a small
town about seven miles farther off, and galloped away directly;
but to stop all enquiries whither I was gone, and all pursuit, I
requested the Inn-keeper, at Drogheda, to say to any person Mrs.
Drumgoold might send for me; that I had walked out of his house,
just after the coach came in, and that he knew nothing more about
me.

It was late when I arrived at Dunleer, and as I was totally a
stranger in the town, I stayed that night at the Inn. After a very
slight refreshment I retired to bed. I say to bed, for rest was a
stranger to me, and sleep never once visited my weeping eyes.
Being left alone in the silent hours of darkness, I had leisure to
consider the horrors of my situation. I became a prey to
reflection, and lay self-condemned without the alleviation of a
single excuse for my conduct. Oh! could we but foresee in the
moments of the gratification of our passions, the hours of bitter
remorse they must necessarily produce, we would surely stop in
career, and avoid the heart-rending pangs that follow guilt.

I arose in the morning without feeling myself in the least
refreshed, but the necessity of coming to some resolution roused
me to exertion. I enquired of the chambermaid, about the
disposition of the inhabitants of the town and neighbourhood, and
being satisfied from her answers that I might remain unknown; by
the assistance of the waiter I procured lodging and board in the
house of a decent farmer, at half-a-guinea a week. I found my new
dwelling perfectly retired, and the people, especially the
farmer's wife, attentive and agreeable. There I passed my time in
innocence, though I cannot say in content, for reflection would
frequently obtrude, and represent to me a father grieving for his
loss, sisters lamenting my lapse from virtue, which they could not
but suppose was the case; friends condemning me; and all of them
enraged at my conduct. In this state religion alone could dart a
ray of comfort; and I felt no pleasure but in the strict attention
to my duties in the neighbouring chapel.—Alas! that these emotions
were but for the season. Had I even then persevered in the right
path, I might not have only avoided evils which followed, but have
atoned for my wanderings in a wrong one.

At length, in this cottage, where I remained totally unknown, I
was delivered of a fine girl, with which as soon as I was
perfectly recovered, I sat out for Dublin, at the earnest request
of Mr. Dardis. He met me at the Inn on my arrival, where he seemed
transported with joy at seeing me, and testified the greatest
fondness for the little innocent. The next day he hired a fresh
nurse, and having discharged the one I had hitherto employed and
brought to town, he took me to a very agreeable lodging he had
procured; where, forgetting all the resolutions I had made in
Dublin, we lived together as before.

There are certain temptations which are only to be resisted by
flying from them. When sensuality attacks the human heart, there
is no time for contending; a speedy flight alone can secure the
victory: we may profitably bear up under the losses and crosses of
this life, with a laudable firmness of resolution, and come off
conquerors; but we must not even capitulate with allurements of
sense, and the poet says,

The woman who deliberates is lost.


CHAP. IV.

To erring youth there's some compassion due,
But whilst with rigour, you their faults pursue,
What's their misfortune is a crime in you.
SOUTHERN

ALTHOUGH HAPPY and delighted with the company, and continued
tenderness of my undoer, and charmed with the opening sweetness of
my child, I yet, was far from possessing a tranquillity of mind.
The thoughts of my father and relations would check any pleasure I
could embrace; and damp my spirits even in the midst of gaiety. My
eyes would frequently swim with tears, and sighs burst unbidden
from my perturbed bosom. My lover perceived my uneasiness, which
he was so far from condemning or thinking in the least
unreasonable, that he even urged me to seek a reconciliation with
my friends. This was my anxious wish, but how to effect it was the
task. Shame kept me some time from making any effort; but at
length I resolved to make the attempt.

The first necessary preliminary was to frame some plausible excuse
for my long absence, which was indeed, very difficult to do. We
had frequent consultations on this head, when at length, he
suggested one. This was to tell my sister Smith (to whom he
advised me first to address myself), that I had been on a visit to
my cousin Drumgoold, at Drogheda. This idea took my fancy, and I
resolved to put it into execution the next day.

Though there is nothing more common than deception, yet there is
nothing more hard to carry on successfully. The most trifling
circumstances frequently are sufficient to detect it; and in this
case I might have easily imagined, that on the least suspicion of
the truth, a line from my sister to Mrs. Drumgoold, would have
demonstrated my falsehood. Indeed, there was no occasion for any
application to my cousin, for she had been beforehand; and highly
affronted with my breach of promise at Drogheda, she had soon
after written a letter to me, full of reproaches, for my rudeness
and ill behaviour. This epistle was directed to me at Mr. Smith's,
where Mrs. Drumgoold conceived I was. The letter lay there for
some time, but on my continuing absent, my sister opened it, and
thereby discovered the route I had taken, though she knew not how
far it had extended; and my incivility to my cousin at Drogheda.

Ignorant then of what had passed, and priding myself on the
speciousness of the excuse I had ready to give, I went with some
degree of confidence to Mrs. Smith; but alas! I was not admitted
so far as the parlour, she immediately called me a vile wretch,
bade me begone, and pushing me violently from the door, shut it in
my face.

Had a thunder-bolt fallen on me, I think I should scarce have been
more confounded. I stood for a while in a state of astonishment,
uncertain what to do, or where to go. The disappointment of my
hopes and expectations, however unjustly formed, struck me in the
most forcible manner. However, in some minutes I recovered myself;
and before I would totally abandon all thoughts of a
reconciliation, I resolved to make a trial of my other sister. To
Mrs. Brady, therefore, I instantly bent my course; but to my
farther distress, from her I experienced, not merely a similar,
but a more severe repulse.

Becoming more desperate by this second repulse, and resolved to
leave no effort unessayed, I went to another relation Mr. H—P—, in
High-street, but I was destined that day to a succession of
rebukes, each rising above the other; I was driven from him with
scorn and contempt, and he even threatened to beat me for having
(as he said,) the impudence to come to his house, and scandalize
it by my appearance.

I returned home agitated with a thousand contending passions and
my breast torn, with rage, shame, sorrow, distress and repentance.
I still remained in the lodgings Mr. Dardis had provided, but took
a firm resolution to see him no more. Ah! had I wisely taken and
kept that resolution some months before, I had not then been a
prey to anxiety and remorse. I wept and lamented day and night,
and had not one moment's peace of mind. I thought it in vain to
try my sisters again. But I had yet a father, a tender, indulgent,
offended father, my duty as well as my distresses urged me to
write to him. With a trembling hand, and an aching heart, I penned
my letter. I despaired of a reply, as I knew myself to be unworthy
of his least regard—I owned, with the prodigal son, that 'I had
sinned against Heaven and before him, and was no more worthy to be
called his child.'—But tenderness and affection, had not abandoned
the dear old man's heart, he wrote to me, and directed me to
return to Killough, in the stage. I hesitated not a moment to obey
his welcome summons, and I quitted the lodgings Mr. Dardis had
taken for me and returned home, flattering myself that I should
find an asylum in my father's house. But alas! he had no longer
the command of it; when I arrived my brother Christopher, constant
in evil, and born for my destruction, refused me admittance. I sat
down on the step of the door weeping, till my dear father spoke to
me from the window, whence he told me he had no power left him
more than I saw; but he would write to my sisters to receive and
board and lodge me. I acquainted him how they had treated me, and
that it would be vain to apply to them. At length, my father
prevailed on his son Christopher to let me in, which he did; but
it was only to provide a man and horse to take me to Kinnegad;
whence he ordered me to go back to Dublin, in the stage-coach, and
gave me a solitary guinea. I then took a last leave of my father
and my brother Garret. The dear parent wept bitterly, embraced me,
blessed me—and I saw him no more—this parting scene was too
distressing to be remembered without emotion, even at this
distance of time.

I stayed that night at Kinnegad, and the next morning entered the
stagecoach (for which I had nothing to pay) and arrived in the
evening, with my guinea in my pocket, which, with my clothes and a
few trinkets, was the whole fund on which a young girl with a
child, had to build her future maintenance through life. And as I
was determined to return no more to Mr. Dardis, I took a small
lodging at five shillings a week, where I remained quite retired,
and perfectly secluded from the world.


CHAP. V.

Where shall the fallen meet with Pity?
Where find the kindly hand to raise them up?
Not among sisters. They will cast ye off.
And, lest the fame of their good families
Be tainted by your failing, foolishly
Will force ye to embrace that train of life
Which taints it more, to gain the very food
Which they deny ye—And thus drive you on
Far in the path of Vice, through show of Virtue.
CHAPMAN

My weakness and indiscretions had thus brought me, at almost the
outset of life, to what was literally a state of solitary misery.
I had no support but what I derived from the sale of my clothes,
which went article by article to satisfy the cravings of nature,
till I was reduced nearly to nakedness and starving. I had now
sufficient leisure to contemplate my folly, and descant on my
misdeeds. I had humbled myself even to the Dust. I again went to
my sister Smith, who had a large family of children, and implored
her with tears to take me once more into her house, when I would
make hers and her childrens' clothes, and never offend or
disoblige her in any respect. Alas! she was obdurate, and refused
me in the most peremptory manner. I applied in the same manner to
my sister Brady, with equal ill success. She was unlimited in her
upbraidings, violent in her abuse, and she declared if a morsel of
bread would save me from death and destruction, she would refuse
it to me. Harsh and hard dealing sisters! it is you, who by
rejecting a penitent offender, and shutting the door against a
return to virtue, drove me on the rocks, which for a long time
wrecked my peace of mind. I returned to my little lonely
habitation, with a soul embittered with the treatment I had
received, and a body almost worn down with anguish and poverty. I
remained there till I had nothing but what covered me, not one
second article wherewith to change what I wore, and for eight days
had lived only on one pound of hung beef and a few potatoes; using
the water in which they were boiled, as the only diluter of my
wretched scanty meals.

Thus having arrived to the verge of perishing through real want,
feeling anxiety of mind, and the keen pangs of hunger, and
destitute of every asylum in Dublin, it occurred to my thoughts,
that as, whilst I lived at my father's house, I had been
frequently serviceable to the tenants and their wives; I had no
doubt, if I could get down amongst them, their gratitude and
hospitality, would afford me shelter in one or other of their
cabins, and give me at least potatoes and butter-milk; which I
should then esteem as most comfortable food. Full of this idea, I
resolved to set out that very night. My landlady kindly lent me
her cloak, to cover the wretched remains of my wardrobe, which
were clean and tight, though mean and much worn. Proceeding up
Strand-street, towards Smith-field, two gentlemen (named Strange
and Droope) met me, and looking on me as an innocent, ignorant
country girl, took me by the hand and invited me to come in with
them, to drink tea and go to the play. I was frighted at this
address, ran from them, and took shelter in the shop of Mr. Moore,
a jeweller, on the Inn's-quay. I had been formerly intimate with
this family when I was in prosperity, and before my unhappy lapse
from virtue. Luckily that lapse had not come to their knowledge,
any more than my present situation. I was cordially received by
Mrs. Moore, and pressed to stay to tea, which I did; and prompted
by hunger, eat till I was really ashamed to eat any more. After
tea I took my leave and proceeded to Smith-field, but to my great
vexation found all the places in the stage, both within and
without were engaged.

Disappointed in my design of going to the country, I had no
alternative but to return to my lodging. I walked very slow,
pensive, and revolving in my mind how I could procure another
meal, for what I had eaten at Mrs. Moore's seemed rather to have
excited than satisfied my appetite. The enemy of mankind is said
to be ever ready to instil temptations to vice, and to seize the
most favourable opportunity for his insinuations. So alas! I found
it in the present moment. I, who had resisted every incitement to
evil, whilst any the most homely and penurious means of life
remained, became desperate when every resource seemed to be cut
off. I reflected on my conduct, respecting the two gentlemen who
met me in Strand-street. I could not help condemning myself for my
shyness.—They appeared to be gentlemen, I said to myself; and
surely would not have done me any harm. I wish I had not refused
their kind invitation. At least I should have gotten a comfortable
meal, which was what I much wanted, and to which I had been long
an entire stranger. None of my relations will give me one, why
then should I reject it from another.—It is not probable that I
shall meet them again, but if I should, I will not be the fool I
was.

Thus I argued with myself, and was fully occupied with these
thoughts as I walked, when passing by the door at which I first
saw them, I beheld the very identical persons alighting from a
coach. They seemed pleased at meeting with me again, and pressed
me to go into the house, which, after some slight hesitation I
did. When we entered I saw a little gentleman writing at a table
in a corner of the room; he joined us and tea was ordered. Though
I had already drank tea on the Inn's-quay, I was not sorry to
partake of it again; but here, as before I was ashamed to eat my
fill. The little gentleman (Thomas Caulfield, Esq; a near relation
of Lord Charlemont,) took more particular notice of me than the
others. I was asked a multitude of questions, to which (as I had
already suffered by falsehoods) I answered with ingenious truth.
When tea was over, Mr. Caulfield asked my name and where I lodged.
I told him, and he begged permission to see me home, probably with
a design to know if what I had said was truth, I consented, and we
took leave of the other gentlemen.

As we walked together, he slipped two guineas into my bosom, and
told me if I would give up the idea of going to the country,
where, from what I had said, I must be certain I had no chance of
being well received; and if it should appear that I told him
nothing but truth, he would settle me comfortably and
conveniently, would be my protector, and I should never want.
There are many virtues, which when carried beyond their due bounds
degenerate into vices, one of these is Gratitude. This operated
powerfully in my breast. This gentleman had relieved my wants when
they were become extreme. I was in possession of more money of my
own than I had seen for many months; my hunger was not yet
appeased, but through him I had the means of satisfying it, which
I was impatient to do. The miseries I had undergone were present
to my mind, and he had promised he would screen me from their
future approach. All these thoughts rushed at once into my mind,
awakened my sincerest acknowledgments, and I esteemed it but a
grateful return to promise all he requested. He saw me to the door
of my lodging, and being thereby assured of the truth of what I
had told him, and where he might find me, he very respectfully
took his leave and wished me good night.

I entered my room in a very different disposition from that with
which I had quitted it a few hours before. Then, all was distress,
doubt and uncertainty. Now, my mind was tranquil and I looked
forward with hope. I had nothing to expect from my relations and
former friends but desertion, reproach and want. From Mr.
Caulfield, my days to come presented protection, endearments and
plenty. The contrast was great, and I must embrace the one or the
other. I was blind to the sacrifice I was about to make, I did not
consider that I was taking a second and similar step to that which
had caused all my distress: and that I was about to plunge deeper
in vice, which would render my return still more difficult, even
if it could be accomplished—which alas! it never was.

As soon as I was seated I sent my landlady to purchase eatables
for supper; and never in my life did I eat one so welcome and so
sweet, nor perhaps ever in such a quantity: and having fully
satisfied the cravings of hunger, I slept with the greatest 
tranquillity.

The next evening, Mr. Caulfield came to see me; but his appearance
in laced clothes, and the sudden change in my way of living gave
my landlady some alarm: she said her house was not suited for the
reception of a fine gentleman, and therefore desired I would get
another lodging. As money was not wanting, this was no difficult
task. Mr. Caulfield soon procured one, where I lived in a genteel
style, unnoticed and unsuspected; where he visited me whenever he
thought proper, and we became daily more pleased with each other.

Here let me anticipate the exclamations of many of my female
readers. They will doubtless say, "we pitied your first
transgression; you might plead youth, inexperience, and affection,
but here you had no excuse. You weakly yielded to the temptation
of a stranger, a casual acquaintance. You say you were on the
point of starving, and rejected by all your friends and relations,
but you should have sought to restore your connection with them,
by the prudence and chastity of your future life, and thereby
proved the sincerity of your repentance. You should have gone to
service, you should have really died for want, rather than have
procured sustenance at such a price as you have paid for it. Nay,
when you had got the two guineas from the gentleman, and he had
left you at your door, you should have pursued your intended plan
of going down to the tenantry about your father's house, and have
lived on potatoes and butter-milk, begged from them; and have
piously taken all your sufferings as just punishment for your
offences—but, fie upon you! you listened to the first temptation,
you did not strive either to resist it, or to fly from it, and
therefore deserve no pity."

All this is easily said, all this may be true. But pray permit me
to ask in my turn—were you ever on the point of starving? Did you
ever experience real want, and part with every article of any
value to procure a scanty meal? Did you ever live for many days on
a single pound of salt meat, and have only the water in which a
few potatoes were boiled for your beverage? For not till I had
endured all this misery, and felt the severe pangs of hunger, did
I err again: Perhaps you utter your censures in a decent, 
comfortable room, after a plentiful meal, and surrounded by your
relations and friends. Therefore, we may well say,

He jests at scars who never felt a wound.

And perhaps you are not quite sure you would have really died for
want! ere you had fallen like me. How could I have gone to
service? Bred up as I had been, for what service was I fit? Who
would have taken a servant without a character? and who had I to
give me one? Neither had I clothes fit to make even a tolerable
decent appearance. My harsh sisters indeed, might have saved me
from ruin, but that their outrageous virtue disdained. Had they
pitied and forgiven my first fault, in all human probability I had
not committed a second; but instead of holding out a hand to raise
me up and support me; instead of alluring me back to the paths of
Virtue, by gentleness and compassion, they plunged me into sorrow
and distress; and by rendering me wretched and desperate, hurled
me down the descent of Vice. Hence they, not me must be chiefly
condemned. Nay I will affirm, from the evidences of observation
and experience, that the real cause of the multitude of unhappy
women, is the harshness of their own sex; who, thinking to elevate
their own real, or pretended virtue, by condemning the failures of
others, shut the door against repentance and amendment; and
thereby compel thousands to continue in error, because their
characters being blasted, they have no means of support from any
industry they may be willing to try for bread. For, the maxim is
true that none stand so firm as those who have once slipped, and
are enabled to regain their footing, by the Christian Humanity of
such of their own sex as possess, and exercise it.—But, to return
to my narrative.

Mr. Caulfield's attention to me daily increased. He frequently
invited and entertained me at his house in Abbey-street, where he
extensively carried on the business of a wine merchant, and I
passed my time smoothly, intoxicated with pleasures that banished
all reflection, till I was brought to bed of a son, which seemed
to augment my lover's satisfaction. He had often told me he never
intended to marry, as he feared he should never have a child. But
soon after my lying-in, as if thereby his fears on that head
seemed to be dissipated, he listened to the advice of his
relations (amongst whom he counted the Earl of Charlemont) and his
friends, and paid his addresses to a Miss Hawkesworth, to whom he
was shortly after married.

This event for a while gave me most poignant sorrow, and as my
temper was become somewhat violent, I was greatly provoked at his
abandoning me.—Silly are those women, and highly infatuated, who
can imagine that connections, which are sanctioned neither by the
laws of God or man, can be permanent, longer than it suits the
convenience of the thus connected parties. No, they must,
necessarily must, have a period: And the certainty of this is the
cause why most women in that line strive to realize as much as
they can, whilst the connection subsists, not knowing how shortly
it may terminate.

However, Mr. Caulfield behaved honourably in regard to me, he
assured me my boy should never want, nor I neither, whilst I
conducted myself with propriety; and accordingly gave us both an
adequate annuity.


CHAP. VI.

Pure from the Rock springs forth the Virgin Stream,
And gently glides untainted and serene.
Its limpid surface gladdens all around,
Till, rolling down the mount, it meets a mass
Of stagnant waters in some muddy pool.
Then, if no kindly hand raises a bank
To turn it from Corruption, whilst its flood,
Is yet but slightly ting'd with waves impure,
It mingles with the foulness, and contracts
Each noxious quality the slime imparts;
O'erflows the brink, and, gath'ring as it spreads
The poisons it encounters, never more
Is pleasing to the taste, or wholesome drink.

THOUGH left by my lover, I was not destitute, his generosity had
afforded me means of every necessary comfort. But as I wanted his
company, I found a void in my mind. To fill up which, I contracted
an acquaintance with a certain Lady of fashion, who introduced me
to some of the most elegant Demi-Reps in town. Knowing I was
passionately found of music, she invited me to an entertainment
she gave at a Tavern, in Smock-alley, which was accompanied by an
enchanting concert. I soon became so attached to this lady, that
we were scarce ever asunder, and my hours stole away without care,
without attention, without reflection. As stinging thoughts would
sometimes intervene uninvited, I banished them as soon as they
intruded, and sought in a whirl of company and dissipation, for
that calm I could not find in my own breast when I was alone.

Mr. Caulfield hearing of my new acquaintance, called on me to warn
me against her. He told me he entirely disapproved of this lady,
that she was a very improper companion for me. That there were as
many women ruined by their female as their male connections, and 
ended with forbidding me to see her. Asa my heart was weaned from
him since his marriage, his remonstrances had little weight; 	I
found the society of this lady very agreeable, and I continued my
intimacy with her, which so exasperated Mr. Caulfield, that he
withdrew my annuity, though he continued that of my son, till he
died of an inward complaint: when I again became destitute.
Although I entirely owed my loss of independence to this lady, I
was still fond of her, and refused to break off with her. My mind
indeed, became again tortured by disappointment and anxiety, so
that I could not find peace at home, and therefore fled to my old
remedy of being constantly abroad. But a life of dissipation
cannot be maintained without some funds. My constant companion
said she would find soon a remedy for that defect; and a gentleman
of the name of Jackson, was introduced to me, whose company and
conversation were very agreeable. After a few weeks acquaintance,
Mr. Jackson begged my permission to bring with him a very
particular friend, to which I consented. This was a Mr. Lawless, a
near relation of the Countess of Clonmel, who will be the subject
of many pages of these memoirs. As both these gentlemen were
equally assiduous in their attentions and endeavours to please, I
was much divided to which of them I should give the preference.
They had many amiable qualities, but those alone would not
suffice; they neither of them was wealthy; and as money was
absolutely necessary (especially in that line of life which I had
unfortunately embraced) I devoted a considerable part of my time
to an English gentleman, of the name of Leeson, who, as my wealthy
friend, made up in the article of cash the deficiency therein of
my other two friends.

Whether it was that Mr. Leeson, wishing to have me entirely to
himself, suspected that in my present lodging, I had too frequent
opportunities of seeing my former acquaintance, he proposed to
take apartments for me more elegant, and more convenient, and
where he thought, perhaps, he should be more the master. As I had
always a taste for show and splendour, I had no objections to a
removal; but when he entreated me to drop at once all the
connections I had formed, both female as well male, to reject all
their visits, and confine myself solely to his society, I could
not help thinking his proposal, ill-natured, selfish and
tyrannical; yet, reflecting that he was to bear the sole expense
of, not only every necessary, but of every comfort, convenience,
and even luxury of life, I was to enjoy: that he declared his
passion for me was solid, and unchanging, and that his character
and disposition were honourable; I thought I owed a compliance
with his wishes, and consented with much seeming complacency,
well-judging I could so far sometimes elude his vigilance as to
see an old acquaintance.—Ah! wretched lot of human nature! how
constantly doth one evil quality draw others into its train! to my
former errors, I now added avarice and deceit, and sought excuses
for them in my own mind.

My condescension increased Mr. Leeson's fondness for me, but that
very fondness led him to suspicions and jealousies, that created
uneasiness to us both; and he even dismissed my former mantua-
maker, lest she should bring letters or messages from any of my
old acquaintances, and introduced one of his own choosing. He had
incessantly in his mind the ideas of Mr. Jackson, and Mr. Lawless.
He sometimes beheld them passing by the door; and was sure it was
on my account. At other times, he thought they were aiming at some
stratagems to see me, and his mind was so agitated that at last,
he resolved to take me out of Dublin, far from the reach of
admirers. Accordingly we went to an excellent house, and beautiful
demesne, he possessed in the county of Kildare; where we lived in
perfect tranquillity and content. He, being freed from jealousy
became placid in his temper, and every day more agreeable. And I,
being thus weaned from other objects, placed my chief satisfaction
in striving to please him.

At length, a business of the greatest consequence demanded his
presence in Dublin. His mind then began to be again agitated. As
his business would necessarily oblige him to a residence for a
considerable time, he could not entertain the idea of leaving me
behind in the country; and as he well knew the city afforded
numberless temptations and allurements to pleasure, which
frequently seduce the innocent, much more one who had already
tasted of the Circean cup, he trembled to expose me again to them.
However, something must be determined, and he thought to provide
against the worst. He took a neatly furnished house, at the skirt
of town, on Ranelagh-road (now within a door of the Circular-
road,) where he kept a very vigilant eye over me, and suffered no
visitors but such as he introduced himself; and with none even of
them did he suffer me to remain alone, for a single minute.

In this manner we lived for a whole year, with the greatest good
humour; and he was so pleased with my reserve, that he testified
his esteem by every possible means, and declared his entire
approbation of my conduct. He even became so thoroughly attached
to me, that he proposed to make me his wife; and, as such a change
would induce an alteration in his mode of living, he would look
out for another house, which should be entirely furnished to my
mode and fancy.

This procedure in Mr. Leeson, was certainly very kind and good
natured, and fully demonstrative of his regard: but however, I
might have carried myself outwardly, a recluse and retired way of
life was not agreeable to me. I thought it hard to be thus totally
deprived of all society with my former intimates; and nothing but
a fixed attention to my interest, could have enabled me to endure
it. However, to speak candidly, I was not so absolutely reserved
as Mr. Leeson thought me. Stolen pleasures are generally held to
be very sweet, and in spite of his vigilance, I sometimes enjoyed
them to compensate for the external constraint I was forced to
assume. I sometimes gave admission to my old friend Mr. Lawless,
through the parlour window; and sometimes also to Mr. Jackson,
when I was sure that Mr. Leeson dined out, and was not to come
home before a certain hour, against which time my lovers were
removed, and all things ready for the quiet reception of my
deceived keeper. Nay, I had gained his own servant so well in my
interest, that whilst any other friend was with me, he would keep
watch at the parlour window, lest his master should return
unexpectedly and surprise us.

Mr. Leeson, being, by my cautious conduct, fully satisfied that he
was the sole God of my Idolatry, and was perfectly secure of my
affections, left town for some time, to superintend some
improvements he was making at his country seat.

Prior to his setting out for the country, he had taken a house for
me in Park-street, which was but just built; and having had it
fitted up in an elegant manner, he pressed me to go and reside in
it before he departed, that I might be introduced to some of his
relations, who might frequently give me their company before we
were married. This did not suit the mode of living I intended to
follow in his absence, I therefore, after paying him my thanks for
his kindness and attention, told him I feared the newness and
dampness of the house would give me cold, of which I was
remarkably susceptible, on which account, I would rather stay
where I was till his return, by which time the house would be
sufficiently dry and aired. Such was his tenderness, that I had
only to speak my wishes for him to acquiesce. He consented,
although (knowing that I was remarkably fond of milk) he had taken
a field, at ten pounds an acre yearly, and put two cows into it.
He also, gave me an unlimited Bill of Credit on a friend of his,
who was a merchant, for any money I might want in his absence;
and, then taking an affectionate leave of me, he departed for the
country.

Mr. Leeson had scarcely got down to his seat, but suspicions arose
again in his mind. He fancied that I might have some private
reasons, for staying in the house where I was; and therefore,
though he admitted my excuse for not going to Park-street, he
wrote to his friend the merchant, to get me another place of
residence, and remove me from Ranelagh-road. His friend instantly
complied with his instructions, and I yielded without the least
hesitation. For the house in which he had taken lodgings for me,
was kept by a very particular friend, to whom I could safely
confide all my secrets, having by presents of considerable value,
and proper douceurs, gained her over entirely to my interest.
Besides, the very merchant was deeply interested for me; and
indeed, I had myself recommended him to Mr. Leeson, as a person to
whom he might consign my supplies, and though rather suspicious in
everything else, he very unsuspiciously acceded to the proposal.

I was quite contented in my new lodging, the people were devoted
to me, my merchant ready to screen everything that I wished not to
come to Mr. Leeson's knowledge; I could act just as I pleased, and
I occasionally received the visits of Jackson and Lawless,
particularly the latter, who was the greatest object of my
affection.

After some time, Mr. Leeson wrote to acquaint me that his affairs
would detain him still a month longer in the country. This news
gave me great pleasure, as I thought I could have my swing all
that time—however, before the month was out he came, when he was
least expected. I shall relate this at full, as it affords a
striking instance, how easily men who think themselves the most
cunning and secure may be completely duped.

As I thought myself in the greatest security, I sometimes went and
stayed for a few days at the lodgings of Mr. Lawless, my
particular favourite. I was there, when one morning, between five
and six o'clock, Mr. Leeson came to town and rapped at the door of
my lodging. The people of the house were alarmed, and from the
description I had given they immediately guessed who it was. As
they knew I was from home, they readily concluded it would be
improper to let him within the doors. They therefore denied that
any such person as myself dwelt there, they bade him begone, and
scolded him heartily for disturbing a family at such an undue
hour. Mr. Leeson was enraged at being, as he thought, deceived by
his friend the merchant, in telling him, he had taken a lodging
for me in that house; and flew directly to him to upbraid him for
his falsehood, and to know where I really was. The merchant arose
and received him, assured him I lodged there, and asked if he
signified his name to those who spoke to him from the window. He
said he had, but instead of admitting him they only abused him.
The merchant guessing how matters were, was much pleased that
Leeson had not been let into the house, and told him that what had
passed was a proof of his attention, and the care of the people of
the house, not to suffer any visitor to see me in Mr. Leeson's
absence; and as they had never yet seen him, he ought rather to
applaud than to condemn their conduct; adding that if he would
stay till he was dressed he would accompany him to me. This
entirely calmed my gentleman's mind, he apologized to the merchant
for his misconstruction; and waited with patience, till his friend
was ready, which he delayed as long as he could, without giving
any room for suspicion.

In the meantime, the merchant dispatched a note to me, in which he
briefly related what had passed, conjured me to get home directly,
and to be ready to receive them, and give the people of the house
their cue. The moment I received this news, I got a coach, drove
to my lodgings, changed my clothes, put on a morning cap, and when
Mr. Leeson and the merchant arrived, I was seated very calmly in
the summer-house, attentively reading a book.

When I perceived them coming up the walk, my heart began to beat
at my consciousness of the deception, and that if in any wise
detected it would be my ruin. But I had better fortune than I
deserved. Mr. Leeson seemed quite happy at meeting me, received
the apology of the good people of the house, with great
satisfaction, and, even thanked them for their conduct; and
remained quite confident at my virtue and attachment. Thanks to my
friend the merchant, and those with whom I lodged.


CHAP. VII.

What gudgeons are we men,
Ev'ry woman's easy prey?
Though we have felt the hook, again
We bite and they betray.
GAY

The pleasure surely is as great,
In being cheated, as to cheat.
HUDIBRAS

The man that's robb'd not knowing what he loses,
Tell him not of it, he's not robb'd at all.
I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips.
SHAKESPEARE

AT THIS PERIOD of my narrative, I doubt not but most of my readers
will exclaim against me, and ask what excuse I can now offer for
my conduct—I will candidly answer-NONE—I confess it was absolutely
inexcusable. Yet, although I own it can have no palliation in the
eyes of the world; though I confess I cannot plead ill-usage to
drive me, want or poverty to urge me, temptation to excite me, or
love to allure me to what I was doing, yet, I was not without some
reasons that appeared plausible, at least in my own eyes, for my
excesses.

There were sundry notions that I had imbibed from the arguments of
some of my companions, and from my own reflections, which had
great weight with me; especially as they coincided with my
inclinations, and quieted some scruples that from time to time,
would obtrude themselves in my mind.

I, at that time, was fully persuaded that Polygamy was not wrong
in its own nature, but merely as it was a great difference between
what was evil in itself and what was evil by human prohibition,
which I think they called malum in se and malum prohibitum: that
there were many customs sanctioned by law far worse in their
effects than a Polygamy, which the law forbids. If the law forbids
a plurality of wives, it might be understood that it equally
forbids a plurality of husbands, but the express letter of the
law, as I am told, does not condemn a plurality of husbands. Some
indeed, may urge, that as I had no husband this reasoning would
not apply. But I looked upon marriage merely as a human
institution, calculated chiefly to fix the legitimation of
children, and oblige their parents to breed them up and provide
for them; to ascertain the descent of property; and also to bind
two persons together, even after they might be disgusted with, and
heartily tired of each other. Nay, it was pointed out to me, that
though the Church of Rome, to which I belonged, exalted marriage
into a sacrament, yet at the same time it strongly recommended,
and in many cases obliged its professors to a single life. Now, I
concluded that if marriage was what I thought it, and that there
was no express law against a plurality of husbands, there could be
none against a plurality of gallants; and that I, as yet single,
should commit much less sin in admitting them than if I were
married. I have long since seen the fallacy of those arguments,
but at that time, they were deemed of considerable force; and by
them I excused my conduct to myself

I have hitherto introduced some occasional reflections for the
consideration of my female readers, and will now beg leave to
offer one to those of the other sex.

My conduct, with respect to Mr. Leeson, will fully show, that
neither pleasure, content, affluence nor gratitude, can bind a
woman of a loose turn of mind, and changeable disposition, to the
man who has formed an illicit connection with her.—That he can
have no confidence in an affection, however strong it may appear,
that is not founded on Delicacy and Virtue.—That her chief concern
is how to raise pecuniary advantages from his infatuated fondness,
and blind attachment to her; and will even prodigal the
superfluities of his misguided bounty on another man who may be
more agreeable in her eyes.—That she will exercise her cunning to
deceive him, and hide her infidelities from his knowledge; and
when she has deceived, will laugh at his credulity.—And—that a man
who keeps a woman, experiences every possible inconvenience of
marriage, without reaping any one of its advantages. Mr. Leeson
was sufficient wealthy and handsome, and I ought to have been
contented with him, but I liked Mr. Lawless better; yet, whilst I
esteemed him most, I entertained his friend Jackson. And great as
his love seemed to be, when he found he had not wealth sufficient
to satiate my desires, and the continual demands of Caprice,
Luxury, and Extravagance, his delicacy did not make him object to
my living with Mr. Leeson, who could supply his deficiencies. He
was of a different opinion with Othello, who said

—I'd rather be a toad,
And live upon the vapours of a dunghill,
Than keep a corner in the thing I love,
For other's uses.

Though I had escaped so well, and avoided detection of my ramble
to Mr. Lawless's lodgings, at this time, yet my good fortune did
not long continue. Mr. Leeson, after living with me with great
content, for some time, and enjoying with singular pleasure every
amusement I proposed, he had another call to the country. But
whether he entertained any suspicions of his friend, the
merchant's, partiality to me; or was resolved before he married me
to have still farther proofs of my fidelity; he engaged an
Englishman, named Van Nost, to watch my steps. Which indeed, he
did to some purpose; for being lulled into security, by my past
escapes, the very next day after Mr. Leeson had gone into the
country, this new spy beheld Mr. Lawless, and Mr. Jackson, enter
my lodgings with a band of music. He heard the concert, saw the
entertainment go in, and did not see them depart. He made a strict
enquiry through the neighbourhood, and when he had collected news
enough to fill his budget, he wrote the whole account very
circumstantially to Mr. Leeson.

What were the feelings of Mr. Leeson, when he received the detail
of my faithlessness (too circumstantial to be denied, and too well 
authenticated to be doubted) may be imagined, from the
consequence. He wrote immediately to the merchant to stop paying
me any more money from that day; and the same post brought another
letter to me; in which, after sufficiently upbraiding me with my
faithless, and abandoned conduct, he declared—he had done with me
for ever.

In many of our punishments Providence gives striking proofs of a
just retaliation. When I received this letter, I was sitting in
the same summerhouse, in which, but a few weeks before, I sat and
hugged myself in the success of the deceit I had practised on Mr.
Leeson. The moment I cast my eyes on the letter, and before I knew
anything farther than that I was cast off and abandoned, this
circumstance darted into my mind. Wretch that I am! (I cried) not
content with the love and esteem of a worthy man, I basely
deceived him. Here in this very spot, I beguiled his eyes, and
made him believe my attachment to him was sincere. He weakly
condemned himself for having entertained any suspicions of me.—Now
he has found his suspicions were too well founded. My treachery is
manifest, and he has abandoned me for ever: and here, where I
committed the fault, I justly receive an account of the punishment
I so truly deserve. When my sobs and tears would give me leave, I
read the whole letter and was distracted. I now saw myself without
any means of support, I called to mind the misery, sorrow, poverty
and distress I had already undergone, and saw them all about to be
renewed. I sincerely regretted my ingratitude to Mr. Leeson. Yet,
fond, amiable, and generous as he had been to me, I candidly
confess I was more distressed with the loss of his purse than his
person.

I was sitting in this distracted state, which was verging to a
stupid inattention to all things around me, when Mr. Lawless
entered. He was shocked to see me in that condition, and with
every tender and soothing endearment, roused me from my anxiety,
and enquired the cause of my distress. The fatal letter was yet in
my hand, and I had only to reach it to him, to make him acquainted
with my sorrowful situation. When he had read it, he besought me
to raise my spirits, and banish my apprehensions of want, for that
whilst he possessed a shilling I should partake of it. He added,
that luckily he had it now more in his power to provide for me
than heretofore, for but a few days had passed since his eldest
brother had died, and though he inherited no real estate from him,
yet, he had bequeathed to him his whole personal property, which
would enable him to support expenses that hitherto he had been
unable to afford.

From the first time I saw Mr. Lawless, he had been the foremost in
my esteem. I really loved him, and during every connection I had
formed, I never failed to give him every proof he could desire.
Therefore, it is not wonderful that I yielded to pleasing
sensations at finding him still attached to me as strongly as
ever; and that he had the power as well as the inclination, to
quiet my fears of falling into poverty. Great as my trouble was, I
was soon lulled into a calm. We entered the house, and there made
the necessary arrangements for our future life. I promised
sincerely he should have the sole possession of my heart and my
person; and he, on his part, assured me of a like return. I
inwardly rejoiced that I should have an opportunity of quitting
that kind of life, to which I had submitted during Mr. Leeson's
reign, and live in uninterrupted felicity with the man of my
heart.

We presently returned to Dublin, where we passed five years and a
half together, during which time no wife was ever more fond,
virtuous and faithful than I was to him; and to give him his due,
no man ever treated his wife for the first three years, with more
attention than Mr. Lawless showed to me. In those five years I
bore him five children, each of which appeared as a new link of a
chain to secure our mutual affections; and my care of them filled
up every vacant hour of time.—Happy period—happy should I have
been had its duration been extended through life. But alas! I was
destined to meet content only as gleams of sunshine in a showery
day, which merely serve to darken the gloom, when they are over-
cast and hidden from our eyes.

For three years, Mr. Lawless never partook of any public or
private amusement without my participation. His love daily
increased, even to a height that sometimes proved disagreeable,
and indeed, was the only impediment to our mutual felicity. If I
was seen, or spoken to by any of my former acquaintance, female as
well as male, he was uneasy and became peevish. If, at the play, I
even accepted an orange, or returned a salute from any gentleman
he immediately insisted on our return home, though the performance
was not half over. This was frequently very disagreeable to me.
Conscious to myself of my strict fidelity to him, I thought myself
greatly injured by his suspicions; and as my temper was naturally
warm, and my passions highly irritable, I was not always placid
upon those occasions; and we had sometimes high altercations.


CHAP. VIII.

I commit many faults, but NONE to THEE.
Indifference would never suit my fate.
My passions are unruly; and, sometimes
Break loose on my best friend: But then you should
Consider them as the effects of Love.
As the effects!—nay, they are love itself.
For love itself is all the passions,
At least to me: whether it be desire,
Or hope, or fear, or anger, or revenge,
In all its diff'rent motions—still is Love.
SOUTHERN'S Fate of Capua.

HITHERTO we had lived in happiness, because we had lived with
confidence in each other. Mr. Lawless's late conduct, had shown
that the seeds of Doubt were still in his breast, and my heat of
temper, perhaps took the wrong way to eradicate them. I should
have considered that his desire of preventing any relapse into
promiscuous amours, sprang from his affection. I should have
behaved with double reserve; and not have met his solicitude with
haughtiness and wranglings, which tended more to confirm than
dispel—even unjust suspicions.

About the beginning of the fourth year, Mr. Lawless began to dine
out, and to go to public amusements without me. This more and more
soured my temper, rendered me still more irritable, and though
still fond and faithful, yet, at intervals, I admitted that fiend
Jealousy, to take possession of my mind. Priding myself on my
strict fidelity to him, I thought every moment of his absence was
occasioned by his attachment to other females and a fresh insult
to me. Hence I redoubled my invectives, and my passions often rose
even to termagancy. I did not reflect that I was proceeding in the
same path, that I had condemned him for treading; and that whilst
I knew my jealousy sprang from Love, I ought to have been assured,
that his doubts and suspicions arose from the same motive.

Mr. Lawless then began to keep very late hours. This irritated me 
so much, that dressing myself very plain that I might not be
noticed, I have frequently sallied into the street, attended by my
maid-servant, and a watchman, and trudging on foot through rain,
mud and dirt (for I would not put him to the expense of coach or
chair hire) would visit every tavern, gaming-house, and place of
pleasurable reception in search of my wandering Strephon. I often
stood listening through key-holes, and under parlour windows, to
try if I could hear his voice, till I have been covered with mire,
drenched with the rain, or almost petrified with cold. Yet, all
that, I endured with pleasure if I could but find him, which
sometimes I did, but more often failed in my attempt. At those
times, after a fruitless search I have returned home, with a mind
tortured with what I thought a proof of his infidelity; or with
apprehensions lest any mischief had befallen him. Yet, the sight
and caresses of my children would give me some consolation, till I
retired to my bed, when my disquietudes returned with double
force, and I passed without sleep till six in the morning; which
became his usual hour of returning home. Then our animosities were
renewed, and became more frequent; and in the place of former
delicacy and endearments, nothing was heard but mutual revilings,
and upbraidings, which drove tranquillity from the house.


O jealousy! wild and insatiate fiend! let every female guard
against its first approaches, for she knows not to what horrid
lengths it may carry her. Well did the poet, Dryden, say of it.

False in thy glass all objects are,
Some sit too nigh, and some too far.
Thou art a fire of endless night,
A Fire that burns, yet gives no light.
The torments of the damn'd we find
Alone in thee
O Jealousy!
Thou Tyrant, Tyrant Jealousy!
Thou Tyrant of the mind.

Happy are those breasts which never entertain it; or whose
prudence, mildness and equanimity can avert the cause, if cause
there is, and not by passion, strife, and outrage, provoke a
repetition of injury, and a continuance in the practice of it. I
am the more urged to give this cordial, this salutary advice,
since I experienced to what horrid extravagancies jealousy in a
turbulent mind, may hurry the wretched victim: and even at this
distance of time, I shudder at the recollection of what I shall
now relate.

Sometimes when I have found it impossible to drown my grief in
sleep, I have risen from my bed, and throwing up the sash, would
hang out of the window till his return. There are never wanting a
set of officious women, who, out of pretended friendship, will
plant thorns in the mind of a suspicious and jealous woman, by
bringing her tales of her husband's or lover's infidelity. One of
this kind had been with me, and seeming to pity me, had related
her certain assurance that Mr. Lawless passed some of his nights
with other females. This intelligence made me more eager to
continue my nocturnal searches, in hopes of detecting him, and
that night I hunted everywhere, but in vain. I returned in a rage,
distracted with what I had heard, and the idea that perhaps at
that very instant, he might be revelling in the arms of one of his
favourites. I took a firm resolution of murdering him at his
return, and then putting an end to myself. I kept a keen razor in
my hand, and watched at the window for his coming. The hours I
waited there steeled my heart, gave edge to my resentment, and
fixed my determination. At length, I beheld him coming up the
street, and frantic with rage, I ran to meet him on the stairs and
execute my bloody purpose. Here let me adore the mercy of the
Almighty, which saved his life and prevented me from the crime. In
my hurry, I left the razor in the window, and was weaponless when
I met him; and as a farther prevention, he returned in a better
humour than usual, took me in his arms, apologised for his late
return, and told me the house in which he had stayed so long. My
rage cooled instantly, my ardent love resumed its place, and I
became calm. When in bed, where I could not sleep, I easily
conceived, that, if he had really been where he told me, I had no
cause for alarm or complaint; but still my jealousy, that had not
been conquered, but only lulled for the moment, suggested, that he
deceived me: then my resolution of revenge returned, and I
resolved still to execute my design, if I found that he had told
me false. I feared that if I sent to enquire if he had been at the
house he said, the master of it might probably be in the plot, and
send word that he had. Alas! my own contrivances in respect to Mr.
Leeson, had taught me to suspect perfidy in him. I therefore acted
with more cunning; and when I arose I sent my servant in Mr.
Lawless's name, to desire they would look for a shirt breast-pin,
which he had dropt there last night. They replied they had not
seen it, but kept the servant whilst a strict and careful search
was made in the rooms in which he had been. I was then satisfied
that he had told me nothing but truth; for had he not been there
they would not have sought for the pin. Then I rejoiced that I had
not perpetrated what I had so iniquitously resolved, and for some
time, as I became more placid, we lived with more tranquillity.

About this time Captain Mathews returned from America. Before I
had known either Mr. Jackson, Mr. Lawless, or Mr. Leeson, I had
been acquainted with this gentleman: he had shown great attention
to me, and visited me very often. He was young and agreeable, and
had a pretty fortune. As he was in the army, his regiment was
ordered to America, and at that time I really regretted his
departure. He had been some years abroad, and when he returned to
Dublin, was desirous of renewing the connection. He had made
enquiries after me, but the private and retired way of life I led
having made me little known, his search was fruitless for some
time. At length, as he was sitting in the window at Daly's Coffee-
house, he saw me pass by in a coach. He directly recognised me,
and immediately followed the carriage, till he saw me alight from
it, at my own little habitation, in Wood-street, which small as it
was I prefered to the castle of Dublin, as it had been the scene
of many happy hours.

When Captain Mathews had been informed of my retired mode of life,
that calumny could not fasten its cankered tooth on my character,
nor malice taint my fidelity to Mr. Lawless, he thought it highly
improper to come to me openly: but he found means to get a letter
delivered to me, in which he requested me to give him a meeting,
as he had a very handsome present for me. This I refused. He then
sent a diamond ring—which I returned. This diamond ring was
brought back to me, accompanied with another of equal brilliancy;
both were rejected. Another effort was made. As, perhaps, he
suspected I had looked upon his presents as too trivial for my
acceptance, he now sent the rings again with a packet of bank
notes: all these were refused. For at that time, his whole estate
would have appeared insufficient to induce me to infidelity, to
the man I so sincerely loved. At length, the Captain proposed
marriage, but even that I refused. I preferred the society of Mr.
Lawless to any other connection, although it might be sanctioned
by law; and the company of my little children, for whom, if
compelled by necessity, I would have sought to gain a support by
my labour, rather than have married the first peer of the realm—
and with this last refusal ended the fruitless proposals of
Captain Mathews, and he desisted from any farther attempt.

Still the altercations between me and Mr. Lawless, continued, and
my jealousy and reproaching temper, embittered both our lives for
about a year longer. Our time during that space was chiefly
occupied, with doubts and satisfactions, quarrels and
reconciliations. At length, as Mr. Lawless's fortune was solely
personal, and as he was never a man of economy, a capital
derangement, or rather dissipation of his finances ensued;
especially as his father, supposing he was married to me (which
indeed, he never was) very much disapproved of his conduct. This
added to his peevishness and petulance; and whenever I thought
calmly, I attributed the greatest part of his disagreeable
behaviour and irregularities, to his unsettled state of mind, on
the melancholy prospect his affairs presented continually to him.
Yet to the last, he showed his strong affection for me, though
very often in a manner that the most virtuous of wives could not
have relished. His jealousy and diffidence increased daily. If
when going out on family business, any man saluted or even spoke
to me, he was alarmed at it, and would on our return not only
scold, but frequently proceeded to blows; and would put me to my
oath, that I had no connection with the person who had paid me any
mark of common civility; nor any kind of knowledge, that exceeded
the strictest bounds of civility. But why need I complain of his
conduct, when, as if we acted by sympathy, my doubts, suspicions,
and jealousies of him went on in an even pace with those of his
concerning me. If at any time we entertained a few friends, and he
out of good manners would call on any female at table to take a
glass of wine with him, it so far irritated me, that I could not
eat a morsel more, and it rendered me disagreeable to the company
for the whole evening after.

One particular anecdote of my turbulence and ill behaviour, I
cannot avoid relating, as it may be a lesson to some of my female
readers to avoid a similar conduct, by showing its absurdity, and
that it constantly fails of obtaining the end it proposes.

A gentleman had made a dinner party for Mr. Lawless and me: There
was a lady in company, to whom I thought he paid too particular an
attention, at which I was so much galled, that it was with the
utmost difficulty I could prevail upon myself to behave with
tolerable decorum, for the remainder of the day. At length, the
company broke up, and I was glad I had an opportunity to give vent
to my spleen and discontent. As soon as we had got into a coach to
return home, I began to scold and upbraid Mr. Lawless. I seized
his gloves, and threw them out of the carriage window—which were
soon followed by my muff, his hat, and whatever I could lay my
hands on. When we got home, where we might make as much noise as
we pleased, we became vociferous in our contention, till we were
both nearly tired. I refused to go to bed, he insisted I should,
which I still refused. He then cut the strings of my clothes, and
threw me into bed. I twisted from him and got under it; he,
greatly enraged at my obstinacy, pulled me out, and in the
struggle hurt me so much, that he was obliged to send for Surgeon
Cleghorn, who found me so bad that he was forced to fetch in Dr.
Cullum. By their united care, I at length recovered, with the loss
of my child, of which I was above four months gone.—Fatal effects
of jealousy, rage and contention! I lost the things I had thrown
out of the coach; had raised my spirits into a temporary madness;
had, by my obstinacy drawn on myself ill-usage; subjected myself
to a long and dangerous illness, had incurred the expenses of
medical advice, and all the consequent charges of a sick bed; and
to crown all, had been the death of the child I carried—and what
was the mighty cause of all this train of calamities—because Mr.
Lawless behaved with politeness to a lady in company, in another
gentleman's house. Reflect on this, ye Females of turbulent
tempers. See what ye gain by being, what is too frequently your
boast, women of spirit; and though your cases may not be exactly
similar with what I have related; yet, from as trifling causes do
your passions rise. Think that mildness is the true distinguishing
characteristic of woman; and that a rage, and what is called
spirit—which is the child of Pride and Folly—degrades the sex
below its real dignity, nay, it defeats its own purpose; for
reproaches and revilings tend more to disgust a man, than to
establish or recal his love.

We now lived an unhappy life, yet, in the midst of all I continued
true and faithful to him. His money was all gone, and for some
months we subsisted on the sale of our watches, rings, clothes,
and ornaments. After them followed most of our household
furniture. To complete our misery, our children died one by one, a
little time after each other, excepting one only, who itself a few
months after sickened. This darling boy was then at his nurse's,
at the upper end of Bride-street. He was attended regularly by Dr.
Cleghorn, and I saw him twice a day; till at length, the Dr.
called on me, and recommended me to prepare for the worst, for he
had no hopes of his life. I ran like a distracted woman to take a
last farewell of my only surviving, yet, dying darling; but on my
entrance into the nurse's house, found he had just departed. I
snatched up the infant's scarce cold body in my arms, and wrapping
the tail of my gown around it, ran screaming through the street,
to my own house, and presented the child to Mr. Lawless. He was
much shocked at the sight, and was greatly affected at seeing the
last of our five children snatched from us. I was indeed, carrying
another, but the birth of that was uncertain, and at best but a
distant comfort. Alas! I did not then behold the hand of
Providence, which foreknowing the calamities that were soon to
follow, wisely and mercifully took my children from me, ere they
lighted upon us. Besides, these illegitimate children gave me
pleasure, and were taken from me to punish me; and it seemed like
the sentence that Nathan pronounced against King David, "How be
it, because by this deed (the unlawful begetting them) thou has
given great occasion for the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the
child also that is born unto thee shall surely die."

Before I relate the unfortunate conclusion of my connection with
Mr. Lawless, I beg leave to mention a very singular adventure that
happened, some time before the death of my children, and whilst
our prosperity was yet present.

Mr. Lawless, thinking to give me a pleasurable jaunt, proposed
that we should go to the Curragh races; a celebrated lady, then
known by the appellation of Kitty Cut-a-dash, was to go also; she
then lived with a Mr. James Cavendish, who was particularly fond
of the turf. We two went in the coach of a gentleman, who was
drawn by four excellent bay geldings, that had been given to him
by a certain Lord, for some services he had done for his Lordship.
The gentlemen were to ride their horses. We all got to the course,
and having feasted our eyes with all that was to be seen, went to 
Burchell's, at the Nineteen-mile House, for some refreshments; but
we found the house so full, that there was not even a room to dine
in, much less beds for us. Burchell and his wife, who knew and was
very fond of me, offered to lay a cloth for us in their bed-room,
and to procure a pallet in the same room, for the accommodation of
us two females. To this I readily agreed, but Miss Kitty objected,
as she had her Jemmy with her, whilst my swain was absent. In this
dilemma, Mr. Cavendish met with two gentlemen of his acquaintance,
who had one of the parlours. We agreed to dine there, and proceed
to Kildare to sleep. We dined, were very merry, drank our
Champagne , and time slipped away insensibly, till ten o'clock,
when Mr. Cavendish, Lord Boyne, and a Mr. Trotter, came in the
coach with us, and their servants rode their horses. The night was
very dark, and one of the grooms, who boasted that he knew every
foot of the road, offered to be our guide, and went before us on a
grey horse, that he might be better seen by our coachman. We had
proceeded about two miles on the sod, when our guide mistaking the
way, led us against a ditch. Our horses being mettlesome and high
fed, made no stop, but leaped and brought the coach clear over
undamaged. We screeched and begged to be let out, but in vain, for
the coachman, as self-conceited as our guide, said he would soon
gain the road, and wheeled about, but in turning, ran the pole
against the bank of the ditch, when it snapped in two. The
gentlemen wanted us to stay in the coach till day-light, saying we
could sleep very comfortably therein. To this I firmly objected,
and then it was agreed we should ride to Kildare on the horses.
There were but three, so Kitty rode, on the bare rump behind Mr.
Cavendish, I sat before Lord Boyne, and guided the horse, whilst
he kept himself fast by holding me round the waist; and Mr.
Trotter led the van on the grey horse. The servants were all left
to take care of the coach.

We then set out again for Kildare. We travelled in this manner,
backwards and forwards for above three hours; and never did I
suffer more than I did that night, being almost perished with
cold, and almost ready to drop from the horse. Kitty indeed, was
not in the same situation, she got warmed by the frequent falls
she had; and I believe nothing kept me alive but my laughing at
her, for she clung so fast to her Jemmy, that whenever she slipped
off, she dragged him down with her.

At last she spied a light, that seemed to proceed from a cabin,
about two miles distance. We made towards it, Mr. Trotter on his
grey, leading the way; when on a sudden, we lost sight of our
guide, he having got into a sand-pit, where he and his pony, kept
dancing amongst the stones at the bottom, to which they had
fallen, for a full quarter of a hour before they could get out. He
shouting out to us to keep where we were. Had I not seen him fall,
I should have been directly on top of him, and Lord Boyne, and our
horse on me; and then in all probability, my memoirs would have
finished here, as there must have been an end of Margaret.

Mr. Trotter now, with constant efforts had succeeded in getting
himself and his horse out of the sand-pit. He still persisted in
making for the light, and at length, we reached it without any
more accidents, than two or three more falls of Kitty; who did not
seem to mind them much, as she had Mr. Cavendish with her, of whom
at that time she was very fond. I had not a like consolation, for
as soon as Mr. Lawless had packed me off, he went somewhere else,
and did not come to join us as he had promised.

When we got to the cabin we roused the people, and by a handsome
reward, procured a man to conduct us to Kildare, which he very
properly did, and we reached the town at about three in the
morning. As it was so late, nobody was up in the town but some
bucks, some gentlemen gamblers, who were fleecing each other.—Not
a bed to be got, all the taverns full, and every private house
engaged. What was then to be done? we could not sleep on horse-
back in the streets all night. The reader has had many proofs,
that my temper was not of the most placid kind; and I began to
vent my discontent on Kitty. A strong altercation began, I
reproached her with preventing us from staying at Burchell's,
where we might have avoided all the inconveniencies we had
undergone: and she in her turn, upbraided me that I would not
remain in the carriage, where we might have been warm and
comfortable, and might have enjoyed some sleep. I urged, that I
was deterred from staying in the coach, that I might not be
exposed to attempts which one of the gentlemen had hinted as we
drove along; for this was in my virtuous days, as I called them;
and though I strongly believed, that Mr. Lawless staying behind
was owing to some pre-concerted infidelity, yet, at that time,
nothing could have tempted me to have returned the compliment.

Whilst we were thus jarring, our gentlemen had been searching the
town over for beds, but not one could be got. However, Farrell the
piper, who they found playing in one of the taverns, had given
them the key of his lodging, which he offered for our acceptance.
We hastened to it; but of all the wretched habitations I had ever
seen, this was by far the worst. The curtains were of ten
different colours, and the bed most miserable. However, necessity
urged, and we lay down in our clothes for about three hours, and
then got our breakfasts from the tavern.

By the time our hairs were dressed, the coach was got mended and
brought to Kildare. We returned to the Curragh; but I was so
distracted with jealousy, at the disappointment of not seeing Mr.
Lawless, that after staying one heat, nothing could induce me to
wait for a second. I would go to town in spite of all the
entreaties of Kitty, who was forced to come and leave her Jemmy
behind, sore against her will.

I had contracted an acquaintance with a Mrs. Johnston, who lived
in Fownes's-street, and was kept by a relation of my first love,
Mr. Dardis; when the carriage came into Dame-street, I got out,
took my leave of Kitty, and walked down to Mrs. Johnston's house.
I gave a single rap at the door, and as soon as it was opened, I
pushed in without saying a word, and opened the parlour door,
without giving the least notice. There I found Mr. Lawless sitting
tête-a-tête, and drinking Champagne with Mrs. Johnston. We all
three stood as petrified. My jealousy was wound up to so high a
pitch, that I screamed, trembled, and was quite beside myself I
snatched up the decanter, and was about to dash it in her face,
when Mr. Lawless seized and held my hands, and prevented me from
murder; which had I thrown the double-flint glass decanter in her
face, must have ensued. She was so astonished at the sight of me,
that she sat motionless in her chair, and never offered to defend
herself, to stir, or even to utter a single word. Lawless took me
home, and in time appeased me. But I had my revenge of Mrs.
Johnston, for I immediately sent for the gentleman who maintained
her, related the circumstance, and also many other proofs of her
infidelity, which had come to my knowledge, and which she could
not deny. And he immediately forsook her, and would never see or
support her more.

But to return to my narrative from whence I have digressed.

The finances of Mr. Lawless being not only exhausted, but also
whatever could be raised from our superfluities, and even some of
our necessaries, he began seriously to revolve in his mind what
means could be found for future support. His friends advised him
to quit the kingdom, as his father was resolved, not to give him
any farther subsistence in Ireland, which he refused in the most
peremptory manner, but at last consented to give him a draft on
Messrs Smith and Ramage, merchants in New-York, to be paid to him
only, on his arrival there; the old gentleman being persuaded if
he gave him any money here, it would be shared with me, as it most
certainly would have been.

This determination was like a clap of thunder, it struck me almost
senseless; although there was no prospect of subsistence, I was
distracted at the thoughts of his going to America. He argued with
me, justly, that his continuing here would, only serve to plunge
us both into greater distress, without even a probability of
extricating ourselves from it. On the other hand, I exerted every
art of persuasion to induce him to stay with me, and endeavour to
find out some means of support, but his pride would not suffer him
to listen to me. He now became the most kind and tender man he
could possibly be, which still more endeared him to me, and
rendered me still more reluctant to agree to our separation. Oft
would he cry, whilst the tears trickled down his cheeks—Oh! my
dear Margaret! If I am obliged to go abroad, will you still bear
me in your remembrance? will you cherish and love, for my sake,
the babe you carry, if it comes to maturity, as it is the sole one
that will be left of our all. I have replied properly, and asked
why he would think of leaving me?

I long thought he would never accede to his father's proposal; but
alas! he had determined, though he would not acquaint me of his
resolution: As he well knew he could not bear the pangs of a
formal parting (and so he told his friends) he secretly engaged a
passage in an American vessel, and got his clothes and baggage
privately on board. The night before he departed, he came to me
and said he was to go the next morning a few miles from town; he
again asked, if I would remember him, and love the expected
infant. He would not go to bed, but at one in the morning, said he
must sleep that night at his lodgings, where his uncle was to call
upon him early, to go out of town together, and give him some
money: this satisfied me, I had no doubts, and suffered him to go.
He came twice or thrice back to my room before he quitted the
house, pressed me affectionately to his bosom, and blessed me with
uncommon earnestness. At that time, I took no notice of these
particulars, though they frequently occurred afterwards to my
mind.

The next morning arrived; a morning that will be ever remembered
with anxiety, whilst recollection lasts or sensibility remains.
The most particular friend of Mr. Lawless came to visit me, and
presented me with a letter from him. As soon as I had the letter
in my hand, I was seized with an unusual fluttering of my heart.
With a trembling hand I broke the seal, and with a moistened eye,
read the words,

My darling Peggy
I sail this morning to America—

I could read no more.—The paper fell from my hands, my sight grew
dizzy, I fell lifeless from my chair, and continued in fits for
several hours. At length, a flood of tears came to my relief, but
came to affix the seal of certainty on my misfortune. I then
strove to read the remainder of this fatal letter, and the
retracing of his dear lines, seemed my only, though melancholy
comfort. It continued in these words.

—I could not bring myself to tell you, my love! I was going to
leave you. Do not be angry then with your dear Lawless, when real
affection, and a disposition not to give you pain, was the cause
that made him thus abruptly break from those bonds, by which he
would joyfully for ever be united to you. Yet, rest in peace and be
certain of hearing from me by every opportunity; and, as you love
me, my dear Peggy! take care of our baby, child—Adieu! and may
every blessing of Heaven guard you tilt we once more meet.

From a state of fainting and almost insensibility, these lines
roused me to fury Words cannot express the tortures of mind. I
tore my hair, I beat my breasts, rent my clothes, and became
outrageously and raving mad—until nature, nearly exhausted by
these violent passions, sunk spiritless and stupid, and the whole
frame of my nerves were palsied. In this state I continued near a
week, incapable to answer any question with propriety. My friends,
alarmed at my condition, brought in two physicians (Doctors Cullum
and Cleghorn,) who ordered me instantly to quit Wood-street, to
breathe a purer air than that close part of the town afforded. I
was then moved to Ranelagh-road, almost powerless, being obliged
to be carried in arms to the coach, and out of it up stairs to my
new lodgings. I was every day carried into the garden, where I
remained for two hours a-day, propped up by pillows; as my
debility was too great to sit unsupported. Here, labouring under
extreme weakness of body and distress of mind, I remained till by
the change of air, and the consolatory conversation of my friends,
I grew something better; and gradually, but slowly, recovered
strength and spirits enough to be delivered of a fine girl, who
was dearer to me than all the children I had borne, as it was the
last pledge of my dear Lawless, and his image was minutely traced
on the countenance of the new-born innocent.


CHAP. IX.

Each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows
Which show like grief itself, but are not so:
For sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears,
Divides one thing entire, to many objects
Like Perspectives, which, rightly gaz'd upon
Show nothing but confusion; ey'd awry
Distinguish form—so, I
Looking awry on his departure
Find shapes of grief more than himself to wail
Which look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows
Of what it is not—weep not
For more than his departure; more's not seen
Or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye
Which, for things true, weep things imaginary.
SHAKESPEARE'S Richard II.

FOR some time after Mr. Lawless had sailed for America, my grief,
though violent, was yet methodical. In my melancholy, sickly
state, I had leisure to exert my fancy, and to combine in one
accumulated sum the divers articles, for each of which I ought to
grieve. First, his absence deprived me of the main comfort of my
life; yet, it was not the sole cause of uneasiness. I figured to
myself the consequences of his absence, both to himself and to me.
In regard to himself, I imagined he would be more easily consoled
than I should be, as he had many more new objects of consolation
than I had. He had a comfortable subsistence; the means of mine
were drained. He had incessantly a variety of new objects
surrounding him to give him pleasure, and banish me from his mind;
I was confined to constant sameness, and everything around me only
presented what brought him momentally to my recollection. He would
doubtless, be caught with the charms of females he might see, and
enter into connections with them. The very idea of which was a
poniard to my heart; whereas I was sickly, and emaciated; and it
might have been said of me as of the unhappy Jane Shore.

,
Her waning form no longer can excite
Envy in woman, or desire in man.
She never views the sun but thro' her tears
And wakes to weep the live long night away.

In the next place, I was sunk in poverty, could scarce afford the
comforts necessary for my sick situation, and my lying-in, with
the most scanty hand, and had no prospect before my eyes, by which
my circumstances might be amended. However just at this period, a
Miss Fleetwood, who was under the protection of Lord Cl—m called
on me, and wanted to take my house in Wood-street. As I was well
acquainted with her, I immediately concluded the bargain; and what
she paid me was highly welcome, as it provided a sufficient
maintenance for myself and child, under my sickness and adversity.
I remained some months in my country lodgings, till I was so far
recovered as to be able to go out. My friends advised me now to
turn my views to the brighter side of my affairs, and to banish as
much as I could all gloomy ideas, as whilst my thoughts were
incessantly bent on subjects of melancholy, I could not expect any
re-establishment of my health. My physicians also told me that
unless I would exert myself a consumption would inevitably come
on, and then I should be accessory to my own destruction.

This advice was so frequently inculcated by all around me, that I
found the absolute necessity of following it; and also of
increasing my finances. When I went to the country, I had let my
little house to Miss Sally Hayes (for whom I had a very strong
friendship) at half-a-guinea a week, which was my sole support, in
my illness and lying-in. And that was the first lodging she ever
occupied after she had left her father's house, with Mr. P—. When
I let my house to Miss Fleetwood, it was on condition that Miss
Hayes should still have her own apartment, and after she had
quitted it, Sally still remained there. When I found myself able
to remove I sent my child to nurse, and returned to Wood-street,
where we lived together, in constant expectations of hearing from
Mr. Lawless. Month after month came, but yet not a line from him.
Whatever outward appearance of cheerfulness I assumed, I was
inwardly greatly disquieted. I conceived he must have been dead,
or what was still more grievous to me that he was ungenerous,
ungrateful, and had forgotten me.

As I had been so many years in a situation so very recluse, and
had so long been absent from every place of public amusement, I
was in a great measure a new face. My friends congratulated me on
my return to the world, and I had presently a very numerous train
of admirers, each emulous to gain my good opinion, and striving
who should pay the greatest attention to me. This flattered my
vanity, I sat with them, partook of their treats, went with them
to public places, and frequently accepted their presents—yet, this
was all they could obtain from me, as I was resolved to keep
faithful to Lawless, till he should return from America, or I
could receive certain news he was dead. For faithless as he was to
me, I still had so much affection for him, that I could not
reconcile to myself the admitting any other person to my bed.

Amongst the number of those who laid close siege to me, and did
not quit their attacks on my firm resistance, as several did, was
the very same Captain Mathews, my old friend, I have already
mentioned. He teased me morning, noon and night, to be again taken
into my favour, and be the representative of Mr. Lawless. He was
soon convinced, that the strong attachment I had entertained, put
it out of the power of even interest, to alter my good opinion, or
make me unfaithful. But the difficulty of gaining me, made Captain
Mathews still more eager to obtain my esteem. I went so far in
indulgence to the love-sick swain, as to accompany him to a
country entertainment, that was both expensive and elegant; but I
took that opportunity to convince him of the folly and inutility
of making any farther addresses to me, as I was most resolutely
determined not to accept of any man, till I had heard from, or of
Mr. Lawless. Captain Mathews, then offered to take me to any part
of America, where I could expect to find Lawless, upon my promise
that if he was unable to support me, or unwilling to receive me,
that I would then accept his offer and attach myself to him.

His proposal was, indeed, very generous, and fully demonstrative
of his sincere regard for me, but I rejected it. I well knew Mr.
Lawless had it not in his power to afford me a subsistence, and
thought it would be cruel in me to give him the pain (as I yet
flattered myself he would feel) at seeing me in the arms of
another. Besides, as I could not find he had written to any of his
own relations, any more than to me, I yet imagined I should
receive some letter from him, in which he would explain his
conduct towards me and acquaint me with the real state of his
affairs. And, indeed, had Mr. Lawless given me such information of
himself, and even told me that he would return to me as soon as
ever it was in his power, I would have waited, however long, for
so joyful an event; and have endeavoured to support myself, by
honest industry, had it been even by plain-work, or washing small
linen, during the interval.—But alas! it was otherwise decreed, I
was fated to taste the bitter cup of misery, and plunge in a whirl
of those pleasures, which bring remorse and sorrow in their train.


CHAP. X.

I've often heard
Two things averr'd,
By my dear Grand-Mama;
To be as sure,
As light is pure,
Or knavery in Law.
He who will prove,
Once false in Love,
Will make all truth a scoff;
And every woman that has—you know what
Will never leave it off
FIELDING

FULL EIGHTEEN MONTHS had passed and yet no letter: still I lived
in daily expectation, when one morning Mr. C— (the gentleman who
had brought me the letter from Lawless, when he sailed from
Dublin) came to enquire if I had heard from his friend. I told him
if I had I should certainly have come to acquaint him with it, as
I knew their intimate friendship. He then begged I would not be
uneasy at his acquainting me with what he had heard.—This is a
very common, but a very absurd way of prefacing disagreeable news,
as the very request excites an alarm; and if the news must be
affecting, how foolish to expect that trifling precaution will
prevent disquiet.—However, I promised I would not be uneasy;
although at that moment very much so, from the expectation of
hearing I knew not what. Mr. C— then told me Mr. Lawless's uncle,
and his brother, had each got a letter from him; on hearing which,
he had been to them to make an enquiry if there was not one for
him, or me—but there was none. Notwithstanding the preparation for
this displeasing intelligence, and my saying I would not be
affected by anything I could hear, my heart sunk in me at this
proof of his neglect. My pride was mortified, and my self-love
greatly hurt, and my resentment roused. What! (cried I suddenly
exclaiming), cruel, base, deceitful, ungenerous man! Have I so
long kept myself faithful to thee for this return! Have I, for
this, lived in obscurity, and refused the ample and generous
offers of several gentlemen, to be thus neglected? No, I will no
longer entertain any affection for thee! From this moment I will
tear thee from my heart! From this hour I hate, I loathe, I detest
thee; and I swear I will yield myself to the first agreeable and
profitable offer that is made to me.

Though I had formed this resolution in respect to another
connection, I did not immediately put it into execution: So
numerous were my admirers, that I was bewildered in my choice, and
hesitated where to fix. I then regretted that I had refused
Captain Mathews, as I might have lived with him in a genteel
style, he having then an income, on which, by proper management,
we might have been comfortably supported; but he was gone to
England, and out of my reach. The principal of my admirers, who
was a single man (for my whole life through, I never was fond of
those who were married) was an amiable young gentleman, who had
been very sedulously after me, whilst taking his degrees for the
Church, in the College. He renewed his acquaintance with me, and I
gave him more encouragement than before. He came to see me every
morning, and when I permitted, would send in supper and wine, and
stay some hours with me. I was pleased with his perseverance, and
made him hope that in a short time I would meet his wishes.

But the ill-usage of Lawless, had changed me to what I never was
before. In short, I was become a complete Coquet. I entertained
everyone who fluttered about me, I received every present that was
offered, accepted of every entertainment that was made for me;
gave them all hopes, yet yielded to none. I was disgusted with the
man of my heart, therefore gave my heart to none. I looked upon
all men as my lawful prey, and wished to punish the crimes of one
on the whole sex; to get all I could from each, and grant nothing
in return. I applied to myself the words of Millwood, who I sought
to imitate in everything but her cruelty.

Women, by, whom ye are, the source of joy,
With cruel arts ye labour to destroy;
A thousand ways our ruin ye pursue
Yet blame in us those arts first taught by you.
O may from hence each violated maid,
By cruel, barb'rous faithless man betray'd;
When robb'd of innocence and virgin fame,
From their destruction raise a nobler name;
To right her sex's wrongs devote her mind
And future Millwoods prove, to plague mankind.
GEORGE BARNWELL

Yet notwithstanding I had began a kind of course of coquetry, my
natural turn was not adapted to continue long in it. Though I
perfectly reconciled my conduct towards men, under the colour of
just retaliation, my passions were not totally extinguished by the
long time I had waited for the return of Mr. Lawless. Mr. L——, my
young clergyman, was amiable both in person and manners. I made
him, at length, a promise of yielding, and even fixed the evening
when he was to come to my house. Yet, that very day, I appointed
to sup with a gentleman at the Rose and Bottle, in Dame-street. I
went, the supper was elegant, and the pleasure was enhanced by a
band of music, of which I was ever very fond, and which I always
insisted on having, to enliven our repast, when I agreed to sup
with any gentleman. The evening had nearly concluded with every
possible hilarity, when a chairman came and brought me a letter,
which he was to deliver to me only. I went down to him in the
hall, I found it was from Mr. L——, who requested me to come home
as he was then waiting for me, and had sent his own chair, lest I
could not conveniently procure one at that hour. I then
recollected my promise to him; and, somewhat warmed and elevated
with Champagne I had drank, I stepped into the chair without the
least hesitation, without either cloak or hat, both of which I had
left above in the room where I had supped; as I knew if I went or
sent up for them they would not have been given to me; and my
company would have prevented my going to my first engagement with
Mr. L——, I therefore went home as I was, and left my company to
think what they pleased, and console themselves for my sudden
departure as welll as, or how they pleased.

When I came home I found the agreeable Mr. L——, waiting for me
with great anxiety, fearful lest I would not come, and happy at my
appearance. Champagne is a wine I never loved, but only it was
dear, and I liked to put those who treated me to as much expense
as I could. What I had drank had so exhilarated my spirits, that I
threw off all reserve, forgot all my resolutions, and—admitted him
to a bed, that no man but Lawless had entered with me for many
years. When I awakened in the morning, I was as perfectly
tranquil, and thought as little about it, as any modest widow when
she takes her second husband; but the servants all the next day,
cried "their old master was forgotten."

From that day Mr. L—— lived with me, and supported me in the most
abundant manner. I soon proved with child, of which he was not a
little proud, and for several months we continued a very agreeable
life. At length, he had occasion to go into the country to see his
friends, and left me a sum of money, fully sufficient for all
expenses till his return. But alas! I could not wait for that.
Having gone so far in the road of Variety, I could not be confined
to one man. Gratitude indeed, ought to have made me as faithful to
Mr. L——, as I had ever been to Mr. Lawless; but Love, the sole
bond of fidelity was wanting. I had began to slide down the steep
declivity of Vice, whereon those who venture seldom stop till they
reach the bottom. I had contracted an acquaintance with a Mr.
Cashel, he was young, gay, handsome, and an undoubted gentleman,
but he had no money. As I had admitted his visits for some time, I
entertained a liking for him, and soon took him to supply the
place and absence of Mr. L——.—Learn, ye keepers!—how much ye
deceive yourselves, when ye imagine ye can engage a woman to
yourselves alone. No, be ye certain there can be no sure and
permanent connection between the two sexes, unless Virtue is the
cement; of this the following event will be a most convincing
proof; if any proof can be wanting to confirm a truth, that lies
open to every person's reason and reflection.

When Mr. L—— returned, he had lodgings of his own, and he came to
me as usual. He had sent in supper and wine, as he was accustomed
to do. As Mr. Cashel was then in my house, I was greatly perplexed
how I should act between the man who generously supported me, and
him who had not a single guinea to give me: But affection at that
time prevailed with me more than interest. I concealed him whom I
admired, whilst I let in him who admired me. As I was then very
big with child, I pretended indisposition; and made that my excuse
for entreating Mr. L———not to sleep with me that night. With the
utmost gentleness and good-nature he acquiesced with my desire,
totally unsuspicious of my real motive; and departed, leaving Mr.
Cashel master of the field. The next night, Mr. L——— met me at the
theatre. Here the same infatuation possessed me, and hurried me to
act a part which was not only absurd, but exposed me to great
uneasiness. Conscious that I could impose upon him as I pleased, I
told him that my present condition would render it very improper
for a time to come, to admit him to my bed, to which I could not
agree till after my lying-in, I therefore, strongly recommended
him to fill up that chasm with some other woman. For some time he
hesitated, but at length he seemed as half consenting to my
proposal. I then asked him, what he thought of Miss Netterville
(alias Kitty Cut-a-dash,) he said he should like her very well,
and I promised to gain her consent.

What inconsistent creatures are women, when under the influence of
their passions! Here, although it was my interest to keep well
with Mr. L———, who was my sole support; yet, my passion for my
other Spark, who was almost penniless, prompted me giddily to
estrange him from me, and even to turn a procuress for his
pleasure. I vainly imagined it would be only looked upon by him as
a temporary amusement. That I could still maintain my ascendency
over him; and could recall him when I pleased.—Foolish, deceitful,
deceived woman!

Having thus broke the ice, I congratulated myself on my
cleverness, and invited Kitty home with us to supper. I took her
aside and told her Mr. L———had not slept with me since his return
to town; that I was fonder of Cashel than of him, and would advise
her to take Mr. L——— off of my hands, and to receive him for a
time. Adding that he was very generous, and she would find her
account in this connection. To this she readily agreed, as she
never piqued herself on constancy to anyone, and we fixed that we
would sup with her the next night, and I would leave him with her.
Accordingly we went the next evening, to her house in Grafton-
street, where after we had supped elegantly, I took my leave of
them and came home alone.


CHAP. XI.

This purse will tell you that I thank you.
Is ev'ry thing in order?—put on your best looks, as well as
clothes;
Gold, that does ev'ry thing, shall make you smile:
Carry an invitation in your face,
To ev'ry one you see, no matter who,
Naught shall appear
Within these walls but plenty, mirth and love.
No matter what the fools of form shall say,
Let them believe us mad, we'll pity them,
And their dull want of knowing how to love.
SOUTHERN

STILL more inconsistencies! I had no sooner turned my back on the
couple I had put together, but my old companion, Jealousy, came to
visit me. I revolved in my mind the agreeable hours I had passed
with Mr. L——, all his good and amiable qualities recurred to my
remembrance: I saw they were then all lost to me. They were
transferred to another, and I myself had negotiated the transfer.
I could have cut out my own tongue for having desired him to visit
her. But the die was thrown, there was no remedy and I must abide
by the cast. These thoughts so rankled in my mind, that when I
came home I did not find Mr. Cashel (for whose sake I had
committed this folly) half so agreeable as he had hitherto
appeared to be, and I was not in the best of humour even to him,
nor could I conquer my jealousy for some time.

In the mean while Kitty acquired an ascendency over Mr. L——,
little less than fascination; of which his pocket soon found the
effects. She was ten-fold more expensive to him than I had been.
She was insatiable in her wants, and made him bring her presents
from every shop, wherein he could establish any credit; which his
being a clergyman, made it more easy for him to obtain, than it
might otherwise have been. He ran some hundreds with Mr. Grogan,
the mercer, for silks and satins; with Mr. Moore, the jeweller,
for diamonds, and many other shops for other articles, till at
length he pretty well ran himself a-ground.

When I saw this profusion of presents, I condemned myself that I
had not engrossed the like: But for my inexcusable folly all these
things might have been mine: I looked upon it as a robbery from
me; and became ten times madder than I was, the night I had left
them together. Besides, Kitty treacherously told him all my
secrets that I had entrusted to her; and my attachment to Cashel,
amongst the rest. This completely shut the door against his return
to me, which was the more grievous to me, as I began to be in want
of money, and my dear Cashel could not supply me with any.

Equally stung with envy, pride, jealousy, and resentment, I
resolved to take a signal revenge on my treacherous she-friend.
She then was kept by Mr. Kilpatrick, who had been exceedingly
generous to her. I sent for him, told him every circumstance of
her faithless and abandoned conduct in respect to him; not
reflecting that I was equally guilty in regard to others, and bade
him give me as his author: For, like Zanga, I did not think my
revenge was complete, without she knew the stroke that would
destroy her, came from my hand. The gentleman seemed to have his
eyes opened, he thanked me for my intelligence. He broke off with
her immediately, and never visited her again, but shortly after
married an amiable lady, nearly related to the Earl of Belvidere.

In due time I was brought to bed of a young Miss L——. The father,
though he saw me no more, yet behaved like a gentleman. He
liberally paid all the expenses of my lying-in, till I went
abroad; and paid for the child in every respect, till she was four
years old.

Miss Netterville and I, after the mutual ill offices we had done
each other, broke out into an open war: We indeed, fought at a
distance, and spoke all the ill we could of each other. However,
at length she hired a set of ruffians, to go into the upper
gallery of the play-house, and thence call out scurrilous names,
and abuse me whenever I appeared in the lattices. This was so
constantly repeated, that the mob made it their nightly practice
to join in the clamour, till it became unnecessary for Kitty to
hire people for that purpose. I had no other part to take, but to
sit still and give no heed to their abuse, but pass over in
silence what I could neither avoid nor remedy.

Giving myself up entirely to a round of pleasure, and admitting
much company, I soon found my little house too small to entertain
them. I therefore, took a large one in Drogheda-street, and Sally
Hayes lived with me. I hired a handsome chariot, and we dashed
away, cared for nobody, wanted for nothing, had numerous presents,
frequented every public amusement, were every night at the play
superbly dressed, and lived like princesses. We constantly drove
to the Curragh races, in a coach and four, my servants in liveries
of scarlet and gold, and Isaacs, the dulcimer player in our rear.
I always took rooms for the week at Burchell's, the Nineteen-mile
House, to the joy of our male, and the envy of our female
acquaintance. We thus lived without care, and without thought or
reflection, supposing this way of life would ever last; and that
age and wrinkles would never approach us; that, as Roe says,

——Then all was jollity,
Piping and minstrelsy, gay mirth and dancing;
Till life flew from us like an idle dream,
A show of mummery without a meaning.


CHAP. XII.

There was a time in the gay spring of life
When ev'ry note was as the mounting lark's
Merry and cheerful to salute the morn:
When all the day was made of melody.
But it is past, that day is spent and done,
And it has long been night, long night with me.
I have been happier, you have known me so.
SOUTHERN

SOME short time after, the postman came early to the door with a
letter. I soon recognised Mr. Lawless's hand. The letter indeed,
was from him, the first I had received for the space of four
years. It informed me that he was returned from America, that he
had landed at Cork, and desired I would come to him there. But I
was greatly changed. The time was past in which I would almost
have given one of my eyes for a letter from him. Now I received it
with the utmost indifference, and read it with disgust. I was
irritated with his four years total silence, and therefore had not
the least inclination to meet him. However, I communicated this
epistle to such of my female friends as had known us both. They
all argued strongly in his favour, but to them I replied, "that
his maltreatment of me, for nearly the last two years we had lived
together, notwithstanding my exemplary conduct and fidelity to
him; my saving and domestic way of life; my having cheerfully
parted with every article of finery, so precious to most women,
for the support of him and his children, and my constancy for a
long time after he was gone, ere I would admit another lover; had
all met with no return but ungrateful neglect; for which reasons,
I could not possibly have any inducement or inclination to see
him." lb be sure in this detail, however true, I quite forgot to
urge the provocation I had given him by my jealousies, turbulence,
and constant altercation.—My eloquence was fruitless, my friends
pleaded much in his behalf; especially Sally Hayes, who said the
expense would be but trifling, for I had a carriage, it was only
adding two horses to my own two, and four would trundle us to
Cork, in a little time. She also joined another argument, that
perhaps he had saved some money, which I should certainly lose if
I did not meet him. This consideration was more prevalent than
every other. I was arrived to the same character, which I had
heard some of my learned College friends ascribe to the famous
Cataline, in a Latin line, which I remember was—Appetens alieni,
profusus sui, which they told me meant—Covetous of the property of
others, lavish of that which was his own.—The thoughts of getting
Lawless's money turned the scale, and determined me to set out for
Cork.

Accompanied with my little friend, Sally Hayes, we arrived in that
city, quite in style. I met Mr. Lawless, but not with my wonted
ardour. I thought I never beheld any object more disagreeable. Not
that he was either disfigured, or deformed in his absence, as he
had hazarded no wounds in battle, nor any change from want, or
climate. But I did not look upon him with the same eyes as
formerly; his neglect (a crime which no woman can bear) had
penetrated deep into my heart. I soon let him know I was entirely
my own mistress, and was accountable to no one for my conduct or
actions; and as I was come to Cork, I would see everything there
that merited attention, and partake of every pleasure and
amusement that city afforded.

I then went into a lodging Mr. Lawless had taken for me, where
Sally and I dwelt. It was on Hammond's-marsh, at the house of an
old stiff Puritan; who had he known who we were, would have
thought his habitation would have taken fire of itself, and have
burnt down to the ground. There we lived a month, making daily
excursions to Cove, Glanmire, the Rock, &c.: dressed with a
flaming elegance, that dazzled everyone, and remained quite
unknown, till the Sunday before we left the place.

On that day, we had driven to Sunday's-well, when I sent the
carriage back, and resolved to cross in the ferry-boat, and walk
home. The boat had about twenty persons in it, amongst whom there
happened to be a whiffling, impertinent cox-comb, such puppies as
infest every public place. He had seen me in Dublin, and knew who
I was. He spoke to me, but I made him no answer, as I did not know
him. Piqued at my silence, he buzzed my name and that of my
companion, which drew the eyes of above twenty directly upon us,
and peeped under our bonnets; some said it was Peg Plunket, with
Sally Hayes. Others that it was not. Mr. Lawless was very
prudently silent, but I really thought from the behaviour of these
people, as I had been told that Cork was a lawless place, that
they would have pushed our man from between us, and have carried
us where they pleased. However, when we landed many of them
dispersed, only a few followed us, and dogged us; but we tired
their patience, and they could not trace us to our lodgings; in
which we stayed but two days longer and then sat out for Dublin,
accompanied by Mr. Lawless on horseback.


CHAP. XIII.

If he swagger, let him not come here: no, by my faith: I
mustlive among my neighbours, I'll no swaggerers here: I am
in good name and fame with the best: I have not lived all
this while to have swaggering now. Shut the door I pray you.
SHAKESPEARE

——his addiction was to courses vain;
His companies unfetter'd, rude and shallow;
His hours fill'd up with riots, banquets, sports
And never noted in him any study,
Any retirement, any sequestration
From open haunts.
SHAKESPEARE

When we came back to Dublin, I found Mr. Lawless had not returned
rich from America. However, though disappointed in my expectation
of money from him, gratitude prevailed on me to admit him into my
house, where we each provided for our separate expenses. He had
excused himself to me for his not writing, as he alleged that the
war had prevented a free inter- course of letters between the two
countries. I seemed to admit the excuse, though it was evident the
correspondence, if partly impeded was not totally stopped: witness
the letters he had sent to his relations, though none to me or his
friend. My love for him no longer existed, yet, such is the
frailty of woman, that I became with child; and when I was about
eight months gone an event happened, that made too much noise, and
was too serious in its consequences to be admitted.

At that time, Dublin was infested with a set of beings, who,
however they might be deemed gentlemen by their birth, or
connexions, yet, by their actions, deserved no other appellation
than that of RUFFIANS. They were then called Pinking-dindies, and
deriving boldness from their numbers, committed irregularities,
abhorrent to humanity; and gave affronts when together, which
singly they would not have had courage even to attempt. They ran
drunk through the streets, knocking down whoever they met;
attacked, beat, and cut the watch; and with great valour, broke
open the habitations of unfortunate girls, demolished the
furniture of their rooms, and treated the unhappy sufferers with a
barbarity and savageness, at which, a gang of drunken coal-porters
would have blushed. At the head of this infamous set was a man,
who, though of a noble family, disgraced it then by his behaviour;
and who has since made his name famous for contriving to mount
nearer to Heaven than he had any reason for expecting ever to
arrive.

This person took it into his head, without any provocation, to use
me in the same manner that others had had been treated. He came
one evening to my house in Drogheda-street, at the head of a
numerous gang of his associates, and insisted on being admitted.
On my refusal they smashed all my windows, broke the hall-door,
and entered through the shattered panels. They then demolished all
the furniture of the parlours; and with drawn weapons, searched
the house to find Mr. Lawless, whose head they swore they would
cut off, and carry away in triumph on the point of their swords;
though he had not given offence to either of the party. Luckily he
was absent. This shock, with the ill-treatment I received from
these self-called gentlemen, at a time when my being so very big
with child, would have moved compassion in the hearts of wild
Indians, threw me into a fit. I lay as dead, when some of my
neighbours took me out lifeless, and carried me in that state to
one of their houses.

Still these ruffians continued their outrage, till the watch came.
They then turned and gave battle, and many cuts and hurts were
received on both sides. At length, the riot continuing, to the
terror of the whole street, the then Sheriffs (two of the best and
most vigilant that Dublin ever boasted,) Messrs Moncrieffe and
Worthington, arrived with a party of the military, at whose
approach the rioters dispersed.

When these magistrates had restored peace I was brought back, and
after three weeks was delivered by Surgeon Vance, of a dead child,
with one of its legs broke, in consequence of the injuries I had
received from these valorous Heroes. The little girl too that I
had by Mr. L——, was at the time of this affray laying with her
nurse in the two-pair of stairs floor, and was so frightened that
she took a fit of screeching, and never recovered of her terror,
but died in consequence of the fright. Thus these magnanimous
warriors, actually murdered two helpless infants, bruised and
maltreated their defenceless mother, destroyed the furniture of a
house, terrified a whole neighbourhood, and wounded some of the
watch—for FUN.—How void their hearts must be of humanity and true
bravery; and how destitute of sense must be their addled brains,
who can act in this manner: and whilst they act thus, and usurp
the respectable name of gentlemen, can have no pretence to
courage! But to return.

When the two worthy Sheriffs had seen all quiet, they departed,
leaving a guard of military to protect the house. The next
morning, the street was crowded with people, to look at the
disorder in which the house was left. However, I got it repaired
before night, at a considerable expense, and had a guard of
soldiers for a whole week. I lodged examinations against seven of
these savages, with their ring-leaders at the head of them, and
offered large rewards for apprehending them. When Mr. Balloon
heard I had began a prosecution, he swore he would shoot me; and I
on my part, openly declared I would keep a case of pistols in my
pocket, and blow his brains out if he approached me. The minor
ruffians dispersed, when they found examinations lodged, some went
to the country, and others to different parts. Their Chief thought
his being of a noble family, would be his protection and enable
him to brazen it out: and some of the lads of the College, who
were dissipated enough to be his companions, came repeatedly to my
house, to intimidate me, and threaten what they would do if I
treated them as I had done their friends: for they would not only
demolish what was within it, but would pull down my own house
itself. I answered, if they did I would build it up again, and
make them pay the expense. At length, by paying high, I got Mr.
Balloon apprehended and lodged in Newgate, for he could not be
admitted to bail, unless the medical gentlemen declared I was out
of danger, which they did not do; and when I was delivered of the
dead child as I mentioned, Surgeon Vance, declared he was ready to
depose on oath, that the child had been dead from the time I was
so misused, and was actually killed from the injuries I had
received. I then said, as soon as I could get abroad, I would
lodge fresh examinations against the prisoner for the murder of my
infant. Counsellor Wolfe, declared if I did, it would surely hang
him. This spread great alarm, the Baronet, his brother, had
striven to get him bailed, suggesting that a malignant fever raged
in the gaol; and requested that if he could not be bailed he might
be removed to the Sheriffs' house, but all in vain. The Sheriffs
and some other respectable persons applied to me, and at their
entreaty I dropped the prosecution for the murder of the child,
but continued that for the breaking of my house. At length, the
trial came on before Judge Henn. I had a cloud of witnesses of the
riot, assault, and destruction of my property, the jury gave their
verdict of guilty, and he was sentenced to be fined and confined.
I then obtained a fiat for my damages. When the time of his
confinement expired, and his fine to the crown was paid, he
thought I had forgotten him, and would proceed no farther; but
revenge is sweet. I carried on my suit for my damages. A second
trial ensued, in which he was cast; and I had him arrested for the
amount, and again put him into Newgate. Green-wax processes issued
against the other rioters, which kept them out of town, but I
proceeded no farther against them; as I at length, got paid all
the damages the law awarded me from their Chief. Thus ended my
intercourse with that gentleman. I was so far from malice when all
was over, that when he was about to go up in the balloon from
Ranelagh-gardens, as I thought no less than that he would be
drowned, I heartily forgave, and shook hands with him. But taught
by this affair, I never after would have any acquaintance with
Collegians, nor ever entertained one of them.

While these prosecutions were depending, when urged to drop them,
I have often gave as a reason for my refusal that revenge is
sweet. My readers must have already seen (and will in the course
of these memoirs, see frequent other circumstances) that I seldom
failed of not only resenting any affront or ill-treatment given
here, but have taken a pleasure in avenging myself of enemies, in
proportion to the degree of the offence. Hence I may be judged to
have been of an implacable temper, though I really was not,
according to the ideas I entertained of revenge and implacability.
I was ever humane and generous, ready to pity and assist others in
distress, which I have frequently done to my own injury. I have
often forgiven offences, when the offending party has confessed
the offence, and sued for pardon. But I ever found it hard to
overlook insults that touched my pride. In the case of this riot,
my injuries were great; but my pride was as much wounded as my
person. The offenders took the wrong way of mollifying me, and
averting my resentment. Instead of apology, they employed menaces.
They constantly added fresh irritations: and as I took no revenge
but that which the laws of my country sanctioned, I cannot even
now, think I carried it too far. Zanga says,

What is revenge but courage to call in
Our honour's debts.

It is true, some of my more grave and serious acquaintance have
urged the precept, to turn one cheek to him who has smote the
other But this requires surely some modification, and was never
designed to be literally obeyed. It can never mean that we should
expose ourselves to fresh affronts, rather than to take vengeance
by the means of magistrates and of laws, made on purpose to defend
mankind against insults, by the punishment of those who commit
them. It must also suppose that the injury is tolerable, or that
those who suffer it, can sustain it without much loss, or much
inconveniency to their families. For we cannot think, that the
Author of that precept can command good, quiet, peaceable and
inoffensive persons, to suffer themselves to be beaten or wounded
by the wicked: to expose their lives to the hazard of losing them,
or their property to be spoiled, rather than make their complaints
to the magistrates. If that were to be the case, there would be an
end to all civil society, in which the inoffensive cannot be
preserved against the violent, but by means of the law, and the
magistrates who execute them. Besides, if I could have over-looked
all the miseries I had sustained, as far as regarded myself, I was
bound to avenge them by the laws, out of my duty to the community
at large; for as they were done from mere wantonness, had they
gone unpunished, that would have served only to embolden the
perpetrators, to have extended their insolence and riotous abuse
to others. Therefore, I am, I think, fully justified in what I did
respecting the above outrage.

Not being willing to interrupt the thread of my narrative, I
purposely ommited several anecdotes that occurred; as they were a
kind of extraneous matter that had no immediate connection with my
adventures, with the several gentlemen I have mentioned. But as
they may afford some amusement, I shall close this chapter with a
few of them.

Whilst I was in my highest prosperity, I was told the celebrated
Miss Catley had spoken very scurrilously of me at the house of a
gentleman where I visited; I therefore, resolved to. affront her
openly the first time I could meet her. Some days elapsed without
an opportunity, my passion had not cooled, but was rather
irritated by the delay. I could no longer contain myself, but went
to her lodgings. She not being at home I hastened to the play-
house, thinking I should find her at rehearsal, but she was gone
from thence also. About two days after, as I was driving down
Fownes's-street, I saw her come out of the stage-door. I bid the
postilion stop, and I called to her. She came to the carriage
door, when I asked how she could presume to revile me, and speak
of me in so scandalous a manner as she had done. She denied she
had ever said anything about me; adding, that whoever told me was
an infamous liar, and if I believed them nobody would believe me.
So saying she turned away; when, not thinking her reply in any
degree satisfactory, I, filled with spite, called her a little
street-walking, London ballad-singer, and told her I would have
her hissed every time she came upon the stage. About an hour
after, I saw her coming along Dame-street, and wanted to have
another wrangle with her, as my spleen was far from being
exhausted, by the few words I had said, bitter as they were. I
accordingly stopped at a Mercer's shop, at the corner of
Parliament-street, that I might speak to her as she passed; and
again repeated my former words; She immediately caught up one of
her sons that was with her, went into the shop, and fainted, or at
least pretended so to do. A chair was got for her, and took her
home, when she told her friend, Colonel Lascelles, I had used her
so ill that she had fainted, and must have satisfaction of me. The
Colonel sent for an attorney, and had her examinations drawn, in
which she swore I had ordered my postilion to drive over her, and
her bastards. This I solemnly declare was a falsehood, for such
words never came from my lips; not did such a thought enter my
mind. However, she positively swore it; and the Colonel declared
he would get the bills found against me, if it cost him five
hundred pounds. He was so enraged, that his dear mild lady should
be offended, that he became like Cain, he was wroth and his
countenance fell. However next morning, after the examinations was
sworn, a friend I had at the Aldermanic Board, sent privately to
inform me to get bail ready, or I should inevitably be taken by
constables; which disgrace he wished me to avoid. I was not long
getting bail for my appearance, which being given, I was to remain
unmolested till the commission. During that interval, the Colonel
was indefatigable in his endeavours with the grand jury, to get
the bills found against me, but when it came before them, my
interest proved better than his, and the Petticoat prevailed over
the Sword and Gorget. Some of the gentlemen observed to the rest,
that it would be a pity not to favour a woman, who, by spending
considerable sums amongst the traders of this city, was of service
to it, preferable to a woman who was only a bird of passage; who
came here to pick up all she could from the public, and then carry
it to another country; as it was well known that Catley never laid
out a single farthing in Dublin that she could avoid. On this
consideration, and that nothing but bare words had passed, and no
assault, the bill was thrown out, to the great mortification of
the Warbler and her Champion, and my no small joy and exultation.

Much about that time, intending to go [to] the play, I had sent my
servant to keep places in the lattice for me and Sally Hayes. When
I went to the theatre, about eight o'clock, the box-keeper told me
that there were three ladies in the places that I had taken. I was
much surprised and could scarce believe him, telling him that no
one would dare to usurp my places. However, when we came into the
box, I saw three females filling the front seat, and my servant
sitting behind, I asked him aloud, why he suffered those ladies to
get into my places? He answered, they took them by force in spite
of me. O! ho! said I, if that is the case I must see what is to be
done: for I engage I will send them as smartly out, as they got
in. So saying, I got to the seat behind them, and tapped one of
them on the shoulder; when she turned her face I knew them to be a
nobleman's daughters. But rank had no terrors for me, when what I
thought my property was concerned. I requested mildly that they
would let me have my places: one replied, her servant had kept the
seats for her, and she would keep them. I touched her shoulder
again, and speaking a little louder, said, well! if I cannot get
them out by fair means I must be a little rougher. She made no
answer but turned her eyes to the stage. Why ladies, said I, there
is not a gentleman in the house, but by your sitting before me
will think you are some girls of my acquaintance, and visit you as
such.—But now I think of it, I am mistaken in my conclusion, for
indeed you are too ugly to be of my profession; particularly
should they see you by day-light, they will be off Indeed you
won't do.—Seeing they were unmoved by this sarcasm, I resolved to
try other means, and thrusting one foot between two of them, I
soon made room for the other, and seated myself on their hips.
Though the daughters of a peer, they were also well known to be
what are styled, Peter's children, every finger furnished with a
fish-hook, or at least with bird-lime, for whatever they could
touch stuck to them. I therefore, called out to Sally Hayes,
"Don't you think it was very lucky I did not wear my diamonds to-
night? and doubly so that I left my purse at home, for it would
soon have been made lighter, as I have got amongst robbers. Yet, I
have one comfort, a lady of my character is a gentleman's
companion, but a thief is not."—In a few minutes the ladies
decamped, leaving me and Sally mistresses of the field of battle.

END OF VOL I.


?
TITLE PAGE of VOLUME II.

Nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice
				SHAKESPEARE
-------------------------------------------------------------
MEMOIRS
OF
MRS. MARGARET LEESON
WRITTEN BY HERSELF;
IN WHICH ARE GIVEN ANECDOTES, SKETCHES OF THE
LIVES AND BON MOTS OF SOME OF THE 
MOST CELEBRATED
CHARACTERS
IN
GREAT-BRITAIN AND IRELAND,
PARTICULARLY OF ALL THE
FILLES DE JOYES
AND
MEN OF PLEASURE AND GALLANTRY
WHICH HAVE USUALLY FREQUENTED HER CITHEREAN
TEMPLE FOR THESE THIRTY YEARS PAST.
---------
VOL II
---------
REASON prescribes strict laws for giddy youth
But the warm temper leaps o'er cold decree
And when once past the bounds that should refrain,
Rambles at large, though conscious it should not
Yet, let not Censure, with its brow austere,
Too heavy fall upon the erring Fair.
He is a choice DIVINE who practices
That which he preaches others.—'Tis by far
More easy to tell twenty what to do,
Than be the one of twenty who will do it.
---------------------------------------------------
------------------
A NEW EDITION, WITH CONSIDERABLE ADDITIONS
============================================
DUBLIN:
PRINTED AND SOLD BY THE PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS
1797?


CHAP. XIV.

A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears,
And instances as infinite of love,
Warrant me welcome.—But indeed
All these are servants to deceitful man.
SHAKESPEARE

SOON after my victory over the head of the Pinking-dindies, Mr.
Lawless's father died, but what he left him was scarce worth
mentioning; and having no farther expectations here, his friends
advised him to go to England. With their advice he found it
necessary to comply; and requested me to sell all the property I
had in Dublin, and live with him in London for the remainder of my
life. However, I begged to be excused. I thought it much better to
stay where I was, immersed in all the pleasures of the world, and
to be entirely my own mistress, than to go with him, and pinch
upon his pittance; or to expend what I had saved in inching it
out. He went off by himself, not thoroughly satisfied with me; and
I saw him depart, with emotions far different from those with
which I beheld his going to America. My love was not then in such
a state as formerly. Time, his neglect whilst abroad; and the
dissipated life I had led for some time, had blunted my sensations
in respect to him.

When Mr. Lawless was in London, he kept continually writing to me
to urge my coming to him; but Sally Hayes and I lived in Drogheda-
street, in an endless round of pleasures, or at least what seemed
such to me, till my dear little girl died, in consequence of the
riot I have already mentioned. The loss of her seemed the greatest
affliction with which I had ever been attacked. I was really
frantic for some weeks, and could receive no consolation. The
house in which I lived, kept up my grief by continually presenting
objects to my eyes, that by reminding me of my dear child,
momentarily renewed my regret. I therefore determined to quit, not
only my house, but even the kingdom itself. Hoping that a variety
of new objects, and new scenes of dissipation might lessen, if not
entirely put an end to my sorrow.

I wrote to Mr. Lawless to London, told him my resolution, and that
I should shortly be with him. Accordingly I arrived in London, and
went directly to his lodgings, but was told he was out. I then
drove to a Coffee-house, that I had heard he frequented, and left
a note announcing my arrival, and whither I had gone; which was to
an Irish lady, with whom I had been well acquainted in Dublin, and
who received me in a very cordial manner. I had not been there
long when Mr. Lawless came. He seemed overjoyed at my arrival,
appeared to be as fond as ever; and took me home to his own
apartments.

O Man! Man! sex of deceit! However glad Mr. Lawless was at my
coming, I since found that when I called first on him, he had a
girl with him, which made him be denied to me till he could
dispose of her; which he did directly, by taking lodgings for her
in a distant part of the town. It is true, he spent both his days
and nights with me, but a portion of every forenoon was dedicated
to his visits to her.

I very naturally wished to see some of my Irish old acquaintance;
but this he constantly opposed, under some pretence or other; well
knowing that as most of them were well acquainted with his having
kept this girl, for some months before my arrival; his deceit
would be soon detected if they saw me. I was therefore, always
denied to any of them when they called at our lodgings, for he
represented them as company totally unfit for me to keep.

For some time I remained his dupe; but one forenoon, when my spark
was gone on his morning tour, I went to the lady I had first seen
on my coming to London, who indeed, was the only one Mr. Lawless
was willing I should see. She had well known his connection with
this girl, but was unwilling to tell me of it, as he had sworn her 
to secrecy in that point, as soon as I came. However, we went
together to take a walk, and I requested she would bring me to
some of my old acquaintance; assuring her that I would not let him
know that it was by her I was directed to where they lived. We
accordingly, visited one of them, who had some more of them with
her. In the course of our conversation, one of the ladies asked
what Mr. Lawless had done with the girl he had kept. Another
winked at her, which I observing, asked what Lawless? and what
Girl? They all sat silent for some minutes, when one of them said,
"why should she be deceived?" it's your Lawless. He keeps a Miss
Sharman, he has kept her a long time, and drives her about every
day in a phaeton.

I was much shocked at this intelligence. To think, that he had
formed such a connection at a time, when he was continually
writing in the most affectionate terms, and urging me to come to
him, hurt me greatly; in my pride at least, if not in my love, for
that was nearly extinct. However, I was happy I had made that
discovery in time; as without this intelligence, I might have
continued to live with him amidst scenes of ill-usage and
distress.

I directly formed my resolution what to do. I resolved that I
would put an immediate stop to all farther connection with Lawless
for ever. I took a house from one of the ladies present; then
returning to the lodgings, I packed up all my trunks and boxes,
and carried them to my own house, leaving my gentleman to dine by
himself when he returned from his Miss Sharman, and to think what
he pleased about me. Where to find me, after he came home and
missed, me he could not conceive. My having taken all my baggage
with me, assured him that I had quitted him, and that I was not
out on any excursion. The servant knew nothing of where I had
gone; and he was ignorant of the cause of my so sudden elopement.
Conscious indeed, to himself of his duplicity, he conjectured I
must have found it out. He then went to seek me at every house
where he thought I might possibly be, saying at each, that he was
sure I could not be long absent, as he knew I was so very fond of
him, that doubtless he would have forty letters left for him at
different Coffee-houses, before to-morrow night. But he soon found
his mistake. The reign of Love was over, as was also that of
Jealousy, though resentment kept its place. The day passed, but
not one of his forty expected letters was left for him.

Enraged at his disappointment, he then thought that my friend whom
he had sworn to secrecy had betrayed him; he flew to her, and
threatened he would murder her if she did not tell him where I
was; upbraiding her with her treachery to him, and calling her by
every opprobrious name his malice could suggest, or passion cause
him to utter. She protested she had never told me of his
connection with Miss Sharman; but, being really terrified at his
threats, she confessed who gave me that information, and that I
was in the house of her who gave me an account of his duplicity,
which I had taken ready furnished, for a year certain. My sole
motive for this step was, that having told all my friends in
Dublin, that I was going to London, to spend the rest of my life
with Lawless, I was really ashamed to return so soon, lest I
should be laughed at, and the consequence I had so long assumed
should be let down, which would have considerably wounded my
pride.

Mr. Lawless having gained intelligence of my residence, came the
next evening to pay me a visit, when he came into the drawing-
room, I went to the looking-glass, and began to settle the
diamonds in my head-dress; at his entering I turned my head round,
and with a look of ineffable contempt, asked him what he wanted.
His reply was, "what do you think I want? I want you, ungrateful
woman! what have I done to cause you to leave me in the manner you
did?"—O nothing at all, my good man (said I,) I want no
altercation with you, and only desire you would go about your
business. This is my house, and I insist on never seeing you here
again. He then began to offer some apology, but I cut him short,
by telling him I required none; and looking out of the window,
said I should neither listen to, nor mind anything he said, and
then began to sing. He then went away almost mad, at my distant
behaviour.

The next morning came a letter from him, containing a deal of
fulsome nonsense, endeavouring to clear himself of his villainy. I
told the bearer it required no answer. The day after, Mr. Beg, an
intimate of Lawless, came to me with another letter, which I took
and threw on the fire, and then opened it with the poker, without
reading a word, and thrust it into the flames. I told Mr. Beg that
I wished the fellow who sent it was in its place, till he was
burnt to ashes, for enticing me to a strange country, wherein I
had not a single friend. In short, he kept teasing me with letters
and messages for some time; but I continued inflexible, would
never forgive him, and he finding all his efforts totally in vain,
desisted from the fruitless pursuit, and here ended all connection
with Mr. Lawless.


CHAP. XV.

No care, no stop! so thoughtless of expense,
As neither to know how to maintain it,
Nor cease the flow of riot. Takes no account
How things go forward, nor has any care
Of what is to continue,—will not hear,
Till strong necessity shall make to feel.
SHAKESPEARE'S Timon of Athens

BEFORE I left Dublin I had paid all my debts, and besides the
money and effects I brought with me to London, I had left a few
hundreds in bank. This was very lucky for me, or perhaps I might
have starved in a strange country, where I knew no one who would
assist me, and where the English gentlemen are more cautious and
less liberal and generous than those of Ireland. However,
resolving to make as great a figure in one metropolis as I had
done in the other, I drew all my money from Ireland, kept an
elegant house, No. 4, Cleveland-row, and hired for a companion an
Irish woman, who had been wife to a respectable merchant in
Dublin; but having caught her in bed with his clerk, he had turned
her adrift, and she had retired to London.

I now entered into a fresh round of pleasures, different indeed,
from those I enjoyed in Dublin. There, not only the expense of
them came from sundry pockets, but I could always lay by something
handsome, but in London, I myself was forced to bear the bulk of
the charges. However, as I had money I was resolved not to balk
myself of any desire or amusement, whilst it lasted; totally
careless of what supply I might get when it was all spent. I
visited every public diversion, the theatres in winter; and in the
summer I was frequently at Ranelagh, till twelve or one o'clock,
and then to sup at Vauxhall, till six or seven in the morning,
dancing and drinking burnt Champagne , and sometimes even rioting.
All the fine ladies and demi-reps, wondered where I got so many
diamonds, and such variety of fine clothes, especially as they
thought many of themselves were much handsomer than I was. Some of
my countrymen, to vex them the more, told them I was admired by
some people of the first fashion in Ireland; and that I had
realised ten thousand pounds, which I had left in a bank in
Dublin. This report made me the object of envy, and well accounted
for my expensive mode of living. It also made me more proud and
haughty than before, and to maintain an air of superiority, highly
flattering to my pride and vanity, of which the following is an
evident proof, bordering even on insolence.

One morning walking down the Strand, I saw a fine dashing person,
attended by another, go into a shop near Temple-bar. My curiosity
to know who it was led me to follow him in; where I soon found it
was the Prince of Wales, and fixed my eyes full upon him till he
had finished giving his orders, which were for some stripes for
waistcoats. I then addressed the shop-keeper, and desired he would
cut off enough to make two waistcoats of the same stripe, and pack
it up very well, as I wanted to send it as a present to my shoe-
maker, in Dublin. The Prince turned, and looked steadfastly at me,
and then walked out of the shop.

Some few days later, I was riding to dine at Richmond, in company
with one lady, and three English gentlemen. I heard a great noise
of clear the way, clear the way: I looked behind and saw the
Prince come, driving furiously in a very high phaeton, with the
same gentleman with him, and a train of servants. The gentlemen
who were with me said, Ride on one side, and make room for his
Royal Highness. Not I indeed, answered I. There is room
sufficient, there is one-half the road for him; and I have as much 
right to the other half, as he or anyone else; ye are three
cowards, and I shall laugh at you as long as I live for your mean
servility. By this time the Prince was come a-breast of us, and as
he passed he stared at me, and looked as sour as if he would have
bitten my nose off But that did not intimidate me, I galloped off,
and kept up with him till he came to a gate, which opened to that
part of the park wherein he lived; into which he turned, after he
had given me half a dozen as crabbed looks, as ever I saw on any
gentleman's countenance.

I then stopped and waited till my company came up, when they
questioned me why I would not quit the middle of the road. I
replied, I did not choose it. They then asked me if I did not
think it very wrong in me, to ride on by the Prince's phaeton. I
said no; as I think part of the road was for my use, as well as
for that of the King; and if you English are servile and timid, we
Irish are not, so I beg you would drop the subject, as I assure
you if the same circumstance was to occur to-morrow, I should act
in the same manner; or indeed, as I thought proper.

At length, we got to Richmond, a most delightful spot indeed,
where we dined, and drank as good Champagne , as ever I tasted in 
Ireland, everything exquisitely good, and served in so superb a
manner, that I am sorry to say, I never saw such a tavern, in any
part of my own country.

After dinner we set off for London, about nine in the evening, and
as I had been somewhat tired with riding, I took a seat in the
phaeton with one of the gentlemen, but the wind blew so strongly
on me, that when I came home, I found myself attacked with a
pungent pain in my side. Yet, I disregarded it so much that I went
directly to a ball, thinking to dance it off. However, I paid dear
for my indiscretion, being seized by a pleuritic fever, under
which I lay above a month, and totally senseless the greatest part
of the time. This was a harvest time for the woman I had taken as
my companion. She had been wife to a respectable merchant, as I
mentioned, and being my country-woman, I took a great liking to
her and paid her particular attention.—Which she returned so as to
prove that those of our own country, are the worst companions you
possibly have when out of it: as they are the first to deceive
you. Mrs. Green, to verify this maxim, and thinking I should not
live to demand them, stole seven diamond pins, a gold watch, three
trunks of clothes, and many trinkets, and articles of value. When
I recovered, and missed my things, I applied to a justice and had
two of my servants sent to Tothill-fields Bridewell, on suspicion.
I should have provided similar lodgings for my kind country-woman,
but she had taken flight on my first rising out of my bed; and as
I shortly after set out for Dublin, I never found her, and would
not carry on any prosecution against the servants; who, if guilty,
were far less so than Mrs. Green, as I had placed no confidence in
them.

On my recovery from this dreadful illness, I found my money nearly
exhausted, and that the extent of the robbery had deprived me of
the means of appearing with equal elegance, as when I dazzled the
eyes of all beholders. This, and my increasing disgust to London,
made me determine to return to my own country, and accordingly I
sold off my house and furniture, packed up the few valuables I had
left; laid by twelve guineas to bear my charges over, and putting
the rest of my money in my pocket, sallied out a shopping to
purchase something handsome, as presents to my friends in Ireland,
male and female, and bought away to a considerable extent. I then
packed up my purchases, and bidding adieu to London, travelled to
Holyhead, embarked on board the packet, and safely landed on
George's-quay, rejoicing that I had again my feet on my dear
native soil.


CHAP. XVI.

Odd's me, the fellow has put me into such a titteration
That I tremble from head to foot. Me! who am approached
With reverence, by Church-wardens, and the Heads of the parish.
But I'll take the scurvy Knave down, I'll have him Coruru
Nobus, aye! and his Roysters, too, I'll warrant you!
BEAUMONT and FLETCHER

SUCH had been my inconsiderateness in my expenses, that when I
landed on George's-quay, I had just two shillings left in the
world. This indeed, paid Wybrants's boat; but I had my trunks to
clear at the Customhouse, my passage in the packet to pay, and a
coach to hire. However, I thought very little about it, I had
friends in Dublin, and was come to where the celebrity of my name
would open the sluices of profit. I apologised to the Captain, and
telling him who I was, requested he would call on me next day in
Mecklenburgh-street, where I was then going; and procured a chair
from College-green, to carry me there.

When I came to Mecklenburgh-street, words cannot express the joy
with which Sally Hayes, and Mrs. Hall received me. I desired they
would pay for my chair, for I was returned to Dublin, ten pounds
worse than a beggar. They with great cordiality gave me what money
I wanted, and when the Captain came the next morning, I gave him
two guineas for his civility in taking my word. The next business
was to get my baggage from the Custom-house. I went myself, and
was welcomed to Dublin, by several of the gentlemen there, who
said they were happy to see me returned. One of the searchers
having asked me for my keys, in order to examine my trunks,
several of the officers cried, O fie, sure they would not suspect
me for having any contraband goods, and they would engage that I
had nothing but my own apparel. The trunks were discharged
unsearched, to my great satisfaction, as indeed I trembled, lest
sundry articles I had brought over, for presents, and for my own
use, should have been seized, as they were liable to have been if
seen.

When my things were got home and unpacked, I made myself very
grand by distributing a great number of presents. To some I gave
gowns, to some caps and feathers, rings and buckles to ladies, and
pocket-books to gentlemen, till I had distributed my whole cargo.
This procedure made it thought I had returned from London, much
richer than I went, and the idea of wealth produces always a
degree of respect: as people are generally more ready to pay
court, and assist those they are sensible does not want it. And
the real state of my finances was never suspected, nor ever known
but to Sally Hayes, and Mrs. Hall.

The next day I dressed and went into town, and as Sally and I
walked, we made very striking figures with bell-hoops, which I had
brought over, and as they were the first ever worn in Dublin, we
were greatly stared at. The mercers and linen-drapers, were glad
to see me, as I was a very good friend to them, as I wore my
petticoats trimmed half a yard up, and always obliged gentlemen
who presented me with clothes, to buy three times as much silk, or
other materials as was really necessary. Everyone we met, of my 
acquaintance, seemed very happy at my return; and indeed, I found
myself of more consequence than I thought I had been; so that I
said to myself, Well, Peggy you will not long be poor.

When we returned home, I had visits from a great many gentlemen;
all welcomed me home, some gave me a bank note, some sent in wine,
some came out of friendship, and others out of curiosity. Some of
those who would scarce look at me before, came to see how I looked
since I came from London, and how far my visit to that city had
improved me. In short, the concourse was great that evening, and
for the most part of the night.

I continued with Mrs. Hall, till I could procure a house for
myself, which I soon did, in Wood-street, for the second time: not
a little one as before, but one that was large and convenient;
with a large waste ground behind it, which at a considerable
expense, I converted into an elegant garden, where I lived very
comfortable for one year, with one of my old lovers.

Just at this juncture, Mr. Georgi and Signor Carnavalli, had taken
the Theatre in Smock-ally, for the performance of Italian operas,
two nights in the week; and as the Signor thought himself a very
great man, he endeavoured to establish new rules never before
introduced in Dublin. The chief of which, was to exclude on his
nights every lady of my description, from admission into the
theatre. He was advised not to attempt such an innovation, but he
persisted in his resolution. When I heard of Carnavalli's
intention, I was much displeased, and determined he should abandon
his design. On the first night he opened, I was otherwise engaged
and could not go, but Mrs. Hall, and Miss Townley, went. They were
just seated in one of the lattices, when the Signor came up to
them, and turned them out. He told them all the seats there were
set, and they might go to the gallery. The two ladies, like
cowards submitted, and quitted their seats. The next morning they
called on me, and told me how they had been treated. I rated them
soundly for their pusillanimity, and declared that if I had been
there, the Italian Thing would have found it very difficult to
turn me out, after I had once got in: but that I would try if he
would dare to make such an attempt with me. On the ensuing night,
I went with a Mrs. Judge; but was rather unfortunate in my
companion, who was the most cowardly female I ever saw. When we
entered the box-room, the two door-keepers, Jackson and Wilton,
were planted at their different posts. I got to the stairs that
led up to the lattices, when Jackson followed and took me by the
arm, saying, Madam, you cannot go there. I asked the reason of my
being refused admittance, to where I frequently sat, when he
replied, it was the orders of Mr. Carnavalli, and I cannot disobey
them. I struggled for some time and strove to force my way up, but
he being stronger than me, took me in his arms and carried me back
into the box-room, and on setting me down gave me a push.
Irritated with such behaviour, I gave him a slap in the face, with
my whole strength. My companion stood by all the time of our
contention, with her mouth gaping, and not offering to give me the
least assistance. Had Sally Hayes been with me, it would have been
quite otherwise, and Jackson would have carried some marks of our
resentment. But this was not the case, they detained the box
ticket, for which I had paid at the door; spoiled all my clothes,
by their pulling and dragging me, and I lost one of my earrings. I
stood in this manner, and sent round for Carnavalli, when he came,
I asked him if it was his order I should be excluded from a place
for which I had paid. He said yes, and that I should never go in
whilst his operas lasted. Very well, Sir, I answered, you'll abide
by the consequences; and I'll bet you a hundred guineas I will. I
then took a chair and came home, crying all the way for spite and
through vexation. I had not long been at home, when four of the
first noblemen in the kingdom, came to condole with me for the
usage I had suffered; and said if I did not make an example of
Carnavalli and his servants, I deserved every ill-treatment such
fellows could give. I was ever very prompt to take revenge for
insults, and told their lordships that my resentment did not want
advice to give it an edge.

This was on Wednesday night, and the following Saturday was to be
the next opera night. The next morning, I went and consulted an
eminent barrister, with whom I was very intimate; and pursuant to
his advice, on Saturday morning I lodged examinations, and
procured warrants against them for an assault, and for robbing me,
by detaining the ticket for which I had paid. I sent and desired
Mr. Roe, the keeper of Newgate, to be with me a few minutes before
six, and got four of the most desperate, ill-looking fellows of
bailiffs, that Dublin could afford, to attend me. I then took a
coach, and directed the catchpoles to keep in sight of the coach,
and to come up when I should cry Holloa! Boys. Thus prepared, I
drove to the theatre, and to the stage-door, as I knew that would
best answer my purpose, as I should not be so soon known there. I
knew Carnavalli was the first fiddle, and by the hour, must be at
that time in the orchestra. When the coach was close to the stage-
door, my coachman told the door-keeper, that there was a gentleman
there who wanted to subscribe, and Mr. Carnavalli was sent for; he
came in two or three minutes, without his hat, to receive the
subscription money. When he came to the coach-side, and saw I was
in it he gave a start, and would have returned into the house; but
at that moment, I gave the signal of Holloa! Boys. the bailiffs
came up and took him. He began to talk, when I said, "fellow, I
have nothing to say to you. Here gentlemen! take this ruffian, and
leave him in the centre of Newgate, and I shall accompany you
myself."—I called them gentlemen, and clever gentlemen indeed they
were, for I believe each had twenty or thirty scars in his pretty
face. I went with my gentlemen, and their prisoner Carnavalli,
without his hat, his well powdered hair, drenched with the pour of
the rain, which luckily fell at that time; and dropping his
spangles as he went. When I saw him safe lodged in Newgate, we all
returned to the box-door, I directed the fellows to stay without,
whilst I alighted and went in. There were locks put on the lower
doors, I suppose, in order to keep me out, and the moment the
door-keepers saw me they ran to lock them. Jackson and Wilson,
were quite ignorant of what had been done to their master, which
was unknown to all but the bailiffs, the coachman and myself. I
said to Jackson. O fie! won't you let me in? he answered, indeed I
can't, it's my orders. I cried out, Holloa! Boys. my four
gentlemen came up, and I told them to take these two scoundrels,
and leave them where they had left their master; and be sure you
conduct them through the rain, without their hats. I then turned
to a great company that was in the box-room and lobby, and making
a profound courtesy, said, "Ladies and gentlemen, I am extremely
sorry to deprive you of the pleasure, you may expect from this
night's entertainment; but I have sent Mr. Carnavalli, the first
fiddle, to Newgate, and am now sending two of his domestics after
him, lest he should want company or attendants:"—and away I went,
leaving them all in amazement. I conducted the door-keepers to
Newgate, and then went home in the highest content; and slept
sweeter that night, than I had done for a considerable time
before.

The next day being Sunday, there was a review of the Volunteers in
the Phoenix Park, and the weather being very fine, drew a great
concourse of persons of all ranks. To be sure, I went there in
high style, and as the adventure of last night, had ran through
every circle, I was the great object of attention, and was
particularly stared at by multitudes. I had the satisfaction to be
congratulated for my spirit, by most of the gentlemen present. I
replied, that I had not yet done with the fellows. Several ladies
of the sisterhood, also accosted me with their thanks for my
asserting their rights. I told them it was more than they
deserved, since they were so mean spirited, as to submit to the
Italian's new-fangled rules. That it was for my own sake I had
proceeded as I had done, for no person merited the enjoyment of
any rights, who had not the courage to assert and maintain them.

Although I had taken these steps with Carnavalli, and his door-
keepers, yet, I was not contented. Their punishment was not my
main object, which was to get free admission to the lattices on
the opera nights; and this I was determined to obtain, even by
force. The following Wednesday, was to be the next night, and I
was resolved to be thoroughly prepared. I accordingly requested
two gentlemen, who I knew had no aversion to what they called,
kicking up a dust, at any time, to go with me to the opera, and
support me; and promised to give them tickets. They readily
assured me of their assistance; indeed, they were two of a kind of
Bucks, that though they were always well dressed, had seldom a
shilling in their pockets, therefore, they could never afford the
opera. They thought, to be there with their swords, and fiercely
cocked hats, would make them appear great and grand; and that they
should be taken for somebodies.

This arrangement was settled, but I had no occasion of putting it
in practice. Carnavalli and his fellows had procured bail, and
were at large. And when I went to Daly's play on the Tuesday
night, Mr. Tresham, his box-keeper, after wishing me joy of my
victory, told me that Mr. Carnavalli presented me with the freedom
of the house; and that Jackson and Wilton, had refused to keep the
doors any longer, lest I should get them knocked on the head. I
thanked Mr. Tresham for his information, and said I was determined
to come sometimes to the opera, but not at the expense of such a
shabby fellow, as I was well able to pay for my seat; and he had
made the offer of the freedom of the house, out of fear.

I then went to the opera without any riot or molestation; though I
went there but seldom, and that only that I might be seen by the
audience, to have triumphed over Carnavalli's new rules. As I had
gained my point, I did not take any farther steps against the
fellows, but let the prosecution drop; to the great satisfaction
of the Italian fiddler, who was much terrified lest I should
proceed: and became as abject, as before he had been insolent. But
all poltroons, are tyrants, when they have an opportunity of
exercising their despotism.


CHAP. XVII.

Though our revels are scorn'd by the Grave and the Wise,
Yet they practise all day, what they seem to despise.
Examine mankind, from the great to the small
Each mortal's disguis'd, the whole world is a Ball.
Sing Tansara rara Masks All.

I have for some chapters, forborne to make any reflections on my
conduct. Indeed how could I? it would not bear reflection; and my
readers will doubtless, make many in their own minds, much to my
disadvantage. This, I own will be just, and I have nothing to say
in my defence. I had entered so deep into a series of errors, and
so plunged into the whirl-pool of dissipation, that I became
engulfed therein. My eyes were blinded, that they beheld not the
evil. My ears became deaf to admonition, had even anyone attempted
to admonish me; which alas! none offered to do. My success in one
plan, gave me courage to go on to another. My wants were all
supplied by others, through vanity or folly; and, I was led to
look upon the men who surrounded me merely as my tools, made only
to minister to my expenses, or contribute to my pleasure. Everyone
with whom I congregated, male or female, seemed to shut the door
against thought, and incite me to fresh irregularities. I had my
pride flattered by having attained  a celebrity, and an eminence
in the line I had unfortunately taken. I was looked up to as a
kind of pattern to the ladies of the sisterhood; and many men
thought it an addition to their character as Bucks, choice spirits
and men of fashion, to be acquainted with me; nay, divers have
made it their brag, that they had spent their evening with me, who
were never once admitted within my doors. My capital error was, in
the entering into the course of life I led; for once when in, I
had no means of getting out of it. Nor do I even now, know one
single line, situated as I was, I could have embraced for support.
The miseries of poverty, which I had so severely felt, were not
forgotten; and their remembrance only urged me the more, to
prevent falling into like circumstances, by any means within my
reach. Living in splendour, enjoying every luxury of dress, table
or show, no matter from which source they were derived, made me
resolve not to quit the means of gaining the end. Thus, I went on
in a circle of pleasures, one commencing where another ended. As
for character, I had totally disregarded it, or to speak plainer,
I had acquired one character, in which I gloried; and which to me,
supplied the place of any other: and I was made to cry out with
Falstaff, "Why 'tis my vocation. 'Tis no sin for one to labour in
one's vocation." Not but I often entertained thoughts of
amendment, though I knew not the day when I should begin it, but
put it off from time to time; saying, for many years, with Prince
Hal,

——When this loose behaviour I throw off
And pay the debt I have not promised,
By how much better than my word I am
By so much shall I falsify men's fears:
And, like bright metal on a sullen ground,
My Reformation, glittering o'er my faults
Shall show more goodly, and attract more eyes,
Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
I'll so offend, to make offence a skill
Redeeming time, when men think least I will.

I have already related some anecdotes, showing my temper and frame
of mind, and shall before I pursue my narrative give another, to
show how far not only impunity, but success, had emboldened me to
proceed to any length.

An order had been given by government, that there should be no
more Masquerades, on account of some disturbances that had
happened. This spirited me up to have one of my own, at my own
house, to show how much I disregarded all law or order, let the
consequences be what they might. I sent and got two hundred
tickets printed, and gave them away amongst my male and female
acquaintance, and fixed the night for the first of May. My
intention ran like wild-fire through the city. Those who had
tickets applauding me for my spirit; and those who could not
procure any, condemning me for my impudence, as they called it.
For a fortnight before the appointed time, I had above twenty busy
visitors of the latter class, trying to dissuade, or frighten me
from my attempt. They told me, if I persisted my house would be
pulled down about my ears, for acting contrary to the order of
government, with which the whole town was acquainted, and I could
not therefore, plead ignorance. However, as I had gone to a
considerable expense, I was resolved to go on. I had my house laid
out in a most elegant style, and had five hundred coloured lamps,
of blue, lilac and green. When the night came I got Mr. Robinson,
the high constable to attend, with a guard; an eminent shoe-maker,
(Mr. Warren) and a Mr. Smith, were my door-keepers. At six
o'clock, the street was full from end to end, and I really began
to be frightened for fear of the mob. About seven they began to be
somewhat riotous, and swore they would demolish all the windows,
if I and Sally Hayes, did not come put and shew ourselves
immediately. I sent them word we would comply with their desires
as soon as we were dressed. But before we could get ready, one of
the ruffians threw a large stone, and broke a pane of glass in one
of the dining-room windows; then indeed, my heart began to
flutter. However, I put the best face I could on the matter, and
with Sally Hayes went to the upper step of the door, and shewed
ourselves to the mob: who, after a few minutes, gave us a huzza,
and told us to go in, for they were satisfied, and no damage
should happen. But they would not let one of the company go into
the house, till they had shewed themselves; and then let them
quietly proceed.

The company then began to flock in very fast. Sally and I wore
fancy dresses. A fortune-teller, very characteristically dresed;
Mr. Pearson, who supported it with much humour.—A jockey, by
Captain Hamilton.—Mr. Jones in a domino.—Mr. McNeil, a sailor.—
Mrs. Hall, a pie-woman. Kitty Cut-a-dash, an orange-girl.—Nancy
Weems, a nun.—Miss Townly, a flower-girl.—Miss Redding, a ballad-
singer.—Mrs. Healy, a cast-clothes woman.—Mr. Gibton, a sailor.—
Mr. Cashel, a sweep.—Mr. Crawford, a domino.—Mr. Meares, a clown.-
Lord St. Lawrence, a whipper-in.—Numbers of dominos and sailors.—
Lord Westport, a blind fiddler.—Lord Headfort, a drummer.—Lord
Molesworth, a coach man, the best in England or Ireland.—Mr.
Finlay, a gardincr. In short, I did not distinguish a tithe of
them, as they did not unmask at supper.

The supper consisted of everything the season afforded and money
could purchase; it was elegantly laid out in the two-pair of
stairs street-room, and with the wines, gave general satisfaction.
The back-room, contained the only bed in the house (all the others
being removed) and for that bed I had put myself to a great
expense, the furniture being of new muslin, richly spangled. It
was kept locked up, being designed for the Duke of Leinster, who,
after all the preparation, never came.

After supper we all came down into the drawing-room, where a band
of music struck up, and we danced till six in the morning, when
the company departed. I then paid the musicians and the guard,
gave them plenty of drink, and then went to sleep in the Duke's
bed; and thus ended my masquerade, of which government took not
the least notice.


CHAP. XVIII.

Each change and excess have thro' life been my doom
And well I can speak of its joys and its strife.
The bottle affords us a glimpse thro' the gloom,
But Love's the true sun-shine that gladdens our life.
Thus a long time I thought, but not think so no more,
For usage and time will diminish the store.

ALTHOUGH I had been at very great expense in fitting up my house
in Wood-street, yet, in about a year, I found I should be
necessitated to leave it. The under-waters had so penetrated to
the foundation, that I not only thought the house unwholesome to
live in, but even unsafe. I therefore sought for another house,
and met with one that was building in Pitt-street, but not quite
finished. I liked the situation and took it, and till it was
completed, which was not till the end of two months, I removed my
furniture to different places, and resided with a lady, who kindly
offered me the use of her house. At length, Sally Hayes and I took
possession of my new house, and for some time lived in our usual
manner.

Since some time after Mr. Lawless's departure for America, I had
not known what love was. I used frequently to sing the song that
so well expressed my disposition.

My pride is to hold all mankind in my chain
The conquest I prize, though the slaves I disdain.
I tease them, and vex them;
I plague and perplex them;
Since men try their arts our weak sex to betray,
I'll show them that woman's as cunning as they.

But behold! after several years of apathy and indifference, I was
again entangled in the nets of Love, and became as infatuated,
with my second, as ever I had been with my first Love, Lawless.

I became acquainted with a Mr. Robert Gorman, I thought him the
only man worth my notice, and fell in love with him to a most
extravagant degree. Whether he had an equal passion for me I know
not; he said he had, and I believed him. He was extremely
handsome. He was almost constantly with me, and then I despised
all the rest of mankind, they became odious in my eyes, which
could not look with pleasure or complacency on any but my dear
Bob.

His father had a country house, near Black-rock, and insisted on
his son's coming to live with him; having, as I suppose, got some
intelligence of his attachment to me. I was much dissatisfied; and
could not sleep one night without him; he therefore, used as soon
as ever his father went to bed, to slip out of the house and come
to town to me, and get back again the next morning, before the old
gentleman was up: soon after, I arose and drove to Booterstown, or
the Rock, where we met and dined together; he then returned to his
father's house, and I went home expecting him at night.

This course went on uninterruptedly for some time, till some busy
devil, envious of our happiness, told old Mr. Gorman, how his son
had deceived him: therefore, he always stayed up till he saw his
son in bed, and then locking all the doors, took the keys up with
him. This prevented our nightly meetings for a while; but Love,
fertile in stratagems, put one into Bob's head, and enabled him to
elude his father's vigilance. He went down into the kitchen; and
established an ascendency over the servants, by a few bottles of
wine, and some money, till they became devoted to him.—It has been
well observed, that there is but one road to the heart of a
domestic, and whoever is generous cannot miss it. He made one of
the men, after the doors were locked, stand in the area, he
mounted on the man's shoulders, and so clambering over the rails
got at liberty, and scampered off to me. This stratagem succeeded,
night after night, for several weeks, to our mutual satisfaction.
At length, whether the old gentleman suspected something, or Bob
had been betrayed by somebody, is uncertain; but one night he went
into his son's room, and found there was the nest, but the bird
had flown. This put him into a kind of quandary. His son was out,
the doors were all fast, and all the keys were in his pocket. The
chamber-windows were too high for him to get out of them; but out
he was, and which way he got out he could not guess. But he
reflected that however Bob got out, he must come in the same way,
as he was always in the house before the doors were open; and
therefore, resolved to watch his coming home; this he did and
espied Bob, come over the rails and drop into the area.

The mystery being thus unravelled, the old man found it would be
in vain to attempt the keeping his son from me; if he remained in
the kingdom; therefore, he determined to send him to the East-
Indies, where he would be far enough from me. Bob, having received
a severe lecture from his father, left the house, and came to me,
where he kept himself secreted for three weeks. The family was
distracted, and Bob's brother came to me every day to enquire
after him, but he would not be seen. At length, I persuaded him to
see his brother; and accordingly, he wrote that he would meet him
next day at Durham's tavern, which he did, and went home with him.
But the father would not see him till he consented to go abroad,
as he had dissipated some hundreds of his father's property, by
gambling and other means. Everything was got ready for his
departure to England in one day, and his brother was to go with
him, to equip him properly there, and to see him off. When all
this was settled, Bob called on me in the morning, told me he was
going to England, for a little time with his brother, as he then
was ignorant whither he was to be sent. He laid before me the
necessity of obeying his father, in order to be restored to his
good graces, as he had been very expensive to him; and depended
entirely upon him for his future establishment in life: and that
he would write to me from the Head, and from London.

The departure of the second man I ever loved (whatever affection I
pretended to others, to hum and deceive them) was an object of
grief to me. I fretted exceedingly, and kept my room for some
days. Bob was faithful to his promise, and we continually
corresponded, till his brother had got everything ready for his
voyage. He then wrote to entreat me to come to him, on the receipt
of a letter from him by his brother; who, having received his
solemn promise to go abroad, and given him a handsome sum of
money, was to be in Dublin in a few days.

Short absences, it is said, fan the fire of love, whilst long ones
put it out, so I found. The short time I had lost my darling Bob,
made me only the more eager to see him again. I therefore, without
the least hesitation, set out for England, the very day after I
had received the expected letter, and soon joined the man of my
heart. After a short stay in London, we went to Portsmouth, where
the ship lay in which he was to embark. However, it was near six
months before it sailed, during which time we lived happily, and
went to every public amusement.

The last fortnight was indeed very gloomy, as every day's approach
to his sailing, made us anticipate our grief for our separation.
He had indeed, another cause of discontent, of which I was totally
ignorant; he had spent above one hundred pounds of the money, he
had received to bear the charges of his voyage. Had I known his
want, he should not have suffered a moment's uneasiness at it; for
though I had but little money with me, I had many things of value,
which I would have gladly pawned or sold for his supply. But his
noble soul, scorned the very idea of being under such a compliment
to a woman. He formed a plausible story in a letter to his father,
and drew upon him for this deficiency. His bill was accepted and
paid, and then, and not till then, did he acquaint me of his past
embarrassment. Many a man would, like a mean wretch, have taken
the advantage of a woman's fondness, had the opportunity offered.
With many such I have met: some have actually robbed me, others
have borrowed my money, and to this hour have never paid me. (But
I shall, in my next volume, lay before the public a list of all
who are in debt to me, with the sum, and how long owing.) Two or
three days before Bob was to sail, he came with me to London, put
me safe into the stage-coach, that was to bring me towards the
Packet, and we parted with great grief and the utmost reluctance.


CHAP. XIX.

There's not a weed so noxious on the Earth,
But holds some virtue clos'd within its rind;
And few there are, howe'er far gone ill,
From whom some quality of use to man
May not be drawn. Heav'n only sees the Heart,
Then let us not condemn from outward show,
But let the good be shelter for the bad,
Plead in its favour and incline our thoughts
To comely Charity, towards our neighbour.
BEN JOHNSON

WHILST we were at London, a Manchester gentleman paid his
addresses to me. As I was then with Bob, I would not listen to
him; but as Bob was on the eve of going abroad, the gentleman told
me, if I would take Manchester in my way home to Dublin, he would
make me a present of a handsome gig, and four very delicate
ponies. I promised that I would, as I thought the gig and ponies
would be very stylish. However, such was my distress on parting
with Bob, that though I actually came through Manchester, I could
not bear to keep my promise. Though, to confess the truth, I had a
terrible conflict between my love for Bob, and my desire for the
gig and ponies; and I did not value myself a little on this
capital piece of self-denial.

When I arrived in Dublin, I found all well, but Sally Hayes, who
was almost inconsolable for the loss of a favourite Captain, who
had been obliged to join his regiment. We being sisters in
affliction, lived like widows for a while; till, like other
widows, we strove to drive away the thoughts of the past, by the
enjoyments of the present; and we followed the advice of
Shakespeare,

Take you some new infection to your heart
And the rank poison of the old will die.

A Captain H——, paid his addresses to Sally; she loved him for near
two years, with as much fervour as she did any of her former
favourites: nay, more, for when he was ordered abroad, she took it
so much to heart, that it brought on a bilious complaint, which in
the end, carried her to her grave: but here I anticipate.

As for myself, a very handsome young fellow of the name of
Cunynghame, became very assiduous to please me. He visited me many
times, before I thought proper to admit him to my favour, as he
was too great and too general an admirer of the fair sex. He was
expecting a commission in the sixty-seventh regiment. However, as
I was totally disengaged, I thought he would make me a very
agreeable dangler and attendant, as I was so much in public: for
indeed, he was fit for nothing else; and therefore, I enlisted him
in my train;—but I shall leave mentioning him for a time, to give
place to some intermediate matter.

Hitherto, for many pages I have candidly shown myself in my worst
light; I now beg leave to mention some anecdotes, which I hope
will place me in a more advantageous point of view; and that,
however vindictive I may have appeared, when ill-used, Pity and
Humanity, were no strangers to my breast. These short narratives
will not be quoted exactly in the order of time; but arc thrown
together, that they may be seen at one glance.

When the Regiment of Black Horse, was in garrison in Dublin, one
evening three troopers of that regiment came to my house, and
demanded some money to drink my health. I met them in the hall,
and asked if I owed them any money? They said no. Then, I think
(said I,) it is very well that I can pay my debts, and not give
money to strangers to drink. It is what I never did nor ever will.
If any person in real distress applied to me, I would relieve them
as far as in my power. On my refusal, the soldiers rushed by me,
and ran upstairs, saying, they would search for a deserter. I told
them there was no such person there, but they might search as far
as they pleased; which they did. This was merely a pretence of the
soldiers, thinking thereby to extort money from me; but when they
found I would give them none they went away, after making a great
bustle.

I had at that time, a lady with me in my house. I requested she
would take a chair and go to the Barracks, to some of the officers
of that regiment, and acquaint them with the behaviour of three of
their men. This she did, and the officers directly ordered the
gates to be shut, and a search made. Eleven of their men were
missing out of their rooms. A guard was sent in quest of them, and
they were all taken, brought hand-cuffed to the Barracks, and put
into confinement.

The next morning, an officer wrote to me, that Colonel Crampton
requested I would come to the Barracks at eleven o'clock; and that
I would drive to the back of the Barracks, on Arbour-hill, and he
would order the men round there, as it would be more private. They
were indeed, ranged there before my carriage came. The Colonel
then asked me if any of the men who had behaved ill at my house,
were among those eleven. I immediately pointed out the three,
telling him that one of them was the man who wanted to extort
money from me, and had been very impudent and insolent: the other
two came indeed with him, but had behaved remarkable civil. The
Colonel ordered the offender back to his confinement, till a
Court-martial should be held on him. In a few days, the man was
tried and sentenced to receive some hundred lashes, at which I was
much pleased; for, if such behaviour were to be passed over, there
would be no end to it. Every day in the interval, between the
sentence and the day it was to be put in execution, I had three or
four letters brought me from the prisoner, interceding in his
behalf At last, the man's wife came crying to my door, and would
not quit it till she saw me. I then pitied the woman, and wrote by
her to the Colonel, to request he would pardon the man, as for my
own part, I sincerely forgave him. The Colonel complied, and the
man was released without any other punishment than the confinement
he had suffered;—after this, sundry of the man's comrades came to
my house to thank me; and declared if any of the regiment were to
meet me on the mountains of Connaught, or the farthest part of
Ireland, they would carry me on their backs to any, the most
distant place to where I would choose to go. And whenever I met
any of the officers of that corps, they never failed to thank me
for my forgiveness of, and pleading for the man.

A young gay fellow, of the name of Gibbons, was particularly fond
of Sally Hayes. He gave her several valuable presents, and some
bank notes; which profusion shortly ran him a-ground, and he was
without money. This not suiting him, he resolved to have money let
it come from whence it would, and in what manner soever. He began
by forging a note on his uncle, for a thousand pounds; but it did
not succeed, as the sum was too large to be negotiated. He then
forged a note on Mr. Maquay, sugar-baker, in Thomas-street, for
eighty pounds. With this he came to me, and begged I would direct
him where he could get cash for it, for it was as good as the
bank, and he would give five guineas for the discount. I not
knowing but all was right, gave him a letter to an eminent
citizen, saying, it would much oblige me if he would give cash for
the note, to the gentleman who brought it, as it was a very good
one, a proper discount would be given; and if he had not all the
cash in the house, that he would favour him with what he had, and
the gentleman would wait on him next morning for the remainder. I
knew the citizen would have let me have as much, without either
note or bond. However, he had but thirty guineas to spare, which
he gave Mr. Gibbons, and told him he should have the rest on the
morrow.

In the meantime, Sally Hayes and I were engaged to dine with two
gentlemen at a tavern in Cope-street, and were gone there. When
Gibbons returned, my servants inadvertently told him where we
were, and he came to us, though rather unwelcome, as we did not
want his company, but had omitted to give proper directions to my
servants.

The citizen, although he had given thirty guineas, in consequence
of my letter, was still so cautious as to go to Mr. Maquay, before
he gave the remainder. He showed Mr. Maquay no part of the note
but the signature, and asked him if that was his hand? he declared
immediately it was not. This alarmed the citizen, who, fearful he
should be charged with uttering a forgery, crumpled up the note in
his hand, and sat off directly; running as if a mad bull were
after him, and never stopped till he found a gate-way, behind the
door of which, he hid for some minutes, till peeping out and
perceiving he was not pursued, he took courage to go to a
magistrate and lodge examinations against young Gibbons. Then
armed with a warrant, he got an officer and came to my house;
being told where I was he followed me, and going into another
room, sent the waiter to desire to speak to me. I went to him
directly, when he asked me where the gentleman was that I had sent
to him for money that morning, for he wished to see him. I told
him that he might do it if he would only walk into the next room,
and asked him and his friend to follow me. As soon as he entered
he bawled out aloud, and bid the officer seize that man and take
him off to Newgate. Off they dragged him directly without his hat;
and then the citizen and his friend, went to their own room. My
heart ached for the poor young fellow, thus devoted to a certain
death. I followed the citizen, threw myself on my knees before
him, twined my arms round him; and with a flood of tears begged
mercy, and that he would not take the unfortunate young man's
life. At length, I softened him, and he agreed Gibbons should be
brought back, and released, if I should give him the thirty
guineas he had disbursed, and pay all the charges, this I did
immediately, though the young man was nothing to me, and the poor
fellow was returned to us. Thus I saved an unhappy fellow
creature's life; and gave him into the hands of his father and
brother, who had come on my sending for them. They did not arrive
till the business was affected; and if they had come sooner, it
would have been to no avail, as they had neither the money to give
the citizen, nor that influence over him which I had. But, Oh!
Ingratitude! what was my reward? Gibbons and his father went to
law with me for the money I had paid to save his neck, and some
other sums I had previously lent him. But I recovered my debt, and
let him fall into other hands.

I had been one day to dinner at Rathfarnham, when returning in the
evening, I found a hackney coach at my door, and was informed by
my servant, that the person who came in it, and was waiting for my
coming home, was a young woman who she believed, had escaped from
some mad-house. I was very angry that such a person was let in,
but went into the parlour to see who it was. When I entered, I
beheld a most beautiful young person, who appeared to be about
fifteen years old, to have been elegantly bred, and to be some
girl of family, though ten shillings would purchase all the
clothes on her back. When she saw me she threw herself on her
knees, and wept bitterly, saying she had been so cruelly used by
her parents, that she could no longer bear it. I asked who they
were? when she replied, that if she were to tell me, she knew my
character too well not to be certain, that I would send for and
give her up to them. I answered, "My good girl, if I thought you
were a virtuous girl, most probably I should; but you appear to
me, rather as one just come out of a mad-house, or a hospital, and
I fear you are not good. But tell me the truth, and then I shall
know how I am to act by you."—Oh! No, said she, I am no such
person, and did you know my parentage, you would not speak to me
thus harshly. And I know your family, and the story of your life,
as well as you do yourself.

This it may be well supposed, made me the more eager to know who
she was; and supposing that her intent was to go upon the town, I
resolved to use every effort to prevent it; as I have ever done
when in my power; for I never in my life was accessory or
instrumental to the corruption of any girl; nor ever received in
my house anyone who had not already been deluded. I strongly
remonstrated with this young woman, on the infamy of the way of
life into which she seemed desirous of entering. That many a fine
woman, who had kept their carriages, and lived in the most
extravagant, luxurious, and superb style for a few years, had
fallen when the town was tired of them, into the most abject, and
unpitied poverty; and died miserable, and in the want of the most
common necessaries of life. This is positively a fact. I have been
a witness to the distress of many such, and have always relieved
them as much as I could, though some of them have been so high and
proud, as to think it not worth their while to speak to me, till I
got into high life. Yet, I returned good for evil; and however, I
have frequently met with ungrateful returns, yet I do not regret
what I have done for them—but to return.

When I had finished my harangue, to which she had listened with
the profoundest attention, the poor girl replied,—It was not her
desire or intention to embrace that shameful way of life, the
consequences of which I had so pointedly as well as humanely
depicted; what she sought, was to live with me, wash my small
linen, and attend me when at home as companion, or humble friend;
for her heart was almost broken with the usage which she had met.
She had been locked up in a two-pair of stairs room, her food cut
off and sent to her on a plate, not being admitted to table; and
compelled to work till her fingers were almost eaten away. All
these hardships were inflicted by an old maiden aunt, to whose
care she had been committed for a few weeks. In lieu of her own
clothes, which had been taken away whilst she was in bed, and were
locked up; an old white dress was given her, which had been
bestowed on the maid some time before, and had a hundred darns in
it. In that condition she took the first opportunity of the door
being open, and ran out without any cloak, or anything on her
head; took the first coach she met and came to my house.

Here let me again animadvert on the ill-conduct of many parents,
who by harsh usage often drive their children, sons as well as
daughters, to desperation. Bad indeed, must be that disposition
which cannot be moved by kindness; and extraordinarily good must
be that temper, which is not perverted by cruelty. Besides, if
harshness is even used as a method of amendment of any errors in
youth, and not merely (as it too often is,) from a tyrannic
inclination, it generally fails of its end. Here, in the instance
before us, a young girl was driven from her home by ill-treatment;
and in my own self, I have bitterly experienced the fatal
consequences of my inhuman brother's cruelty, that first exposed
me to miseries, that led to the way of life I had embraced. But
for him I should not have erred. Nay, had I had only a friend, who
would have given me the advice that I cordially gave this unhappy
girl, I might have been as virtuous a woman as she is now.

It was in vain that I pressed her to let me know who her relations
were. I told her it was near eleven o'clock, and as I could not
keep her any longer in my house, I must place her with one of my
neighbours, and in the morning I would advertise to know her
parents, and where I should take her, for she should not stay with
me for any consideration on earth. Still she persisted, saying,
that if her parents got her home again, they would tie her with
cords, and use her still worse than before. I told her, no, I
would take care of that, I would go to them, and give them such a
lecture that would harrow up their souls, and induce them to use
her like a queen; and if they did not, then I would receive her,
and never let her go to them again.

Finding all my efforts in vain, I then altered my tune, and
threatened to turn her out into the streets at that late hour, for
the first ruffian she met, to drag her as he pleased. This menace
had its effect, she then told me who her parents were and where
they lived. This determined me how to act with her.

All the time I had been talking with her, two gentlemen had been
waiting in my front parlour, who had been watching to get a second
glimpse of her, as they had seen her when they first came in with
me. I therefore, sent for a coach, put one of my cloaks upon her,
and went into the coach with her, directing the coachman to drive
to a different place to where I intended to go, in order to
deceive the two gentlemen. And to make them still more sure, I
locked them in the parlour, and gave the key to my servant,
telling her when she thought the coach might have got some streets
off, she might let the curious, disappointed gentlemen out.

When we were at some distance, I gave the proper directions to the
coachman, and we drove to the house the poor girl had left: she
kissing my hand, and wetting it with her tears all the way we
went; and praying she might yet have it in her power, to nurse me,
wash my feet, and be a comfort to me in my old age.

When we arrived at the door where she was to enter, I left her in
the coach, and went in myself. I found her father, and said
sufficient to him, to make him promise she should be used well,
and that he would not let her crabbed aunt or anyone else, say an
uncivil thing to her. I said also, I would come once a week, and
know from her own mouth how she was treated; and if ever she ran
away again, I would let her stay with me and advertise the whole
transaction, with names and places of abode. But I never heard one
word of complaint again.

My two bucks that I had locked up in the parlour, having just seen
this girl, and being much struck with her beauty, had told the
transaction to some of their companions; and as they were always
on the look out to ensnare young birds, were very urgent with me
to get her to my house; and would give me anything I should ask if
I would send for her. This I constantly refused. They then
requested that I would let them know who she was, and where she
lived. This also I denied to do, as I never was or would be in the
most distant way, instrumental in deluding any young female.

Another anecdote of this kind, and I have done for the present
with this subject.

Some short time after the above adventure, a very fine dressed
lady, very young, and very ugly, came to my house, and said she
wanted lodgings. I told her I had none; nor indeed, did I ever
choose to let anyone lodge in my house, who did not go with me
into public company. For above half a year she was coming to me,
and teasing me to let her live with me. She was always well
dressed; and every time she came she wore a different dress. I at
last asked where she lived, she said in New-street. Sure, said I,
there cannot be a house in that street, fit for a woman of your
appearance to live in. She replied, there was, and she had a
friend who supported her there. I advised her to stick to that
friend. In about a fortnight after, she came to me again, in a new
garb, neat and elegant. As from her coming so often to see me, we
had contracted a kind of acquaintance, I asked her to stay for
tea; she complied, asking me, if in case she should be locked out,
I would give her a night's lodging. I answered, ten, if she wanted
them. In the evening she went away, but returned in about an hour,
and said she could not get in. That night she slept with me. The
next day I was engaged to dine out of town, and to take Kelly, the
dulcimer player with me. I asked my guest to go with me, to which,
after some hesitation she consented. We went and passed a very
agreeable day. When we came home, I told the maid to see the
strange lady to bed, then to lock the door and bring me the key.

The next morning early, Kelly, the dulcimer player, came to me,
and to my great surprise, told me the lady who I had taken out of
town with me the day before, was a boarder in the Nunnery, where
he had seen her four or five times when he had been to play there.
I could scarcely believe him, but he assured me he was quite
certain of the truth of what he said.

I had the lady called down to breakfast, and when that was over I
took her into my own room, where she confessed the truth. I then
reasoned with her, and sometimes scolded her. I wanted to know
what could be her motive, to want to embrace such a way of life,
as she seemed desirous of following. That she must be both very
vicious, and equally villainous, to leave such a comfortable,
elegant place as the Nunnery, to throw herself into a line, in
which she certainly must starve, and die in a cellar without a
morsel to eat, or a bed to lie upon. For indeed, you mistake the
trade, which you are not framed to follow with any the most
distant prospect of success. I sent her away, crying bitterly, and
bid her bless God, that she had a decent support, in a virtuous
place where she could want for nothing, and exhorted her to keep
it as long as she could. She went away, and I saw her no more.


CHAP. XX.

'Tis a pitiful piece, like a farce in a fair
Where show, noise and nonsense misrule,
Where tinsel paradings make Ignorance stare
Where he who acts best is the fool.
G.A. STEVENS

LIFE IS CHEQUERED, good and bad fortune alternately arise. So it
is with the actions of those who do not derive them uniformly from
principle, but solely from the impulse of the moment. My heart was
naturally good, and thence arose the conduct I held in the above
instances. But on the other hand, that natural good was frequently
perverted by evil examples, by the love of pleasure, and from want
of reflection. I must therefore, depict myself as I really was,
and now having related some worthy actions, I shall return to some
other anecdotes, not so deserving of commendation.

A noble Lord, of my own name, but to whom I had not the honour of
being in the least related, expressed a great regard for me, and
was one of my constant visitors. He often urged me to name what I
particularly wanted, that he might make me a present of it.
Knowing him to be both rich and generous, I was frequently
inclined to ask for a gold watch, set with diamonds, a diamond
necklace, or a pair of diamond bracelets; yet, I could never
muster up courage to request anything so valuable, lest I should
be refused. At length, he so teased me to ask something, that I
hastily replied, Then my Lord, I want a good Palliasse for my bed.
My Lord directly said, Egad then I will fit you, I have a
Frenchman, who was the greatest connoisseur in Paris, in that very
article, and I will send him to take measure of your bed. Monsieur
came accordingly, and having got the dimensions, about three days
after, brought me in his lordship's coach, the most elegant
palliasse I had ever seen, made quite in the French taste. I gave
the Frenchman a guinea, and slept very comfortably on it that
night, and indeed ever since; having had it cleaned or new
covered, whenever soiled or time had injured it in the least; and
whilst I live I shall ever have a remembrance of Lord M——, about
me.

Much about the same time, I had invited a smart select party to a
ball and supper. The company was all met by twelve, every lad had
his lass and were dancing merrily. Sally Hayes and I were setting
out the supper in the dining-parlour, when a most violent rap came
at the door as if it would beat it down. I ordered my man not to
admit any person, for as the whole company was come, there was not
room for any more. When the door was opened, in rushed Captain F——
e, of the Castle, with Mr. Dicky D——n, and two more sparks, with
whom I was unacquainted. These bucks wanted to be of the party,
and to be admitted where they were dancing. I told them it was a
select party, if it were not I should be as glad of their company
as of any others; but as that was not the case I begged they would
depart, as the supper was ready to come up, and I wanted the room
clear. The Captain returned a very rude, impertinent answer, and
put out one of the candles. Sally Hayes seeing this behaviour,
seized a horse-whip, with a long lash, which lay on the chimney-
piece, whipped the Captain round, and round the table, which was
pretty large; and then turned him and his comrades out and locked
the street door. The supper was brought in, the company came down,
and the night was spent in mirth, to which Captain F——'s merry go
round, did not contribute a little.

The very first week of the establishment of the police guard, I
had been at the play and had returned home full dressed, it was
turned of eleven, and I was engaged that night to sup at Mrs.
Hall's, in Johnson's Court, and it being a light night, I thought
I could walk from Pitt-street, it being so short a distance. I
went out with my footman, but had not got out of sight of my own
house, when a police-man came running up to me as hard as he con
trot, and asked where I was going? I answered, what's that to you
where am going? and my servant asked what assurance he had to stop
his mistress. I will let you know that replied, the police-man,
she and you to must come to the watch-house. I asked for what, he
said I should go,—I answered, well my good fellow! Remember you
will pay for this, and advise you to be quiet. The man was
peremptory, so in my way I called at my own house, and got a pair
of coloured shoes, that I might not spoil those I had on. All this
while I reasoned with the man, and assured him he was doing wrong.
No said he, I am doing my duty. Do you know me?—he said he did
not, nor did he care who I was, go I should—Well, my fine fellow,
I replied, I am Peg Plunket, and this is my house, and I don't
think you can have any orders to take me up. But come, let us go
to the watch house, and you shall pay dearly for your conduct. All
this time, I suppose he thought to squeeze half-a-guinea or a
guinea out of me, but he was taken: I went with him to the watch-
house in Aungier-street, and asked the guard there to show me the
best apartment they had; and sent a servant to either Captain
Carleton, or Captain Atkinson, to let them know where was. The two
gentlemen came directly, to my great comfort, who was no very well
pleased with my curious situation, they put me in a chair and sent
me home, and put the fellow who took me into the black-hole. It
being Saturday night, he lay there till Monday, when I attended
and made my complaint, on which he was broke. I then went home and
mounted my horse for a ride, from which when I returned, I found
my police gentleman on his knees at my door, begging I would get
him his bread again. I pitied the poor fellow, bad as he had
behaved, and wrote to Alderman Warren and the rest of the
gentlemen, thanking them for their politeness to me and requesting
they would pardon and restore the man, as I had heartily forgiven
him, which they did.


CHAP. XXI.

There have been Knights, and Lords, and Gentlemen, with their
coaches; I warrant you, coach after coach, letter after letter,
gift after gift, smelling so sweetly, all musk, and so rustling, I
warrant you in silk and gold; and in such elegant terms, and such
wine and sugar of the best, and the fairest, that would have won
any woman's heart.
SHAKESPEARE

I HAVE already mentioned my having entertained a Mr. Cunynghame as
a dangler. He was indeed, a likely young fellow; and having
obtained the commission in the sixty-seventh regiment, which he
expected, became a more respectable attendant on me. His regiment
coming to Dublin Barracks, he was obliged to live there; and
furnishing his apartments in an elegant style to accommodate me,
requested me to come and live there with him. But to do that
entirely did not suit my disposition. However, I compromised the
matter with him, and used to pass four days with him, and three
days at my own house, where I could see what friends I pleased.

Through my connection with this gentleman, I became acquainted
with a Lieutenant W——, of the navy. He, like many other gay
sparks, frequently visited me. One day in particular, he came
about one o'clock in the forenoon. I was then under the hair-
dresser's hands in the dining-parlour, and sat before a very large
looking-glass. My side-board was directly opposite to the glass
and behind my back, but I could see distinctly all around. To my
great surprise and confusion I beheld in the glass, the Lieutenant
go to the side-board, and take two silver table spoons, and some
tea-spoons, and put them into his coat pocket: thinking doubtless,
as my back was towards him that he was not observed. I was so
amazed at such an action, by a gentleman and an officer, that I
really had not power to utter a word; but as he came round to the
middle of the room to speak to me, I looked at him steadfastly,
and my hair being finished, went with him into the other parlour.
Still I could not tell him what I had seen, and in a short time he
departed. I then called to Sally Hayes, told her what had
happened. My gentleman had gone to sell them at a shop in College-
green, where the master knew them to be mine; and having said so,
the lieutenant said I had given them to sell as I wanted money. He
then bought them, but not having sufficient change desired he
would call again. In the meantime, notice being sent around to the
shops, it came out that they were stolen. The shop-keeper then
declared he would stop the officer, when he came for the change;
and could not be mistaken in the man if he even did not call, as
he should know him wherever he met him, being in a uniform totally
different from any in Dublin, and would lodge him in Newgate. Of
course, if he had I must have appeared and prosecuted him. I
directly sent my compliments to the shop-keeper, and requested him
not to stop the officer, for it would cost me much trouble, as I
must inevitably hang him; but not receiving a satisfactory answer,
I went myself to the shop-keeper; told him I had given the spoons,
and would much rather drop the affair, were they even worth ten
times what they were, than hang or transport any man. Indeed, had
I been inclined to prosecute those who robbed me, I might have
sent a hundred of them over the Atlantic long since;—here the
business ended, and I saw my new acquaintance no more.

Whilst I was connected with Mr. Cunynghame, Sally Hayes and I were
invited to dine with a friend of hers in French-street, and we
took Cunynghame with us. We passed the day very cheerfully, but
there happened a great fall of snow, and when it was time to come
home, there was no carriage to be got. However, as we felt no
cold, being tolerably warmed with good wine, we resolved to walk
home. It was pretty late, and we came on kicking the snow before
us, as if we cared for nobody. We had come down about half the
length of the street, when we were met by Counsellor B—y and
another; who said to Cunynghame, you have two ladies, and one is
sufficient for you, you may therefore give me the other. On this a
dispute arose, and they knocked each other down. The officer had
neither sword nor cane, but the counsellor had a sword, which he
drew, and made a push at Cunynghame, which passed a-slant through
his cloth waiscoat, and slightly grazed his breast, but did no
other damage. The captain being enraged, wrenched the sword out of
the counsellor's hand, and broke it in two; and then, with the
assistance of me and Sally Hayes, gave them both a very sufficient
beating. The counsellor called the watch, and I bid Cunynghame set
off for home, and leave us, as by that time we knew each other.
The watch came, and they charged us, and we them. We all stood
above half an hour in the snow, scolding and abusing each other;
till being heartily tired, and growing very cold, we let each off,
and shook hands. Indeed, to give the little counsellor his due, he
behaved in a spirited manner, and called upon me several times to
obtain the captain's address, which I declined giving, as I knew a
duel must have ensued.

When the year expired that kept the regiment on Dublin duty, my
poor Cunynghame was obliged to go to Country Quarters, and was
cantoned about Tralee and Clare Castle. This put an end to my
barrack engagement. He wanted me very much to go with him; but as
his finances were but middling, and nothing but interest, could
have induced me to such a ramble; though he was a fine showy
fellow, I had much rather remain in Dublin, where I knew every
wish could be gratified. I endeavoured to weep, but the tears,
disobedient to my call, refused to come into my eyes. However, I
made some semblance, and he departed fully persuaded of my ardent
affection. He kept up a correspondence with me all that year, from
Tralee or Clare Castle. The next year he came to Cork, to embark
with his regiment for the West-Indies; and I was prevailed upon to
pay him a visit, for about ten days before he sailed. I heard from
him from Barbadoes and St Kitt's, also from London on his return;
and, about seven years since, from Tullamore, where our epistolary
intercourse dropt.


CHAP. XXII.

Another, and another still succeeds
And the last fool as welcome as the former.
ROWE

MY next particular acquaintance was the charming Captain St Leger,
and charming indeed he was, far exceeding all I ever knew. He
visited me very frequently whilst he was in this kingdom. I next
was acquainted with J—— W——, Esq; who was then very young, and had
very little money, but what he had, young as he was, he knew very
well how to keep; for very trifling were my gains from him, though
he was ten times more troublesome, than many gentlemen from whom I
derived ten times the advantage. He would often break my windows,
and pull the rails out of the kitchen stairs, whenever he could
not meet with me at home. I bore with this behaviour for some
time, till meeting him one night in the box-room, I asked him for
money; he replied, he had none for himself; an altercation ensued,
at the end of which, finding I could get no money, I gave him a
severe slap on the cheek, and left him to pay his next debts of
honour better; nor would I receive him ever after.

I still increased in celebrity, and was esteemed the first woman
in Ireland in my line. I was visited by nobles and gentlemen of
the first rank in the kingdom; for it became quite the fashion to
be acquainted with me. Miss Sally Hayes was my constant companion
whilst she lived, and the woman I loved best, as she had a spirit
congenial with my own. But alas! I lost her; for, as I mentioned
before, she contracted some bilious complaints from vexation, at
the loss of a favourite captain who went abroad, which carried her
off.

Though I greatly regretted the loss of poor Sally, it did not
occasion any change in my mode of life. I was ever particularly
fond of music, I engaged Isaacs, the dulcimer player, at fifty
guineas a year to play for me once a week; but after two years, I
found that did not answer; therefore I continued to send for him
when I wanted him, and take my chance of his being disengaged.
Often I had him to parties at all the different outlets round
Dublin, particularly at the Dargle, or the Glen of the Downs. I
used to have my groom, with the dulcimer tied on his back Isaacs
playing on it, and another man on the violin, to play through all
the walks; and when on the road, I had a coach or a gig for them
to play as we went; or sitting on the banks at the Salmon Leap, at
Leixlip, at Carton, or the neighbouring demesnes.

Although in general, my life went on in a circle of amusements,
yet, I sometimes met with very disagreeable adventures. At the
earnest desire of Mr. Henry Monck, I dressed myself in his
uniform, and went in it to the Rotunda. I was there accosted by an
officer of the name of Hunt, with How are you, Peg. I thought that
salutation as very unmannerly, walked on and made no reply. He
still kept following me, and calling me Peg, and being piqued at
my not vouchsafing to speak to him, he asked me aloud, how I dared
to wear an uniform, and threatened to pull it off my back. Much
chagrined, I left the room, and resolving to have satisfaction for
the rude and unmanly affront, I wrote an account of the treatment
I had received, and sent it next morning to the committee of
officers. They took it into consideration, and thought it so
ungentleman-like, that a court-martial was held on him, and he was
dismissed from the corps. This disgrace had such an effect on Mr.
Hunt, that he died a few weeks after.

A little before Sally Hayes died, a set of young officers, the
Captains Boyle, Hanger, Freemantle, Monck, Cradock and M'Guire,
paid a visit at my house. Not finding me at home (as I was then at
the barrack) they made a great riot in the street; they wanted to
get in but got no admittance, they then broke every window in my
drawing-room, not leaving a single pane of glass whole. Luckily it
was just daylight, or Sally Hayes would not have been able to
recognise them; but she knew them all and would not admit one of
them. The next morning, she came to me to the barracks, and told
me the whole affair, and the treatment of those Castle heroes. I
sent for an attorney, and lodged examinations against them all but
Captain Boyle, as he was a kind of favourite with Sally and me,
which saved him from the scandal that fell upon the rest. The
bills were all found, and then I had incessant visits from their
friends, to beg I would not bring them to trial. I, at last,
forgave them on each coming down handsomely, and paying my
attorney, and all the charges.


CHAP. XXIII.

Letters bear witness of their writers' minds
Display their Talents, and, show forth their Taste
Or set their Ignorance to public view.

IT HAS FREQUENTLY BEEN SAID, that the mind and genius of persons,
are better displayed in their letters than by any other means. I
have already mentioned the long epistolary correspondence, I had
with three gentlemen, Mr. Lawless, my dear Bob Gorman, and Mr.
Cunynghame. Therefore to vary the scene, that I may not be
constantly speaking of myself, and that my readers may themselves
judge of the literary abilities of those gentlemen, and not merely
from my report, I shall lay before them a few letters from each.

My adventures with Mr. Lawless are well known, by what I have
already related. And his neglect, with his treachery to me—the
following came from London, and was written in a great Pet.

"On my coming to town from the Bath, I found your letter, and must
acknowledge on reflection, am not surprised at such a one from you,
I now only regret I was so sincere and ingenuous with one (though I
ought ere now to have known you sufficiently,) who possesses so
vile a heart. I did not for some days past, think I should trouble
myself, with condescending to write a single line in answer to such
an epistle; however, as it is to be the last, you see I am quite
agreeable to your determination. I shall only say, any thinking
person in a like situation, would have been obliged to me; but you,
ever different from your sex, must now doubtless, ever continue so.
On the subject you have been pleased to write, I have only to add,
I never entertained the smallest partiality for that person,
neither did I see her for full three months before I left Dublin.
That part of your letter alluding to regard, &c. I just think as
much of, as I am confident it really merits: I am not at this time
of day, to be imposed on so; and as to your behaviour on the
occasion, I shall think no more on it, but that I should have been
glad ( if possible,) in one instance only, you could have kept your
promise. As to your disposal of the other, certainly, as you may
think proper, my motive for wishing for that one was, merely owing
to the regard I once thought you entitled to from me, be assured
not any late merit; for that, though you have had confidence enough
to write and persist in the contrary, I am well and fully satisfied
of. As to your resolutions and determinations, I shall not say a
syllable, but leave you to your own choice entirely, as I should
not wish to be a means of making any individual unhappy on my
account; and as to your two last insinuations, I equally despise,
as I do the assertions falsely thrown out, either by you or any
lying informant: not that I think it necessary or incumbent on me,
on that head, to say a word. And now Madam, though I shall not
conclude in the like style you are pleased. I shall, let your
residence be where it may, wish you all happiness, confident, that
on my part (in reality) I have not in the least injured it.

"1st September.—I dare say, you may make up your mind, about any
dissatisfaction you have in meeting me here, as I hope not to be in
the way of being so disgustful to you. So much for your future
happiness when here. Adieu, since it is the last, and must be for
ever."

Meeting with a very smart answer, he wrote the following, striving
to varnish over his conduct.

"My dear Peggy,

"This day I received your last, as to the former, I think you need
not have expected an answer to. Had you given yourself a moment's
reflection, I am confident you must be sensible I did not merit
such a one from you, for mine was far from meaning to offend you,
though I find you very wrongfully took it in that light.

"I assure you it hurts me as much, as it nearly can you, your
frequent reflections of an affair, that each time I hear of, makes
me hateful to myself; however, after my candid declarations to you,
it is not only unkind, but highly ungenerous in you, to upbraid me
with what I now regret from my soul; and be assured my dear Peggy,
few as my connections were, that what you allege against me,
respecting that Sunday night, is the most unjust insinuation you
could harbour, as I carefully avoided her, some considerable time
before; after all I have said to you already on this (I cannot
avoid terming it unfortunate and unlucky,) subject, yet, still I
could from my heart wish, you would think no more on it, as rely on
it my dear Peggy, you never had more reason in your life, to think
lightly of a matter of the kind, than you have of that, as there is
nothing you should think less serious of, for every reason
whatsoever; so I could wish most strenuously as you ought, you
would never more think about it.

"In answer to your observation of being, and writing treacherously
to me, I shall only say, to a certainty in my own defence, what
long before you knew, or had the excuse you have latterly taken the
advantage of. You are in your soul sensible, you gave me every
reason to entertain that opinion of you, from the equivocating
manner in which you wrote, and answered my letters. I do not wish
to particularise, I know you must, and are conscious of it, and
that, I think, is too sufficient, not to enlarge further upon it.—I
should be sorry, my dear Peggy, you could suppose I wished to write
anything merely to hurt or distress you; my thoughts on that head,
were no such intention, it was only owing to your conduct towards
me, and writing in the manner you did (after the first or second
letter I had,) since I saw you, and all that, a long time before
you had the excuse you so dwelt on lately. Damn the cause of the
poor excuse, I wish most heartily I had never known it. But you are
doubly ungenerous in saying, I never debarred myself a moment's
pleasure on your account, as that I look upon the height of
ingratitude for you now to affirm, as you then had acknowledgment
enough to own. I constantly gave up my time to you solely, but
that, as well as everything else, you seem to wish to forget.—As to
my being in Dublin, staying there or elsewhere, I am now fully
convinced, can be no object to you. Dublin has ever hitherto, been
a place I could not propose any real satisfaction in, this you must
be satisfied of as I am, from not only the people I had immediately
to deal with, but also the busy inquisitives at large. My affairs
here, since my being in this quarter, has been considerably injured
by my last stay in Ireland. I once thought I had a friend, at least
in my dearest Peggy, that I might confide in, but that is now over,
so shall not attempt a relation of matters, that cannot touch or
affect any individual whatsoever, at least where I might expect it
would; and now be assured my dear Peggy, you are the last I would
trouble about my affairs or disappointments.

"Great as you term this place, and as it really is, yet, I do not
know that I ever had less satisfaction in the most obscure, or that
I ever had more anxiety, distress, or uneasiness of mind, than I
just now feel. The person you mention having your intelligence
from, respecting me, I cannot conceive from what view he could
frame such a falsehood, as I never either knew or heard of such a
person, much more what you relate: perhaps he found your weak side,
and thought it would answer him some private end, I do not know any
other construction to put on it; you know best now whether it was
so or not, for most solemnly I can assure you, I neither knew him,
or any such person as he endeavoured to make you believe I might
have been connected with, which so help me God, I am not, nor any
other whatsoever.

"From the last letter you thought proper to write to me, I expected
nothing less, than what you have now said, about the paltry
stockings; but had I really been as you observe, with some dear
girl, let me assure my dear Margaret, that should be no
preventative, which, to the contrary of any such intention, I never
entertained one single idea of the kind, since I saw you.

"And now, my dear Peggy, let me with equal pleasure inform you, it
is equally disagreeable to me; and I dare venture to say, much more
so, to have been obliged to keep up the very disagreeable style,
some time past subsisting between us; but so far from wishing to
add to your mind's distress, believe me, my dear Peggy, it would on
the contrary, add to my happiness considerably, to render it every
ease in my power, however different you may wrongfully suppose. It
concerns me not a little, your relation of your frequent fits of
illness; however, it must be some consolation to you for the loss
of poor dear little Sally, as you say, whenever you are afflicted
in the manner you mention, you have one with you, who alleviates
your pain and anxiety. Whether you mentioned that by way of causing
me uneasiness, I shall not take upon me to say; but this I must say
Peggy, with truth and sincerity, nothing would distress me more,
than to find you stood in need of a friend and not have one. May
you never want that, or any other attention, which can afford you
the satisfaction you wish for, which is, and ever shall be, most
fervently the wish of him, who remains with warmest esteem, my dear
Peggy's, truly sincere.

"PS Wednesday 10th, the day after the Lord Mayor's great day here,
which in reality is to me a mere nothing. I thank you for your last
intelligence, should you hear anything more particular, will thank
you to let me know, or anything new in your quarter from you, will
be acceptable. My regards (if you please) to all friends. I hope
you will not misconstrue, or be offended at anything in this
scroll.

"The time now grows short, but my good people not letting me have
the command of some of my money, has hurt me much, as I might by
that means, have had a decent certainty by this time. Adieu my
dearest Peggy, I suppose I have tired out your patience. May you
however, be easy and happy, though I cannot.

"Shall I hear from you immediately, and in what manner, but will
wait with expectation, so say no more for the present. I think your
two last seals, were by no means so neat as your cypher.

This was not his usual mode of writing. Whilst I was straining
every nerve to serve him, and sending him every assistance in my
power, before I went to him to London his style was different; as
may be seen by the annexed letter, the last of his that I shall
quote.

"My dear Peggy,

"I entreat your excuse for not hearing from me long ere this, in
answer to yours of the 10th, which has been occasioned only, by my
absence from town, since a few days after I last wrote you; your
letter has been laying ten days for me, but did not expect any, as
you delayed so much longer than your usual time of answering me.

"I shall not take upon me to say, how much I am obliged to you and
Mrs. Netterville, for both your good intentions, and most friendly
dispositions to serve me; and if either or both, can succeed, shall
ever acknowledge, a true and sincere sense of obligation in return.

"I assure you, I could not have the smallest objection, to the mode
or manner of application, you have desired and recommended me. At
the same time, should be exceedingly sorry, if Mrs. Netterville,
would harbour a single thought, that my declining it, proceeded
from a want of either the highest respect, or most sincere regard
and esteem. My only motive being, merely a matter of delicacy on
such private affairs, the consequence of a third person knowing
on't, might possibly turn out rather prejudicial than serviceable;
therefore, have no doubt, she and you will use all your friendly
exertions, in my favour and behalf. I request your preferring her
my sincere acknowledgments, and best wishes.

"And now, my dear Peggy, I hope in the course of ten days from this
time, to be enabled, with that gratefulness I sincerely and justly
owe you in return, for your friendship and good nature, to repay
the different obligations I have lately experienced from your
hands; and which, I hope most strenuously, has not been attended
with any degree of inconvenience to you.

"It gives me infinite satisfaction to hear you are likely to
recover, what I am thoroughly sensible, is nothing more than your
just right, and that you may be successful is my most ardent wish:
it also affords me not a little pleasure, to find you have those
different miscreants you mention, so much in dread and awe of you.
May you ever have it in your power to keep such reptiles, at a
distance and defiance. I wonder you have never mentioned Mrs.
Dixon, since I wrote you about her son; I hope she and all friends
are well, to whom request you will kindly remember me, to Sally in
particular, whom I am apprehensive, has very unjustly considered me
in a different light from what I ever deserved; for, be assured, I
entertain the same sincere esteem I ever have done for her.

"Adieu, my dear Peggy, and hope immediately on receipt hereof, to
have the pleasure of hearing from you, remaining with gratitude,
most sincerely yours,

"J. LAWLESS

"Monday, 28th Feb.—Great news confirmed this day, of Admiral
Rodney's success, but that my dear Margaret, delights not you, nor
woman neither. I would have been this night at the play, to see
their majesties, but declined it, for this pleasure in writing
you.—Once more adieu, God bless you. 10 o'clock.

"I thought it was better for me to agree to my good peoples'
desire, than now to begin another twelve, or, I should have said,
fourteen years variance with them, though it is at the same time,
very hard on me at this juncture."

I now proceed to some of my dear Bob's letters; whose absence I
always deplored, who was faithful to me, and never merited my
resentment.

The following is the first I received from London, and is at once
a testimony of our mutual affection, and the honour he always
possessed.

"London, Sunday 12th April, 1783.
My adorable Peggy,

"I had this day, the happiness of receiving your two letters; and
my love, I have been neither able to speak eat, or drink since I
saw them; as the idea of your being unhappy on my account, makes me
miserable, my love. With respect to your coming to see me, it would
be the height of madness, as everyone would conjecture you left
Dublin for that purpose; it may, I believe, be possible for some to
have an idea, but it must be a faint one, of the feelings of my
heart, at being torn from you, but it was unavoidable. I can never
express my gratitude, for your offers of extricating me; but my
dearest love, I could not clear myself in Dublin, for less than
seven hundred; and if that were even paid, I could never bear the
idea of living in the style I would be obliged to do, considering
the manner I have existed; added to this, I should have been
obliged to give you up as one of the first preliminaries: to be
obliged to live there without seeing each other, would be a
thousand times worse to us both, than even being separated.
Besides, my life! though fortune has frowned on me for some time,
she may in a little time begin to smile on me, as my darling Peggy
has so often done; so that we must hope for the best, but prepare
for the worst. I am to be in the East India Company's service, as
that is what I am advised to in preference of the King's. I shall
go to India either with the commander in chief, or with a
particular friend of mine, who has been there many years. I shall
go with the first introduction, so that it will be my own fault if
I do not get forward; and I hope I shall always be capable of doing
my duty. The army I believe you know was always my passion, and the
Indies is the place of all other, that every military man is
pushing for. So that I have every prospect not of subsisting as a
gentleman, but of getting a fortune, which I some day or other,
though remote, will hope to lay at your feet, when you have forgot
that there was such a one as little Bob. My picture you shall have
by the first opportunity, as I shall begin to sit for it to-morrow.
I only regret, that I am not able to send you some more valuable
token; but, my Peggy, I am sure will take the will for the deed. If
I should be able to suggest any probable method of your seeing me
before my departure, I shall let you know; but I hope you will give
up thoughts of it, as the seeing me for a few days, would only
revive the uneasiness that I have been the unfortunate cause of to
you. If I am a gentleman I love you, or may I be branded with every
infamy, says

"BOB"

After receiving many other letters, I went to him, as I mentioned
before, but at length, we were forced to part, and he sailed. He
wrote the following letter from Madeira.

"Eurydice, at Sea, Wednesday
"15th October, 1783.
"My heavenly delight,

"I had the happiness of your letter, dated Michaelmas day, on
Friday last. About an hour before we sailed, I went on shore in
hopes of getting a line from your pretty hand, and if I had been
half an hour later, should have lost my passage; but my love prayed
for me, and I saved it. I really don't know what I should have done
if the ship had sailed without me, everything I had on earth was in
her but five shillings. We have been fortunate for so far, as we
have got as far in five days as other ships have been five weeks
going. We have got clear out of the bay of Biscay, and are about 
six hundred miles from England without any accident, except the
springing of a leak, which did not prove dangerous, and was soon
repaired. I think myself remarkably lucky that this ship has
sailed, as I must undoubtedly have been put to extremity, had I
been obliged to have gone in an Indiaman; for, my love, I had but
fifty pounds, leaving England, after laying in provisions for my
passage. I would not let you know this before I sailed, lest you
might distress yourself for me, as I know the goodness of your
heart so well, that you would do anything sooner than have me
distressed. But now, my love, I hope there is no danger of that,
and that I may live to make you happy. The sea has been very rough
since we left Spithead, and I seize this moment, which is the only
calm we have had to write to my sweet Peggy. Welcome, I need not
say your letter was to me, but God knows when I shall get another;
and yet, I must be content, and wait with patience. I should have
began to answer your letter, my love, before this, but the sea has
run so high, that it was almost impossible either to sit or stand.
You see, my life, how uncertain our stay was, when once the orders
arrived; for, though we did not expect to sail before Sunday at
soonest, we sailed on Friday. I am happy to hear that you at last
wore my picture, as you longed for it so much, it must I am sure,
have been set with infinite taste and elegance, when it was your
fancy. I wear your picture the whole day; and when I go to bed I
have it under my head, lest the heat of my hand should disfigure
your lovely face. I now come to the part of your letter, where you
say it distresses you reading my letter, and saying, farewell my
Bob. Judge then, my delight, what my distress must be when I
reflect, that every hour (even now that I am writing to you,) takes
me ten miles farther from the idol of my soul. You kissed my
picture, so have I yours heavens knows every day, nay every hour,
since I left you, and shall till I see you again, let that be when
or where it will. Bless you, my love, and protect you, my returning
to Dublin is quite out of the question, at least for some time. As
to their mentioning me at home, I am perfectly easy about it. My
brother I believe loves me, and I imagine the rest does so too, but
I hope I shall be able to live without any of them. I can see but
little variety, you may judge at present, nothing but sea and ship;
the same faces every day; the climate is perceptibly warmer
already, we expect to reach Madeira in a week more.

"Madeira, 24th October.—We arrived here the 22d, without any
accident, after a rough sea; you recollect Jones, the purser of the
Race Horse, at Spithead, that we dined with, and that you gave the
garters to, his ship was here before us; whenever he heard I was
come, he sent a boat for me and introduced me to the principal
people of the town, and brought me to dine with one of the first
people the day I landed. We shall leave this on Sunday, for the
Cape of Good Hope, I can tell you but little about this island, as
I have been but one day on shore: it consists chiefly of friars and
nuns, with a number of English, Irish, and Scotch merchants; the
people are very hospitable, but miserably poor. They make very
pretty flowers, I wish I could send you some of them, as I think
they would please you. I should attempt it, if I thought there was
a likelihood of your getting them safe, but I fear that is out of
the question. The Tabbinet did not arrive before I left Gosport; I
desired Mrs. G——, to forward it by an India ship, if it should come
to her house. You recollect Brown's direction. If you love me,
which I have no doubt of, you will write to me by the first
opportunity: if you do not find the method of sending your letters
from Dublin, enclose them to Brown, he will take care of them, and
inform you how to forward them after he leaves England. Jones, and
Wallace the surgeon, desire to be remembered to you affectionately.
May every happiness that can attend a human being, attend you, my
love! says one, who dotes on you, my heavenly Peggy. The people
here said I was Frenchman. I had on my painted stuff waistcoat, and
a long sword: everyone here wear swords, so you may guess I would
not be out of the fashion. In fact, it would be unsafe to walk in
this place unarmed. I must conclude, my love, as the ship that
carries this, sails to-morrow, and I must send it immediately.
Bless you once more, and make you as happy, as I shall be wretched
till we meet, says

"R. J. G.

"Remember me affectionately to Sally, Mrs. Hall, Miss Love, &c.
M'Dermott and Burroughs.

"Present my compliments to Mrs. Pearson. I hope to deliver her
letter to her son in less than four months. I shall write to you
the first land I see, and frequently on my passage. Adieu,
farewell, not for ever I hope."

He wrote next from the Cape of Good Hope, December 25, 1783; and
when he got to Madras, he sent the following, which I insert for
the sake of his travelling observations, which may be amusing to
many of my readers.

"Madras, 14th March, 1784.
"My heavenly darling,

"We arrived here the 9th, after a very tolerable passage, at least
it was more so to me infinitely than I expected on sailing. The
weather at one time intolerably hot, at another freezingly cold. I
had the good fortune of being liked by the officers and passengers,
which made me much more comfortable than I could possibly have
been; for, with every comfort and convenience, very few of which I
had, five months at sea, is very trying to one who has never before
been accustomed to it: though I assure my love, I had the character
of being more composed in every vicissitude, than any except the
downright seamen. However, I think I have got a knowledge of the
world, by spending so much time at sea, that I would not want for a
great deal. You may compare being at sea, to being shut up with a
number of people in a house, without having any intercourse with
the rest of the world, nor any resource, but what you have had the
caution to provide.

"I stayed four days at Madeira, where I met Jones the purser, and
Wallace the surgeon, that we dined with at Portsmouth, they were
very civil to me, and introduced me to several people of
consequence in the island. Madeira is the place that the famous
wine of that name comes from. It is inhabited chiefly by
Portuguese, they are of a sallow complexion, very poor and very
lazy; the lower class are almost black, the women I think are very
ordinary but sprightly, and have fine clear voices. It is a
beautiful island to look at, and abounds in fruit of all kinds. The
English merchants are particularly hospitable to strangers. From
thence we went to the Cape of Good Hope, nothing very particular
happened in our passage; we had it very cold for some time, colder
infinitely than I ever felt it before. When we got on the coast of
Africa, the heat was almost intolerable, directly under the sun, at
one time incessant rain, the next hour broiling heat; which
exhausted the most robust constitutions amongst us. I believe you
know mine is not the most delicate. I have not been ill a day, my
love, since you had the trouble of nursing me at Portsmouth Common.
I hope I may be equally fortunate in India, the European officers
complain much of the climate, but I think they want spirits only.
The soldiers here to be sure, earn their bread harder than any
profession whatsoever; however, it is the most honourable, and they
are often rewarded for their services. The regiment which I
intended to have gone into was the 36th, it has lost a number of
men, though they have only been six months in the country; yet,
subalterns have shared two hundred pounds in taking one fort.
Before I made this digression, I had mentioned the Cape of Good
Hope, it is inhabited by Dutch, but was taken in this war by the
French, and the French troops remain in possession of it until the
ransom is paid, which the Dutch are unwilling to pay; they are fond
of the English, and treated us tolerably well. I had the good
fortune of meeting two acquaintances there, that I had known
formerly in Scotland, which was some little satisfaction to me, as
I could dine and sleep with them occasionally. There is not such a
thing as a tavern in the whole town. The Dutch are tolerably
hospitable, but amazingly fond of money. I was well received, being
introduced by gentlemen who had been there before, had been out to
India, and were returning home. Would to Heaven, it were my fate,
to be returning or going anywhere, where I might be blessed with a
sight of you; but the fates have decreed it otherwise. I had the
misfortune of losing a friend at the Cape, he was unluckily shot in
a duel; though he had my own pistols, and shot his antagonist
through the belly. He was a young man, astonishingly well
recommended, called to the bar, and going to practice in India:
but, what distressed me most to think of, was his having a wife. I
wrote you two letters from the Cape, which I hope you have
received, I would have written to you as you desired on the
passage, but there was no possibility of every being a moment alone
on board; this, and the constant rolling of the ship, was the only
thing that could possibly have deprived me of the delight of
conversing with you, as writing to you is the only substitute I can
have for speaking to you. I wrote you one letter, between the Cape
and Madras, which I sent by a ship we met at sea, bound to France,
but I fear you have not received it. The only gratification this
world can afford me next to seeing you, is writing to you, or
thinking of you. I shall now, my love, endeavour to give you some
little idea of India, though you will perceive I have only been
here five days. The natives of the country are all black, the
better sort of the men wear a muslin gown, plaited tight about
their waists, a sash round the waist, and a large quantity of
muslin, rolled about their heads: the inferior class seldom wear
anything, except what decency requires, over a particular part.
Their women have little or no covering more than men, they load
their toes and fingers, with a great quantity of paltry rings, and
often have plates of silver round their ankles and wrists, rings
through their noses and ears; and their hair, which is quite black,
stuck with flowers. This, you will say, is a curious manner of
ornamenting: at first, I pitied their ignorance, but saw them so
perfectly well pleased with themselves, that I could not help
laughing at them; they are very neatly formed, and by far the most
active people I ever saw, very delicately made. They have no other
idea, but being in some degree dependant on the English, and many
people without large incomes, have fifty servants; indeed, it is
impossible to keep the worst house, with less than ten; you may
hire them at about eight shillings a month without diet; and yet, I
would rather have two real English servants, than ten of them; but
that is impossible, for if you have white servants, you must have
blacks to attend them: every private soldier in the horse, has two
blacks to take care of his horse only. The country is beautiful
about Madras, but everything intolerably dear, eight shillings for
a bottle of white wine, and twelve for claret; provisions in
proportion, owing to the war, which was carried so far as the
skirts of the town. I have been rather unfortunate in not meeting
one of the gentlemen here, to whom I was recommended, except
General Burgoyne, and he is under an arrest. As I hear, that
several of them are gone to Bombay, I hope that my meeting them
there, will make amends for my missing them here. The horses here
are very pretty, all with long tails, and amazingly sprightly.
There are but few white women in India, but these few are paid the
greatest respect to. There is seldom an instance of any woman
tolerably handsome, coming out here that is not greatly provided
for. I wonder a number of our country women, with small fortunes,
do not try their luck. Could you, my love, live in India amongst
blacks, I think you said, you could live anywhere with me; but my
darling, the passage is the disagreeable part, yet, I would ask
you, if I had anything to support you, as soon as I have you shall
know it. I am sure, let what will happen, you can never want; but,
my love, as you value me, be careful of your constitution, as
health is the only thing that can ensure happiness. I have been
particularly careful of myself. I shall sail for Bombay in four
days, where I hope to arrive in about a month. As I go in the
Eurydice, I shall be much more comfortable than I was coming out.
All the passengers left her except me, and I mess very comfortably
with the Lieutenants. Captain Courtnay, who commands, is a fine
dashing young fellow, very fond of me, and is an old companion of
Captain Packenham's, who, I have heard you speak of. Should
anything happen at home, by which I should be able to exist, I
believe I shall return home to you, my love; but that I fear is
very remote, if it should happen at all. I am therefore, determined
to take hold of every opportunity, where it is possible that
anything can be made. I cannot give you any information respecting
myself. I hope from the number of officers that have fallen, I
shall have some rank, and of course, may have an opportunity of
doing something. I wish you could see the dress I am sitting in, as
I am sure you would like it; a white waistcoat, with sleeves, edged
with red; long breeches to my slippers, which are of white linen,
bound with red; and a straw hat, the crown covered with muslin, and
adorned with the feathers you gave me, which I shall never part
with, but with my life: not a dust of powder in my hair. I am I
think, rather fatter than I was when I left you, from being more
confined than I was accustomed to before: I am browner in my
complexion, occasioned by the heat. I shall soon hope to see Mrs.
Dixon and Mrs. Pearson's sons, as soon as I do you shall hear from
me. I shall hope for a letter from you, by the first ship. Remember
me to Mrs. Dixon, Mrs. Pearson, Mrs. Hall, Sally Ashmore, Betty
Love, Nancy Wimms. Don't forget me to Nelly Palliser, I hope she
has met with every success, as I think she deserves it. If I omit
anyone, I beg you will remember me to them, as you know I don't
mean it.—Remember me in the warmest manner to poor Perry, John
Burroughs, if he does not forget me, tell him I shall write to him
when I reach Bombay. Heatly has my best wishes: I think if he
leaves the thirty-second, he should come to India. Tell M'Dermott,
I hope to drink some bottles with him in old England yet. For God's
sake, mention me to James, my old servant, let him know I don't
forget him, and hope to see him yet.—I wish I could send you
something from this country, as I know how welcome it would be to
you, but there are so many chances against your receiving it at
present, it almost discourages me from making the attempt. However,
I shall try it as soon as I have found out the safest method of
conveyance: the corded muslin is beautiful, how I long that you
should get some of it for short dresses. Direct to me when you
write, to the care of Lieutenant Pearson, Bombay, as I shall leave
my direction with him in case of my removal. As I have some idea of
going to Bengal, which would be much more advantageous to me.

"Remember me to Fitzgerald, say everything that your good nature
will suggest of me, to those who enquire about me: I hope that none
of the mechanics will lose by me, as I despise the idea. I gave an
exact list of every shilling I owed, to my brother, which I have
every reason to believe, he will pay as soon as he can, in case I
should not return. I must now my heavenly comfort, conclude, with
wishing you every satisfaction this world can afford, and offering
my prayers for your safety. Adieu! Adieu!

"Adieu (thou idol of my soul!) though not for ever, I hope
	"ROBT J. GORMAN

"I am sorry to inform you my love, that Captain Eames, Mrs. Dixon's
son, was taken prisoner with General Mathews, and that they have
not been heard of. They are supposed to have been poisoned, with
many others; but certain it is, that they are no more. I shall make
every exertion in my power, when I arrive at Bombay, to know the
state of his affairs, and to represent his mother's situation in
the most lively colours, in order that she may receive some relief.
I beg you will remember me affectionately to her. May you be as
happy as I shall be wretched, till I once again behold you: think
of the distance between us, eighteen thousand miles; and then say,
whether the idea of my lovely Peggy, can ever be erased from the
mind of her faithful, and ever doting,

"BOB"

All his other letters I omit, as however delightful they were to
me, they may not be so to my readers.

I now come to the third of my correspondents, whose letters were
widely different from those of the others, in both style and
subject. They fully demonstrate that those who are conscious of
handsome persons, generally pay but little attention to the
improvement of their minds; they ornament the outsides of their
heads, regardless of what ought to be therein, and their epistles,
like their discourse, are generally confined to superficial small
talk; a confusion of ideas, and a polite neglect of grammar, or
even spelling. But let the gentleman speak for himself.

"My lovely Leeson,

"I hope you'll not take it ill, for my not calling to you to-day, I
assure you, my dear Leeson, it was not for the want of affection,
but partly owing to a could, I got last night. I must compute it to
my going out last night without a surtoot, it effects me with pains
in my bones, and my limbs rather stiff. I intend to take a bath to-
night, and I'll be able to see you to-morrow, if not, you may
depend I will write. Nothing my dear Leeson, would have prevented
me calling to-day, if it had not been for my indisposition; and I
am sure, when I tell you, I have been unwell, you'll not be angry
with me. But my dear Leeson, when I think of the coolness, you
treated me with last night, and sending a letter to Mr. Barret,
without ever enquiring for me; if I had ever such an inclination to
call to you, that ought to have prevented me; but Hove you too
much, to think such a thing, would prevent me calling to one, I
love as I do you.
"I am, dear Leeson, yours,
loveing and sincerely.
S.L. C——M."

"My dear Leeson,

"There is not a more distressed or troubled man in the world, than
I am at present; and particularly so, if I thought I treated you
ill; and am sure, when I tell you the reason of my absence, you
will not blame me. Part of the money I got for my exchange, I lost
at hazard; and to complete my misfortunes, I saw the gentleman I
lost the money to, at Tralee; he and I had some disagreeable words,
but there it ended. Mr. Warren and I went to the country, to see if
we could rise the money I lost: fortunately we got it sooner than I
expected, which was the occation of my coming Monday, instead of
Tuesday. The reason of my not going to you last night, I will tell
you to-night. I hope you will not imagin I have used you ill, as I
assure you, on my honour, you would be the last person in the
world, I would offend. There is only one sitting for my picture,
and you may expect to see it tomorrow."

Out of a multitude of his other letters, from different quarters
in Ireland, and from the West Indes, I shall lay two before the
readers, which I have selected for the singularity of their style
and contents.
"Mary Borough, June 11, 1784.
"Dear Leeson,

"The morning I parted with you, I went to Neace, and stead there
that night, the next day we marched to Kildare, and was time enough
to see the Rases: in the evening, I was in company with K——h, O'R——
y, and Tomy N——t, about ten o'clock I took my leave of them and
went to bed; the next morning, we got up at three, and marched for
Mary-borough, where we halt a day, and intend to go Rossgray to-
morrow. There is no one of our party but Captain W——, T——y B——r and
I, and assure you Toby, speaks very well of you, and we drink your
health every day, after dinner out of tumblers, and assure you we
don't forget Sally Hays.

"My dear Leeson, I am sure I wile never forget your goodness to me,
and if I never loved you, I am sure your good-natur and generosity
most have made me love you, and I never loved you so much as I did
lotterly. I have not time to say any more, as I am called to
dinner, only to give my best respects to Sally Hays and Nancy Wems;
you will heare from me as soon as possible, untile then far wele.
"I am, my dear Leeson
your's sincerely.
S. L. C——M."

"I received a very extraordinary letter from Dublin, that followed
me here, and would not suppose you to be the author, had I not
known your hand. As to the epithets you were so good as to annex to
my name, such lyeng rascel, &c. I only laughed at; as I supposed
jelousy to be the cause of it.

"And have you mistaken me so much? Why, I defy you, the whole
world, and the power of calumny, to point out one instance, when my
character could be impeached, or even called in question. I would
tare my heart-strings by the very root, before I would do anything
mean or low, or act contrary to a man of strict principal and
honour. And you charge me with everything bad.

"Fifty pounds a night is the great mystery. Instead of venting your
spite on me, you ought to revenge yourself on the person, who
wanted to bring you and I at variance. I assure you Leeson, if I
had a sum of money to spare, I don't know any woman more deserving
of it than you; or, is there any woman on earth, should have it
before you. If it is any satisfaction for you, to know I keep a
woman, I do? As for my having a connection with one woman more than
another, I have not by G——d, and I believe never will. Therefore,
you need not expect that I would be constant, to the finest woman
in the universe.

"If you inform me, who the woman is that you say, I wished so much
money on, you will oblige me particularly; for, upon my honour, I
am a stranger to her, and you may rely on it; if any woman was to
get a sum of money from me, it would be you. The reason I write to
you on the subject is, that you may prevent any such report. The
person that propagated such a one, must be the most infamous of all
assassins, to attack me in such a mean cowardly manner. And, if
such report should take place, I might be injured very materially,
for reason I don't choose to mention. Upon my honour, it is as
false as the perfidious wretch, that promulged it. And if I hear
any more of it, I will prosecute him or her for defamation.
"I am, dear Leeson,
Your's truly.
L—C—M.
Heathlawn,
Eyrecourt."


CHAP. XXIV.

As in their faces, so in mind and heart,
Men differ from each other—few alike.
BEN JOHNSON

I WOULD now resume my narrative, but for some few years there was
an entire sameness in my way of life; the change of which, will be
the subject of my next volume: The remainder of this will be
occupied with a set of anecdotes, which have no absolute
connection with each other, though singularly amusing.

I had formed an acquaintance with Lord G——d, son of a noble Earl,
he called on me one evening, in company with a noted attorney
(who, at that time had the management of my Lord's family affairs
in his hands, had since got into Parliament, and very lately paid
an intrusive visit to the dominions of Neptune, whence he never
returned alive.) His lordship complained he was very thirsty, and
desired I would send for a pot of porter. It was brought and they
both drank of it. When they were going Lord G——, threw a guinea on
the table, and desired the attorney to put down another. He
replied, "Not I indeed, my Lord! I think your guinea is sufficient
to pay for fifty pots of porter! What! two guineas for a pot of
porter! I have not such a fortune as you have, to throw away my
guineas in such a way."—Why M—l, said my Lord, I thought you would
give five guineas for sitting in that lady's company. But I 
suppose you have no change about you. Come, come, I'll pay one for
you—which he did. His lordship went away laughing, and the man of
the law scolding, muttering, and grumbling as he went along.

What a contrast between the two. The one sordid and mean, the
other noble and generous. Many pleasing parties have I had with
his lordship, Captain M——ws, and young D——d L——, who all
frequently visited me. Young D—— indeed, used generally to employ
the time he was at my house, in admiring himself in my large
looking-glass. He would contemplate his person with a great degree
of complacency and self-approbation, then would turn round to me,
cut three or four capers, and cry out,—"Well Leeson, ar'n't I a
damn'd handsome fine fellow?'— Whatever I thought, it was my
business to praise him, in order to coax him out of something
genteel, and therefore, my constant reply was, that there was not
a handsomer man in town; nor in my opinion a finer dancer.

One of the drollest characters I ever knew, was a gentleman who
lived not far from the Linen-hall. He was a mean looking ugly old
fellow, and the dirtiest wretch I ever sat in company with. He was
one of my danglers for a time, but had no chance of pleasing me.
He teased me to leave my house, and he would take a very elegant
one for me, and settle one hundred pounds a year upon me for life.
I coaxed him and fed him up with hopes till he gave me the first
year's allowance in advance; and then told him I would give him a
definite answer in three days. The interval seemed tedious to him,
and he came to me at the expiration of it. I then told him, that
he could doubtless get ladies enough, but as for me, I was too
fond of a public life, to bear confinement. I thanked him for the
hundred pounds he had so generously given me, to buy a horse,
which I would certainly do. I would use the beast well, for his
sake, and the first time I mounted it I would ride by his door,
that he might see, that his present was not ill bestowed.

A little before Sally Hayes died; I was called into the parlour to
a handsome young lad of about seventeen or eighteen years. We had
a short conversation, but he would not tell me who he was. I went
into the next room where Sally, and Mrs. Hall sat, and desired one
of them would go and know who and what he was. Mrs. Hall went to
him, but returned back no wiser than she was before. Sally then
went, saying she should soon know him, if he was anybody worth
knowing; but she could not make him out. I then approached him,
and said, Sir, I have not the pleasure of knowing you, nor can
either of the ladies I sent in. I therefore must wish you a good
night; and desire whenever you shall do me the favour of another
visit, that you will bring some gentleman with whom I am
acquainted to introduce you, for I never admit any strangers
unless they are properly recommended. This seemed to displease him
very much: he danced about the room, and pulling out a handful of
guineas which he threw on the sofa (but I must observe, he threw
them where he could easily pick them up again; which he did,
without leaving a loose one for the servants) asking me if I did
not think he was a gentleman. I answered, I could not tell whether
he was or not—What, said he, does not my appearance look like one?
I replied, why really, Sir, your scarlet frock, in my opinion,
seems rather against you; as, I assure you when I first came into
the parlour, I took you for some English flashman, such as the
ladies in London have about them. They are commonly hair-dressers,
or waiters, dressed every Sunday in just such another frock and
small clothes, as you have on now My gentleman now became like a
madman. He gave me half a score hearty curses, calling me every
opprobrious name he could recollect, and picking up his guineas
went away swearing he would never enter the house again. However,
about two years afterwards, he thought proper to come again, and
then I knew him to be a Mr. B——r, of Kilkenny. Then I and Mrs.
Hall were his particular favourites. He shortly after came to be
Lord T——s, by his father's obtaining a very ancient earldom.
However, though advanced in rank, that was the only point in which
he was more respectable, and we resigned his lordship, for others
of more consequence.

After the death of Sally Hayes, I became acquainted with a lady on
Summer-hill, of the name of Wynne, I believe she had been formerly
of the sisterhood, but was then married to an Englishman. This
Mrs. Wynne was constantly applying to me to let a young lady of
her acquaintance live with me: for as at that time I had no one,
she thought it a pity such a large house as was mine, should be so
totally disengaged. This young lady was a Miss Kitty Gore. I
mentioned this circumstance to a Miss Ross for whom I had a
sincere regard. She warned me against taking Miss Gore into my
house; which, if I did, I would soon have occasion to repent it. I
asked the reason; when Miss Ross assured me, that Kitty Gore had a
most infamous character, and that she had a mother who was ten
times worse, who would be constantly coming after her; and who had
never lodged in any house, but had been turned out of doors, for
the usage she gave her daughter.

On hearing this, I sent my answer of refusal to Mrs. Wynne,
relating what I had heard. Thus, properly forewarned, it was
natural to think I would have persisted in my refusal, and have
kept the promise I made to Miss Ross, never to let Kitty Gore into 
my house. But, in truth, I was always an easy fool, who suffered
myself to be over-persuaded. Mrs. Wynne called on me, assured me
that Miss Gore's mother was quite another character, and said so
many fine things of the daughter, that I consented to receive her.

The next evening the mother called on me, and desired to know when
her daughter, the young lady Mrs. Wynne had recommended as a
lodger, might come to me. I told her next night. But the next
morning the old woman came again, and said her daughter had lodged
two months at Mrs. Burnett's, No. 22, Whitefriar-street, where she
owed seven guineas, and could not get her clothes out, till she
had paid that sum. She requested me to advance the money, which I
immediately did. At night the mother and daughter came; but no
clothes, no trunks, no one kind of baggage. I enquired when her
clothes would be sent; they said to-morrow—but alas! to-morrow
never came, and her whole wardrobe might have been comprised in a
comb-case; and the very cloak Miss Gore had on had been borrowed,
and the mother, when she saw her daughter housed, took it back to
the person who lent it.

Well, Miss Gore was now with me; and proved such a shocking
creature as to baffle all description. But, I anticipated;—as soon
as the mother was gone, I asked again about her clothes, when she
owned she had not a shred more than was on her back, but what was
in pawn. I desired to know the cause of her poverty; she answered,
she had lived with a very great scoundrel, a surgeon, a Mr.——, who
had made her pledge everything she had; that she had left him
three several times, but he had found her out, and brought her
back. And so (said I) I suppose he will do here. Not, replied she,
if he thinks I am poor; but if he thinks I am in cash, he
certainly will—but I won't go with him again.

Well, child, said I, you are a likely girl, and may do very well,
if you take care of yourself; and behave properly; but you can't
keep my company, without making an elegant appearance. If I should
take up proper things for you, will you be honest, and repay me?
She swore a hundred oaths that she would, and that she would never
forget my humanity, but be always grateful for my kindness. The
next day, I took her to the several shops, at which I usually
dealt, and let her have as much as she pleased, of everything she
wanted, to nearly the value of a hundred pounds.

Being dressed in a genteel style, next day her mother came in the
morning, to see what she could get from her. She denied she had
any money (though she had then a twenty pound note,) and begged I
would say the same, or else the old woman would beat her till she
got all, or, at least, what she had got. At length, after much
altercation, as we were tired of her company, I made her daughter
give her ten pounds, with which she went off, and we were rid of
her for about a fortnight.

Miss Gore had not been long with me, but I got a thorough
knowledge of all her past transactions. She had lived a long time
in the Four Courts Marshalsea, with her father and mother; and
then, in the same place, with a gentleman who was confined for a
very considerable sum, till he detected her in doing some very
improper things. He caught her in another gentleman's room; and
when he looked into his chest, he found the mother had made free
with it for a long time. He then turned her off to look for new
friends. She and her mother went into town every night, till the
girl made connections with some ladies who kept convenient houses,
and lived successively with several of them; particularly with
Mrs. Dillon, in Fishamble-street; Mrs. Sterling, in Jervis-street;
Mrs. Wynne, on Summer-hill; Mrs. O'Brien, in Longford-street; Mrs.
Burnet, in White-friar's-street; and, at length, with me, to my
great misfortune.

In about a fortnight after Miss Gore came to me, she paid forty
pounds out of what she owed me; which money, with much more, and
several genteel presents, she got from a Mr. Palmer, who was very
kind to her: She might have continued to receive his favours, had
not her old acquaintance, the surgeon, concluded she was rich,
from seeing her riding out every day with me, elegantly dressed;
and on visiting her, hearing that she had clothes sufficient to
serve her for at least two years, if she bought no other. He now
resolved to get what property she had into his clutches; he
therefore came and requested she would come and live with him
again; and to induce her to comply, trumped up a story that he had
been left some money at his father's death, and would do
everything in his power for her. He told me if I would send her
clothes to his lodgings, he would pay me what she then owed me
(which amounted to fifty-two pounds). Relying on his promise, I,
very weakly, gave the security for my debt out of my own hands,
and delivered all her clothes to the messenger she sent for them;
taking neither note or bond from her or her friend, the surgeon.

After waiting three or four months, and no money coming, I sent to
the gentleman for payment. The answer he sent me was, that he
would never pay me a farthing, and that I might send for it to Mr.
Palmer. I then took out a writ, and arrested Miss Gore; the
surgeon got bail for her, and defended the suit. After a short
time, her attorney came, and offered to pay me the half; but I
thought it too bad to loose twenty-six pounds, for my foolish good
nature, refused, and the case came to trial.

In one point I was very deficient, and wanted law-cunning. There
was a counsellor, as eminent for his talents and abilities as for
his scurrility and grossness of language; him I should have
engaged, and then, right or wrong, I might have got my cause. But,
failing in that prudential step, he was retained against me; and
though I had three very respectable counsellors (one of whom
returned a fee of ten guineas, and politely assured me he would do
all he could for me;) yet, the gentleman against me, uttered such
a volley of abusive language, as influenced the Jury against me. I
had all the tradesmen, from whom I had taken up things for Miss
Gore, as evidences for me; and their bills and receipts were
produced, insomuch that the Judge himself said, the case was so
clear, there was no occasion for any more evidence; and gave a
charge to the jury accordingly; notwithstanding which they found a
verdict against me; influenced more by the clever counsels' wit,
satire, and abuse, than by justice. But it must be remarked, they
were not a jury of honest respectable citizens; but a set of
picked-up fellows, hired, like hackney coaches, for a shilling
fare each, who valued neither soul nor body; and probably had not
the price of a dinner, till they received their hire from Kitty
Gore's honest friend and protector.

I have now continued my narrative, and the corresponding
anecdotes, to the end of this volume. I shall proceed, in my next,
to those of a later date, even down to the present period; which,
I doubt not, will prove still more entertaining to the reader than
the past; as many now, living characters, will be produced, and my
own conduct related with the same fidelity I have hitherto done,
without concealing my defects, or striving to palliate my errors.
I shall also, for the sake of Justice, enumerate those, of what
rank soever, who have been so ungenerous as to continue in my
debt, for money truly and lawfully due; that those who have defied
justice, may not escape shame.


APPENDIX to VOLUME II.
WHEN I had committed the foregoing sheets to the press, I
requested an old friend (who was well acquainted with both books
and men) to peruse them, and give his candid opinion. He took some
time to consider them attentively, and communicated his thoughts
in the following letter:

"—— Street, Dec. 12, 1794.
Madam,

"I have read that part of your memoirs, with the perusal of which
you favoured me, and must own I was highly pleased. You have kept
strictly to your promise at your outset; and whilst you have
candidly acknowledged your errors, have accompanied them with such
reflections as totally prevent them from being seductive; and
render them very fit to be put into the hands of young females, to
serve (as you remark, yourself) as a chart by which they may avoid
the rocks and sands, on which many are wrecked. Many of your
adventures are amusing, some very laughable, and others excite our
pity at your early sufferings. Whilst, altogether, they give an
instructive view of the vices and follies of human kind.

"The original letters you have interspersed are satisfactory; and,
as you say, form a striking contrast of the tempers and abilities
of the writers. But you have acted rather partially; you have given
us more of the epistolary correspondence of the gentleman you style
your favourite BOB, than of the two others. I agree that there
appears more of affection and genius in them; but the public hath
little to do with the mere affection part of them, which concerns
yourself alone; and if the other gentlemens' letters contain what
is amusing to the reader, they merit as much attention, in one
particular especially; that is, we find by your narrative they all
three were travellers, and to different parts. Mr. L——s to America,
Mr. C——, to the West Indies, and your favourite BOB to the East.
Some of the itinerary remarks of the latter you have given; but why
not those of the others? As, you say, they corresponded with you,
doubtless some of their letters contain some accounts of their
voyages, that might be acceptable to the reader. The cursory
observations of travellers in their private letters, which are not
written with a design of publication, are often as agreeable as the
remarks and descriptions of tour writers.

"If therefore, you have any such letters, and have room towards the
close of your second volume, it is my opinion, you would do well to
insert them, or give them by way of Appendix. For, as I perceive,
your third volume will contain matters of recent date, the letters,
at which I hint, could not come into that with any degree of
propriety, as they were written some years since.
"I am,
Madam, your friend 	and well-wisher,
C—— L——"

This friend's hint struck me very forcibly; and I have accordingly
looked over my correspondence, and selected from it such letters
as seem to me to come under the scope of his idea; and shall close
this volume therewith—But my friend seems to have forgot, that I
had no letter from Mr. Lawless, while he was abroad.

"Barbadoes, May 26, 1784
Dear Leeson,

"We arived here yesterday, after a remarkable fine passage of about
six weeks from the time we sailed from Cove: we had very fine
weather, except two or three days; we had squally weather the 6th
and 7th of May, where we parted with the rest of the transports,
and do not expect there arival for seven or eight days.

"Barbadoes is reckoned the most beautiful and healthful, of any of
the Windward Islands; and I only regret we are not to remain here;
we dine to-day with the Governor, and to go to a ball in the
evening. I would wait to give you a description of it, but the
packet sails at three o'clock to-day, and could not have an
opportunity of writeing to you perhaps wile we remained here. For,
as soon as the other transports arive, we go to Anteaque and St
Christopher's.

"I forgot to mention to you, that I put into Madeira the 18th, were
we got a pipe of Madeira wine; but remained there only eight hours,
and had not an opportunity of writeing to you.

"My dear Leeson, from the time we parted with you, your heavenly
person never left my sight, your image was allways before me, and
thought of nothing but the blissful moments we spent together. And
although you were fond of another man, and your showing me his
letters made me jealous and distacted for a moment; but, when I
again thought of the length of way you came to see me, made me love
you in spite of myself. The instant I got to Cork, I got your dear
pickture set in as elegant a manner as I possibly could: I
constantly wear it on my finger, and kiss it a hundred times a day.

"I can't say any more, as the man is called to take my letter on
board.
"Your's, sincerely,
S.L. C——M."

"Don't write to me until you receive another letter from me, as
perhaps I will never ceive it."

"Brimstone-hill, St. Christopher's,
Nov. 4, 1784.
My dearest Leeson,

"The instant I received your long wished-for, and most heavenly
letter, I seized it with rapture, and every line I read gave me
fresh vigour, and animated my poor debilitated spirits. When you
mentioned Circular Road, Rotundo, Plays, and all the public
amusements, I sighed, and brought to my recollection the many times
I have been with you, and the many blissful moments I spent in your
company. I once flattered myself, my dear Leeson, we should some
time or other, be completely happy. But when I came to the part of
your letter, where you mentioned BOB, all my hopes were blasted;
and every pleasing reflection my poor heart could possibly suggest,
were totoly vanished! I stop'd—considered, and thought of the past
pleasures, I never could repeat.—Your long wished-for lover will be
at last happy. I saw a gentleman here, who informed me he was
getting, or had got into some young regiment; and that they were
going home immediately, and believed the were now on their passage
home.

"Since I have been so unfortunate as to give you my affection,
while you were fond of another man: I am my own persecutor, and
have no one to blame but myself. While I was connected with you, I
loved you sincerely, and seriously thought of no other woman; you
are in possession of my heart, and while I think of your being with
another, who loves you as I do, is enough to distract me. I suppose
this letter will make you one of the happiest women existing. For,
as to Bob's going home, is as certain, as that I am in the island
of St Kitt's, if he got a commission, for I know that all the
troops that are in the East Indies, are to be relieved in Spring,
if not already. And suppose, he only wanted to surprise you, when
he mentioned two years; for, if he is in any regiment in the East
Indies, you may expect to see him next Summer.—And I—must content
myself with this reflection! The woman I love is to be in the arms
of another, to be in a broiling climate, which is subject to every
calamity of the climes, and never to see my native country. My
foreboding spirit, suggested some extraordinary event had happened:
for, a few nights ago, after my usual custom of kissing your
pickture. I lef it on the table, the window being up, it was blown
of, and fell in a mug of water, that was by the bedside, which
disfigured it as you see: I send it to you, in hopes you will
replease its former beauty; I expect it shortly, and will think it
an age, until I have it once more in my possession. Ten thousand
thanks for the ribon you sent me, and it must partly supply the
place of the ring, and will ware it to my wach, until I get it.

"I have been a witness to two earthquakes and a hurrican, since I
came to this country; the hurrican, I suppose you must have heard
of, in the news-papers.—But it is impossible that pen can describe,
or that your imagination, can form any conception of the scen of
horror, that presented to our view in the morning. You would see
fields of sugar-canes, whirled in the air, and scattered over the
face of the country; trees were torn up at a blast, and driven
about at the mercy of the wind; windmills blown down; the fixtures,
and stills of several hundred weight, were wrenched from the
ground, and battered to pieces; even houses, were no protection;
you would see the roofs of some blown off at a blast, while others
were tottering, imagining every moment, the would come down, and
crush to death the unfortunate inhabitants.

"I have nothing particular to tell you, there is no news of any
sort, in this part of the world, only what I have mentioned; so
must conclude, with giving my best wishes to P. Butler, and all
friends. Hedges sends his respects to you, D. Butler, likewise. I
believe I will be shortly removed to Antique, when I am I will let
you know. Adieu, my dear Leeson; every blessing attend you. The
next letter I receive from you, I suppose, will be the news of
Bob's arival in England.
"Your's, my dear Leeson,
very sincerely,
S.L. C——M."

The above two were the only letters I received from the West
Indies. However, as I have some more of Bob's letters from the
East, I insert the following.

"Cape of Good Hope,
25th Dec., 1783.

"I have the pleasure of informing my darling love, that I arrived
safe this day, after a good passage so far; which is reckoned the
longest half between England and India: I should have written on my
passage from Martinica, had anything happened that could have
afforded you the smallest entertainment. Indeed weather, and the 
heat of the ship, has been so great that it was almost impossible
to stay below: there are twelve gentlemen passengers besides
servants; the ship only a little larger than the one you dined in
at Spithead; it is at sea where we are obliged to shut every air-
hole, you will easily judge very disagreeable; the captain, who is
a very fine spirited young man, is very fond of me, which makes
everyone in the ship very attentive; indeed I have the good fortune
of pleasing almost everyone, which is not very easy, as there are
so many parties in almost every ship; but you know one of the last
requests you made of me was, not to quarrel, which I shall ever
attend to in every occurrence where my honour is not called in
question; indeed I shall attend to everything I think could please
you, if you were present, and live in hopes of our once more
meeting to be happy, and never to part, which I do not despair of;
and be assured, the farther I am from you, the more deeply is your
image rivetted in my soul; all the little occurrences that ever
happened between us come into my mind when awake, and when a-
sleeping, I dream of you every moment; I one time think myself in
Dublin, and you and me riding; at another, I fancy that I had
returned, and you would not see me—that you preferred someone else;
and I leave you to judge what my feelings must be when I dreamed,
that at another time I thought I had got a fortune, and that you
and I were driving in a phaeton; then indeed was I completely
happy; but, alas! it was all but a dream. We shall remain here but
a few days, and shall then, I believe, go to Madras, which we shall
reach in two months, if we are looky, from whence I shall hire a
two months' passage to Bombay, where I hope I shall be well
received. If I had a hope of seeing you at that time, how happy I
could make myself, but shall exist on the idea of your being so,
and endeavour to reconcile myself to fate. The climate of Bombay is
remarkable healthy, almost as moderate as England, I'm told;—I
think with myself if I had a little house there, and you with me, I
should live content for ever, but that would be too much for me
even to hope; how oft at night do I clasp you in my loving arms,
and wake, and find it all a vain dream. I hope you are enjoying
yourself with every diversion the town affords, from home. I
dreamed once that my father was dead. I shall hope to hear from you
shortly after my arrival at Bombay.

"The ship that carries this is just ready to sail, but you may
depend on hearing from me by every opportunity, which is all the
comfort I can now afford you; may you be as happy as I shall be
wretched, till we again meet; says.
"Your own doting little
BOB"

The soul don't from the body part,
With half the anguish or the smart,
That I now tear thee from my heart,
Which I so freely gave thee.

"I embrace the present opportunity to tell you that I am well. I
had a long letter written to you of, many sides, containing an
account of everything that occurred to me since I had the
happiness of writing to you last; but unfortunately my servant has
stolen it, with my pocket book. I have had many losses by the
villainy of servants; at one time my watch, shoe, knee buckles,
hat, and twenty-five pounds; at another, four guineas, a great
part of my linen, and pocket book: these were losses I could but
ill afford; however, I am resolved to make the best of every
misfortune or accident. But why do I tell you such things that I
know will give you pain, and can afford me no pleasure to relate;
but the satisfaction I have in communicating everything to you
that relates to myself, as I would know how affectedly you would
sigh for me, and say, My Bob; should I never have the happiness of
returning, how eagerly shall I kneel before you till I hear from
your lovely lips, come to me, my Bob, for ever. I have applied for
a commission in the 36th; I believe my recommendation is gone
home; should I have the good fortune to obtain it, I may hope to
be in England in three years, perhaps two, an age, you'll say. But
the fates have decreed it, and we must submit, and then my darling
the pleasure I should have in telling you everything about India,
a place nineteen thousand miles from where you are; and perhaps
never again to be called away. I have met with many here that I
little suspected. Callage, who I have heard you mention; but I
avoided him cautiously. He came out, I believe, in the navy. I
remember a Mr. Lawler at your house the night that M'Dermott cut
his hand with the glass; he is now lieutenant and quarter master
to the 102d regiment; he treated me with a great deal of
attention, and we often drank your health in half pint bumpers.
Should you see him in Dublin, he'll mention me to you; I dare say,
he expects to be there in about a year. He has made some money, by
bearing two posts, and seems to spend it freely, as most people do
here. Would you believe it that Miss Scriven, who lived at the 
Green (you must have heard of her), arrived here this week,
married to a writer. I never was more surprised in my life than
when I saw her; but nothing is strange under the sun. I am now
embarked on board the Defence, a 74 gun ship; we sail for Bombay
to-morrow, where I hope to be blessed with a letter from my
heavenly Peggy; with what rapture I shall gaze on it, and
eagerness break the seal. May every blessing shower down upon thy
head, my heavenly darling. It is now one year since I left
England; if I could promise myself with any degree of certainty a
sight of you, my delight, I could exist on the bare thought. I
have been very unlucky in not finding the people I was recommended
to. I mentioned to you that general Mathews, on whom I chiefly
relied, was taken prisoner and poisoned. Mrs. Dixon's son suffered
the same fate; he was eldest captain and chief confidant to the
general. I shall make every enquiry with respect to his affairs
when I reach Bombay; I shall show her letters to him, and will do
everything in my power to represent her situation in the most
lively colours, that something may be done for her. I am told he
died very rich, but what has, or will become of his property, is
very uncertain. Mrs. Pierson's son is very well, I am told by
those who have seen him lately. He was in all the campaign until
within a few days of the capture of general Mathews, and was
fortunately left behind in a small fort. I have received more
attention from one letter that Brown gave me than all the others I
had to this place. His brother is now a captain in General
Burgoyne's light dragoons, quartered near this. I have met with a
Mr. Gibbons since I came here, the very person I heard you and
Sally speak of: he is an officer of this establishment, has been a
long time a prisoner, and has got leave to go home for his health:
he is indeed the most emaciated man I ever saw. Whether he goes to
Dublin, or not I don't know with certainty, but suppose he will: I
also met a Mr. Baily, who knew your picture immediately. This
place is amazingly stupid, and very inhospitable to strangers. I
have scarcely been acquainted with a single family since I came
here. I'm told Bombay is much better in that respect, but
miserably poor: the heat here is excessive. I assure my love, I
sleep generally in the open air, with no other covering than a
pair of drawers. How different that, my love, from your charming
bed and heavenly arms. But why do I intoxicate my brain with the
idea of what, perhaps I may never enjoy; yet, yet, I will hope and
live in anxious expectation. Did you but know the feelings that
distract me at this moment, you would give a tear to your ever
doting Bob, for my heavenly delight I may with truth say, I'll
never change, nor time, nor place, my faith shall move. I dreamed
last night I had got five hundred pounds a year, and was going
home to purchase a company; would to heaven it were reality; I
then might say I had a prospect of being really happy, which is
not to be expected I fear in this unfortunate kind of world. I
shall write to you on my arrival at Bombay. May I entreat you by
everything that is sacred, by everything that is lovely, by your
own darling self to take care of your health, as I know you have a
constitution, if taken care of, is equal to anything; therefore,
my love, do it a little justice, that I may once again gaze on
that lovely form, whose image is ever before my eyes. There is no
entertainment in this stupid place; nothing like a public place,
only a ball once a fortnight, and concert once a fortnight. This
is very different from Dublin, you will say; where you have
something pleasant every night. The amusement of this country is
riding or driving phaetons. It is hardly possible to walk any
distance until one is accustomed to the heat. I have had a
gentleman's phaeton and horses generally to attend me for these
last two months, a beautiful pair of greys. O God, if I had you in
it with me; the horses are very handsome and amazingly sprightly;
you judge I drove in style, and astonished the natives. I can say
but little about myself. I have been very near wanting money, but
never absolutely, still got a supply in time. I have been obliged
to live on my own bottom, which is very expensive. We cannot get
the plainest dinner less than a pagado, which is eight shillings
sterling. I hear that Brown is on his way coming out; so that I
shall hope to see him on my arrival at Bombay; if I do not, I
shall think you have forgot me; the very thought is worse than
death, but that can never be the case, for my darling is too good.
I shall write you particularly when I get to Bombay. I am
distracted with dreams every night, which makes me imagine that
something has happened at home since my departure. Should it be in
my favour, you may expect me in England very soon. Let my fate be
what it may, my prayers shall ever be for your happiness; which I
think your own goodness of heart will ever ensure you. I shall
conclude, with offering prayers for your happiness, let what will
befall your doting,
"BOB"
END OF VOL II.


?
TITLE PAGE of VOLUME III.

Nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice
				SHAKESPEARE
-------------------------------------------------------------
MEMOIRS
OF
MRS. MARGARET LEESON
WRITTEN BY HERSELF;
IN WHICH ARE GIVEN ANECDOTES, SKETCHES OF THE
LIVES AND BON MOTS OF SOME OF THE 
MOST CELEBRATED
CHARACTERS
IN
GREAT-BRITAIN AND IRELAND,
PARTICULARLY OF ALL THE
FILLES DE JOYS
AND
MEN OF PLEASURE AND GALLANTRY
WHICH HAVE USUALLY FREQUENTED HER CITHEREAN
TEMPLE FOR THESE THIRTY YEARS PAST.
---------
VOL III
---------
REASON prescribes strict Laws for giddy Youth
But the warm temper leaps o'er cold Decree
And when once past the bounds that should refrain,
Rambles at large, though conscious it should not
Yet, let not Censure, with its brow austere,
Too heavy fall upon the erring Fair.
He is a CHOICE DIVINE who practices
That which he preaches others.—'Tis by far
More easy to tell twenty what to do,
Than be the One of Twenty who will do it.
---------------------------------------------------
------------------
A NEW EDITION, WITH CONSIDERABLE ADDITIONS
============================================
DUBLIN:
PRINTED AND SOLD BY THE PRINCIPAL BOOKSELLERS
1797


CHAP. XXV.
I SHALL now commence with the most memorable epoch of my
unfortunate life, bidding adieu to Bob and Bobbadil, and all such
paltry bagatelles. After I had elegantly fitted out my house in
Pitt-street, which I had furnished in the most superb and
luxuriant style, with lustres, gerandoles, branches, elastic beds,
lascivious prints and paintings, and every matter that genius or
fancy could suggest to the most heated and eccentric imagination,
I, on or about the beginning of the year 1784, set up an elegant
equipage, with a couple of smart footmen in embroidered liveries,
an aldermanic ruby faced coachman, and not only a complete suite
of servants, but a fresh importation of delicious Filles-de-Joys,
chosen by myself from the purlieus of Covent Garden and Drury-
Lane: being thus prepared for a smart winter's campaign, who dare
vie with honest Peg? Now at the very zenith of my glory, the
reigning vice queen of the Paphian Goddess, I could not have
chosen a finer season for the Loves and Graces to sport in than
the winter of 1784; 'twas the beginning of the administration of
the gay, the witty, the gallant, the convivial Rutland, whose
court outrivaled that of Comus himself. Shortly after I was
completely and elegantly settled in Pitt-street, as Mrs. M'Clean,
Miss Love, Mrs. Stevenson alias Brooks, Mary Read, Kitty
Netterville and I, were soberly drinking our tea, we were
surprised with the trampling of horses at the door, and a
monstrous tantarara, when behold to our amazement who should be
announced but his Grace himself, attended by two of his Aide-de-
Camps and a troop of horse, the latter of whom remained on horse-
back armed cap-a-pie, with swords in hands, from one o'clock in
the morning 'till five in the afternoon of the next day, sixteen
hours!! to the no small surprise and amusement of the whole
neighbourhood, and indeed of the entire city, who all flocked to
behold the state, the exalted Peg was worshipped in by the Vice
King of the realm. The Aid-de-Camps soon decamped with an impure
each, but as for honest Charley, he and I, tête-a-tête, drank and
spilled three or four flasks of sparkling Champagne , after which
we retired together, for his Grace would take no partner but
myself, and in the morning he paid me a profusion of compliments
on the happiness he enjoyed in my company; swearing he would give
ten thousand pounds his beautiful, his divine Duchess, was as much
mistress of the art of pleasing, as I had the good fortune to be,
and as a proof of the sincerity of his declaration, he had me
immediately placed on the Pension List under a borrowed name, for
three hundred pounds a year, assuring me, I deserved it much
better than S——, though he had done much more for her.

"Oh! how pleasing 'tis to please."

His Grace paid me afterwards frequent visits, but not in the same
state, and indeed I must do his memory that justice, that 'twas
never his intention, the troop should have followed him to Pitt-
street; when he set out he was in a state of intoxication, nor did
he ever know he was so powerfully attended 'till he was on his
return to the Castle, when with great vexation he espied his
valiant life guards all drawn up about my door; however I took
care of the poor fellows, and had them properly plied all night,
with the pure native and a large portion of Maddocks' Irish
porter, than which, not Whitbread's boasted beverage ever
excelled, though the produce of the nasty Thames. This adventure
produced a number of pasquinades, and every news-paper teemed with
anecdotes of Peg and Charley; and at the play house a few nights
afterwards, when the reigning gods of the upper regions were
sporting their witty talents, all upon poor me, they roared out—
"Peg who lay you with last?" on which I with the greatest
nonchalance, replied, "MANNERS you black-guards;" this repartee
was received with universal plaudits, as the bon mot was
astonishingly great, the Duke himself being in the royal box with
his divine Duchess, who was observed to laugh immoderately at the
whimsical occurrence, for 'tis a known fact, that this most
beautiful of woman kind that ever I beheld, never troubled herself
about her husband's intrigues; she was the very reverse of poor
Lady W——, who absolutely languished 'till she died, in consequence
of the criminal intercourse between the Hon. Mrs. S. and her noble
stripling. About a week after this affair, which made no small
racket, I found two of the ladies of the S——d family had taken
possession of the front of my box, Lady F——H——t and Lady G—— Q——,
however, I took no sort of notice of them, and contrary to my
usual custom, I suffered them to remain in quiet possession of
their places, seating my good ladies in the row over them, and
placing myself between the honourable pair; who not seeming to
like their company, became extremely uneasy, and at last arose to
begone; when I told them with a very audible voice, so as to be
heard by the whole house, "Ladies don't be ashamed to be seen in
my company, no doubt half the house know I am a wh——e, and the
other half are as well convinced that you are arrant t——s, and
pray tell me now, who are so fit to go together as wh——s and th——
s? Though you must confess the wh—— is a much safer acquaintance
than the th——f." This you may be assured was received by my good
friends the Gods, with their usual applause; for I must confess
they have always been very partial to any of my bon mots, and
though I can't help acknowledging, they sometimes gave me, to use
a slang phrase, "Great goose," yet upon the whole, they received
me with much kindness, and they had no right to do otherwise, as I
was always humane and charitable to all who were distressed, and
was besides a remarkable good pay.

In my account of the Duke's first visit to me, I made mention of a
Mrs. Brooks, then Mrs. Stevenson, who had just come up from the
North, with the pretty Jenny Neilson, Miss Polly Dalzell, and two
or three other blooming northern lasses. This abbess, who was
driven from Belfast, by the majesty of the mob, who would have
taken away her life, on account of the cruel murder of a Mrs.
Donnelly, whose husband was the favoured Cicisbeo of this lady,
who 'twas thought instigated him to the perpetration of the
diabolical cruel deed, had it not been for the interference of the
well known and unfortunate Mr. A——s G——th, who on account of his
being the principal person who set the prosecution on foot against
D——y, was the only one the populace would listen to, and merely on
his account they spared her life; I say this lady, when in
Belfast, moved in the humble style of an apple and orange woman,
sometimes sharing her favours (and an ill favoured wench she was,
though elegantly made and possessed of a good address) with any
porter who could afford to give her a shilling; however she now
moves in a much higher sphere, keeping an excellent house for the
reception of her north country friends, the Rev. G—— P——, the
veteran Waddell C——, honest W——ls——y, &c. &c. in Darby-square, nor
could any lady of the town cut a genteeler figure than Mrs.
Brooks, or show a finer covey of birds; though a few years before
I was told, she picked up a gentleman in the town of Belfast, who
being intoxicated invited her home with him (his lady being in
this city) and absolutely took her into his bed in, the dark, but
as soon as the day appeared the gentleman became tolerably sober
(the very same who afterwards saved her from the fury of an
incensed mob,) he was astonished at his own depraved taste, and
giving her some trifle turned her out of, not only the bed, but
the house, hardly giving her sufficient time to huddle on her
rags; and notwithstanding all, this lady, now Mrs. Brooks, has
retired from business, after having made a very handsome fortune,
and at present enjoys otium cum dignitate, with all the sang-froid
of the most virtuous lady in the metropolis, keeping her gig and
ponies, and her town and country house, why not? "win gold and
wear it." For

Gold makes a Patrician of a slave
A dwarf an Atlas, a Thersites brave;
It guides the fancy and directs the mind,
No bankrupt ever found a fair one kind.

Poor Brooks however notwithstanding all her good fortune,
encountered many losses; Surgeon A——r particularly, who was her
paramour, her constant bedfellow, her every thing, for he could
enjoy no female with pleasure but Brooks, ran in her debt, and for
wine, beds,——, &c. near an hundred pounds, which he never paid
her, and at another time her house in Trinity-street was set in
flames by the wanton gambols of a Mr. T——s and a Miss Mary Russel,
of Limerick, a dashing little girl, who in the height of their
love feats, performed in the true Humphreys and Mendoza style—buff
to buff, forgetful of the candle, which was placed behind the
arras, and regardless of the consequence, nearly perished like
another Semele in love's flames; the bed, their wearing apparel,
and all the furniture of the room, having been consumed to ashes,
and they themselves, turned out of the house, like our first
unhappy parents with not even a fig leaf to cover them, and who
could attempt to censure poor Brooks when her entire property was
at stake, through the lascivious whims of those capricious
votaries of the Cyprian Queen, who must needs ape the Celestials,
by making love bare breeched—not in clouds, but on beds of down.

"The first created male long wandered up and down,
Forlorn and silent as his vassal beast,
But when a heaven born maid like her appeared,
Strange fancies fired his breast, untyed his tongue,
And his first talk was love."

So by T——s and pretty Russel, they wished to enjoy their fill of
love, as 'twas once practised in the Garden of Eden, but the angry
Jove took umbrage at their presumption, and set fire to their
elastic couch.

In the beginning of the year 1785, that memorable year, when
tyranny and oppression first commenced their career in Ireland,
when two of the first officers and best men in the kingdom,
William Sharman and Amyas Griffith, Esqrs. were dismissed from
their employments, for their virtuous and independent principles,
and struggles in the cause of liberty (but these were not the acts
of my poor Charley, they were B——d's. Peace be ever to the manes
of Rutland. A masquerade was publickly announced to be held at the
Rotunda, for the benefit of my worthy friend Hughes of the
gambling club house in College-green; immediately on this
gratifying information (for the masquerade was to be patronized,
matronized and sanctioned by the viceregal pair) I employed all my
industry, to engage four of the prettiest impures I could select
in all Dublin, whom I introduced as VENUS and the GRACES. Fanny
Beresford appeared in the character of the Modern Venus, and Mary
Read, Miss Love, the northern Mary Neilson, as the three Graces—as
for myself I thought the character of the Goddess of Chastity,
Diana huntress of the woods, would best suit me, as we were all in
masquerade, for had I appeared in the character of Cleopatra,
Messalina, the Ephesian matron or any such, it surely could not be
deemed masquerade; as to be in masquerade is undoubtedly to be in
an assumed character; thus I sported that of the goddess of
Chastity, and kept it up as well as the famed Lady Arabella D—— of
charitable memory, would have done amidst her own Magdalen. Beau
Myrtle, that unfortunate wight, appeared that night in the
character of Beelzebub, not a bad one for a young divine, and
being inflamed by beauty and heated with Champagne and Burgundy,
of which he tippled too freely, he took most indecent liberties
with the beautiful Vice Queen, by thrusting his nasty black hands
into her fair bosom, and attempting to do more; however he
experienced the same fate of his prototype Lucifer of old, he was
hustled out of Paradise, admidst the execrations of all the
company, but more particularly of myself and fair group, who
seemed to be outrageous at the varlet's temerity; the drunken beau
was afterwards degraded, totally ruined and turned out of the
university, in consequence of which he eked out a scanty
subsistence by writing for the Man of Ireland, poor Jack Magee!
and delineating the characters of the senators of this nation,
with some perspicuity and justice, for the Dublin Evening Post.

At this masquerade I met with an officious young fellow in the
character of Lamb, a hair dresser, who stuck close to us, and paid
us so great attention, that I was prevailed upon by the late Moll
Hall of Johnson's-court (who appeared in the character of the Rosy
God, and a most incomparable one she made) to invite him home with
us to breakfast, for we all agreed to adjourn to my house, "the
blissful seat of fun and revelry;" accordingly young Mr. C—— (for
that was my spark's name, and proud enough he was at the
invitation) accompanied us, and ever afterwards 'till I was
obliged to take very coercive measures to get rid of him, paid
such amazing attention to me and my girls, that he was scarce ever
from our parties; he attended us regularly at the play-house, as
one of my suite, kept seats for us, ran of our errands, picked up
culls and would have turned bully for us, had he spirit enough,
and in fact would do anything to oblige and please us; indeed poor
C—— had a very taking way with him, which he soon convinced me of
to my cost, for he took the liberty of sending several suits of my
Dresden as well as a number of valuable lockets, rings, bracelets,
pendants, watches, pictures, and other trinkets, to Charles Aylmer
Kelly's for sundry sums of money; which on my discovering, and his
refusing to restore me the duplicates, that I might release my
effects; together with his boasting of favours from me, which he
never obtained, for I always held such creatures in such thorough
contempt, I applied to my dear worthy friend —— O'M——, who
immediately introduced me to an attorney of his acquaintance, who
marked a writ against my nimble fingered Mercury at my suit, and
sent him for his improvement to Ormsby's Seminary in Thomas-
street, where he remained swindling on his brother prisoners, till
he got out in about two years afterwards, on an insolvent act; I
might have capitally prosecuted Mr. C——, had I thought proper,
however I concluded that the safest way of proceeding, especially
as I had every assurance from Billy Jenkins my apothecary, that
his father the w—— drawer, would pay his debts, and liberate him;
however I was in that respect deceived, his papa and mama allowed
their spem gregis half-a-guinea a week and paid for his lodging,
which with the young gentleman's adroitness at Legerdemain, in
which art he was a great proficient, he lived very comfortably,
and frequently had the honours of visits from several of my nuns,
which was a great gratification to him, for the name of an amour
was all this genius aimed at. How applicable are Rowe's lines, to
these sort of butterflies, mere maggots of the day.

"Away, no woman cou'd descend so low,
A skipping, dancing, worthless tribe you are,
Fit only for yourselves,—ye herd together,
And when the brisk glass warms your vain hearts,
Ye talk of beauties that you never saw,
And fancy raptures that ye never knew;
Legends of saints, if saints had ever being,
Are not so false, as the fond tales
That ye relate of love."

Some time after my adventure with C——, I was visited by a most
beautiful creature from Skibbereen in the county of Cork, she was
indeed elegance itself.

"Just so among the trees superior shine,
The hallowed cedar, and the stately pine."

This charming woman, wishing to become one of my boarders, told me
she was the wife of a Mr. A——, an estated gentleman of the county
of Cork, who made so infamous a husband, that she had several
years before obliged him to allow her a separate maintenance; that
she afterwards formed a connection with a gentleman, under
government, the cidevant Inspector General of the province of M——,
who was married to a most amiable worthy woman, notwithstanding
which, she had the pleasure of his company very frequently, as he
continually contrived to spend as much of his time as possible in
the town she chose for her residence, by which means he avoided
giving any uneasiness to his lady, whom he passionately loved;
that during this intercourse, she had three children by her
friend, and "never was a friend more dear;" that about eleven
years ago, this gentleman in his opposition to government at a
general election was ruined, by not only the loss of all his
lucrative employments but of his effects, and finally his liberty;
that lately hearing he was released from prison, but that his wife
and only son were dead, and he himself in very embarrassed
circumstances; she had come up to town on purpose to see him, and
to render him any service in her power; that he received her
affectionately, visited her after, and sometimes spent whole days
and nights with her, but absolutely refused to live with her, at
her expense, declaring that had he the means of supporting her in
the style he could wish, there was not a lady breathing (now he
had lost his ever to be regretted Fanny) he'd rather spend the
remainder of his life with, than with her; but as that was not the
case, he must beg leave to decline her generous offer, as he was
determined never to go into keeping, but at the same time, her
happiness was his, and he'd esteem it as the highest blessing on
earth to be permitted to visit her as often as possible, but that
he never would be under any pecuniary obligations to her, and
absolutely refused accepting of any part of her property, though
she had made him an offer of her purse, which contained upwards of
seven hundred guineas. This woman appeared so disinterested, and
at the same time so lovely, and so accomplished, that I was
fascinated with her, and made her an offer of my services, &c. as
long as she thought proper to accept of them; she had a charming
taste for poetry and the Belles Lettres in general, sung like a
Syren, played inimitably well on the piano forte, and was in every
respect one of the most accomplished and withal beautiful woman I
was ever acquainted with. She told me her seducer had ensnared her
with his rhymes, and repeated a number of beautiful poems and
songs he had from time to time addressed to her, with many of her
answers; during the time she remained with me, she admitted no
male visitors but himself, and at last when she found she had not
power to prevail with him to live with her, on her own terms, she
took her farewell of me, and returned to the county of Cork, where
shortly afterwards she married a Mr. S——, a gentleman who had been
long attached to her, who had buried his wife at the time A——e
died, and who was in actual possession of near five hundred pounds
estate a year exclusive of a lucrative and honourable appointment
under government, which he acquired in a very ungentlemanlike
manner. I have had several letters from her, expressive of her
splendid way of living, but at the same time declaring, she would
have been better pleased to have begged with her friend, than live
in a palace with the little whiffler she had espoused: generous
disinterested creature!! how few of the old sanctified puritannic
tabbies of the present day can be compared to you, whose chief
blemishes were virtues. She gave me the following account, which
had been addressed to her by her friend, when in the hey day of
his love.

Charming as angels in the realms above,
Heaven in her looks which prompt to instant love;
Resplendent graces, in her air appear,
In all her actions worthy and sincere;
Sweet as the violet or the vermile rose,
That in Elysium for love's goddess grows.
Innocence and truth, her actions ever grace,
Attractive smiles dwell always on her face,
Nor time her dear idea can erase.
Assist me every power to gain her heart,
To reign for ever there, in every part;
To spend my life in serving my sweet fair,
Eager to prove for her my every care;
Regardless of the world, for her I'll live,
In every act, her ever faithful slave;
Dearer to me than men to doting hags,
Gain to a miser, when he's crammed his bags,
Eager to hoard, though hungry and in rags.


CHAP. XXVI.
SHORTLY AFTER the departure of this excellent lady, I had the
honour of a visit from the Earl of W——, then Lord L—t of I——,
whose amiable Countess, as I said before, died of a broken heart
in consequence of his connection with that celebrated demirep the
honourable (heaven how that word is prostituted!) Mrs. ——. On his
Excellency's entrance I arose and received him with much respect,
blended with hauteur and contempt, but on his attempting to be too
familiar, I told him he must positively excuse me, as in all my
life I never admitted any freedoms from culinary heroes, one of
which description, he certainly could not deny himself to be, or
he never would have contracted with the brother of that celebrated
cock bawd, Doctor Achmet, for his kitchen stuff, what the poorest
huckster woman in Dublin would blush to do; he denied the charge,—
—I insisted upon it, and produced the Phoenix, a paper at that
time in high esteem, in which his French cook had absolutely
advertised him,—this was such damning proof, that W——d could not
rebut my evidence, on which he and C——k, much chagrined, made a
precipitate retreat, forgetting even to pay for the flask of
Champagne , the noble Vice-Roy had ordered upon his arrival.—
Pitiful! despicable! mean wretch! what a contrast to the
excellent, generous, noble Rutland, whose like we never shall
behold again.—Monsieur Le Conte of worthy memory, was the head
cook, who had the temerity to advertise his regal master, and 'tis
rumoured that this very Le Conte, was in a few years afterwards
extremely active in effecting a revolution and demolishing the
odious Bastille.—Hughes's masquerade ball, and my own mentioned in
the former part of these memoirs, threw poor Moll Hall into the
masquerade mania; she could speak of no other subject, and indeed
to do her but common justice, the little fat pretty creature, who
was (to use a French phrase) the very UN BON POINT, to hit the
taste of even a prince; she was the life and soul of every festive
party; she, I say consulted me on giving a masquerade ball, a la
Masonique, as the gentlemen of that ancient and honourable
fraternity in this city gave sumptuous entertainments, fandangoes
and coteries, by inviting their friends and acquaintances to roast
meat, and beating them with the spit; that is by clubbing them
sans ceremonie:—we accordingly agreed that every male creature,
was to pay two guineas for his ticket, besides extra charges
should he solicit to be admitted into conclave, or the embrace
delectable, i.e. to the share of one of our fair guests' beds. My
house being the most roomy, convenient and fashionable, and
furnished with the greatest variety of elastic beds (they being
quite the ton, since poor Netterville's days,) couches,
palliasses, &c. &c. was pitched upon for the rendezvous of all the
choice spirits, the bon vivants, the Loves, the Graces, the
comodites and momodites of the capital, to exhibit their charms,
their wit, and their pleasantry in.—No sooner said than done,
whip, fly, pass and begone; Moll Hall, the proposer, peace be to
her gentle manes;—Sturgeon, Digges, Beresford, the Ballyclear
Neilson; sweet Ballyclear, where there's no Sunday! the Limerick
Russel, and Brooks, were appointed matrons of the splendid gala,
and Henry B——H——t, the old proprietor of the Pretty Grove; W—— C——
that ungrateful old lecher, who while his amiable wife lay barren
by his side, for forty-five years and more, made a shift to knock
triplets out of his kitchen maid; E—— Rad—— R—— of convivial, 
cleanly and generous memory, —— John —— S——, the identical little
whiffling old gentleman, who is now wedded to the divine Kitty
Attridge, one H—— W—— of Fethard in the county Tipperary, and M——
K——, Esq; that civil pander, who rents White Hall, for the
convenience of his friends, or second Achmet's Baths;—and a Mr. B—
—, or M—— of the B—— Coat H——, were by us the female coterie
appointed stewards, from whom all tickets of admission were to be
issued, though some of us thought it would be rather hazardous, as
W——l no doubt, would not forget his old gait of going, and
consequently smuggle in a number of his northern electors.

All matters being thus adjusted, I threw five or six rooms into
one, which I could always most conveniently do, by the help of
sliding partitions, though indeed poor Surgeon B——r offered us the
use of the Lock Hospital, near Donnybrook, for the occasion. At
last the great, the important night arrived, big with the fate of
the votaries of the Cnidian Queen; my rooms were crowded before
eight o'clock, and many a fat sleek greasy alderman, sheriff's
peer, common council man, and ruby faced parson honoured the
entertainment with his presence; the late alderman W—— of police
and hated memory, and Moll Hall, led up in the characters of
Father Paul and Mother Cole; B——h——set and Grove, in the
characters of the Mayor of Coventry and Pretty Maud, both
elegantly supported; — W——l C—— and Brooks in Alderman Smuggler
and Diana Trapes, the Rev. G—— P—— and Mary Neilson, in Tony
Lumpkin and Miss Hardcastle;—Mr. Justice S——, the gauger (who
endeavoured to fine me at the excise office for selling unlicensed
liquors, and would have done it, had it not been for the
interference of my old lecherous gallant Col —— R ——) and Miss
Pedero of Bow Bridge, in the characters of the Fifing Girl and
Drumming Boy, in the midst of a large recruiting party, headed by
Mathews the bailiff, in the character of Serjeant Kite; but it
would be endless to relate the different couples, and the
characters they sustained; I shall only mention a few more of the
most remarkable of the ladies, and give some little account of
them:—Mrs. Robinson, sported her sweet person in the character of
the Blue Eyed Nun of St Catherine's, she was imported into this
land of Saints by Lord F——tz——w——m, who kept her at Mother Grant's
for some time; however Mrs. Grant becoming rather disagreeable and
austere, she left her, and took lodgings in Capel-street, where
she unfortunately became acquainted with Beau R—— the jeweller,
from whom she purchased above five hundred pounds worth of plate
and a pair of set shoe buckles, which he declared he'd give her a
bargain of; and that he'd charge her but prime cost, thirty-five
guineas!! and she foolish devil as she was, not doubting the
supposed brilliant gentleman's honour or probity, paid him the
money down; after which in a few days being discarded by her
keeper, she was obliged to leave her lodgings, being no longer
able to keep them in elegance; and return to Grant's, who not
being satisfied, in depriving her of all the plate she had
purchased from R——, robbed her of almost all her wardrobe, as a
pretended compensation for former favours conferred on her!!
Finding herself thus embarrassed, and reduced to her last guinea,
she was obliged to have recourse to R——, to return him the paste
buckles she had never worn; expecting at least to get half their
value, but to her loss and astonishment Beau Mordecai, that blood
sucking usurer, offered her no more than five guineas!!! which
dire necessity obliged her reluctantly to accept of in order to
get as soon as possible to her own country; however as soon as I
heard this poor woman's story, I made her a present of twenty
guineas, and the honest creature, in two months after her arrival
in London, sent me a package of calico, worth fifty pounds, and a
beautiful edition of the Woman of Pleasure, with some of the
finest cuts I ever beheld; would that all my debtors behaved in
the same spirited principled manner, so that their names might be
adorned with equal narratives, for I would much rather hold out
the wreath than the rod — but alas! I found very few Mrs. Robin-
son's among my acquaintances; upon the whole, I was plundered both
by belles and beaux. Mrs. Vallance another of the fair votaries of
the Paphian Queen, was born in Naas, her mother supported herself
and beautiful daughter by spinning wool, and very properly sent
her early to the charity school, but being naturally idle, she
made no progress, and often, alas, have I heard her say, she
repented she had not made a better use of her time. Almost as soon
as Vallance got into her teens, Mr. P——, with a few presents of
clothes, baubles, money, and mellifluous speeches, gained her
affections, and whenever an opportunity served, even her mother (I
often heard her tell it) encouraged her to gratify his passion, in
her own cabin; however at length weary of a country life, she
suggested the idea to her friend P——, who immediately took
lodgings for her at Mr. A——'s in Capel-street, where she resided
for two years; by what she told me, P—— was very attentive and
amorous for the first year, but finding herself at last neglected,
she boldly at once ventured on the town; and on her first entré or
debut, to use a theatrical phrase, she met with A—— J—— , who
advised her to decamp with him to a Mrs. Orde's, Great Britain-
street, where he hired lodgings for her at a guinea a week, and he
being at this time in Capel-street, within a few doors of her
lodging, the pleasing moments passed unperceived away, for some
little time, until one night at cards, Mrs. Orde got jealous of
her, as her husband, she imagined, made too free with her; and she
intoxicated with pleasure and Champagne , spurned the gross idea,
and in a pet, quit the house, and poor J—— and she could find no
place of reception, 'till at last they were through dire
necessity, compelled to take refuge for the night in a cellar in
West Arran-street;—next day however J—— took lodgings for her at
Mr. U——r's in Dame-street, where they lived for a month; after
which she became acquainted with the divine, the edifying Rector
of Castle B——, a Mr. C——, who adored her, though at the same time
his wife was living, and often gave her presents, for what the
poor creature could not enjoy, he has often insisted the poor girl
to pull up her clothes, and touching her —— has exclaimed, oh!
that I had you divine Vallance but thirty years ago.—At length C——
's wife died, when he proposed marrying her, which proposal she
unwillingly accepted, though not 'till he made her a present of
five hundred guineas, after which he purchased a house on Ormond-
quay, where they lived in every supposed harmony, he not in the
least suspecting his friend J—— enjoyed what he dearly paid for.—
J——s indeed has often given her a five guinea note, which she used
to put in the old fumbler's pocket, and in exchange take a fifty
pound note for it, as he was near sighted, and never suspected any
loss, provided the number of notes were forthcoming. The old
wretch at length growing jealous, made her life miserable, in
consequence of which, she one night eloped, with all his property,
besides many debts which she contracted, that C—— was sued for,
and obliged to make good, particularly one to my friend J——s P——
for eighty pounds—Poor Jonas, who following the paths of his
venerable namesake, with some variation, slipped into the belly of
a BUCK—instead of a whale, and thereby hangs a tale!— The Rev.
Divine attended his darling to this masquerade, and had the
unspeakable pleasure of seeing himself made a cuckold of almost
before his face, as she parted from him, and went into one of the
recesses of the God of Love, at the end of the room, with her
friend J——s, who did for her what C—— never could.

Another of my fair masqueraders, who figured away that night, on
the light fantastic toe, was a Mrs. Grant, whose father's name,
who was a dairy man, was Connor; she was born in sweet
Stoneybatter, and I have heard her myself confess, her father
always supplied his barn, by cow stealing. Grant usually carried
about the ambrosial beverage, morning and evening to her father's
customers, and as we all know, a little pretty rosy cheeked milk
girl attracts the attention of warm youths. J—— H——, a gentleman
whom she served in the Liberty, frequently plied her with cake and
wine, and promised to make a Queen of her, or anything she could
mention, if she consented to become his mistress; being then of a
virtuous cast, she despised his offers, and for a few nights sent
a little girl, now the celebrated Mrs. Sinnott, alias C——y, an
acquaintance of hers, to deliver the milk.

"Oh! the sweet lass with the milking pail."

At length thinking he had forgotten her, she went again to his
house, where to her astonishment he opened the door himself,
forced her into the parlour, and made her quaff potations to Cupid
and Bacchus: As the transaction happened in the Liberty, and the
goddess was rather of a complying cast, he easily prevailed on her
to suck in as much of the juice of the grape as threw her off her
centre of gravity, and entirely overpowered her senses, after
which he took a coach, and brought her to Crown-Alley, to one
Simpson's; often have I heard her curse the crooked mouthed
rascal, who on swearing falsely against a citizen, found in a few
moments his mouth on his shoulder; here the fond couple had more
wine, and concluded the scene, by every gratification. During the
interval of a few days, spent in every lust and luxury, that
College-green, or Simpson's neighbourhood could afford, she had
the mortifying information, that her father was apprehended for
cow stealing, and lodged in Trim gaol; however, little concerned
for the fate of the author of her being, she took no manner of
notice of the intelligence, 'till unfortunately, it being assizes
week in which he was arrested, he was tried, found guilty, and
having snapped a pistol at the person whom he robbed, was hanged
the second day but one after his conviction.—By all accounts, and
by her own confession, he had no fault in nature but one, he would
deprive all the world, if he could, of their property, to
aggrandize himself and his family.—Are not there many dignified
imperial royal robbers like him?

Poor H—bought her very genteel mourning, and took a house for her
in Stafford-street, where they lived in amity 'till her
extravagance contracted his income, when she, vicious abandoned
woman, charged him on the police for robbery, since which time she
has never heard of him: she then fortunately met with a Mr. ——,
who hired another house for her in the same street, and he though
a diminutive creature, as she often told me, pleased her much
better than the ascendancy H——; she generally gives him a 10l.
note, going to the hazard table, and he seldom returns her less
than one hundred, tolerable interest you'll say for her money; but
her paramour is one of the luckiest little gamblers that frequents
Daly's silver table.

Another character worthy of notice was NANCY HINDES, who was born
at Malhassey in the county of Meath; her father was cottier to Mr.
Hindes of that place; his young son Allick and she grew up
together, and in their advancement to maturity laid aside all
puerile play, and privately enjoyed every venereal pleasure, any
loving couple possibly could on such occasions. Our sex being
naturally fond of dress and show, she encouraged poor Allick, who
was dotingly fond of her, to rob his brother Ralph, of every
article he could convert into cash, besides ready money to a large
amount, and all to gratify Jenny's ambition and vanity.—At length
being discovered, the fond pair were obliged to separate; Hindes,
though poor, had a tolerable share of beauty and spirits, and
consequently deserted the place of her nativity, and ventured up
to town, where applying to Mrs. C——, who kept a register office
for servants, she was recommended to Mrs. Orde of Great Britain-
street, and accordingly not knowing what she was to encounter,
hired with her for three guineas a year, and half what she made by
defrauding the guests; and in this humiliating station she lived
for three years, when, to her great happiness, a Lieutenant S——r
took her into keeping, who having expended his own property, and
much more, he being on the recruiting service,—a Captain W—— came
to his lodgings, and seeing him much distressed, offered to lend
him one hundred guineas, which being gratefully accepted, with
sincere promises of returning it as soon as he could make a lucky
hit, for he was a successful hazard player; he took accordingly a
house in Great Britain-street for her, where she commenced
business on her own account, made some money, and invited her poor
distressed Allick to come to town, promising to share her last
guinea with him.—Allick accordingly agreed, and by what she told
me there was not a woman in the kingdom better protected than she
was by her two able bullies, who would beat and abuse every
creature who would not spend money at her house, on what she
called Champagne, which, by the by, was merely perry — some time
after this the unfortunate W—— being called in haste to join his
regiment, gave S—— a letter of attorney to receive his rents in
this kingdom; S—— executed his commission, but alas! alas! not to
his advantage, but to his lady's; in consequence of this new but
ill-gotten acquisition Hindes and Sp—— lived in every luxury the
city afforded, whilst poor W—— being disappointed in remittances,
and that by his supposed bosom friend, in the moment of frenzy put
a period to his existence at Dunkirk, by shooting himself through
the head.

Another of our masqueraders was the pretty Wrixon, she was born in
Liverpool, her papa being a chimney-sweeper, who frequently during
her childhood, whipped her in course with his other sweeps, as he
termed it; poor Wrixon, if she was to be scourged to death, could
not enter the funnel, and her mother being of a mild placid
disposition, protected her as much as possible until grown to the
age of maturity, thinking no doubt, when she became a mistress-
sweep (for her father intended to leave all his sootrican slaves
under her protection and government) she might comfort her in her
old age; but how greatly was the poor woman mistaken! poor Wrixon
only waited to be seduced, and perfectly satisfied to gratify the
first honest athletic fellow who might offer; walked into the
fields near town, when observing two gentlemen with arms and
without attendants, she followed at a distance, when in a few
moments they exchanged shots, in consequence of which one fell,
whose name was Fox, the other made a precipitate retreat; and the
tender hearted Wrixon, went as it were to succour the distressed
or dying hero, who after being supplied with some water, seemingly
recovered, when Wrixon brought him to her sooty habitation, and
finding he was likely to do well, stripped him of all his cash
amounting to two hundred guineas, and some silver, his watch, a
diamond ring and pin; and immediately consulted a butcher's boy
her intimate acquaintance, one Wrixon, under whose name she ever
afterwards went, who encouraged her to fly the kingdom, and he'd
accompany her; no sooner said than done, they embarked in Captain
Harrison's packet, and arrived in Dublin in August 1789; I can't
forget it, as they spent the first night in my house, and in the
morning purchased an house, that is, they fined down an house, in
Great Britain-street. But Wrixon and his pretty female sweep,
being both of an eccentric cast, frequently came to handycuffs, in
which paroxysms of frenzy, they often discovered the depredations
they had committed, not only on the poor duellist, but latterly on
the unwary Irish,—in consequence of which, lest there might be any
insurrection in the country, occasioned by these lawless band of
ruffians called defenders, they determined to quit the kingdom,
and more particularly so, fearing the man they had robbed might be
in any way akin or connected to Mr. Fox of Capel-street; indeed I
always laugh when I think on't, but absolutely the sight or name
of a Fox, would make poor Wrixon change a hundred colours.

"Thus conscience does make cowards of us all."

Mrs. Palmer, another of our tribe, was the daughter of John Kelly
and Mary Slack; she was early bound to a milliner, with whom she
lived for three years, and was seduced by a Captain Palmer, who
brought her to town and hired lodgings for her at the Rev. Mr. C——
's (Ormond-quay), rector of Castle B——, where she lived for some
time; the Captain being called to his regiment, there was a Mr. J—
— P——y, who by profuse presents and vast sums of money, prevailed
upon her one night to go with him, as he said, to a friend's; but
where should he bring her to, but Mrs. Sterling's, Jervis-street,
where, with the powerful assistance of some flasks of Champagne,
he prevailed on her to gratify his passion, which has been ever
since repeated when opportunity and convenience offered.—
Disagreeing with Mrs. C——, she took lodgings in King-street, where
she unrestrained embraced her last lover, he being the second who
enjoyed her. A woman once devirginated, will not stop at any other
faux paux. A Mr. C—— was the next who proposed, and was admitted
to live with her at intervals for three months; at length
discovered by Pas——, an engagement took place, both being able
bodied men, the contest was doubtful for some time, and at length
J——s gave C—— a chance blow, and levelled him with the ground, the
unfortunate fair, thinking him dead, sent for the best advice in
the neighbourhood, to a surgeon G——, who bled the vanquished C——
and recovered him; for the authenticity of this narrative I refer
my reader to Mr. G—— of Abbey-street. Mrs. P——through this
accident, was under the necessity of going after her Captain, and
I am told they live perfectly reconciled, being since married.

Besides these remarkable ladies, some of whose adventures I have
sketched out, there were a number of the minor sort; as Mary Read,
Poor Rowe, formerly Ashmore, Miss Archbold, who was then in high
keeping with a Mr. H——s yclept the S——, but for my own part I'll
freely confess, I have never met with a more generous fellow.—A
Mr. Le F——, son to a perfumer in Grafton-street, had the honour of
my fair hand towards morning, for we kept it up from nine o'clock
at night 'till five the next afternoon, when carriages being
called we all separated; however I detained Le F——, who absolutely
was the best woman's man, or as the gentlemen say of us, the best
piece I ever met with, and that, I have been heard frequently to
confess to my poor dear friend the late James W——n, who was
undoubtedly the unrivalled Christie of this kingdom: the gentlemen
who favoured us with their company were very numerous, senators
from both houses, authors, &c. &c. &c. all flocked to this rare
entertainment, which was, and has been unequalled; being an
assemblage of all the choice spirits of the kingdom, en masse;
Lewellen and Father Fay, both sent to the conductors for tickets,
but as they had been so very recently and I might say wonderfully
escaped the fall of the leaf, the ropes having been out for them
for several hours before the arrival of their reprieves, I would
by no means consent they should be accommodated; for I always had
an aversion to anything base or scandalous, and I challenge all
Ireland this moment, to advance in any one instance, where a male
or female received the slightest injury in my house or through my
means, no, no.

"True conscious spotless honour knows no sin,
She's doubly arm'd, who's innocent within."


CHAP. XXVII.
I SHALL now give a farther account of a few more of my fair
friends, whom to neglect would be unpardonable, and then proceed
with the remainder of my chequered and whimsical memoirs: The
following ladies, who should not be passed by, particularly graced
this masquerade with their presence: Mary Fagan, who was a
foundling, was taken out of the hospital in the year 1775 by Mrs.
H——, who finding her a smart girl took her apprentice to herself
(being a mantua maker) she behaved herself very well for some
time, and got a tolerable knowledge of her business; Mary being
red haired, and consequently prone to venery earlier than girls of
a different colour, at the age of fifteen years, stole into the
bed of Mrs. H——'s youngest son, who was prevailed upon though
unwillingly to gratify her passion;—time passed imperceptibly to
the fond couple, who repeated their joys clandestinely for three
years, 'till at length discovered by the mother, she was turned
out of doors, when destitute and friendless she walked about the
streets for some time, and at length fortunately met with a Mr.
Hone, son to the Creole who shot himself at Kitty Cut-a-Dash's
House in Grafton-street, who prevailed on her to go with him to
Mrs. Orde's Great Britain-street, where they remained for three
months, but at last his cash being spent, he was compelled to go
to the country to shun his creditors; and in the interim, Mary
remained at Orde's, but not getting remittances from her gallant,
she prostituted herself to every honest fellow who offered:
Fortune threw in her way a Mr. C—— of the College, who liking her,
and having plenty of cash, took lodgings for her at a Mr. H——,
apothecary, in Capel-street, where they lived for three years in
as much amity as man and wife; unfortunately for her, T—— H——, who
at this time was serving his apprenticeship to a druggist, visited
her, and being discovered in her apartments by C——, he kicked him
down stairs, and next morning reluctantly discarded his angel,
though he passionately adored her; Mary Crosbie, for so we must
now call her, again bereft of friends, went to board with a Mrs.
Moore, a celebrated b——d in Capel-street, where she exercised her
natural powers with the best subjects that offered. Poor H——,
considering himself the original cause of her misfortunes, scraped
up by every industry a few guineas, and took lodgings for her in
Aungier-street, where he visited her occasionally, and unable
himself to support her extravagancies, brought her some good
culls, particularly Mr. R—— H—— of Capel-street, T—— A——, Alex——
Mc M——, Dan. M——, Mich. D——, J—— U——, C—— W——, &c. &c. in this way
she procured means delectable for her lover and herself; but
happiness alas! is seldom permanent—H——'s friends being acquainted
with the proceedings, checked him severely and prevailed on him to
swear he'd never see her more. Again destitute of a protector, she
went and lodged with a Miss Boyd of Longford-street, of detested
memory, who was the cause of a Mr. Barlow's death, son of the
widow Barlow; here she passed some miserable days, 'till she met
with a Captain Misset, who took a house for her in Mecklenburgh-
street, where they remained 'till she deprived him of the last
guinea, and then gave his creditors information that they might
arrest him with ease at her house; the unfortunate Misset was
accordingly pinned and lodged in the Sheriffs Gaol, where he
remained for two years in the greatest distress, after which he
was removed to the Four Courts Marshalsea by Habeas Corpus, where
he still continues.

Incautious youth beware of Mary Crosbie! who now rolls in every
luxury, at the expense of the distracted Misset.

Elinor West was a merry begotten, of R—— A—— of Capel-street, who
when nine years old bound her to a ribbon-weaver, with whom she
lived for three years, but being ill treated by her mistress, she
went to her father, who, unnatural man, refused her every
protection; upon which she repaired to a register-office and was
employed by a Mrs. West as children's maid, with whom she lived
for two years and behaved remarkably well—Mrs. West's eldest son,
an attorney, by many presents and persuasions won her affections,
and by repeated promises of marriage gained his end.— Poor Nelly
thus deprived of what virgins hold most dear, languished away,
after reminding him of the vows he made, with a determined
resolution never to perform; at length, the ungrateful West told
her he was married—whereupon she, in a distracted fit quit the
house, and went to a house of resort in Capel-street, where she
met with a Mr. N——, a grocer, who, captivated with her youth and
smartness, supplied her with every necessary ornament of dress,
&c. and then brought her to Multifarnham in the county Westmeath,
where they lived in harmony for sixteen months; unfortunately a
Mr. James O'R—— of Ba——s——na, visited at his lodgings, where he
remained a few days, and seduced my poor Nelly, brought her with
him to his country seat, where they remained until examinations at
college, when he and she came to town and lodged at my house,
where she behaved with the greatest candour and honour to her
protector, until a Mr. C—— who sung remarkably well, paid a visit
to Pitt-street during the absence of Mr. O'R——, and having spent a
few nights with her, she was so captivated with his music and fine
parts that she eloped with him, though at that time 50l. in my
debt; however the honest girl in two months later, sent me
enclosed a 60l. note, with an account, that she was forsaken by C—
—, who on leaving her gave her debentures to the amount of 300l. —
Mr. West came to town shortly after, and though the cause of her
mishap she doted on him, and passed some pleasant hours in his
company, he being engaged. Elinor West, the name she had gone by
ever since, having made away with the debentures given her by Mr.
C——, determined to get another protector, which she could not
expect to find in private lodgings; she therefore went to Mrs.
Orde's, where she met with a Mr. Eife, who ensnared by her
agreeable manners and actions, offered to marry her and lay his
whole property at her disposal; however she being naturally fond
of liberty, and a volunteer in heart, declared she would rather be
his mistress than wife, and as long as he behaved worthy her
attachment, she would act with honour towards him; this candid
declaration overwhelmed him with joy, and redoubled his love
towards her; he accordingly took a house for her in Great Britain-
street, where the reader may have an opportunity of hearing this
narrative from her own delectable mouth.

Mrs. Ottiwell—was the daughter of William Atkinson of Belfast,
flax-dresser, mathematician and wool-comber; her mother was a
mantua-maker, in all which branches, she herself excelled;
beautiful and good humoured, she behaved herself virtuously and
modestly until that monster the Rev. Mr. B——, under the specious
veil of sanctity, invited her to his own house, where she remained
as it were, to instruct his children, but he like a demon of
darkness, despising the earthly functions he was ordained to
discharge, and taking advantage of the innocent fair, when his
family went abroad to spend the evening, committed a rape upon her
body; horrid! horrid! in one of God's representatives!!! Mary—poor
girl, reduced to the last extremity with shame (the transaction
being discovered by an old woman who lay concealed in a cradle bed
in the next closet;) and hearing that Mr. Edward B——, afterwards
Kingsmill, next morning was resolved to travel post to Dublin,
solicited a seat in his carriage, which being granted, she packed
up all her movables (though small) they were her only treasure. I
shall now leave the reader to judge what passed between the fair
one and this old well-known gallant; suffice it to say, they
arrived at the Belfast Hotel, at four o'clock in the morning,
where the good old man ordered a bed for himself and his lady, and
then finished what he had attempted to begin two days before,
which though well-inclined, his age and infirmities prevented him
to accomplish: The old gentleman being gratified, left poor Mary
in a strange house, without friends or money; unfortunate girl!
what now to do was paradoxical; lamenting her situation, she was
overheard by a gentleman in the next room, a Mr. Henry O——, who
offered his assistance, which being accepted by the unfortunate
fair, he gave her a fifty pound note, and told her he'd take
lodgings for her;—all his proposals being admitted, he hired
apartments for her opposite the hotel, at a druggist's house,
where they remained for some time. O—— was profuse in his
presents, until she had been discovered coming out of the
druggist's room, one night as he returned home from the gaming
table, where he had met with some hands as knowing as himself
Incensed at losing his money, and the inconstancy of his mistress,
he almost murdered her: Her shrieks being heard by K——y (that was
the druggist's name;) he courageously broke open the door, which
was bolted by the cowardly O——; and here a bout of boxing
commenced;—Johnson and Mendoza could not take their ground with
more skill or agility; the contest remained doubtful for some
time; K——y taking courage being at home (a dunghill cock) tipped
O—— a Mendoza over the left eye, which levelled him with the
ground, and left a mark on that part ever since. The unfortunate
fair lay speechless during the contest, and Tom thinking himself
victorious, took her in his arms, and swore by the Holy G—— she
should be his alone; and as soon as O—— recovered the blow, coward
like, he took his hat and run away, and never since paid K——y.
Mary's misfortunes now commenced; Mrs. K——, who was out on a
visit, returning and finding a beautiful stranger in her
apartments, ran distracted about the house; poor Ottiwell, now her
name, knowing good manners, in imitation of Mrs. K——y, ran mad
also, and poor Tom, though master of his profession, was now more
thunderstruck than ever on any like occasion; what was to be done
was the question, he called for his man to bring him two straight
waistcoats, which being fitted to the two unfortunate women, they
were led in triumph, amidst the acclamations of the multitude, to
the mad-house at Drumcondra—poor Tom no doubt must have been
distracted, or he would have thought of a coach. Here Mrs.
Ottiwell, the subject of my story, lay for six months, during
which time the infamous Harry never sent her any money. K——y
thinking he had paid very well for his amour, sent deputies to Mr.
O— to request his interference on this trying occasion: O—
hardened to every delicate feeling, desired he'd turn her out, and
let her 'fish for herself'; both brutes alike, unfeeling and
inhuman.—The distracted Mrs. Ottiwell was turned out on the town,
without either guide or protector—fortunately for her, I in my
carriage passing by, could not bear to see so much beauty
unnoticed, and accordingly invited her to my house, which she
gladly accepted: I brought her home, and during the course of
eighteen months which she spent with me, I never in my life
discovered better manners, more upright integrity, or more correct
morals in any woman; at length she left me, through the influence
of Ald—— J——, and now I believe lives at Mrs. M'Clean's, Eustace-
street.

Mrs Bridget Orde, of whom I often made mention, with her father
John West, kept a house of lodgers in Cook-street; she was the
only person to attend the gentlemen and take care of every other
domestic duty; at the age of fourteen she was seduced by a Mr.
Fetherstone of the county of Westmeath, who lived with her for
three years at Mr. W——'s, Bride-street, in the greatest love and
harmony; at last she unfortunately bestowed some favours on honest
Charley, which being discovered by her friend, she was dismissed
with a present of 50l. with which she purchased a small house in
Queen-street, where she commenced procuress.—Mr. S—— was a great
friend to her, and who being fond of variety, frequently changed
his miss once a week, and for every such purchase he paid her 10l. 
Passing smoothly on in this line a few years, and thinking a more
extensive trade more eligible; assisted by a Mr. G——, she took a
large house in Britain-street, where she commenced nocturnal plays
and amusements of every sort; at this time she was called Biddy
Fetherstone. A Mr. Orde was the next who offered; a good natured
man, but young and giddy, who in the course of a very short time
spent his paternal property, and was compelled to go abroad to
recover a fortune in the West Indies, which was left him by his
uncle, which getting possession of, he returned, and still enjoys
his loving though inconstant Biddy—now called Orde. During his
absence she employed a Mr. W——, attorney, to settle her affairs,
and allowed him a handsome salary, as she was this time in
affluence; Mr. W—— was very attentive to his trust, and living
always with her, obtained by every means foul and fair, large sums
of money from every man who unfortunately became her debtor.—
Graham all this time in the country, at his mother's in the county
Cavan, now resolved on returning to town, when he prevailed on the
silly Biddy to call an auction, sell off her property, and convert
every moveable (except two suits of clothes) into cash; he
pretending to be afraid of bailiffs, took lodgings on George's-
quay, where she visited him; the time drawing near for their
departure, he took her trunk, which contained her all, on board
the packet, telling her he would return in a hour, but alas! was
never since heard of. Poor creature again distressed, applied to
her friend Orde, who as usual, good natured fellow, purchased
another house in Great Britain-street, where they live amicably
until this day, and where she and her beautiful nymphs, may be
inspected by the supposed continent Priest or lecherous
Archbishop; she owes me 10l. which I request she will give to the
Friary of Denmark-street, for the purpose of masses for the
salvation of my soul.

Maria Ford, another priestess of the little God, was the daughter
of a respectable merchant of this city; being well educated and
accomplished, she resorted every public place of amusement; one
night at the Exhibition-house William-street, she danced with a
Mr. R—— W—— an handsome gallantman who sung very pleasingly; the
innocent Maria was enamoured of him, and in a very little time
became a sacrifice to his desires; being discovered by her mother,
she was turned out of doors; however the constant Bob (this puts
me in mind of my poor Bob) had neat lodgings furnished for her in
Irish-town, and lived with her while his circumstances permitted;
but cursed poverty, the inveterate enemy to many constant lovers,
urged her to come to my house, where she behaved with every
politeness to all who visited her; there was a B——y Y——n, who was
very attentive to her and gave her large sums of money, with which
she rigged herself to the best advantage, and without flattery,
she was simply beautiful. In this manner a few years passed, 'till
the luckless Ford, through some unforeseen mischance became much
addicted to gin drinking, by which means she was neglected by her
friends,—getting also into debt, she was compelled to go to
Liverpool in defence of her liberty, where she lived for two
years, saved some money, returned home, and honestly and
generously paid me 100l. which she owed me:—seeing her so well
principled, I made her a present of the one-half; telling the
circumstance to a Mr. W——n, he became so captivated by her beauty
and honest principles, that he took her into keeping, and now
lives with her in the same lodgings Walsh originally hired for
her. I dined with her a few days ago, and was much gratified on
seeing the happy pair live in such excessive harmony. As some of
the prime characters and geniuses in the kingdom were at this
ball; my readers may judge it passed with great eclat and much
celebrity, and as it was given in my house, the merit of the
entire was bestowed to Peg, to dashing Peg. Amyas Griffith (who
after he was ruined by a certain inveterate party, set up a paper
called the Phoenix, of which he was sole proprietor and editor)
gave a flourishing account of that whimsical entertainment, with
all his own hyperbolical embellishments, and an addition of the
late Buck English's (of murderous memory) impotent attempt, to
enjoy me in one of the recesses, and my being heard to declare
that, that infamous assassin was the SIXTH who had served me so:

"Eager to sin, though destitute of joy."

The late poor Ned Nowlan, author of, "Sure thou wert born to
please me," editor and doer of the Freeman's Journal, was also
there; and being much elevated, attempted to be happy with me, and
served me in the same manner as the Buck: I was also honoured with
the company of gimlet-eyed Andy A——, alias Henry Harmless, the
wretched C——h, my late poor namesake Jack Plunket, of innocent
inoffensive memory; Daly, of the kingdom of Kerry, who came from
the Devil's A——e-a-Peak; Scot, of diabolical memory; Mrs. M——e the
authoress, Captain K—y, Peter S——g——n, that unfortunate premature
politician; the limping I—— P—— S——, of p——p——g memory; the over-
reaching Captain R——ts, that African hero, who can play on all
instruments of music, was master of languages, could cut
anterchois better than the little devil himself, was a much
greater poet than Milton, a better orator than the renegado K——, a
greater hero than the immortal Wolfe, and a finer gentleman than
Chesterfield; this great officer, who pretended to everything and
knew nothing (the very counter-part of Mrs. M——) must also crack
of my favours; may B——lz——b carry off the impotent quartetto:
these were the only men in the room who did not pay for their
admission, except poor —— C——h, F——x, and A——g, not one of whom in
all their lives, could ever say he was worth a crown, much less
two guineas: poor John M——, the late worthy honest Bell of the
Herald, of transmigrating memory; and my intimate friend Jack G——d
were also there, as were indeed every man in the literary line in
the metropolis, from Preston of tragedy memory, to poor blind
Bartle Corcoran, the famous balad composer, on the Inn's-quay.


CHAP. XXVIII.
IN A few days after this never to be forgotten masquerade, my old
friend P—— H-—ll and Barry Y——, of whom I have made mention
before, called to my house, when the latter gentleman, of whose
abilities in every way I entertained a very poor opinion, "popp'd
the question" to me in form; for I had before from the detestation
I held him in, absolutely refused to have any connection with him,
or suffer him to take the smallest freedom; in consequence of
which, the poor lovelorn swain, for he was absolutely enamoured,
offered to marry me; this was a matter too serious to be refused,
I knew to a certainty his father from his great legal abilities,
would be very shortly created a peer, and the very sound of the
Honourable Mrs. Y——'s coach, the Honourable Mrs. Y——'s chair, so
tinkled in my ears, that I absolutely took him at his word, and a
couple-beggar being sent for by my friend Phil, we were tacked
together that very night, but not 'till the marriage articles were
properly ratified, signed, sealed and delivered, in the presence
of my friends H——tch——l, Le F——, and the late worthy James W——n,
of whom I have already made honourable mention.

"Thus the happy knot is tied;
Peg became a virtuous bride:
Ring the bells and fill the bowl,
Revel all without control.
Who so fair as lovely Peg,
Who so blithe as Barry Beg.
Who so blithe," &c. &c.

All the impures in town (the noted ones I mean) came formally to
congratulate me on my marriage, which was very handsomely
announced in all the public prints, and many beautiful
epithalamiums and songs were written on the joyful occasion; the
very ballad singers caught the infection, and sung about the
praises of "the gallant B——y and his charming Peg", and blind
Charley O'Gallagher in particular, and his little father-in-law
Mr. Kinselagh, were chanting madrigals upon us, much longer than
the honeymoon lasted; for alas! the hard-hearted man, no sooner
was he surfeited of very imperfect enjoyment indeed, than he grew
as cool as a cucumber, and had the impudence to say, "he could not
bear to kiss my lips they being always so plastered with salve or
spermaceti ointment," which I really must acknowledge I used every
night to lay on, to prevent them from chipping; and you'll say my
poor lips, so often smacked, had a right to be the worse for wear.

Our nuptials made such a noise, that at last the C—— B—— came to
hear of them with astonishment and regret, and accordingly sent
for me to demand an explanation; when I produced him my well
authenticated certificate, at the same time assuring him, I looked
upon the connection with such loathing, that for a very trifling
consideration I was ready to relinquish every claim I had on young
hopeful; whereupon the C—— B—— taking me at my word gave me five
hundred guineas, and I gladly released his pretty boy from every
conjugal tie, executing whatever papers he laid before me; which
was very well for me, as in a few months afterwards he was
arrested for a variety of peddling debts, and lodged in the
Sheriff's Prison, where he remained in the most profligate course
of life, 'till liberated by the benefit of an insolvent act; after
which he called frequently to see me, but I was always denied to
him. Some time after I got rid of my graceless spouse, I had the
honour of being waited on by a deputation from the "States of
Castle-Kelly," commonly called, the Anecdote Club of Free
Brothers, with an able spokesman, the great and powerful
Stoneybatter king at arms, at their head, vulgarly yclept the
Tomlinson; who in the name of that most respectable community,
amounting to above five hundred members, presented the freedom of
their commonwealth to me and my nymphs and nymphlings, elegantly
engrossed on parchment enclosed in a beautiful silver box, with
all the emblems of the beggars' benison handsomely carved on it,
and a delectable poem, called the Guide to Joy, or pleasures of
imagination realised, written by the amiable Mrs. H. now of
Drumcondra; that once happy favourite of that prince of good
fellows, whose birth-day was so elegantly celebrated, by the La-
bra Pleasura of honest well-meaning Magee, with his racing-pigs,
dancing-girls, grinning-hags, cudgelling-blades, &c. &c. &c. at
the famous Fiat-hill, near this city. I accordingly received
Stoneybatter and the deputies with my usual affability, treating
them with cake and wine, and returning a proper answer to their
very polite and civil address; at the same time sending them their
freedom of Pitt-street, and constituting and appointing that
divine Sappho, so very fat and so very fair, to a seat in
conclave, with all the adults of my female menagerie. Mrs. H. is
an authoress of much estimation, and as for a roguish poem of any
kind I give her the BUSH, as no doubt her Guide to Joy, now in the
possession of a friend of mine, and which I will give my readers
in due course;{see note] this charming effusion of fancy, beats
any production for high colouring, brilliancy of style, and
luxuriance of imagination, in that line now extant—Rochester's
Poems, Fanny Hill, the Cabinet of Love, or Kitty and Amynter,
being all mere trifles, when put into competition with that famous
and unequalled poem.

[Note: This very elegant Poem, (as we would not wish to offend the
chastest ear, or tinge the cheek of blushing modesty with any
indelicacy) will be printed by itself, and delivered gratis to
such of the purchasers of these volumes, as would wish to be
supplied with it.]

Mrs. H—— was formerly a prodigious favourite of the P—— of W——,
her face was beautiful, her person rather too much in the
embonpoint order, more than his own dear injured F——t; she was a
lady of an amorous complexion, as will appear by her poem, and
knew the outs and the ins as well as any lady in Europe; when she
came to this city, she advertised to read a poem of her own
composition at the Exhibition-room in William-street, at opera
price, half-a-guinea admission; however when the night appeared,
and she had expended, in advertising, posting bills, puffs, &c.
&c. five or six pounds, no person attended the curious exhibition,
of seeing a fat lady with a parcel of tow under her jaws, read her
own productions very inelegantly—but three or four printer's
devils, whom their employers had given the lady's eleemosynary
tickets to, as they could prevail on no other persons to accept of
them. "Sic transit Gloria Mundi:" thus terminated mother H——'s
exhibitions in this kingdom, since which, she has scarcely been
heard of; but that my fair friends and I know she lives retired
upon her princely pension, opposite Broadhead's in Drumcondra,
where we have paid her frequent visits, and often had the pleasure
of meeting with several literary characters both male and female.

A Mrs. H——y in particular attracted my attention, she was the lady
of an eminent attorney, was a pretty little smart Brunette, had a
vast deal to say for herself, and had a pretty turn for poetry;
romantic girl! 'twas that talent and her propensity to novel
writing brought her upon the town; were it not for that, she might
have enjoyed much domestic felicity with poor Tom, who was
passionately fond of her. In one of my visits there, I also had
the pleasure of meeting with the charming H——g——s, who after
having squandered away near two thousand pounds a year, real
estate, in debauchery and dissipation of every kind, was at
length, to eke out a wretched existence, obliged to betake herself
to the stage, where she cut but a very la la figure, 'till at
length she went into keeping with H——l——n, who after having had
three children by her, not only basely deserted her, but published
her infamy in all the public prints of England, Ireland, and
Scotland.

"Were you, you fair, but cautious whom ye trust;
Did you but know how seldom fools prove just,
So many of your sex would not in vain,
Of broken vows and faithless men complain.

And again,
"Trust not to man, they are by nature false,
Dissembling, subtle, cruel and inconstant;
If a man talks of love, with caution hear him,
But if he swears,—he'll certainly deceive you."

As H——n deceived poor H——s,—and apropos, now I have introduced
that lady, I must inform my readers of a circumstance not
generally known:—my heroine's father married her mother who was a
beautiful woman, at a very advanced time of life, and during a
term of eighteen years never had a child by her; 'till an
unexpected visit from that celebrated genius Buck English (who
remained at Mr. —— H——'s hospitable mansion near Thurles, for
upwards of two months) worked the happy effect; for in less than
eight months after the departure of the Squire, who was also a
senator of Ireland, Mrs. H——s was safely delivered of that paragon
of beauty, wit and bravery, Miss H——s, who as she grew up, gave
strong intimations of her real parent, lascivious, passionate,
vindictive, aspiring, cruel, determined, and quarrelsome, blended
with a pusillanimity and meanness, which was better suited to the
daughter of the Buck, who was merely foster-brother to poor Tom
Cook of begging memory, than to the child of the poor innocent
doating H——s; Cook having being nursed and suckled by the Buck's
mother, who was the wife of a common unlettered hind near
Tipperary, who fortunately found, when trenching potatoes, a large
crock of money, on the strength of which, he cunningly and
gradually advanced himself in life, by taking cheap farms, &c. &c.
&c. which enabled him to give his children good education, and
leave the sanguinary Buck upwards of five thousand pounds a
year!!! Such events as these happen frequently in the lottery of
life, which put me in mind of those expressive lines:

"Thus equal crimes unequal fates have found,
And whilst one villain swings, another's crown'd."

So by poor Tom Cook, heir to Kiltinan, and a man of the first
connections; whilst he is begging from door to door, his foster
brother, the son of a Munster peasant, is rolling about in his
gilt chariot, gambling at Daly's, or quaffing Champagne and
Burgundy with some of the finest impures that Ireland or England
can afford, either in Pitt-street or Johnson's-court; which brings
forcibly and painfully to my feeling mind, the exit of my poor
friend Moll Hall, in that court; a few days before she took ill,
her word would go for any sum, nor was there a wine-merchant, a
grocer, a mercer, a milliner, or a haberdasher in Dublin, who
would refuse her any credit she desired; when lo! no sooner had
the last breath quit the body of my friend, when citizen D——, as
he calls himself, and every creature she was indebted to
(following his infamous example) came down upon the house, and
seized even upon the very bed she lay waking on—carrying all off
without any legal authority whatever, leaving poor Hall upon the
bare ground with three or four of her girls sitting weeping over
her body, not knowing how to dispose of it; until at length this
melancholy transaction reached my ears, when I sent a kitchen
table and some oak chairs for the wake, as also candles, cake,
wine, pipes and tobacco, together with cold meat and some of
honest Hutton's good bottled porter; who would not have served any
of God's creatures after such a barbarous manner: and in two days
after her demise, I had her decently interred in St Anne's Church-
yard, with this whimsical triplet engraved on her tombstone:

"Here lies honest MOLL HALL,
Who once had a great call,
And a fig for you all.
She departed this Life the 22d of July, Anno Domini 1792, in the
49th year of her Age; and in remembrance of her many Virtues, for
she was in the actual Possession of all but ONE, and how many great
Ones retain that alone; her steadfast Friend and Compeer, Margaret
Leeson, of Pitt-street Nunnery, caused this Stone, after being at
the Expense of her Wake and Funeral, and many Masses for her Soul's
Repose, to be placed over her.
Requiescat in Pacem."

I had this poor woman's funeral conducted with great taste, having
hired six mourning coaches, in each of which sat four of the
sisterhood as deep mourners, with scarfs, &c. &c. amounting in the
whole to twenty-four, exclusive of which, my own carriage, and
several others belonging to very respectable people attended the
funeral procession. Peace to her manes, she's no more; but in case
of my own dissolution, and that I died as poor as Hall, would any
human being do the like for my remains? indeed without vanity, I
must say, there are very few possessed of a greater portion of the
milk of human kindness, than I have ever been; and if charity
covers a multitude of sins—honest Peg, thy only failing, of making
use of what God gave, must be forgiven.


CHAP. XXIX.
SOME TIME after, the Abcderian Society for the relief of reduced
and superannuated teachers, began to gain ground; I sent two
guineas to Mr. McC——e their secretary, desiring him to enroll me
as the principal of Pitt street boarding-school; however the
honest worthy Puritan, not choosing to be so taken in, sent the
following note, and my money back.

"John McC—— presents his compliments to Mrs. Leeson, cannot think
of enrolling her with the several very respectable ladies who keep
boarding-schools in this city, and who are a honour not only to all
ladies in their line, but to human nature; if Mrs. Leeson chooses a
subject for ridicule, she has pitched upon a very improper person
in McC——, and a very unfit one in the Abcderian Society, which is
composed of some of the most respectable persons, of all
descriptions in the community; however if Mrs. Leeson persists in
bestowing her charity, McC—— has no objection to accept of her
subscription as a honorary member; however she must excuse him from
entering her as a teacher, as her gaits of going, would ill suit
the pupils of the other professors; nor can McC—— with propriety
return her name among the subscribers, for insertion in Watson's
Almanack, which would only subject the other boarding-school ladies
to ridicule."

On the receipt of this note, I dispatched my messenger back with
the money which McC—— had returned, desiring him to enter me under
what class he pleased, and assuring him, whatever degree of
respectability he might please to place the other superintendents
of boarding-schools in, I thought myself not inferior to any of
them; Nature I told him was my goddess—and she, he could not deny
as a classical man, had been worshipped from the earliest period;
Eve herself took nature as her guide and tutoress, and all her
children had travelled ever since in her divine foot-steps; I at
the same time invited Mr. McC—— to my academy, where I told him,
stoic as he was, I would hold him one hundred guineas, before he
and I parted I would make him confess my hypothesis to be just.
McC—— returned no answer to this polite invitation, which made me
believe he was afraid of encountering me and my goddess.—Just at
this time the woman of Ireland, having come to an arbitration with
poor Magee, who married her in one of his paroxysms of insanity,
came to my house to spend some time; she was then in possession of
about 300l. which she made a shift to squeeze from honest Jack, on
giving him a release; for she absolutely was married to him at a
certain house in Great Britain-street, where also the nuptials
were celebrated in great style; on her joining my squad, she told
me in what elegance the printer had kept her for about two months,
her own chariot, footmen, and coachmen in laced liveries, her
house in College-green, and another at the Rock, confessing he had
squandered away on her and suite upwards of three thousand pounds,
and that he never would have discarded her, had it not been for
her own overbearing conduct and tyranny; in consequence of which
he swore "he'd astonish her", and giving her a cruel (as she
termed it) horse-whipping, turned her naked out of doors at about
two o'clock in the morning; by this we see the instability of all 
sublunary matters, the woman of Ireland basely flagellated, and
turned almost naked into the streets like any common prostitute,
with a lacerated back; why be it so,
"Priam from fortune's lofty summit fell;
Great Alexander, midst his conquests mourn'd:
Heroes and Demi-gods, have known their sorrows;
Caesar has wept, and she has had her fall."

At last Buck W——y (who had returned from a pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, as an atonement for his sins, and to win some
considerable wagers) for the honour of the thing, in order merely
to have it to say, he had Mrs. Magee, the Woman of Ireland, in
keeping, took her from my house, after paying me for her board and
lodging, and making me a very handsome present into the bargain;
indeed I was not sorry to get rid of that exalted lady, as she
became extremely troublesome, and was beside too fond of the
native; and I often imagined she had imbibed part of the mania of
her worthy spouse, and a worthier man, jesting apart, never
existed; and I am happy to hear, at this present writing, that my
poor honest friend, though still at Swift's, by his own choice, is
perfectly in his reason; and now that his intellects are
meliorated, and that he has lost all his eccentricities, is one of
the best and most agreeable companions (by every account I could
hear, for I never had the pleasure of his company since he became
a ward of Chancery) in the kingdom. Indeed it would be a thousand
pities anything should go amiss with him, as he is one of the best
of men, and kind for him, as there does not exist better
characters than his worthy old father, his brother the worthy
William Magee of Belfast, and indeed all his family.

In about a fortnight after I had got a good riddance of the woman
of Ireland, Miss McPherson from Banbridge called to see me; she
looked wretchedly, and appeared in great distress and upon
impatiently enquiring into her story, she told me, she and her
unfortunate sister had been seduced by the late and present M—— of
D——, father and son; that the present man had cruelly disordered
her wretched sister, and afterwards suffered her to languish under
the disease, without affording her the smallest relief, or medical
assistance, till she died; that for her part, her fate was milder,
for her hoary old lecher was extremely fond of her; had her
picture drawn by the late Jos. Wilson of Belfast, in various
attitudes, dressed and naked; kept her in the most exalted style,
introduced her among his tenantry and dependants, at all the
Hillsborough balls and entertainments, and so thrust her down the
throats of all the little country squires, squireens and squirts,
and their ladies, in the vicinity of his residence; that she
generally went by the title of the Marchioness of ——; that at
length, her most noble antiquarian beginning to tire of attempting
what he was not by any means equal to, bestowed her fair hand upon
a little inferior lowlived revenue officer, for whom he had
procured an employment in the revenue; that she had willingly
embraced the proposal, in order to get rid of her old tormentor,
which was not the case, for by the permission and orders of her
mean-spirited rascally husband, she was obliged to obey the
mandates of her old teasing friend, who frequently sent for her to
spend the night with him; that at last it pleased Providence to
take her patron of fumbling memory from her, and shortly
afterwards her accommodating spouse; in consequence of which the
present M——s refusing to allow her the smallest support, and
finding herself despised by those who in better days courted her
acquaintance, she had ventured up to this city in quest of
adventures, and begged my assistance to forward her in her amorous
career; though I saw nothing in McP——n that could promise any
emolument, yet as 'twas my constant study to alleviate the
miseries of all the woe-worn animals who applied to me for relief,
I heartily welcomed her to Pitt-street, lent her five guineas to
get a change or two of linen, which she stood very much in want
of, and pushed her into company by the title of the ci-devant M——
ss, which had the desired effect, and procured her a few gallants,
who would never have noticed her as plain Molly McPherson. While 
this lady was in the character of my Protegée, another sham
Marchioness came to pay her a visit; she was a lady who had been
in high keeping with the late worthy honest Marquis of A——, who
had no fault on earth, but too great an attachment to the brandy
bottle, in which he'd indulge with any of his own servants, from
the hour he rose in the morning, till he'd get so drunk as not to
be able to walk through the streets; and many and many a time, has
this most noble peer visited me in that state—a state of utter
stupefaction. Among other no less curious anecdotes which this
lady amazed us with, was an assurance, that though the Marquis had
kept her in her coach for several years, she had in all that time
no sort of connection with him; with astonishment, we both asked
her in a breath, for what purpose he had kept her? "for merely the
unspeakable pleasure" answered she archly, "of picking, washing,
and cleaning my pretty little toes, which he took great delight
in, and in which pleasurable, innocent, and inoffensive pastime he
as often spent hours; 'twas the greatest gratification to him on
earth, nor did he (said she) indulge in any other, as in all the
time we spent together, he never was even rude enough to give me a
kiss; however I amply made up for the time I lost with this poor
drunken peerless Peer, as the instant he left me, I sent for my
poor friend Frank Mc G——, and with him enjoyed every luxury of
love,—both laughing heartily at ——'s whimsical letch.' She told
me, however, that her friend who was a married man, and had at
that time an excellent employment in La Touche's bank, was some
time before the Marquis's death obliged to abscond, he having made
too free with the cash, his connection with her, having given him
too great a taste for dissipation and debauchery of all kinds.
Observing that my two Marchionesses were extremely fond of each
other, I invited my fair visitor, for she really was a charming
creature, to spend some time in my house en famille, which she,
nothing loth, gladly accepted of, in consequence of which I also
introduced her as the titular Marchioness Dowager of A—— to all my
friends, and very shortly she became a great favourite, for she
was a sprightly, gay, agreeable woman, sung an arch song with a
great deal of humour, and often has set the table in a roar with
whimsical accounts of her toe-picking Marquis of harmless memory.

—My mock Marchionesses drew a great deal of company, for as I said
before, they had much to say for themselves, and the very name of
receiving civilities from ladies, who had been favourites of the
first men in the kingdom, was such a stimulus to the gay, the
unthinking and the giddy, that neither of my Marchionesses ever
slept a night unoccupied while they remained in Pitt-street, which
was near nine months, during which time they realized upwards of
three hundred pounds each, besides paying me very genteely and
honourably; and then took flight for England, accompanied with two
veteran officers, one a Lieutenant Colonel, the other a Major, who
took such a liking to them, that for the last three months, they
were scarcely ever out of my house; and though the younger of them
was past his grand climacteric, yet they both confessed they had
never been better pleased in their lives—repeating the old adage,
"that old cocks tread sure", and so it really happened, for
McPherson left the kingdom great with child — so much for the
nobility.

And now I shall descend to the lady of a celebrated itinerant
pedlar, one Bennett, well known in the Masonic world, by a
humorous song that was composed on him, on his applying to a most
respectable lodge to be admitted one of their fraternity, with the
reception he met with from them; a full, witty and whimsical
account of which, with notes critical and explanatory, my readers
will find in the edition of Ahiman Rezon (printed by my dear and
worthy friend Tommy Wilkinson of Winetavern-street) dedicated to
the Master, Wardens, and Brethren of the Orange Lodge of Belfast,
beginning with

"How Bennett was made, a pedlar by trade,
A Mason of whimsical order;
We stript him quite bare, deprived him of hair,
And painted his skin like a border, &c. &c."

Mrs. Elizabeth Bennett, alias Betty Quigley, was as fine a woman
as ever I beheld; a face like an angel, a complexion equal to the
lily and the rose, bewitching eyes, and a bosom like hillocks of
driven snow, which rose, as Chesterfield said, in his elegant song
of "Fanny blooming fair," than which the English language can't
possibly produce a better, "suing to be pressed." Mrs. Bennett,
when she came to my house, was about forty, quite in the
embonpoint order, which was the rage, and why not? when the heir
apparent sighed for nothing less, than fat, fair, and forty,—with
b——m and b——b——s in abundance, just such a woman was Mrs. Bennet,
with a luscious county of Kerry brogue which rendered her all
captivating; on her introduction to me she accosted me with "Arrah
my dear Mrs. Leeson, or Mrs. Plunkit—but by my soul I know you
better by the name of Plunkit, for I have been after hearing of
you since I was dat high, you see I have come all the phay from
Waterford, to be after spending a few days in your mighty
agreeable company, and I have brought you a prisant or two to
ensure my whelcome;" on which she drew from her pocket, a piece of
the most beautiful embroidered muslin I ever beheld, which she
told me she had smuggled, with a variety of other valuables, from
the East India fleet, when they lay in the river Shannon, which
was the first place she had been tempted to share her person with
any man but her husband; that in the town of Tralee some revenue
officers had seized a great parcel of goods from her, after she
had returned from the fleet, and that in order to have them
restored, her husband being then in Cork gaol, she had permitted
one of the principal officers to take what liberties he pleased
with her, in consequence of which, as she remained in sweet Tralee
for upwards of eight months, she brought poor Bennett home all the
contraband goods, with a chopping boy into the bargain, whom she
was delivered of in about two months after her return. However
Bennett could not relish the latter, though she honestly told him,
she had prostituted herself for his sake, in order to regain his
property; and this in some degree appeased him, especially when he
was told the officer was the gentleman who officiated as master,
when he was initiated into the mysteries of freemasonry in the
county of Cork: she also informed me, that Bennett having been
released from prison, by virtue of an insolvent act, they had
taken up their abode in Waterford, where they kept a little shop
since the year 1780; that however as her husband grew old he grew
peevish, and at length became intolerable, continually upbraiding
her with her faux pas, and beating and abusing her constantly, in
consequence of which she had scraped all she could together, money
and effects, and had come up to town, in order to make the most of
her person she possibly could, and she had no doubt of success, as
she'd be quite a new face on the town, and if her glass did not
deceive her, she was still what the men call a damn'd good piece,
and so she must have been, as in all my life I never saw, with all
her vulgarity, a more dashing looking woman, nor with all, a more
innocent or generous creature; indeed she fascinated all who
conversed with her; her open innocent, sweet countenance, her
broad county of Kerry brogue, "haw dau you dau my sweet friend,"
pronouncing the i's and u's so divinely broad, in short all-
together, that is, the tout ensemble, she was everything a man
could possibly wish; in fact she was what the French call a "je ne
sais quoi": This darling woman lived with me, esteemed by all who
knew her, until a countryman of her own, a Mr. O'Falvey, fell
desperately in love with her, and by flattery, presents, and
promises, prevailed on her to accompany him to that romantic
earthly paradise Killarney, from whence I received a letter from
her, not a month ago, expressive of her gratitude and the sense
she entertained of the civilities I had shown her, and promising
when an opportunity offered, to send me various rarities which
that country spontaneously abounded with; she also mentioned the
happy state she was in; that Bennett was no more, and that her
dear Falvey, by whom she was then with child, had made a honest
woman of her, as the poor dear simpleton termed her marriage to
us, which at once showed my girls and I the naiveté of the heart;
but as blind Billy Jenkins often says, "we were not angry with
her", 'twas merely the effusions of a honest simple heart. In her
letters she also informed me she kept her coach and was visited by
all the neighbouring families, who paid her every respect she
could possibly wish for.

Another of my visitors, was a fair lady of the name of Mrs.
Roberts—she was a foundling, whom the unnatural parent left at the
door of a Mr. Roberts, Batchelor's-walk; he caused her to be sent
to nurse, and reared her at his own expense, until she was ten
years old, when the spirit of infamy began to appear.-Mr. R—— was
very fond of her, and used to have her in his office, out of which
she contrived to take a hundred pound bank note, which she gave to
a John Cunningham, a cadet servant, who visited the girls of the
house, and who was hanged a few months afterwards for the robbery
of the North mail.—Mr. R. good natured enough, sent Mary to board
and lodge with a woman in the county Wicklow, near the Dargle,
when in a little time she became acquainted with a Mr. N—— B——,
who prevailed on her to quit her lodgings and go home with him,
where she did not long behave herself prudently. He came home one
night intoxicated, with a large sum of money, fifty guineas of
which she, though young (only twelve years old) found means to
conceal in the folds of her petticoats, which being discovered by
B——, he dismissed her, giving her but a solitary guinea for her
past services.—She immediately set off from the Cross-roads, and
meeting a carman, who told her he was going to Dublin, she
embraced the opportunity and went with him; he left her in a
cellar in Mary's-lane, which we called a preferrer's for under
servants; here she took lodgings at the moderate rate of sixpence
a week. Not long after she was noticed by a Mr. H—— of the Custom
House, who being amorously inclined, hired her; she lived with
this gentleman some short time; though short, she found means to
ease him of a great part of his property, which was considerable,
but he, inclined to dissipation, did not discover his inamorata 
until reduced to the last extremity; she being young, and he being
unwilling to expose himself, after getting the duplicates of
clothes and some few articles of plate, turned her off: being now
deprived of every friend, and money, except what trifle she had
after leaving H——, she became troublesome to every passenger, by
means of a notorious set of robbers who she became acquainted
with—being smart and pretty, they employed her as a decoy duck,
she picked up every unwary person, and brought them into lanes
appointed by this banditti, by whom the unfortunate men were
stripped of money and wearing apparel—the chief places for these
depredations were a lane in Jervis-street, Boot-lane, Green-street
and Marlborough-green; among these fellows was one Lynch, a
robber, of infamous memory, who took her to himself, and prevented
any more street walking; he took rooms for her in Grafton-lane,
and lived with her until he finished his career at the end of a
rope in front of the New Prison—Mary being left sole heiress of
this man's plunder, took a house in Strand-street, where she
employed a few of her former thieving acquaintances, to assist her
in depriving her unfortunate guests of every moveable; and her
ingenuity was such, that at night she appeared as a grey headed
old woman, and by day as a smart girl; by this means she evaded
justice, and having saved some money in this very profitable
employment, she quit her retirement and purchased a house in
Abbey-street, where she became so troublesome that the neighbours
resented her as a nuisance, and she was expelled that street by
the grand jury, whereupon she purchased a house in Camden-street,
where she now lives: I beg leave to add, that this lady would
never have had a place in my memoirs, but that she introduced
herself to me as an innocent country girl, whose parents abandoned
her, and wished to put herself under my protection; but a very
short period indeed, discovered to me the very dangerous inmate I
had, for she improved on my old acquaintance C——e, and probably
would have plundered me of the whole of my property, had I not
discovered her in time; I hope therefore the unwary will be on
their guard against her, which indeed was my only motive for her
introduction here.

My next boarder was a Margaret Whittle, alias P——rt——r; she was
the daughter of a very respectable farmer in the county of
Wicklow, she married the unfortunate and wretched P——r, when very
young, he being the son of a much esteemed clergyman in Whittle's
neighbourhood, and a magistrate of the county; soon after she was
married to the besotted P——r, he set up an extensive shop in
Dublin, where my unfortunate heroine first became acquainted with
a Lieutenant W——ms, brother-in-law to the famous Mrs. Sinnott, who
procured through her influence with her Rt. Hon. Paramour, a
commission for him in the army: for we all know,

"A beauteous sister, or convenient wife,
Are prizes in the lottery of life."

After W——ms's appointment in the army, he and his sister-in-law
frequently visited Mrs. P——r, until poor P——r failed; after which
W——ms entirely took up his residence there, and Mrs. P——r in
consequence, declined any longer intimacy with Sinnott; the fact
was, she was well inclined to commence business in that line
herself; else distress could not have occasioned her lapse from
virtue, as she plundered her unfortunate husband on his failure,
of near three hundred pounds in specie, and a vast quantity of
clothes and jewels, which she was absolutely in possession of,
when she became a votary of the Paphian Queen of fond desires,
Mrs. Sinnott has been often heard to declare, she would exert
every nerve and sinew to serve Mrs. P——r in her new mode of life,
and wished of all things on earth to fix her in some situation in
her own line,—a demi-rep of some consequence, with her coach and
suite of servants; but the depraved P——r was far from being
discreet, if she was, no lady of the ton would have had a better
chance;

"With her stand by, clear the way."

In fact, before she was two months on the town, she became so
common, that Mrs. Sinnott broke off all connection with her; and
yet notwithstanding her abandonment, the unfortunate P——r, is 
happy to share her favour with every ruffian who can "a crown
afford," honestly confessing his own weakness, but declaring that
it totally proceeds from his affection for her, exclaiming that,
"Angels were painted fair to look like her."

He some time ago made some effort to get into the army, and
applied by memorial to the commander in chief for that purpose:
however, that great and good character, on hearing of P——'s
conduct, declared he would not disgrace the military character, by
recommending such a contented nincompoop to any appointment in the
service, lest,

"Boys should hoot the cuckold as he passes."

P——'s conduct being too gross for my acquaintance, I gave her
warning to quit Pitt-street, and forgave her some trifle she owed
me, in consequence of her speedy compliance; as I was apprehensive
if she remained much longer with me, she'd bring a reflection on
the credit of my house, which was always the resort of the most
luxurious and licentious votaries of the little God, but never of
the abandoned and depraved.
[Note: Mrs. Porter now figures away in a neat furnished house in
Mark-street, where she has a resort of the best company;
particularly a noble D—— who is passionately fond of her; her
chief delight, is boasting to her votaries of the presents she
receives from her "noble slave," as she terms him, particularly a
DIAMOND RING, a late offerihg of his, to this frail beauty.]

The evening of the day that Mrs. P—— took her departure, a Mrs.
Dalzell from the county Down, begged leave to see me; she was a
fine person of a woman, with a beautiful face and gilt to the
water edge, a very soleil royal; she was accompanied by another
pretty little woman of her own complexion, a Mrs. B——, yclept the
Bantry Ginger; these ladies told me, they had the misfortune both
to be married to creatures whom they, from their souls despised,
poor contented cuckolds, who would gladly make the most of them.
Mrs. D—— told me she kept a tavern in the town of Belfast, where
she had left her cara sposa, who was himself a butter-buyer of
some eminence; and Mrs. B—— informed me her husband had been a
carpenter of some repute in the county of Cork, had afterwards
commenced pedlar, and latterly, after having made a good deal of
money through her exertions, had set up a shop in this city, where
he was doing well, but yet his ignorance and vulgarity were so
conspicuous, she was ashamed to be seen in his company, or to
acknowledge him for a husband: both the ladies indeed seemed to
vie with each other who should abuse her dear partner most; and
both, I do verily believe, had sufficient cause; Mrs. Dalzell in
particular, who was a charming agreeable woman, with a pleasing
Scotch accent, whereas Mrs. B—— appeared to be a little termagant,
a vulgar Munster broganier vixen, with nothing to recommend her
but her complexion; they both honestly acknowledged, they had in
their time formed many connections; and the lively Dalzell
laughing told me, she had frequently, when her husband had got
inebriated in the forenoon (which had often been the case and gone
to bed), invited her gallant up to his room, and obliged him to
gratify his and her desires in the very bed with her snoring hog,
and by his side, to the no small terror of her affrighted friend,
who was apprehensive of Dalzell's waking and finding him in her
arms; however she told me, she delighted in trying the constancy,
bravery, and prowess of her paramour in this manner, and no doubt
it was a tryal with a vengeance, as her poor lover stood a chance
of being murdered, or if he escaped death, of being ruined by a
suit, instituted against him for crim. con. but little did the
volatile lascivious Dalzell care for the fate of either husband or
gallant, so she had satisfied her own whims, and had her laugh;
indeed she has declared to me, the wicked devil, she often sported
in her amorous dalliances more than was necessary, on purpose if
possible to waken her stupid somniferous brute, and make him
sensible of the manner she returned his infamous and besotted
treatment, and slight of her world of charms; and I must confess,
she was wife fit for any man in Europe; she also sung charmingly;
among many other compositions was the following, which she told
me, was addressed to herself by a Mr. F——ch——r, who first caused
her to stray from the paths of virtue and morality.

"When first I saw, then just eighteen,
My sweet Dalzell appear,
Methought 'twas love's majestic queen,
With her enchanting air;
I gaz'd! I wish'd! I lov'd! I sigh'd!
I doted on her charms;
Ye Gods what cruel fates deny'd,
This treasure to my arms?
And shall a stupid brute refuse,
Such bliss, by Heaven design'd,
When lovely, she might justly choose
A sentimental mind.
Think not, my fair, on censuring crowds,
Who envy you, your worth;
Your spotless fame, above the clouds,
Shall daily blazon forth:
Then grant to him, who loves you well,
The greatest bliss above;
And free from torment worse than hell,
A soul who's chain'd to love:
Give to his arms your lovely self,
That he may boast that bliss,
Above parade or worldly pelf,
To die upon a kiss."

This sweet though eccentric woman lived with me very near a year,
after which, having made some money, she took it into her head to
go off to America, that glorious land of liberty, and where that
was, it was her country, where she soon got married to a very
wealthy planter, with whom she lives contented and happy. As for
the Bantry Ginger, her husband was arrested for debts she had
contracted to a large amount and thrown into prison; and she
herself, by what I can understand, is contented now to char about
the prison, and dispense her favours around, for a casual support:
for my part I have always hated her, an insignificant, vulgar,
presuming creature, of very dishonest principles, who has made
shift to cheat and rob me, in the space of a very short time, of
upwards of forty guineas—exclusive of which, she thought proper to
pilfer from every man who had connection with her, who all
complained of her base, mercenary disposition. I must here premise
to my moral readers, and I hope I may have many, that I would not
have admitted these last two married ladies, or any others in that
line, to an asylum in my nunnery, had they not given me perfect
assurances they had followed that course of life for a length of
time; that their husbands were well apprised of their profligacy,
and that they were determined to take their own way; no, no, 'tis
well known I never consented to the deflowering of virgin
innocence; the seduction of a married woman, nor did I ever with
my will, wish to entertain a married man in my house; but if it
should so happen, I always took care they should meddle with no
lady, if I could help it, who was not perfectly safe; many married
women have applied to me, in the absence of their husbands, for
lodgings for a few nights, without success; I even refused a
certain lady well known in the fashionable world, and her spirited
admirer, an appointment in my house to carry on their intrigue, in
consequence of which they were obliged to resort to other methods,
which led to a discovery, and turned the parties into ridicule and
contempt; even a Reverend Divine, and the seduced wife of his
friend and patron, I treated in the same manner, reprimanding her
in very severe terms, and telling him he was a scandal and
disgrace to his cloth; but enough of this digression, I must not
tire the reader with numberless applications of this kind that
occurred every day, but proceed to my own story.


CHAP. XXX.
ONE NIGHT as Mrs. M'Clean, Fanny Beresford, Miss Grove and myself
were playing a sober game of whist, we were interrupted by four
inebriated bloods, who swore we must leave off playing and retire
with them to another game: They were very young handsome fellows,
and so urgent, that we complied on certain conditions, that they
should deposit with us ten guineas each, and we agreed on our part
that for every perfect enjoyment, one should be returned; our
sparks closed the agreement with a burning smack each, and thus
coupled we retired to our respective apartments, under promise of
a disclosure of particulars the next morning at breakfast; when
lo! my gallant, was the only person who was able to draw a single
guinea; the other girls retained ten guineas each, and I nine, and
that, I must confess, was owing to my own wonderful exertions, as
I wished to lose a guinea or two if possible; as our beaux were so
deadly drunk, that they, as soon as they got into bed, dropped
instantly into the arms of Morpheus. This whimsical affair caused
great laughter, and poor a figure as my hero cut in the groves of
Venus, yet he certainly was the conqueror by a chalk, in
consequence of which, being part of the agreement the night
before, he was exempted from any club or expense in my house, and
came off Scot free, except the nine guineas; the three other
gentlemen looked rather blue upon the occasion; however it all
ended with a laugh, and placed to the score of immoderate
intoxication, for we all know that Bacchus and Venus never yet
agreed.

That morning two of our sparks, with Mrs. M'Clean and I, agreed to
take an excursion to the divine Lake of Killarney, and in our way
to touch upon Youghal, Mallow, Limerick, &c. &c. and pass as
married people; accordingly, the gentleman who drew the guinea the
night before fell to my lot, and I was not sorry for it, as he was
a fine dashing fellow, and was, and had the means to be as
generous as a prince; he was well acquainted in the country, and
knew almost everybody; M'Clean's friend, whose name was O'Brien,
was also well acquainted in many parts of the country we were to
pass through, and accordingly on the very next morning, early, we
set off in my coach, attended by two footmen in laced liveries
(belonging to our beaux) very well mounted, and without meeting
with any accident, or any extraordinary occurrence, Mr. and Mrs.
Purcell, Mr. and Mrs. O'Brien, for these were the names we went
by, and their suite, after remaining some days in Limerick,
Youghal, Mallow, &c. &c. (in all which towns we went into public,
and received the visits of some of the first people of
consequence, for our characters escaped totally unknown) arrived
in Killarney on the first day of June, 1789, and putting up at the
best inn, and a remarkable good one it was, built for the
accommodation of visitors, by Lord Ken-mare; my friend sent to a
Mr. Walter Eager, an acquaintance of his, to request his company
to sup, and with him everything was settled for our next day's
entertainment; Lord Kenmare's barge was bespoke, as was also her
worthy coxswain Mr. Barry; a band of music was also provided, with
patteraroes, and every requisite to render the excursion as
delightful as possible; and while these matters were adjusting, I
privately stepped out, having first enquired for the house, to see
my fair and amiable friend, Mrs. O'Falvey, formerly Bennett, and
have some chat with her; 'tis impossible for me to describe the
ecstasy she was in at meeting me, she clasped me round the neck
and perfectly cried on my bosom; at length, however, when she was
a little calm, we both agreed to be totally secret, with respect
to what we knew of each other, and resolved that after my return,
Mrs. Falvey should pay me a visit, and represent me to her Kerry
friends, as a lady who had once been a great friend to her; and
she was to give the same instructions to her husband, who was a
gentleman of great worth and honour, and in whom any confidence
might be reposed; however, upon due consideration, Mr. Falvey was
totally averse to the matter, "My dear Peg," said he, "Mrs.
Falvey's reputation would be totally ruined, amidst a circle of
respectable acquaintance with whom she must always reside, if your
story should be blasted, which may be the case, considering the
variety and extent of your connections, and the number of people
who visit this place at this season of the year; whereas, my dear
woman, if you should be found out to-morrow, you can return to
your own house at will, and the only consequence that might result
from the discovery, would be a few tilting matches, which your
supposed cara sposa might be engaged in, in consequence of his
introducing a lady of your complexion, under the character of a
wife, to the hospitable and genteel inhabitants of this village;—
had Purcell been married to you, though a whole camp, pioneers and
all, had tasted your sweet body, it would not have signified; Mrs.
S——e of Cork, was never thought the worse of, though a common
prostitute, after S——e made her his wife; nor was Mrs. D——e, who
was visited by the Countess of S—— and the first people in the
county, after she had become the wife of her fool; but your case
is widely different—therefore I would humbly submit to your better
judgement, whether it would not be better for you and my sweet
Betsy, to appear as total strangers to each other, except what may
arise from your intercourse here; especially as Betsy is looked
upon as a girl who never made a slip in her life, except in her
marriage with the pedlar, as any indiscretion she might have been
guilty of, in order to recover her India goods, never came to
light, her friend being more the man of honour, and the man every
way, than to kiss and tell; no doubt suspicions went abroad, as
his conduct on the trial was thought most extraordinary; but it
never went farther than bare surmise"; Falvey's arguments were
deemed so good, that everything he advanced was thought
unanswerable, and the ladies parted, to meet the next morning as
utter strangers, of which I was to apprize M'Clean. On the morning
following, we accordingly took boat at Ross Castle, M'Clean and I,
and our two male friends; Falvey and his wife, who had been
invited by O'Brien, Mr. and Mrs. Eager, and Mrs. C-—ll, the latter
of whom I must recollect to give some account of (as her memoirs
are most curious) Mr. and Mrs. McGillicuddy, Mr. and Mrs. B——n——h—
—tt, Sir B—— D—— and his Lady, a Miss Chute, the grand-daughter of
one Paradine, a slater, of Tralee, who was married to a Captain in
the army, whose name I totally forget; a Mr. and Mrs. S——al——y,
and a Mr. John Lewis Fitzmaurice, Beaucoup de Tournack, and our
worthy coxswain Mr. Barry.—The morning was remarkably fine, and as
we took boat at five o'clock, we sailed through the lower and
upper lakes, shot the bridge, fired our patteraroes at the Eagle's
Nest; purchased salmon of the haul; bought filberts from pretty
little naked wood nymphs of the several islands we passed; enjoyed
the delight of the chase on the water, with the melodious notes of
the stag hounds, re-echoed a thousand times over; and at about
five o'clock dined in the beautiful and romantic island of
Innisfallen, where I left my name, and the names of the whole
company, on one of the windows of the banquetting room, with my
diamond ring: Heavens! what a place was here for love!!! I heard a
gentleman of my acquaintance declare, "If he had enjoyed the
pleasures of the Lake, for a day, with the ugliest old hag of four
score, and that there was no other object near him, to satiate his
desires, he could not possibly help being enamoured with her, nor
could he avoid enjoying her, if enjoyment could be obtained by
force or otherwise." Our salmon were divided in large cuts, and
roasted on wooden skewers, round a fire of wood, and so delectable
a treat I never partook of in my life: When the fishermen hauled
in their nets, they permitted the gentlemen to pick three of the
largest for half a crown, and I was informed they would have been
perfectly satisfied with a shilling; exclusive of the salmon we
had ham and fowls, a cold sirloin of beef, cold neat's tongue, a
cold mutton pie, an apple pie, some cheesecakes, a parcel of the
finest cack-a-gee cider I ever smacked, with porter, Madeira,
perry, sherry, port, claret, and some very excellent Nantes
brandy, that never was contaminated by the odious dip of a revenue
rule, as also a bottle of the real North Country native, got on
purpose for my companion M'Clean, for which she had the most
unconquerable partiality. After we had dined, we were regaled with
some of the finest gun-powder tea I ever tasted; 'twas most
delicious, and procured for us by Mr. Eager, who was a revenue
officer; he told me he bought a large parcel of it on board the
Lord Holland, a few years before, for about five shillings a
pound, and generously gave M'Clean and I a couple of pounds each,
at the same price. Towards dusk we rambled about the charming
island of Innisfallen; and Purcel and I could not resist the
temptation of enjoyment under a lofty oak, and miraculously
escaped detection, as the instant we were missed the whole island
resounded with the names of Mr. and Mrs. Purcell—stole away—stole
away—hark away, &c. &c. When it became quite dark we returned to
town, and ended the bewitching regatto with an elegant supper, and
a dance at the inn. The next morning, early, the same party, with
the addition of a Mr. and Mrs. Gunn, betook ourselves to our boat,
and after visiting all the islands, a whimsical motion was made by
Mr. Gunn, i.e. that each married couple should be landed on
different islands, and left there to amuse themselves in the best
manner they could for three or four hours, after which our
coxswain, Mr. Barry, was to sail round the several islands with
any of the company who would wish to remain in the boat, and pick
the different couples up, at the same time smilingly saying, that
each lady and gentleman might personate an Adam and Eve in the
Garden of Eden; the motion was seconded, and almost unanimously
agreed to; Mr. and Mrs. Gunn, Mr. and Mrs. McGillicuddy, Mr. and
Mrs. Fitzmaurice, Mr. and Mrs. B——tt, and Mrs. O'Brien, alias
M'Clean, and her admirer; Mr. and Mrs. Eager, Miss Chute, and a
Mr. Fitzgerald her admirer; Mr. and Mrs. Falvey, Mr. and Mrs. C——
ll, my friend Purcell and I were landed on ten separate islands;
the most beautiful our coxswain could hit upon amidst the heavenly
variety, was appropriated to me; indeed the only person who
appeared a little squeamish on the occasion, and did not receive
the proposal with pleasure, was Mrs. C——ll, but more of this lady
hereafter: Purcell and I were landed on Miss Plummer's Island,
where the arbutus, the geranium, the jasmine, and all the
evergreens that ever nature formed, grew majestically
spontaneously from solid rocks; and here, just when the sun was in
its highest meridian, did we refine upon ecstatic luxuries, like
our first parents in the Garden of Eden; we sauntered through this
beautiful paradise, where the charming Plummer, once left her
fragrant stream, from whence it borrowed its name; we also took
refreshments with us, as did every other couple; and with great
regret, after spending upwards of three hours in this divine
place, we left the island, but not until Purcell carved upon a
venerable oak, with his pen-knife, the following inscription,
being determined to leave Killarney the next morning.

"Be it remembered, that on the third day of June, 1789, the divine
Margaret Leeson of Pitt-street, in the city of Dublin, with her
lover, enjoyed every pleasure the most refined love could imagine,
in this luxurious spot, with her own Purcell; her enraptured lover,
humbly presumes to alter the name of this enchanting island from
Plummer to that of Leeson."

After our return to our Inn, we all supped together, when Betsy
Falvey took an opportunity of letting me know that C——
notwithstanding her prudery was no better than she should be, that
she was the daughter of one Attwood, a blind brogue-maker, of
Tralee, and had when on a visit with an uncle of hers in Cork, one
Anthony Gumble Croneen, given her fair hand to a married man,
though warned of the consequences, and assured from the very best
authority, that Mrs. Maudsly was living, for Maudsly the man whom
she espoused, gave out that his wife was dead; but notwithstanding
all these warnings, and the many letters she received on the
business, the guilty wretch married John Cavendish Maudsly; the
consequence of which was, he was prosecuted for bigamy in about a
month after his marriage, by his real wife's friends, who were
people of the first respectability, and sentenced to
transportation for life. A few years after which Mr. C—— took her
for better for worse, without connections, beauty, fortune,
sentiment, wit or reputation: and now my dear Purcell, said my
agreeable Betsy, don't you think my Falvey made a much better
choice? on which I told her, he certainly had, that C—— had not
only been guilty of gross prostitution and adultery, but had been
the cause of separating man and wife, and of ruining the wretch
she had unlawfully married. After spending a most agreeable night,
and taking leave of our Killarney friends, we separated, and the
next morning at the first dawn began our journey to the little
village, and breakfasting at Shine's before eight o'clock, we
dined at Macroom, and lay that night at Cork, where we spent a
week; and Daly's company of comedians being then there, we
exhibited our charms every night in the boxes; however I was too
well known in Cork not to be immediately recognized, in
consequence of which, and the visits of some buckeens there, that
became troublesome, we resolved to shift the scene, and return to
Pitt-street as soon as possible, but not as Mrs. Purcell and Mrs.
O'Brien, but in our own proper characters,—as the identical Leeson
and McClean; this frolic had however like to turn out very
serious, as our sparks were called out two or three times, by some
spirited gentlemen in the county of Kerry, for presuming to
introduce women of our description under the colour of their
wives, into their families; and poor Purcell in particular, was
wounded in the right shoulder very desperately, though I must do
him the justice to say, he behaved as brave as any man in his
situation possibly could;—indeed upon mature deliberation, I do
not think we carried the joke too far, though at the same time, I
solemnly declare I never spent my time more agreeably in my life,
particularly the scenes in Plummer's Island shall never be
forgotten, "whilst memory holds a seat in this distracted globe."

"Killarney Lake, how sweet its smiles,
With verdant hills and stately isles,
And buildings, many lofty piles,
And ever blooming Berry.
Of all the seats give me Dunlow,
Where gaiety smiles, and bumpers flow,
And heavenly scenes divinely show,
A paradise in Kerry."

While I was on this party, I by chance met with my old
acquaintance, Mr. Ned T——ns——d, who some years before made a noise
in that part of the country, from the following circumstance.—At
the time of our glorious Volunteers, those real disinterested
saviours of their country, when 'twas deemed dishonourable not to
be accoutred a la militare; this gentleman, by way of jest, formed
a corps of his own choice, consisting of a few eccentric men of
fortune and fashion, who called themselves JOLLY DOGS, wearing
white coats faced with green, with white waistcoats and breeches,
all embroidered with silver, and most curious epaulets, extremely
rich, of black and silver, each resembling the p——vi——s of a man,
beautifully executed, and this passed so well that they went into
every public place, and mixed with all companies with these b——wd—
—y epaulets, totally unnoticed, except by a few intimates in the
male line, who to be sure, could not keep the joke from their
wives;—for this curious corps were all married men of avowed
gallantry; to make therefore some eclat, as they never appeared
under arms, they gave a splendid regatta, to which all the quality
in the neighbourhood were invited; and when the boat-race, and the
amusements of the water were over, we were regaled in a beautiful
island belonging to Mr. Thomas Green, with every viand and
beverage the East and West Indies, and Europe could produce, and
in the midst of this hilarity, the ladies began to admire the
uniforms of the JOLLY DOGS; one in particular, a Miss F——m——g,
declared she'd purchase a uniform, and become a Jolly Dog, "That
you can't, Betty, by G——,' said Ned T——ns——d, 'but I'll tell you
what will answer the same purpose and you'll be up to it to a
shaving, you may purchase the uniform, and call yourself a proud
b——tch." The young lady, who was an innocent good creature, was so
incensed that she burst into tears—but as for my part, I actually
bought a riding dress, made up after the same fashion, epaulets
and all, and on my return to town sported it at the play house, on
the Circular Road, and everywhere I went, for the remainder of
that summer, telling everyone I had joined a corps of proud b——
tches in the barony of West Carberry.


CHAP. XXXI.
A DAY or two after my arrival from this pleasant and never to be
forgotten excursion, I had discovered that during my absence, Miss
Grove and Miss Philips, two ladies that I had as boarders, led
such a life of riot and dissipation as really to be a nuisance to
the neighbourhood; this circumstance gave me a considerable share
of anxiety, as my house was ever known to be as quiet and regular
as anyone in town, and upon a more minute examination, I found the
former of these ladies, had made free with a large quantity of my
furniture, which she contrived to get out of the house, under
pretence of exchanging them by my directions, for some of more new
and fashionable patterns, she sure enough made the exchange, but
it was for money, to Mr. F—— of Bride's-alley, who, Jew-like, gave
about the eighth of the value. This conduct determined me to
lessen my family, and as God had assisted my industrious
endeavours, with what a moderate person would call independence, I
began to reflect that it was high time for me to think of retiring
from business, I accordingly agreed with a gentleman in the
building line, to complete a house for me on a lot of ground I had
taken on the Black Rock road, it was to be finished in a year in
the most complete and comfortable manner, and for which I
contracted to pay five hundred guineas. I determined to have one
year or two more of pleasure, and then take my leave of public
business, and get into the shade of retirement, to pass the
remainder of my days in ease and independence. This resolution I
was fully determined to carry into execution, and the first step I
was induced to take was, to not only contract my family, but also
to select my visitors, and by degrees to wean myself from the
round of company and dissipation I was accustomed to move in; I
therefore instantly discharged Miss Grove and her vicious
companion Philips, and took into my house Fanny Beresford, of whom
I made former mention; this young woman was of a sweet
disposition, and in whose company I found real pleasure—she was of
a most reputable family, who gave her an excellent education; she
was my principal amanuensis, and who prepared these my adventures
for the press. Just at this time, she was engaged in an amorous
and whimsical adventure, the relation of which amused me very
much, and as she was the principal actress in it, I shall beg
leave to give it a place here.

She had been taken into keeping by a Lieutenant B——e, and lived
very pleasant and happily with him at the barrack in Arklow, where
he was quartered, 'till this adventure caused a temporary
separation. I shall give it to the reader in her own words.—
"I was surprised with a visit from two of my old friends in Dublin,
who came to Arklow on purpose to see me; one was a young printer,
and the other the son of a very eminent tea-merchant, Mr. H——n. It
was in the Whitsun holidays that these young bloods, well mounted,
made their appearance, assuming the character of Peers, with their
stars and other symbols of nobility, and to do them but common
justice, they acted their parts to admiration, as they were vastly
more generous, and had more cash, than many of our sprigs of
fashion and rank; these, I say, arrived about eleven o'clock in the
morning, and as my gentleman had dined that day at Wicklow,
insisted that I should dine with them at the inn, to which
invitation I consented; they prevailed on me to take advantage of
the absence of my friend and accompany them to Dublin, and I not 
much liking a secluded country life, and fond of variety, agreed to
the proposal with pleasure; and while dinner was getting ready,
every preparation was made, a horse hired, and I took an
opportunity of equipping myself for the journey, which I had some
difficulty of doing, as our movements were beginning to take wind;—
however, after dinner, on pretence of taking a ride, we took to the
road, caring little for what I left behind, and knowing my friend
was too generous to withhold my clothes and trunks, we pursued our
way to Wicklow: indeed a thousand times I was sorry for the
precipitate step I had taken, for if we had met my gentleman coming
home from Wicklow, I knew the consequence must have terminated very
unpleasantly; however on we went, but to our very great amazement,
after we were from Arklow about four miles, and on getting on a
rising ground, we perceived a troop of horse after us; no doubt my
flight being discovered, and the fear of the vengeance of the
Lieutenant, was the cause of the pursuit; however my two friends
were not at all dismayed, prevailed on me to quit the high road,
and take refuge with them in a cabin that lay at the end of a field
near hand, and my friend Type, whose presence of mind never forsook
him, gave half-a crown to a countryman, to tell, when enquiry was
made from him by the troop, that he saw us return to Arklow through
a bye-road (very fortunately one offered itself to his view) which
he pointed out; this had the desired effect, and after our pursuers
returned, and was out of sight, we set spurs to our horses,
continued our journey, and arrived safe at Wicklow at ten o'clock
that night; we immediately called for supper, and in the interim a
quarrel arose between my conductors, relative to me, each insisting
on the possession of me for the night; it was referred to myself,
and as it would be unjust to give a preference to one, I
recommended they should draw lots for the prize: this idea was
immediately adopted, and my friend the Grocer was the happy man;
this was no sooner settled, than we were surprized with the voice
of the Lieutenant; we knew he had been in the house, as my two
friends breakfasted there in the morning, and had seen him, and as
they were intimately acquainted, the Lieutenant expressed his
sorrow, that he could not be in Arklow to receive them at dinner;
and on our arrival the first question we asked was, whether he was
in the house, and was answered by the waiters, that he was, and in 
company with a club of gentlemen: this you may be sure made us more
circumspect; however to put the best face on the matter, I went to
my bed-chamber where I ordered my supper, after binding the waiters
to secrecy; and the Lieutenant supped with my two friends, they
assuring him, his fair mistress was quite inconsolable for his
company at Arklow, and he was determined to set off at the first
light, so as to surprise her at breakfast. You may be sure my dear
friend, my situation was not of the pleasantest; but to corn-pleat
this chapter of accidents, my friend Type played a deep game; after
getting his friend dead drunk, he slipped from table and took
possession of my chamber, where he fortified himself by placing a
chest of drawers and half a dozen chairs against the door, and then
very soberly stripped himself and slipped into my bed, where I had
been about a hour. I was not very sorry for this trick upon the
grocer, but I was apprehensive in revenge he would "peach," and so
make terrible work; however he was so completely intoxicated he had
not the power to stir, and he was left on the floor by the
Lieutenant, who retired to his own room, and who at the peep of day
set out for Arklow: about three o'clock in the morning, Tea and
Sugar came to my door and demanded admittance, but he was soon
cooled by Type, who very deliberately got up, opened the door, and
dragged him by the feet down two pair of stairs, and left him to
ruminate on his adventures in a flagged hall. However at breakfast
all animosity was forgot, and I reconciled the friends by assuring
my Tea-selling spark, he should to a certainty have all his wishes
gratified in Dublin;—we after breakfast continued our way to town
through Bray, and arrived in town the same evening."

Here my friend Beresford concluded her story, and I was well
pleased with the favourable issue of this adventure, as I was ever
an enemy to quarrels of every kind, and I also had the
satisfaction by my interference, of reconciling the Lieutenant to
Fanny, with whom she lived 'till his regiment was ordered to his
own country (Scotland), and my fair friend was too much attached
to hers, to accept of his invitation to accompany him, after which
she returned to my house.

At a large party one night at my house, we had the pleasure of the
company of Colonel Mercer, who among a number of pleasant stories,
related the following, which is not generally known. It happened
in the 49th regiment, of which he was the Colonel. There was a
private soldier, whose mother nursed the colonel; this man had
several times deserted, but was by the good colonel got off from
punishment; it happened that the corporal, another soldier and
himself, not only had deserted but actually took away some
articles belonging to the regiment; it was during the American
war, where delinquents of this nature seldom escaped; they were
soon apprehended, tried by a general court martial, and sentenced
to be shot; this man as usual made application to the colonel, but
he declared, that to save him was totally out of his power, and
advised him to prepare for death;—the evening before the fatal
day, he entreated the favour of seeing the colonel, who did
accordingly attend him; he asked, was there no hope, no
possibility of changing the punishment, but the colonel solemnly
declared that his fate was fixed, and die he must; "Then sir,"
says the soldier, "I am perfectly well reconciled to my fate, I
have only one request to beg of you, which I cannot die in peace
till you grant, and which you must pledge your honour to fulfil,
it will not be attended with trouble, and the expense will not
amount to a guinea." The colonel imagining, it was some request he
had to make relative to his body, and without hesitation gave his
honour, his request should be complied with, "well then," says the
man, "you are a man of honour, and I shall die in peace, well
knowing you will be equal to your promise,—my request is, that
when I am shot dead, you will instantly in presence of the whole
regiment, turn up my body and kiss my a—e."

The colonel's promise was sacred and he could not be off; he
however so effectually exerted himself, as to prevent so
disagreeable an exhibition, and got a free pardon for the three
soldiers: he added, that after so narrow an escape the soldier
reformed, and turned out afterwards one of the best in the
regiment.

My readers must have recollected the celebrated Doctor Bell, the
magnetizer; among the rest of my visitors at that period he was
one, and a libidinous little dog he was; he frequently gave me and
my friends admission tickets, to hear his lectures and see his
experiments on somnambulism and sleep-walking; it was really
astonishing to see how the people (and the most sensible and best
informed too) were gulled by this foreign Chevalier d'Industrie;
he affected to show his mighty powers on a Miss W——r and several
others, and from his absolutely persuading them they were actually
asleep, strange to tell, they affected to nod. A gentleman
requested of the Doctor, to try his magnetic powers on him, and
send him to the regions of Morpheus, his answer was, that the
gentleman being in rude health, and having an athletic
constitution and strong nerves, he could not grant him his wish
immediately, but if he wished to be put in contact with a Mr.
Godsell a madman, who was then in company, he should be instantly
gratified with a paroxysm of madness, or if it was more agreeable
to him, he should have a raging fit of the gout, an inveterate
venereal complaint, or a burning fever, "which, sir, do you
prefer, either shan't last more than a hour?" The gentleman, who
was no other but Mr. L——e, made a precipitate retreat, almost
chilled with horror at the proposal, and left the doctor to exult
in his success; indeed the doctors fame was so industriously
spread about by his female disciples, Mrs. Fitzm——, Lady G——, Mrs.
S——, and a few old tabbies, who imagined he was the great Lama,
just come to diffuse universal knowledge and the cure of all
distempers. I shall forbear to mention the names of a number of
gentlemen who paid large premiums to this follower of Mesmer, to
be initiated into the occult sciences; among a variety of the
distempered who attracted my attention, round his wooden oval
machine, filled with coal ashes and dirt, and having crooked bars
of iron all round, opposite to each of which there was a chair,
and a patient, conveying the animal fluid, with their hands into
the system; I discovered a worthy old friend of mine, of whose
worth and abilities in his line, I was long acquainted with, it
was Mr. Charles C——, a celebrated watch-maker, who came for advice
for a complaint in his eyes, the Doctor after taking his guinea,
sent for a glass of water, and made him squat down on the floor,
and first opening the lash of the blind eye (he was then blind of
one eye) and after stroking it over with his magnet, closed it
again, he then opened the other, and dipping his magnet in the
water, let one drop fall into the eye, and then with a
consequential look and voice, pronounced "rise up sir, I pronounce
you a cure:" He then gave him the magnetized water, with strong
injunctions to expose it to the rays of the sun every morning to
retain its magnetic powers, and to use it as a lotion to
strengthen the cure; however: this curious eye water had such an
effect upon poor C——g, that a few weeks afterwards he was stone
blind, in which melancholy situation he continues to this day. The
Doctor soon after this wonderful cure, terminated his career in
Dublin, being detected in an amour with one of his fair disciples,
whom he had prevailed on to admit his animal fluid into the proper
receiver, which he assured her, would give her all the knowledge
she wished for, without the trouble of study; the discovery
compelled him to make a precipitate retreat: he then shifted his
quarters to Cork, where the novelty of his amazing art, gave him a
kind reception into the families of some of the first people in
that city, who immediately formed a club for propagating the
rudiments of that wonderful metaphysical science; his particular
intimates were, Doctors Longfield, Callanan, and Gibbings; Sir
Henry Mannix, Mr. Bousfreld, Mr. M.R. Westrop, Sir Robert Warren,
Mr. Leslie, Mr. Morrison, Messrs Hearvey and Deaves, Edmond R.
Kinselagh, Hickman and Grey, Sir R. Kellett, Mr. Bonwell, and
Father Synan, the celebrated Protestant Priest, &c. &c. &c. his
disciples and followers in that very hospitable city, and who paid
the Doctor largely for their initiation into the mysteries of
somnambulism, were very numerous; among which were Mr. White, Mr.
J. Franklin, Mr. Snowe, Mr. Bastable, and the Roscius Mr. Dan.
Connell;—Mr. Pope, Mr. George Jack, and the facetious Tommy
Howard; Messrs St Leger, Travers, T. Jones,—Wassy, Durden, Haly,
and Knapp, with numberless others whose names are not worth
enumerating;—but notwithstanding the powerful encouragement he met
with, from some fatality or other, he contracted debts he was
unable to satisfy, in consequence of which he was thrust into
gaol, where all his friends deserted him, which gave him an
opportunity of studying the occult sciences at his leisure: He was
afterwards liberated by the interference of the Humane Cork
Society, and went back to France (his native country) where
Robespierre's magnet (i.e. the guillotine) soon terminated his
career, and put him into a state of somnambulism from which he
will never awake.


CHAP. XXXII.
MRS. LEESON'S ECCENTRICITIES.

AS I found it impossible to introduce every remarkable occurrence
of my life, in the regular order it happened in; I appropriated a
book which I called my "Eccentricities;" and to which I committed
every little adventure, which I thought one day or other, would
afford me some entertainment; though I little thought then of
committing either them or any Memoirs of mine to the press. I am
therefore determined the public shall have them without variation
or alteration,—let them therefore speak for themselves.

One day in the month of July, 1791, Groves, O'Brien, Beresford,
Burnet, old Mrs. Sterling, Mrs. Bennis, a few more of the first
rate impures and I, attended by our Aid-de-Camp Squire C——e, took
an excursion to Rathfarnham, to view the charming retreat of
Captain Southwell, the little Dargle, and after very minutely
examining all the beauties of that enchanting spot, adjourned to
Laughlin's tavern, on the ponds, where we dined and spent the
remainder of the day; by accident the company of Printers and
Booksellers, amounting to upwards of fifty persons, happened to be
there also. After we had finished our dinner and drank half a
dozen of choice Champagne, we ordered wine, tea, &c. into the
garden, and were regaling ourselves very merrily when we were
waited upon by a deputation of six of that respectable body, who
hearing we were there, sent to compliment us; in consequence of
which I ordered more wine, and after finishing two or three
coopers, the lads of the Frisket insisted on treating us, which I
peremptorily refused, telling them, if they could drink a hogshead
in my company on such an occasion, they should not pay a farthing,
and accordingly more wine being brought in, my Typographers began
to grow fine and mellow, particularly the son of my poor friend
Bartle C——n the Hibernian Poet Laureate, who made some amorous
advances towards me, which fired the blood of my hero C——e between
whom and young C——n, a battle royal ensued in presence of the
whole company in the garden. In the course of the scuffle C——
pulled off Type's wig and threw it to Fanny Beresford, who
instantly went aside, and filled the brown-bob with the briny
produce of her luscious fountain, after which she returned it to
C—e, who not dreaming of its consecration, thrust it in its
inundated state into his Nankeen breeches, which caused a vast
deal of merriment, as notwithstanding the heat of Fanny's
constitution, poor C—found his privities extremely chilled, which
caused him in a paroxysm of rage to throw the well sluiced peruke
into a running brook at the bottom of the garden, from whence it
was carried off never to be recovered by the heir of old Bartle;
who was obliged to return to town with a handkerchief tied about
his bald pericranium, to the no small diversion of the company.—A
select party of these gentlemen did me the honour of supping at my
house that evening, and generously laid down a guinea each for
their entertainment, my friends Jack S——e and P—— W—— by their
lively wit and singularity of humour, keeping the table in a roar
the whole night.

One day that we spent at Drumcondra, Broadhead, our landlord, did
not as I thought treat us with that deference we expected, and
accordingly I left the following couplet, written with my diamond
pencil on one of his parlour windows,

"Not Broadhead but Flathead you surely should be,
As you're really a Flat, in the highest degree.
M.L."

One evening as Joe the game cock and I, were talking upon the
impossibility of the existence of such monsters as S——d——s and C——
t——s in such a land of beauty as ours; a loud rap announced some
person of consequence; when seeming terribly alarmed, lest it
might be Buck Lawless with whom I lived at that time, I requested
with tears in my eyes, his lordship would be kind enough to step
into a clothes-press which stood in my dressing room, and on his
lordship's politely complying, I turned the key on him, and amused
myself with my favourite L——g for about half a hour, when I walked
out with him, leaving his lordship a close prisoner till my
return, when I had the honour of liberating him, almost stifled
and pressed to death in the presence of eight or ten of my
laughter-loving wenches, who absolutely were convulsed with
laughing, at the ridiculous figure his lordship cut on being
released from doing Cupboard duty.

A Gentleman of my acquaintance, who before his misfortunes was
looked upon as a celebrated Wit, happened to meet me one morning
on the road to Rathfarnham, and asking me very politely the way? I
directed him to go straight forward;—"Zounds madam," exclaimed he,
"if that be the case I shan't be able to get there this night."—
"Why so," said I, "Lord Loftus's house is not a quarter of a mile
off." "Aye," replied the eccentric, "I'll allow that, but you have
cruelly desired me to go straight forward, which is a thing
impossible— s, if I was dismounted, you'd find me as crooked as
the line of beauty."—"I'll charge you nothing for that," said I
laughing, and galloped off.

Another day as I was riding in the Park, with a little diminutive
dwarf-looking servant trotting after me, Sir B—Balderdash bawled
out, "yarrow Piggy, what thing's that's behind you?" "My A—e, Sir
B." said I, "would you choose an introduction in the old fashioned
way?"

Another day as I was riding on the Rock road, a Buckeen accosted
me with, "By G—Peg, I wish I was st——g you."— O Lord, sir!"
exclaimed I, "what good would that do me?" "Why Peg, it would make
you as lively and sprightly as possible." Oh," replied I, "would
it so? why then for heaven's sake st——e my Mare, for she's as lazy
and dull as the devil." My spark rode off like a cur who had lost
his tail.

Once on the road to Cork, I stopped at the sign of the Angel,
which was kept by two sisters whose Christian names were Faith and
Prudence; on my first stopping there I was treated with the
greatest good manners, everything the best in its kind with the
most reasonable charges: however, on my return back in about six
weeks, all was changed; the Angel was converted into a Shoulder of
Mutton, and on enquiry I found the eldest sister Miss Faithy was
dead, and that Miss Prue was not a whit better than she should be.
On which a Wit in my company left the following Jeu d'Esprit on
one of the panes of the window:

"When Faith and Prudence lived here,"
An Angel kept the door:
But Faith is dead, the Angel fled,
And Prudence turned a wh——e."

Once in a large company of Belles and Beaux at my house, the tide
of ridicule was turned against a gentleman in company well known
in the literary world, who happened to have the misfortune of
having crooked legs, on which he pleasantly said (holding out his
right leg,) "You may make what fun of me you please, but I'll hold
you an unlimited rump and dozen; there is a worse leg than that in
the company." A gentleman present thinking that impossible, closed
with the bet, on which he produced his left leg, which was much
more deformed than the right) and won the wager, to the no small
pleasure of all present. In Edwin's eccentricities Mr. Williams
takes notice of this excellent Bon Mot, but not with the justice
it deserves. Williams says Mr. G—— produced the fellow to the leg
the wager was held upon, when, in reality, he produced a worse,
which made the jest more excellent; besides Mr. Williams relates
it as happening in Belfast, when it actually happened at my Table
in a large mixed company of Munster gentlemen, and fashionable
Impures and Demireps of the Ton.

On my being told that the late Stephen R. who was an active agent
for the Ministerial party at the famous Carrickfergus election
(when C——n the Smuggler was returned Member for that town against
the united powers of eleven Peers of the realm) was arrested and
thrown into prison at the suit of his democratic Baker, to whom he
owed sixty pounds for bread; and that Amyas G——th, Esq. was
dismissed from all his employments under the crown, on account of
his opposition to the Court Candidate the late honorable Joseph H—
—. I heaved a heavy sigh and said, "Alas! poor Stephen, you have
lost your Liberty for your Bread, whilst my poor Amyas has lost
his Bread for his Liberty."

The tax upon Salt was long whispered about, before it was agitated
in the house of Commons: I exclaimed (hoping however it would
never take place) "damnation to them! they have already taxed poor
Paddy's brogues, and now they purpose not to give him Salt to his
Porridge.'

When the famous companion and Fidus Achates of secretary P——, the
pretended Count R—— the chimney doctor, was mentioned to be only a
spy, sent here and also to England by the French Directory, to
feel the pulses of the two kingdoms, I burst into an immoderate
fit of laughter saying—"By Jupiter, he has fairly smoked us all,
peeped into our private recesses, and will shortly perhaps pay us
another visit, and send us to his country seat Rumford to get our
A——s new bottomed."

One evening I had the pleasure of the company of my friend P——n
immediately after the publication of that diabolical tragedy
called Democratic Rage, which was cramm'd down the throats of all
his Majesty's dutiful and loyal subjects,—in order to impress the
Canaille with horror against the Sans Culottes, I took the liberty
of sending to his lodging a very handsome drinking glass with the
following epigram written on it with my diamond pencil:

"Alas poor Lewis, what a fate was thine,
Untimely taken off by Guillotine;
Which roused the folly of a P——n's pen,
To have thy memory slaughter'd o'er again."

On going through part of the county Wexford on a pleasurable
excursion, my party happened to stop just at dinner hour at
Taghmon, a little village in that county, where we could not get a
morsel to eat, or any kind of lodging; on which I left on one of
the widow Breen's windows the following lines:

"Tis surely a bore,
That a favourite wh——e,
Praised by wits for her humour and fun,
Should with cash in her purse,
As if God sent a curse;
Want lodgings in hungry Taghmon."

One evening in a large party at my house in Pitt-street,
Saunders's newspaper was handed about, which announced the
marriage of a Mr. and Mrs. Brush,—the witty and facetious
counsellor Curran who was one of the party instantly produced the
following:

"Now Brush with Mrs. Brush, a Brush may take,
And Brush her Brush, so little Brushes make."

One day just as our Catholic Brethren had obtained some
relaxations from the Popery laws, which in themselves were a
disgrace to any nation, that brilliant orator and senator Sir B——
Balderdash happened to call to see me,—when the subject turning on
politics, I happened to mention the advantages the Catholics had
gained that session, when the obsequious Knight and Baronet
replied, "Yes Peg, what you say is very true, we should all be
very much obliged to his lordship our good Lord Lieutenant, for
this very great indulgence,"—pronouncing his I's and U's with the
luscious brogue of his own sweet kingdom of Kerry. Once I had the
pleasure of visiting the Baronies of East and West Carbery, Bere
and Bantry, with a captain T—— my then husband pro tempore, and
being invited to spend the day with a musical party of Amateurs in
the town of Skibbereen, when the Rev. Charles Tuckey in
particular, was to entertain us with his musical glasses, a
species of sound at that time quite nouvelle, except with
Cartwright himself, whose harmony was never heard of by any of the
sprightly hospitable inhabitants of that obscure village; a number
of old Milesian chieftains graced the board, O'Donovan,
O'Driscoll, O'Donoughoe, O'Falvey, Leary, M'Carthy, &c. &c. &c.
together with a variety of other gentlemen and ladies of the first
consequence, Colonel T——d and family of Castle T——d, Edward T——d
of White-hall, John T——d of THORNHILL, together with a
heterogneous mass of F——k——s, H——gf——ds, Bald——ns, who never once
suspected me to be a Fille de Joy, a young gentleman of the
O'Driscoll race, a Mr. Dennis O'Driscoll, who had just been
imported from Crook-haven or Ballydehob, and who had never seen a
tree growing till a week before, called upon me "to be kaind
enough to help him to a bit of the cap of the pye." "What is it
you desire to have, Sir?" said I. "Only a small bit of the cap of
dat dere pye, I mean madam, de kiver." "Oh! Sir, you shall of
kiver or cap," said I, "be helped plentifully," and knowing the
dish to be merely a deception of bran and paste, I dexterously
whipped the entire covering off, and clapping it on his head,
proclaimed aloud, to the no small entertainment of the much
diverted company: "Dennis O'Driscoll of Ballydehob, I create you
and your heirs for ever lawfully begotten, the renowned knights of
the order of the Cap of the pye; so in the name of St Patrick take
off your Helmet and devour a part of it,"—and from that hour to
this, Dennis O'Driscoll of Skibbereen in the county of Cork, goes
by no other name than "Cap of the Pye"—nor did I ever hear that I
was even suspected of being any other person than the lady of
captain T——, and as such became an universal toast in that
country, where I spent four months of the pleasantest of my life.

A Mr. S——t——y, a hungry looking dog, son of a Cabinet-maker, lived
with me on the Rock road for a few months as my favourite
Paramour; during which time he by degrees pollocked (to use a new
phrase for cozening or tricking one), me out of considerable sums
of money; and not satisfied with that, he absolutely pawned a
number of my trinkets and movables, which the unprincipled villain
found means to secret from me. 'Tis really very singular how I
suffered myself to be so duped by a contemptible miscreant who
came into my house more on the footing of a servant than anything
else, and who at the time was actually in rags—but the old proverb
is verified frequently on such occasions,

"Clap a Beggar on horse-back and he'll ride to the devil."

"I'll hunt the hated varlet all his days,
No hour shall bring the dirty reptile ease."

A Mr. Fleet——d an attorney, gave me an annuity of thirty pounds a
year during my life, for my elegant house on the Rock-road, the
bare erection of which by contract cost me five hundred pounds,
besides upwards of a hundred I laid out on it myself during my
residence in it; and surely the interest of that sum would have
brought me in six pounds a year more than the honourable attorney
allowed me, exclusive of which my constitution was so broken and
my speedy death so certain, that the concerns during my life,
should at least have brought me one hundred pounds a year: but
what cared honest F——d so he brought the grist to his mill, and so
he certainly has done to some purpose, as I am well informed on
his laying out about one hundred pounds on the premises they will
let for upwards of sixty pounds a year for nine hundred and ninety
nine years, and he pays but six pounds a year ground rent.

As my customers were very numerous, it was impossible for me to
recollect each person in company, especially as in general they
were in a state of intoxication, or at least so impregnated with
generous wine as to lose their retentive faculties and
consequently forget to pay for their Viands, beverage, or Filles
de joys, in which case when I could not bring to mind their names,
I generally had a reference to their employments, some defect in
their persons, the colour of their clothes, their provincial
accents, &c. &c. As a specimen the following is given, taken from
the 126th folio of my private ledger:

Mr. Blinker, the old country man from Thurles, I found out his name
afterwards to be B——k—— 
For Money lent, Wine, and sundries: £34—6—0

Captain Longnose, the whiskered hero with the county Limerick
brogue.
For Wine and passing my word to Miss Groves and Fanny Beresford
that he would not bilk them: £18—6—6

Brown Billy from Kerry, with the yellow spencer.
A week's Board and Lodging: £5—13—9


Flat W——l——n, whose father lived with the Collector who hanged
himself.—This buck was snaffled by two Catchpoles, Mooney and
Sheridan, and I not bearing to see a gentleman in such hands
advanced 3 Guineas, which with 2 flasks of Champagne he drank at my
expense to thank me,—amount to 4 Guineas,—which he handsomely never
thought proper to pay for: £4—11——

The curly pated Squire from Limerick: one Night's Lodging, a girl
and a bottle: £2—16—9

The Broganier Fool, from Tralee, with 	the long ruffles and
tremendous sword, A—— R——l, Esq;—Politely took a fancy to a gold
Seal I had, and for which he promised to pay: £4—11——

But this volume would not hold the half, could I at this moment
bring myself to publish the names and transactions at full length.
In this curious whimsical way I generally kept my accounts, and
have often recovered notes of hand, I. O.'s and other securities
without ever troubling my head to see if the parties had signed
them: there is one that was contracted and terminated singular
enough:—A gentleman-like looking man, in the sea-faring line, had
been arrested for a debt of £18 passed for wine, and having no
acquaintance in town, begged to be carried to my house; the shark
who had him in custody, gratified him,—and though I never saw him
but once and only in company with a friend of mine, I sent for the
plaintiff (a Grocer in Grafton-street) who took my note as a
discharge for the debt, — the gentleman passed me his note with
thanks as follows:

"In twenty-one days time I certainly will pay Mrs. Peggy Leeson
nineteen pounds ten shillings.
Witness my hand."

He unfortunately omitted both date and name, but he had a
remarkable token about him that I could not forget, namely a
wooden leg. Upon producing it however after to a Captain L. of
Belfast, he told me he knew the person by the writing and
description I gave of him; and that the note must have been passed
by one Heighl—d, who had formerly been a midshipman in the Navy,
and who was then in the Revenue, and that if his profession did
not pervert his principles, he was certain, as a Sailor, he'd
scorn to take any advantage, after so distinguished a piece of
service from me; and that certainly the date and omission of the
name was an oversight of his own. I accordingly applied to Heighl—
d, and found that the brave honest Tar was sunk in the occupation
of a pitiful mate of a Revenue Cruiser; for the scoundrel
positively denied he had ever been in my house, or had even passed
me a Note of any kind whatever; however he paid dear for his
assertion, for I commenced a suit against him and fully proved the
transaction, and his ingratitude, to the great satisfaction of the
court. The debt and cost amounted to upwards of sixty pounds,
which he was obliged to discharge.

Once on a trip I took with a gentleman to Belfast, I went to a
Coterie there. Tom G——g (who had been an old blacksmith, but was
then a top Merchant and joined with his brother-in-law the famous
C——n) was King, and a Mrs. P. a diminutive deformed hobgoblin,
Queen. Among a great number of beautiful, well behaved, affable,
charming women, one who was by far the most disagreeable, ordinary
and ill-behaved in the room, attracted my particular notice; she
was made up of conceit, pride and impertinence, with an hauteur
that could not strike awe or respect, whatever it might disgust.
On enquiring who this creature was, a Capt. Tom B. of the 70th
Regiment informed me she was Miss Jenny G. daughter to the king of
the Coterie, whom he had known to have followed the trade of a
Horse-shoer in that town, but that now the case was altered, he
had by smuggling and other such honourable practices, amassed a
princely fortune, in consequence of which, not only Vulcan
himself, but the whole family had become vain, saucy, imperious
and impertinent, particularly Jenny, who absolutely stunk with
pride. Having got my cue, I made it my business the whole night to
turn her into ridicule: I whispered my partner H. W——n (as we were
next couple to Jenny and her partner Count J——n from Pill-lane)
loud enough to be heard, "Pray has not that tall awkward thing a
great deal of the Black about her countenance?" "Hold your tongue
you rogue," answered Hill, "don't you know her Papa, the king
there, was a blacksmith." What care I whether he was a blacksmith
or a whitesmith, if his daughter could learn to behave herself
with propriety; but, as Gay says,

"All upstarts insolent in place,
Remind us of their vulgar race."

Before we left the ball room, I publicly before the whole company,
wrote the following lines on one of the windows of the Coterie
room which was held at the Donegall arms.

"Jenny G——g they say has wit,
And some, they add, have felt it;
She walks as if she was besh——t,
And looks as if she smelt it."

Some years before the French Revolution, when Roman Catholics were
thought to have a greater respect for the Grand Monarch than for
their own good king; than which, by the by, no opinion on earth
could be more erroneous; the earl of B. and Col. V did me the
honour to take a petite soupé at my house: the noble Lord sat on
one side of me, and the Colonel at the other; when B. (thinking me
a bigoted papist, and consequently inimical in his mind to church
and state) taking up his glass, drank, "here's the king, Peg, but
not your king by God", on which, with the greatest nonchalance I
took up my glass, and addressing the Colonel with a thump on the
knee said, ""Well Colonel, here's the king, but not your king by
G—d." "What do you mean Peg?' said the great colonel most learned
in Irish; "Colonel, I drank the toast merely as I got it; it is
not that I don't love my own king the great and good king George,
better than any Monarch on the habitable globe." "Bravo! bravo!
Peg," exclaimed lord B. "by the L——d I believe his Majesty has not
a better subject on earth." Not one my Lord, and who has exerted
herself more for the purpose of manning his Fleets and Armies; I
have incessantly laboured for him day and night, and sometimes
without a shift to my back."

I have often wondered at the similitude between the heroes of
ancient Greece and Rome, and our own modern heroes of the dear
kingdom of Kerry; a part of the world I love in my very heart. In
fact I really believe more gentlemen have committed Suicide in
that county, nay, in the very town of Tralee (I'll confine myself
to that charming spot, where I have spent some of the pleasantest
days of my existence; though utterly unknown to the dear, the
hospitable inhabitants; for I absolutely lived there with a
gentleman in the army for one entire year without ever being
discovered; long, long before my excursion to the divine Lake of
Killarney). Imprimis then, to my own knowledge. My dear Edward D——
y, the most accomplished gentleman of the name, shot himself at an
obscure Inn in the north of Ireland. When an Ensign in the Army,
he lived on his pay economically and prudently like a gentleman,
but when by his marriage and the bequest of his worthy brother
Arthur, he came into the receipt of about eleven hundred pounds a
year, he ran in debt, he was attacked by the clamours of
unrelenting creditors, his nerves were unstrung, his feelings
superlatively great; and he made at once with a loaded pistol his
own quietus.

Francis C——l, Esq. brother to the husband of Miss A——n, who has
been mentioned before, was tried in London for the commission of a
rape, and condemned to be hanged, but by the interference of his
countryman Lord Shelbourne, was pardoned; in consequence of which
he returned home, with his last speech, confession, and dying
words in his pocket, and deliberately shot himself. This line from
Ovid was found in his pocket,

"Nobody shall kill Ajax but Ajax himself."

Thomas H——k——n, Esq. an eminent physician and a gentleman of worth
and honour, on his eldest brother's reforming, as they call it
(i.e. turning Protestant and taking possession of the entire
property of the whole family, consisting of himself and five
brothers): (Glorious law! enacted by a band of merciless,
sanguinary villains,) took a resolution to starve himself, and
absolutely lived upon water alone for forty one days, refusing any
other sustenance, though importuned by the first ladies in the
town, who on their knees implored him to take nourishment, but in
vain; he languished for forty one days and expired. And upon being
asked whether he felt much pain in fasting, he declared that for
the first three days he was in great agony, but for all the rest
of the time he had not the smallest inclination to eat.

Samuel M——r——s, Esq. after inviting a very large company to spend
the day with him, just as dinner was dishing, stepped into his
carriage which happened to be at the hall door, and blew his
brains out, to the no small mortification of the company, who
thereby lost a splendid entertainment.

The Rev. Fitzm——e B——t, after having paid his addresses to an
amiable young lady for a number of years, at last obtained her
consent, and accordingly the writings having been completed and
every matter adjusted, and the day fixed for the celebration of
the nuptials, the Rev. Divine (who was a worthy, a most excellent
man, and in affluent circumstances) retired to the stable the
evening before the completion of all his wishes were to have been
ratified, and hung himself on one of the collar braces.

William B——h——t, Esq. collector of the county, a gentleman in
possession of estated property, to the amount of near six thousand
pounds a year besides his collection; he was also married to an
amiable, sentimental and beautiful lady, by whom he had a number
of fine children, and possessed a character in high estimation
among all his numerous friends and acquaintances, notwithstanding
all which (in short though in possession of all the good things in
this world) he deliberately finished his existence by hanging
himself in one of his stables, to the great grief of a virtuous
affectionate wife, a large family of children and servants, and a
multitude of friends and near relations.

Crosbie M——ll, Esq. an eminent attorney, hearing of the immersion
of the late poor Baron Power near the Light House, notwithstanding
he had been returned for the borough of Tralee, that he had given
thirty thousand pounds with his daughter in marriage to the late
Sir B. D——y who was afterwards fairly pistoled by C—— in a duel.
In fact notwithstanding M——ll had risen to be the greatest man
that ever was or will be in that august family, and had the
cleverness to die nine hundred thousand pounds in debt,—yet upon
mere speculation and chance, in order to obtain the place of the
Barons' Register in the regions of Tartarus, had the temerity to
plunge after him and seek an asylum in that country from whose
bourne no traveller returns. The following epitaph was written by
me on the occasion.

Here M——ll lies whom not a soul bemoans,
For whom we see no tears, nor hear no groans;
Death and the devil snatched him quite away,
The devil take death for suffering him to stay
Among us longer than his natal day.
M. L.

Besides these suicides which all happened in my own memory, there
were many others if I could bring them to my recollection; and
what is still more extraordinary, the gentlemen were all
contemporaries and school-fellows, all educated in the town of
Tralee at Young's school; all excellent scholars and accomplished
gentlemen, and in general highly respected by all who had the
pleasure of their acquaintance; and what is very singular, there
was not one of them who had not one time or other basked in the
sunshine of my bewitching smiles: They all in turn had been my
devoted slaves and admirers, from whom I had received vast sums of
money. Indeed I often think my poor friend Henry B——t will go the
same road, and as little regretted as his compeer C——e M——ll.


CHAP. XXXIII.
POEMS ADDRESSED TO PEG PLUNKETT, AND FURTHER
ECCENTRICITIES

AN EXCLAMATION,
Written by a gentleman on Mrs. Margaret Leeson's retiring to the
country for the benefit of her health.

Why droops the head, why languishes the eye?
What means the flowing tear, the frequent sigh?
Where are the lenient medicines to impart,
Their balmy virtues to a bleeding heart.
Fancy no sweet ideas can suggest,
To lull the raging tumult in my breast;
In vain, or Wit invites, or Friendship calls,
Wit dies a jest, and conversation palls.
No scenes amuse me that amused before,
Since what delighted once, delights no more;
The budding plants of variegated hue,
The blossoms opening with the morning dew,
The vernal breeze that gently fans the bowers,
The laughing meadows and enlivening flowers,
Th' enamelled garden where the roses bloom,
And gaudy pinks so pregnant with perfume,
All, all in vain with charms united glow,
Since Leeson's gone, they but increase my woe.
'Twas she enliven'd Nature all around,
And made the heart with every joy abound:
'Twas she illumined all, with brightening rays,
The feathered Choir to her addressed their lays.
But stop, Oh man! thy plaintive strains suppress,
Since they can never make thy griefs the less.
Perhaps some power divine may yet create,
Some beams to brighten up thy present state;
May yet restore unto thy longing arms,
Thy much loved Peg with renovated charms.
Then songs of gratitude, and joy, and praise,
As thankful tributes to that power raise.

TRUTH and FALSHOOD; a Fable.
Addressed to Mrs. Margaret Leeson, who had been given to understand the 
Author had written something against her.

Soon as the Iron Age on Earth began,
And vice found easy entrance into Man;
Forth from her cave infernal Falsehood came,
Falsehood the hate of Gods, of Men the same.
A silken robe she wore of various hue,
The colour changing with each different view.
Studious to cheat, and eager to beguile,
She mimick'd Truth and ap'd her heav'nly smile.
At length she saw celestial Truth appear,
Serene her brow, and cheerful was her air.
A lily robe was girt about her waist,
And o'er her arms a radiant mantle cast.
Thus Truth advanced unknowing of deceit,
And Falsehood bowing low began the cheat.
"Hail charming maid, bright as the morning star,
Daughter of Jove, and heaven's peculiar care.
Why walk we thus regardless of our ease,
Exposed beneath the sun's meridian blaze.
Let us repair to yonder river's side,
To bathe and sport our limbs within the tide."
Thus spoke the Phantom, and with friendly look
Supporting what she said, approach'd the brook,
Truth followed, artless unsuspicious Maid,
And in an evil hour the voice obeyed.
The Fiend upon the margin lingering stood,
The Goddess naked leaped into the flood.
Sporting she swam the liquid surface o'er,
Unmindful of the matchless robe she wore.
Not Falsehood so—She hasty seized the vest,
And in the beauteous spoils herself she dressed.
Hence Falsehood cheats us in the fair disguise,
And seems Truth's self to all unwary eyes;
With safety dares to flatter, fawn and sooth, 
For who knows falshood when array'd like truth?
Therefore dear Leeson let no slanders bias
Your honest heart against your friend Amyas.

N .B . The above produced the Author a guinea each for ten Tickets
for his benefit at the Theatre Royal.

A SONG
Addressed to Mrs. Leeson, when Miss Plunket, by her first Seducer.


Air, Nancy Dawson.

I.
Of all the last and beauteous race,
Which Jove did give, this Earth to grace,
Not one has such a heavenly face
As charming Peggy Plunket.
The Sun is deadened by her eyes,
A swimming brightness from them flies,
Like constellations in the skies,
So bright is Peggy Plunket.


II.
Nature looks gay when she appears,
And Winter too refrains from tears;
A golden age the world shares,
When blessed with Peggy Plunket.
So chearful, affable and gay,
The gods take pleasure to array
This lovely Maid like fragrant May,
And call her Peggy Plunket.


III.
Blessed happy Man! doomed to untie
Her zone, and with transporting joy
In sweet ecstatic raptures die
On lovely Peggy Plunket.
And when from paradise he'll wake
A second blissful draught to take,
A heaven like this no one can make
On earth but Peggy Plunket.

The Town Major of Dublin, one N——n, who squints most horribly,
called at my house in Pitt-street with an intent to treat Jenny
Neilson and I with some excellent Champagne, that Ferns had then
just imported, half a dozen cases of which he sent me. And after
drinking a couple of flasks, he asked us could we hide another
bottle? undoubtedly was the answer. "Well then Peg, call for one."
"Oh! by G——" said I, "N——n I see a cast in your eye." "Then send
for a cast," cried N——n laughing very heartily, "or two if you are
equal to them."

As my readers have often heard me mention the Kingdom of Kerry, it
may not be incurious to know why that county was first called a
kingdom. A great number of people from that county having been
obliged to emigrate for bread to France, the late poor Lewis when
he used to ask from whence that General, that Admiral, that
Bishop, or that Abbe came, was generally answered; "may it please
your Majesty, from Kerry." "Pray then," replied the ill-fated
Lewis, "What part of the Kingdom of Kerry is Ireland in?"

The following humorous ballad, was written by a friend of mine in
consequence of a grand Fandango, which Squire Crupper gave us at
his Villa, at which most of the Filles des Joys of the City were
assembled.

The Crupper-making Squire of White-Hall
A new Ballad.


Tune—Galloping dreary Dun.

I.
A CRUPPER-MAKING SQUIRE, I certainly am,
Galloping dreary Mick,
A Crupper-making squire I certainly am,
With my old auctioneer called slippery Sam.
With my haily gaily, cheat away daily,
Jockeying, cantering, auctioning, mortaring,
Saddling, dreary Mick.


II.
I'm lord of White-hall, and drive my own gig,
Galloping dreary Mick,
I'm lord of White-hall and drive my own gig, And for those I have
cheated I care not a fig.
With my haily, gaily, &c. &c.


III.
A Brother I have, called poor Cockney Jack,
Galloping dreary Mick,
A brother I have, called poor Cockney Jack,
A swindler, a cheat, and a Munster crack,
With my haily, gaily, &c. &c.


IV.
I've converted White-Hall to a Mansion so fine,
Galloping dreary Mick,
I've converted White-Hall to a Mansion so fine,
Where Jockeys and Fillies drink, gamble and dine.
With my haily, gaily, &c. &c.


V.
Sure Achmet's famed baths to mine can't compare,
Galloping dreary Mick,
Sure Achmet's famed baths to mine can't compare,
Where there's such an assemblage of black, brown and fair,
With my haily, gaily, &c. &c.


VI.
The famed widow Shee, squire Walpole's own dear,
Galloping dreary Mick,
The famed widow Shee, squire Walpole's own dear,
And sweet Kitty Doran[see note 1] shall also be there
With my haily, gaily, &c. &c.


VII.
Peg Plunket shall honour my board at White-Hall,
Galloping dreary Mick;
Peg Plunket shall honour my board at White-hall,
And Buxom Joan Driscoll, shall lead up the ball,
With my haily, gaily, &c. &c.


VIII.
Squire Edgeworth is always at my table D'Hote,
Galloping dreary Mick,
Squire Edgeworth is always at my table D'Hote,
And many adventurers not worth a groat,
With my haily, gaily, &c. &c.


IX.
The brave Colonel S——y, once of the Police,
Galloping dreary Mick,
The brave Colonel S——y, once of the Police,
And Lamprey the chandler, because we're not nice,
With my haily, &c. &c.


X.
You know I once kept a capital ride,[see note 2]
Galloping dreary Mick:
You know I once kept a capital ride,
Where all kinds of Quadrupeds were duly tried,
With my haily, &c. &c.


XI.
To Bipeds I now have turn'd my mind,
Galloping dreary Mick:
To Bipeds I now have turn'd my mind,
And at White-hall you'll find them gentle and kind,
With my haily, &c. &c.


XII.
The Cyprian Temples must go to decay,
Galloping dreary Mick:
The Cyprian Temples must go to decay,
As White-Hall from them all will carry the sway,
With my haily, &c. &c.


XIII.
The Sentimental Mag. [see note 3] will inform you more,
Galloping dreary Mick:
The Sentimental Mag. will inform you more,
Where I've got an engraving behind and before,
With my haily, gaily, cheat away daily,
Jockeying, cantering, auctioning, mortaring,
Galloping dreary Mick.

[Note 1. This lady was formerly kept by Henry Langley, of
Lismerock, and afterwards lawfully married to squire Walpole, Lord
C-—ll's cousin german.]
[Note 2. In Exchequer-street, it was called the Menage.]
[Note 3: We by no means mean a Magpie, but a publication replete
with wit and sentiment; printed by Jones, of Grafton-street; and
conducted by the very ingenious Mr. Lewis, corrector of the press,
&c.—In which the CRUPPER-MAKING SQUIRE has published a view of
this Temple, dedicated to the PAPHIAN QUEEN.]

Taking a ride one day with a near relation of the late unfortunate
Geo. Rob. F——tz-G——d, soon after his execution, and on passing by
a luxuriant field of hemp, he enquired of me what that was, that
looked so green and flourishing? "Only you'd be angry," said I,
"I'd tell you." "Angry, madam, 'tis impossible anything you could
say or do, would make me angry." "Then," replied I, "that's the
very Salad that choked your cousin Fitz-G——d;" he pretended to put
it off with a laugh, but I am convinced he never forgave me, and
certainly I was very much in error; for,

"Who for the short delight of being smart,
Wou'd lodge a sting within a brother's heart."

When poor Mrs. Jane E. M—— of poetical memory, was waddling from
shop to shop, and cellar to cellar, collecting subscriptions for
her abominable trash, in which office she was indefatigable; she
was frequently observed to sit for hours together in an eminent
apothecary's shop in this city, as an amicus curiae, for that lady
also dealt largely in nostrums, and took upon herself to cure
every scrofulous complaint, King's evil, Leprosy; and in fact all
incurable disorders; that witty, that elegant authoress Mrs. B——
tti——r, being asked, if she ever met with Mrs. M——e at Mr.——'s
shop, as she frequently called there to see her friend Mr. Griff——
th, replied that "perhaps she might, but if so, she mistook her
constantly for the great Mortar."—"But where was the pestle," said
Jonathan ——, "Oh as for that, you must ask Mr. G——ff——th, I looked
upon him as pestle to the great Mortar."

When the Dog in Office abused a late eminent and worthy Printer in
this city, I laughingly said—"Well what need they be surprised,
sure 'tis very natural for hungry dogs to lick Pots on all
occasions, when they meet with any."

Hearing that G——dini, as Mrs. B——r calls him in her Gibbonaid, was
honoured with above one hundred black beans, when he had the
effrontery to be proposed a member of the Lawyers' Club,—I told
him, on his calling to see me, that, "all he had to do, to live
well the winter, was to lay in a good stock of bacon, as his
brethren the Lawyers had contributed to supply him with plenty of
beans."—The son of the Dog sneaked off, as if in reality he had
lost his tail, and by all accounts, jesting apart, young H——y
effectually made a singer of him, so that if one trade fails, he
can't miss of bread among the Castraté of the Drama.

One morning meeting the celebrated Mr. G——iff——th on the Circular-
road, I asked him what the devil made his legs so diabolically
crooked?—"S—g one of my mother's maids standing," answered he,
with the greatest sangfroid imaginable.—I could not be angry, my
question deserved the answer.

One night at Daly's Hell, Buck English, that sanguinary hero,
happened to fall fast asleep, when a thought came into the heads
of some gentlemen engaged at silver hazard, to frighten the Buck
out of his wits, and accordingly, without the smallest noise, had
the fire removed, and all the candles extinguished, after which
they began to make a horrid racket with the dice, "Seven or
eleven,"—"Seven's the main,"—"By G——d, Sir, that's not fair,"—"I
appeal to the groom porter,"— Rascal D——p——t, what did Lawler
throw?"—"You lie, you lie you villain,"—"Damn your body, take
that."—Then swords were drawn, and a dreadful clashing and uproar
ensued; all the while the dice rattling away. In the midst of all
this tremendous din, the Buck awoke frightened out of his wits,
fearing the Almighty to punish him for his murderous deeds had
struck him blind, and falling on his knees, for the first time
since his arrival to manhood, began to ejaculate in the most
devout manner, all the prayers he could recollect, not omitting
his old ave maria, for the Buck was reared a good Roman Catholic;
and in this lamentable situation, he was removed quite in the
dark, to a bed prepared for him in the house, where he remained in
inconceivable agony, being certain he had lost his sight.—A little
before daylight he was visited by most of his companions, who were
determined to carry the joke a little farther; they pretended it
was noonday, began to condole with him on his misfortune, and
recommended Mr. Rouviere the celebrated oculist to him; having no
doubt but his ability would restore him to his sight. The Buck was
assisted to dress by some of the servants (still in the dark) all
the time bemoaning his misfortune and promising that if Heaven
would be pleased to work a miracle in his favour, to immediately
seclude himself from the world, and pass the remainder of his days
in a, convent in France: But as soon as Sol's gladsome rays had
convinced him of the trick played on him, he started (forgetting
all his sanctity), and full of sentiments of revenge he jumped
from his chair, with the pious determination to blow poor Peter D—
—p——t's (the groom-porter) brains out, and to call L——r, D——y,
O'B——, Charley S——l, Jack P——t, Major B——r, Jack L——y, Buck L—ss,
land a number of other Dupes and Blacklegs to a severe account; in
fact nothing but blood and slaughter was to be dealt around;
however, by all accounts, the matter ended with poor D——t's being
knocked down and kicked by the Buck.

"The Duke of Brunswick and his mighty men,
Went up the hill, and then came down again."

I once by mere accident at an Inn in Cashel, happened to breakfast
in company with three very remarkable ladies and their husbands,
Moll Roe, Ally Croker, and Kate of Aberdeen, all celebrated
beauties in their time, but then converted into old married ladies
by the names, styles, and titles of Mrs. Walsh, wife to a captain
Walsh of the county Tipperary, a virtuous worthy woman,
notwithstanding that highly obscene and ridiculous song, beginning
with,

"I met Moll Roe in the morning,
Her tail it was draggled with dew, &c."

which was composed on her out of mere fun by a Popish priest.—Mrs.
Langley, wife to Charles Langley, Esq; of Lisnerock in the county
of Tipperary, also, was the famous Ally Croker, and a Mrs. Mercer
the lady of Major Mercer, was the beautiful Kate of Aberdeen. To
make up the peerless quartetto, I made bold to add the name of the
celebrated Margaret Leeson, and I actually left the four names on
a pane of glass in poor Bob Keating's parlour.

I recollect once I was in Belfast with my first love, at the time
of Thurot's landing at Carrickfergus, a number of French officers
were on their parole in that town, and were treated with the
greatest attention, hospitality and politeness by the
inhabitants.—At a very large entertainment, given by the late
worthy Joe Wallace, all the French gentlemen having been invited,
one in particular (anxious to know as much of our language as he
possibly could) went into the kitchen, and enquired of the surly
cook the names of several dishes, and at length asking her the
name of a plate, in English, the cook tired with his ridiculous
interrogatories answered,—"C——Monsieur,"—the Frenchman happy in
being able to converse a little in English, happened to sit near a
Miss T——y, an old maiden tabby, who had finished the leg of a hare
she had been help'd to, which the officious attentive polite
Frenchman observing, said to her, "Mademoiselle T——y, you have got
no hare upon your C——", meaning her plate, which occasioned Miss
T——y's precipitate retreat, to the no small diversion of the
company, who were highly entertained with the Frenchman's blunder,
and the old maid's confusion, which was the greater, as Monsieur
by all accounts happened to stumble on the truth.—It is worthy of
remark that the identical officer mentioned here, when the fire of
musketry was going on in the principal street in Carrickfergus,
between the English troops under major Jennings and the French, a
child of about 6 years of age, ran out among them to see what was
going on, and narrowly escaped being shot; with great presence of
mind he quitted the battle, took up the child in his arms, and
carried him back to the house, and then rejoined the ranks.—A
piece of humanity that a modern Frenchman would blush to own. This
anecdote though very little known now, was in great measure the
cause of the very handsome reception the French officers met with
afterwards in Belfast.

I once had the pleasure of the company, for one night, of the
facetious Ned Townsend of White-hall in the county Cork, who told
me the following anecdote: A French gentleman, Monsieur Le Roque,
happened to be on a visit with him for several days, and his
custom was the instant the cloth was removed, he retired to the
garden to smoke his pipe, in consequence of which always on his
return the ladies used to tease him by their enquiries of, —
"Captain where have you been?" "Where do you go always after
dinner?" "You're certainly courting some of the tenants'
daughters," &c. &c. &c. The poor Frenchman on these enquiries, not
one of which he understood a syllable of was always mute, and on
his telling the distress he felt, on not being able to satisfy the
ladies, to his hospitable entertainer, Mr. Townsend replied,—"Why
Captain when those inquisitive girls ask you again, tell them the
honest truth, that you were F——g."—The Frenchman highly pleased,
that he knew how to answer the ladies, was impatient till he put
his newly acquired learning into practice, and accordingly on his
return the next day after taking his whiff, all the ladies were
open mouthed with,—"O! Captain where were you? what were you
doing? &c. &c."—"Me phas F——g;" replied the innocent Captain. "Oh!
fye, Captain," said one of the gentlemen, "don't say so."—"Upon my
vord I tell de truth; me phas only F——g, and Mr. T——d here can
vouch for me if he pleases." This set the table in a roar, put La
Roque into the greatest confusion, and obliged the ladies with a
smothered laugh to withdraw; Ned T—d vociferously roaring out,—
"The devil mend you girls, the devil mend you."

When in Tralee along with a gentleman, we happened to be at a
horse race where was a most beautiful and charming young lady,
Miss Eliza Paine, since married to a Mr. F——r; this gentleman when
courting her, among a variety of little jeu d'esprit that he
addressed to her, and which he daily communicated to me (being on
terms of great intimacy with my gentleman), was the following:

"Whilst some seek out for glory, others gain,
My wish is somewhat strange; to be IN Paine."

And sure enough he soon was to his heart's content, for they were
shortly after married, and in nine months after, she was brought
to bed of three children, who were all healthy, and lived.

The unfortunate prodigal and spendthrift Sir Henry Echlin, who ran
through an estate of four thousand pounds a year, besides about
ten thousand pounds in ready cash, by sheer eating and drinking,
and afterwards was reduced to the sad alternative of a subaltern
revenue employment, with a salary of about forty pounds a year,
once at my house compared himself to an Earthquake: "An
Earthquake, Sir Henry," said I, "how so?"—"because, Peg," replied
he, "I have swallowed up above five thousand acres of land—did you
ever hear of any earth-quake doing much more?" If this was an
extemporaneous thought, 'twas extremely witty; but were I to take
notice of all the flashes of wit, and brilliant bon mots that
passed in my presence, I could furnish my readers with a much
larger, better and more genuine collection, than Joe Millar's and
Edwin's Eccentricities, put together.

I had for a number of years a man and a maid servant, who were man
and wife, and who served me very faithfully, but she happened to
be so prolific, that regularly every year she was brought to bed
in my house. I jocularly remonstrated with the man, why he brought
such a continual expense and trouble on himself? When he answered
with a true Cork brogue,—"Yerrow why now my jewel now, how can we
help it? I wish YOU, or some honest good natured Christian would
cut out of us both, the means of getting any more, for 'pon my
soul now I'm tired of the work, for it brings nothing but trouble
and vexation, and runs away with all our earnings besides now."

This brings to my recollection an anecdote, told me by the late
Sir John C——t of Ardrum in the county of Cork; in presence of one
of his tenants who came to pay him some rent, he desired his lady
pro tempore, Miss C——t——es, to be exact in waking him early in the
morning, to go on some very particular business; she protested it
was not in her power, as she generally slept so sound, that 'twas
late every day before she awoke; when they were interrupted by the
well meaning countryman, who in the honest simplicity of his heart
begged to be heard: "'Pon my soul my Lady, when I wants to get up
at the first light, I houlds my water over night, and I never
found it to fail, and if you will try yourself to night, I'll be
bound for it you will wake Sir John early enough.'

For the honour of the lady's memory I cannot omit relating an
anecdote heard of that suffering pattern of her sex, the late Mrs.
Francis Gr——ff——th; soon after her unfortunate husband was
liberated from a long confinement, by a nonsuit he obtained
against his infamous plaintiff, who was afterwards disrobed for
malpractices; a Doctor Kelso, of harmless memory, a near relation
of the late Jos-called upon them, just as they were sitting down
to a frugal meal of bacon and peas soup; Mr. Grif——th, though
generally hospitable in the extreme, on eyeing what was for
himself, his wife, son and maid, and not thinking it quite enough,
did not even ask the doctor to sit down; however, it was not so
with his highly respected and admired wife, she asked the doctor
to partake of what they had? And he "nothing loth," not having
tasted a morsel for three successive days, sat down and greedily
devoured, not only the bacon and soup, but all the bread, butter
and cheese in the house, with two potted herrings into the
bargain. With astonishment and hunger poor G——ff——th beheld the
mighty havoc and devastation, and as soon as the learned Doctor
had taken his leave, and as they sat down to tea and toast, to
make up for the loss of dinner; he asked Mrs. G——th, — "Why then
my dearest Fanny (considering we had such very short commons,) why
could you think of asking that wretched hungry Doctor to dine with
us?"—"For the very reason," replied the angelic woman, "that he
was both wretched and hungry."—Let this answer of hers be enrolled
in the registry of Heaven. Did Sterne, the immortal Sterne, ever
write or say anything half so sentimental? But she really was as
the poet says:

"The best of mothers and the best of wives,
The best of friends,—she led the best of lives."


CHAP. XXXIV.
ONE EVENING I had the favour of a visit from two remarkable
gentlemen, a Mr. B—— and a Mr. T——lb——t; however, being in no very
good humour, and having read an account in some of the public
prints, of their having refused to pay an unfortunate gentleman
(who had through necessity set up a paper) for their Election
Advertisements, amounting to upwards of sixty pounds, I absolutely
refused entertaining such unprincipled fellows, telling them
freely my mind, and giving them as good a lecture on the
heinousness of such gross dishonesty, as either Wesley or
Whitfield could have done, nay, I doubt if the divine Kirwan's
admonitions (whom I perfectly adore) would have struck so great a
panic into the hearts of my depraved beaux, as my ex-tempore
rhapsody did; indeed to use a vulgar expression, I sent them off
with a flea in their ear; and in fact I preached so much to these
gentlemen, that I absolutely wound myself into a fit of
enthusiasm; I took a horrible retrospective view of the course I
had run, and all of my past life; and falling on my knees,
addressed myself most devoutly to the God of nature,—"Omniscient
Father of all," cried I, "does Peg Leeson (or rather Peg Plunket,
for I could have no legal claim to Leeson, having never been
really married but to Y——,) set up for a reformer of Men and
Manners?—The depraved, the wretched, the prostituted, the polluted
Peg; does she, I say, presume to preach up morality to would-be
senators and highborn men? the wretch who has reduced herself
below the dignity of almost any of the animals of thy numerous and
wonderful creation; for there's not creatures of the four-footed
tribe, would go indiscriminately from male to male, and suffer
perhaps a score in four and twenty hours to enjoy their favours;
and yet this, wretched abandoned Peg, thou hast done, oh! horrid!
horrid!—what a sink of infamy, thou hast been all thy life in,—in
vain you may solace yourself with the idea of your being
charitable, humane, compassionate, tender hearted; of what avail
are all those virtues to a blasphemous prostitute? Who shared her
charms indiscriminately with every ruffian who could afford a
price."—These reflections made a deep impression on my mind and
spirits; I offered up my Orisons to an offended Deity, I
contemplated in my mind the blessings I had let slip: Heavens,
said I, what happiness had been my lot, had I observed my honoured
parents! had I been married young to some worthy man, I might now
have been blessed with a smiling happy progeny, whereas I shall
leave nothing behind me but the traces of my infamy, to hand down
my abandoned name to posterity; in all my life I have not secured
a real friend; the prostitutes my associates, and the libertines
whose caresses I submitted to, all despise me; to add to my
distress, I felt an oppression, a load upon my spirits, that I
could not shake off, and in a fit of delirium I drank four ounces
of thebaic tincture, and thought I had at once made my own
quietus; but how was I mistaken, the deceitful opium worked no
such effect, I found myself extremely weak; grew sick in my
stomach and threw up a deal of stuff, after which I lay in a state
of stupefaction, without taking the least nourishment for upwards
of eight and forty hours, when in a languid state I arose, utterly
detesting my own existence, and regreting that the opium did not
take the desired effect, and bring me to my eternal rest. M'Clean
and Miss Sands, one of her lively virgins, called upon me almost
as soon as I was dressed, not hearing of my indisposition, with an
intent that I should take them to Laughlinstown camp, but I
excused myself, and instead of trifling with them as usual, gave
them a severe lecture on their past lives; which made them imagine
I had lost my senses; but I persisting in my exhortations, they
both burst into immoderate laughter, and ran out of the house,
almost in convulsions.—As soon as they had left me, I locked
myself up, and rather devoutely praying for very near a hour,
wrote the following ex-tempore verses addressed to the Deity:


"I.
Where e'er, O God, I turn my eyes,
Thy wisdom is display'd;
E'en I myself—myself surprise,
So fearfully I'm made.


II.
If to the deep I bend my sight,
The long extended main
Bids me to tremble at his might,
Who can its force restrain.


III.
The nurse and grave, old mighty earth,
His power immense declare;
Who with a Fiat, gave thee birth,
And flung thee in the air.


IV.
Who made your mountains and your rocks,
'Tis he who daily fills,
With horn'd herds, and fleecy flocks,
Your islands and your hills.


V.
But what are herds and flocks to those,
His bounty doth supply,
The creatures of ten thousand globes,
Beyond the mortal eye.


VI.
And the creation over past,
Where night and silence reign;
The great interminable vast,
Is all his wide domain.


VII. 
In various wonders I am lost,
And yet the subjects fire;
For to applaud you—oh! thou know'st,
Is all my soul's desire.


VIII. 
Till at thy nod, with great amaze,
We'll see this nether world,
Burst all at once into a blaze,
Again to Chaos hurled.


IX.
Lord fit us all for that dread day,
Oh! may we then appear;
(When all your glory you display,)
Fit objects of your care.


X.
Immortal placed in realms above,
We'll view all nature run,
Within due bounds,—nor Venus move,
Too near the evening Sun.


XI.
All sects, all kinds must own thy sway,
And each alike you'll bless;
Who at thy grand tribunal day,
Thy talent did increase.


XII.
The dreadful thunders when they roll,
Thro' clouds and air disturbed;
And storms of hail from pole to pole,
Intended for our good.


XIII.
The cattle bound about the land,
E'en four-foot creatures dread;
The thunder falling from the hand,
Of him, who all had made.


XIV.
To fright the tyrant on his throne,
To show a power above;
And wake the peasant when alone,
To praise his God with love."


Had lady Arabella Denny lived, a lady who has left but one like
herself behind, Mrs. Latouche; that paragon of charity, piety and
humanity, I would have given all I possessed to the Magdalen
asylum, and retired into it myself. In fact I did not know how to
act, I was determined as I said before, to shake off my profligate
acquaintance, both male and female, and gracious heaven! where was
there to be found a reputable one, who would associate with the
abandoned Peg Plunket? Oh! piteous case, that no penitence, no
contrition for past levities can atone for a lapse from virtue—the
wretched Magdalen, has no Saviour now to take her to his bosom; if
she is poor she must continue so, for our ladies of virtue are too
delicate, too sentimental, too refined, to succour or give bread,
or encouragement to a honest W—— who was in the possession of more
good and amiable qualities, than ever fell to the lot of such made
up Automatons of the day,—"Sans face, sans teeth, sans shape, sans
hair, sans principles, sans everything."—Being deserted now by all
the world, I was resolved to take refuge in the sanctuary of
religion; and being bred a Catholic, I immediately sent for the
Rev. Doctor Leonard, who administered every divine consolation to
me in his power, and indeed I found all comfort in his spiritual
advice; at the same time I must premise to my readers, that I was
no bigot to sect or religion; I believed the honest Indian, or the
wild African, who worshipped his God his own way, was as sure of
salvation, provided he improved the talent God had endowed him
with, in worthiness and charity, as his holiness the Pope of
Rome.—In fact all religions were alike to me, but as I had been
brought up in the Catholic persuasion, and had never known a
preacher of the word of that religion, to frequent my house—
whereas it always swarmed with abandoned Abbies of the established
church. I thought it safer to confide in them, than in men, most
of whom had connections, if not with myself, with poor creatures
in my house.—As for my creed, I honestly declare I do not believe
in anyone I ever read or heard of. "I religiously and devoutly
believe in one true and only God, and no other; and I farther
believe, that in deeds of charity, humanity, and benevolence, I go
the readiest way to please and honour that all-seeing Being, who
must delight in beholding the animals of his creation, made happy
by the exertions of each other. In fact, I would wish to do unto
all mankind as I would wish to be done by; I would also worship
the God of nature, in spirit and in truth, no matter whether in a
Mosque, a Meeting-house, Chapel, Church, Synagogue, bed or field;
and THAT creed, in my opinion, will carry any poor sinner to the
realms of bliss;—I hold good works, in great veneration, and can't
agree with your Swaddling pretended devotees who exclaim: "Only
believe and yours is heaven."—At that rate, a person may rob and
murder, and commit the greatest atrocities, no matter what, so
they have Faith; but I say, "Charity covers a multitude of sins,"—
and faith, without good works, is like a garden without seed,
which produces nothing but weeds and rubbish. I now kept entirely
at home, and could have wished for the society of some amiable
reduced gentlewoman, whom I might support in decency, and leave
what I might die possessed of to. But what creature on earth,
would become an intimate of mine? Oh! heavenly Virtue, how
precious art thou, how much should you be valued, for when thou
art gone, every place becomes a hell; conscience like a foul
fiend, haunts the wretch who's deprived of thee, and hurries her
from one extreme of wickedness to the other, till at last she's
brought, like poor Vangable, of equestrian memory, to the very
zenith of human misery!!!

VANGABLE, after leading a life of the greatest dissipation and
debauchery, and after figuring away at Astley's Amphitheatre in
Peter-street, and exhibiting her wonderful powers of horsemanship,
to crowded and admiring audiences; she, I say, contracted every
infamous disorder, and died not only rotten with venereal
complaints, but to add to her misery, she was also afflicted with
the Herodian distemper; and on the cold bed of death, requested I
would give orders to have her put into a slit deal coffin, bor'd
all over with holes, and have her taken about a league out to sea,
and thrown into the ocean; such was her dying request, which I
minutely complied with.


	"Alas poor Vangable."
"Absent or dead, still let a friend be dear,
A sigh for absent claims, the dead a tear."

I wrote to my two friends, Mrs. S—— and Mrs. Falvey, informing
them of my reformation, and received very satisfactory letters
from each, in which they extolled my resolution, and expatiated
largely on their own domestic felicity; advising me to go off to
England or Scotland, and that they had no doubt, from my agreeable
manners and sweetness of temper, I would soon meet with a
companion, who would render the remainder of my days happy: but
alas! the idea of mankind became detestable to me;

"I'd that within, which baffled human art,
A burning fever,—and a broken heart."

No, no, I was resolved never to venture on the shoals and quick-
sands of matrimony; besides, in my opinion it would be baseness in
the extreme, to go to a strange country, and palm myself upon any
honest gentleman, as a woman of honour; who wretch like me, had
trod in the paths of prostitution for upwards of thirty years,—
Gracious Heaven!

"The blackest ink of fate, was sure my lot,
And when she wrote my name, she made a blot.!

In my answer to Mrs. Falvey, I requested she'd prevail on a Miss
Elizabeth Edmonds, a poor young lady, whom I had got acquainted
with at Killarney, and who wished (thinking me a virtuous married
lady) to be hired as my waiting woman; however I then would not
hear of it, as Pitt-street house, at that time, would be a bad
asylum for my sweet black-eyed sentimental girl; I now however
thought she'd prove a great acquisition in my retirement; and
entreated my dear Betsy Falvey to send her to me without delay,—
and accordingly in about a month afterwards, I was made happy in
the agreeable society of my poor dear Betsy, who had, herself
wrestled with adversity for several years, "a woe worn daughter of
affliction."—Miss Edmonds was the illegitimate daughter of the
famous Billy the Beau, so celebrated in the annals of gallantry;
her mother's name was V——y, whom the Earl, her father, debauched
at the age of fifteen. Miss V——y was at that time, one of the most
beautiful creatures under Heaven, with all the loves and graces
sporting in her train; but notwithstanding all her charms and a
most excellent education (for her connections were as good as her
seducer's), she fell a prey to the "insidious wiles of faithless
man." Billy the Beau, triumphed over her virtue, in consequence of
which my poor Betsy Edmonds, this child of sorrow from her
infancy, made her melancholy debut in this world; her mother died
in consequence of her birth: the blame entirely resting upon
little L——hy an unskilful country Accoucheur, than whom, nature
herself had proved a better. The death of Miss V——y was a source
of affliction to the noble Earl of G——, my Betsy's father, who
took all imaginable care of the little darling; and when she
arrived at a proper age, put her to one of the best schools in the
city of Cork, where he sent her for her education; and where in
the commencement of her teens, she unfortunately became acquainted
with one Edmonds, the natural son of a gentleman of an immense
fortune of that name,—who thinking his fortune would be made by a
connection with so rare and choice a sprig of nobility, found
means to carry her off, vi et armis, to the county of Clare, where
they were married by a Couple Beggar; as Edmonds was really a
pretty gentleman, poor Betsy in a very short time became perfectly
satisfied with her lot, and having often solicited her husband for
a legal marriage, as no licence could be obtained, the banns were
called publicly in church, three different times, when they were
indissolubly tied, with all the forms of the established church,
before a crowded congregation, in the parish church of Ennis in
the county of Clare. In vain did poor Betsy sue to her noble
father for forgiveness; and as fruitless were Edmond's
applications to the author of his being: The miserable though
beautiful pair, were left to shift for themselves, and drag out a
wretched existence, in penury and want. Poor Mrs. Edmonds had
three children who died almost as soon as born; and her husband at
length, though dotingly fond of her, yet as he could not support
her equal to his wishes, he joined a marching regiment just going
off to America, to fight those sons of Freedom, who by their
exertion in the glorious cause, obtained emancipation from the
mother country, and was killed at Bunkers Hill: where many a
gallant youth, as well as Edmonds, and the unfortunate Jonas
Griffith (whose head was shot off fighting at Edmonds's side) paid
the great debt of nature most prematurely.—Poor Edmonds and
Griffiths went off volunteers together, obtained Ensigncies the
same day; and lost their lives the day after, fighting side by
side; some of the fatal effects of that truly unfortunate war, by
which our country has irretrievably lost some of its most brave
and faithful inhabitants.

Some time after the death of Edmonds, his disconsolate relict,
hired as own woman to the late beautiful divine and elegant Mrs.
M——w, and went with her to France:—where that stain to human
nature, the parricidal Orleans, whose will was absolute at that
time, unfortunately grew enamoured with her incomparable mistress:
which as soon as she became acquainted with, in order to avoid his
detested overtures and addresses, left France, she and poor Betsy,
in a cartel ship that was bound for England;—and on the passage,
oh! horrid to relate, the whole crew and prisoners, amounting to
upwards of sixty ruffians, mutinied against the captain and
officers of the vessel, whom they bound; and afterwards brutally
ravished the heavenly mistress, and her charming companion; every
man of them alternately satisfying his infamous lust: in
consequence of which, poor Mrs. M—w languished in a melancholy
situation for a few days, and died; leaving her fellow sufferer 
who survived her, her clothes, watch, a few trinkets, and a trifle
of money; with which she retired to a farm-house near Killarney;
where I luckily became acquainted with her, and from herself
learned the mournful story, which was most dreadful, as several of
the miscreants who had committed the foul crime, laboured under a
certain disorder; in consequence of which Mrs. Edmonds was obliged
to have recourse to medical assistance:—as would be the case with
her angel mistress, had not the great disposer of all things, in
pity, taken her to himself

"Sweet suffering faint, dear innocent, adieu,
Angels were painted fair to look like you."

Soon after Mrs. Edmonds's arrival, I found my affairs much
embarrassed:—I certainly had in bonds, promissory notes, and I
O's, upwards of two thousand pounds due to me; but what value
could be set upon the obligations of unprincipled men of fashion,
and a parcel of abandoned prostitutes;—in fact my affairs were so
very much deranged, I was under the disagreeable necessity of
disposing of my house and furniture in Pitt-street, and removing
with my friend to my new house on the Blackrock road; which the
produce of my Pitt-street house, &c.—enabled me to fit up in a
comfortable manner; and where we lived in a pleasing retirement,
with only a little girl to attend us; as I would by no means
suffer Mrs. Edmonds (though she offered her services,) to undergo
any more slavery than myself.—In this place the thought first
struck me, of publishing my chequered Memoirs, as my ready cash
was fast diminishing imperceptably away; and all my bonds, and
securities for money, could not procure me a shilling, many of
which I placed in the hands of rascally vile attorneys; in return
for which, I was furnished with bills of costs, and insolent
threatening letters. Thus circumstanced, my only source for profit
and revenge was the publication of my unfortunate life; resolving
to publish the names of several persons to whom I was indebted for 
my ruin, in the last volume: and so I certainly will, as 'tis
rather cruel that my substance should be lavished among a parcel
of people, whose ideas do not extend farther than the brute
creation. H—— B—— after living upon me for years (he and his 
hussies), only sneers at me when I present his bond to him for
payment; and such is the case with T—— H——, W—— T—— G——, W—— B——,
Rich—— W——, M—— O'C——, Jack B—— of Wexford, a simple gentleman, a
surveyor of Excise at Tralee; the late self dubbed Knight, and the
old B——, who returned the late worthy C—— M—— for a seat in his
borough, for a certain valuable consideration, in favour of his
spem gregis, Mr. O'B——, another limb of the law; who thought it
damn'd hard to be obliged to pay at my house, a guinea and a half
for a bowl of Turtle soup and a flask of sparkling Champagne ,
which the unpolished boor called eel broth and perry;—no bad
substitute by the bye for these luxuries. Two wooden headed
Aldermen who were scarcely ever out of my house. Squire B——, a
sheriff's peer, and Mr. B—— an heel rubbing Catiff, who, under
pretence of recovering debts for me, cheated me of upwards of
fifty pounds; another celebrated gentleman, famous in story, who
was disrobed in all the Courts, equal to an exhibition in the
pillory, and thrown for life into Newgate. Mr. K——, that precious
pander, who not only robbed me of my profession by setting up in
my line, but run a bill with me to a considerable amount, without
the smallest notion of paying; and C——, who plundered me under
cover of an Insolvent act; and one Coleman, who acted as my waiter
for very near two years, carried off effects to a considerable
amount;—with a number of others, who owe me among them very near
three thousand pounds, for all which I have specialties to
produce.–Relative to my Memoirs, when I had the two first volumes
ready I sent them about to my particular friends in trade, whom I
had dealt with; and they all behaved extremely liberal on the
occasion: and for which I shall ever retain the most grateful
acknowledgements; in fact all the gentlemen in business were
everything I could wish. I merely sent the two volumes to them
sealed up and directed without any card or letter, and I never got
a smaller return from any one of them than a guinea; so that by
the publication, after paying all expenses, I found I had cleared
upwards of six hundred guineas, but what signified that sum to a
woman who knew not how to turn it to any sort of use; one of an
extravagant turn, who never knew what economy was; and who always
as she got money very lightly (light come light go), threw it away
as it came, like the amiable Desdemona, when in confinement in the
Four-courts Marshalsea, who having received a benefaction of one
guinea from the late worthy Robert Shaw, send the entire out for a
brace of woodcocks and a flask of Champagne, though 'twas well
known, neither she or her poor husband had tasted a morsel for two
days before. Oh! the depravity of human nature; would it not have
been much better for the pretty Desdemona, to have sent out for a
leg of mutton, a loaf of bread, a quart of the pure native, or a
pot or two of porter, and a little tea and sugar:—but there is no
accounting for these things. As I said before, my resources for
getting money were all dried up, in a very short time. I began for
the first time in my life to feel acute distress; while my money
lasted poor Edmonds and I lived luxuriously, though quite within
ourselves; for except a few mendicants whom I always relieved, we
scarcely admitted any others:—the virtuous and the good I could
not expect, and the vicious I was determined to shun. By degrees
all my finery, went to the Pawnbrokers; above a dozen miniature
pictures, beautifully set, for which I scarce got the value of the
gold; my repeater set round with brilliants, with a number of
diamond rings of very great value, all went the same road merely
to eke out a loathed existence. At length one morning when all was
gone, and even the duplicates sold for what they would bring;
Edmonds and I was sitting very melancholy over the dying embers of
a wretched fire; when a woman I had often dealt with for East
India goods, teas, lawns, china, &c. a Mrs. Deborah O'Dowd,
formerly Debby Casey, a very pretty little ginger, who had been
seduced when very young by a Mr. Y—— of the county Kerry, by whom
she had one son, now an eminent physician of great repute: and
after marrying one Dowd a tobacco twister, a very uncouth brute of
a fellow, poor Debby was in the habit of granting favours to such
gentlemen, as she really had an esteem for, and who were her
customers.—I say this girl having found out where I lodged, and
being also well acquainted with Mrs. Edmonds, called to know if I
wished for anything in her way? And on my answering with tears
glistening in my eyes, that I had not wherewithal to buy our
breakfast, much less to purchase fineries of any kind: the good-
natured creature insisted on her lending me half her stock of
cash, amounting to ten guineas, and besides made me a present of a
pound of Gunpowder-tea, and two beautiful India shawls, one to
each of us; and though sorely distressed, we were sometime before
we could be prevailed upon to receive such compliments from our
pretty petty chapwoman;—however, at last like Romeo's apothecary,
"our necessities but not our wills complied." Very shortly after
that supply was nearly exhausted, a young fellow, a quondam 
footman of mine, brought me (prefacing his present with, "I hear
you are writing books Madam,") a quire of gilt paper, a bottle of
ink, a pen-knife, a bundle of pens, and his whole quarter's wages,
amounting to two guineas, at the same time blubbering like a
child, after ejaculating,—"Good Heaven did I ever think it would
have come to this. You my ever honoured mistress, who were good
and charitable to every creature who appeared distressed." 'Twas
in vain I urged the impossibility of my bringing myself capable of
accepting the wages of the poor honest fellow's labour; all would
not do; he declared he had no use for the money, and would take it
much to heart if I refused his little mite; hinting that surely it
would never lessen my consequence, in accepting a trifle from a
poor creature, who had formerly owed so much to my bounty and
humanity; for the poor lad took a bad fever when with me in Pitt-
street, and I need not tell my readers I had every possible care
taken of him; and he deserved nothing else from me, having been
always a honest, faithful good servant.—At last I accepted of his
affectionate offering, which affected not only me, but Mrs.
Edmonds so much, that we both shed tears of gratitude; and I
poured forth my acknowledgements to my parti-coloured friend with
the greatest candour and sincerity; and little as his present was,
it enabled us to dine and spend the day comfortably; which would
not have been the case had not divine providence thrown him in my
way; and I must confess, that the all-seeing Power was ever good
to me, and that I never was in imminent distress, that some
channel or another did not open for my relief; however I now found
myself in the very abyss of misery, for having occasion to go to
Fleet-street in order to settle for a debt I owed Mr. O'B—— a wine
merchant: I was arrested for £15, at the suit of a Grocer in
Grafton-street, by Matthews my quondam friend, who had once
figured away at one of the masquerade balls, in the character of
Sergeant Kite, he carried me to his Sponging-house, without a
shilling in my pocket, or any means left for subsistence; and my
very bed in the hospitable purlieus of a Spunging-house, would be
two shillings a night, with perhaps a bedfellow or two if there
was a necessity, forced upon me in the bargain.


CHAP. XXXV.
IN THIS hopeless, helpless situation I remained 'till towards
night, when my faithful friend, Mrs. Edmonds came to me with a
supply of cakes, wine, tea and sugar, which the honest soul
procured by the impawnment of all the little remains of her
wearing apparel. That evening a very pretty little woman was shown
into our apartment, who though a married woman and even a femme
couverte (such is the glorious uncertainty of the law,) was
arrested for about eleven pounds; and to aggravate her misfortune,
she was arrested by a ruffian of the name of Mooney, who with the
look of a hangman, and the manners of a Yahoo, took her into
custody; and with the most dreadful imprecations threatened to
drag her through the streets to his own villainous lock-up house,
if she did not immediately give him five guineas: this mode of
extorting money, and which is his constant custom, she was well
acquainted with; but knew it was contrary to law [see note]; and
absolutely refused to go to his house, where she knew every
imposition was put in practice against the unfortunate prisoners;
however as this miscreant found she was firmly determined not to
go to his infamous dirty and loathsome house, sooner than put her
into the sheriff's goal, committed her to the care of one of his
own tribe, Mr. Matthews, who if it is possible to be respectable
in such a profession, is so in a very high degree: and I am proud
to pay a tribute of acknowledgment to his worth and humanity, as I
had an opportunity of witnessing his, and his worthy family's
tenderness to a number of unfortunate prisoners.
	[Note: This despicable CATCHPOLE had been convicted for a
practice of this kind, and suffered three months' imprisonment
besides a fine.]

This debt was incurred by obtaining necessaries for her infamous
husband, in the Fourcourts-marshalsea. On our beginning to cotton
together, to use a vulgar expression; for I could not help taking
a liking to her, as she was a beautiful little woman: she told me
her father was steward to the Right Hon. Mr. C——, and a man of
much wealth; that at the age of fourteen she was married to one
Mulligan, who conducted business for an eminent brewer in this
city;—that Mulligan (who was old enough to be her father,) by
extravagance and dissipation of every kind, was thrown into the
Four-courts Marshalsea before they had been married two years,
where they both got acquainted with a counsellor S——, who was
married to an old lady, a Mrs. E——, who in order to preserve her
jointure (particularly circumstanced,) never acknowledged her
marriage; the consequence of which was, she was also a prisoner as
well as her spouse; both for very considerable sums. That as the
counsellor and his lady, to save appearances, had separate
apartments in the Marshalsea, and never were known to sleep
together; he, as a person will, "kiss the child for sake of the
nurse," became seemingly very much attached to her husband, had
him every day, and consequently herself to breakfast, dine and
sleep; and at last for, and in consideration of his giving up all
his right and title of her, and a house of hers near Mount Brown,
S—— gave him two hundred pounds, but not before Mulligan formally
put the lawyer in full and ample possession of the premises. She
told me her nefarious husband had frequently put S—— and her to
bed together, tucked them in, and upon taking away the candle
wished them—"a pleasant night."—She also informed me, that the
cause of her present imprisonment, which certainly was illegal in
the extreme, was for groceries, and other things which she had
taken up to support her vile husband and self, before she had got
under the patronage of S——. She also acknowledged she never loved
or esteemed S——, no more than she did her husband; as she really
might be the grand-daughter of either of them, being then but two-
and-twenty; that revenge (what wont an injured woman do,) was the
cause of her succumbing to the vile adulterous bargain. In fact
she told me both her husband and Cicisbeo had been liberated by an
Insolvent act; and her husband being applied to for payment of the
goods she had procured for his use when in durance vile: and he
not only refused payment, but denied her to be his wife; she was
in consequence arrested by virtue of a writ marked against her, by
an infamous fellow one J. B——, who had been a brother prisoner
with her husband; and had also like him, been enlarged by virtue
of the Insolvent act. I could not help pitying, and admiring this
poor artless creature, who was plunged into every complicated
misery by her base husband.—Our society was farther enlivened by
the company of an agreeable girl, Miss F——, who had been seduced
and brought from England by a nobleman, who soon cast her off when
she was reduced to the necessity of turning common street-walker
for subsistence; and having ran a bill with a Milliner to a
considerable amount, at the time she was in keeping by his
lordship.—She was, poor creature, a stranger and desolate,—thrown
into the very same Sponging-house with us.—As was also a very fine
gay fellow, an English lad, one Jessop, who held a genteel
appointment in the castle, immediately under the secretary;—and he
being much smitten with the charms of his country woman, married
her in the prison; in consequence of which, she was at liberty to
go where she pleased: and very shortly afterwards through the
dexterity and influence of an amorous judge, obtained his liberty,
and returned with him to England:—where I was told he was shortly
afterwards executed, for swindling a merchant out of a
considerable sum of money. Poor Mrs. Mulligan, also, did not
remain with us more than a week, when her honest father hearing of
her distressed situation, procured bail for her,—with an intent to
litigate the debt, and bring her husband if possible to condign
punishment.—During all these transactions, my poor friend (who
never quit me but to bring me relief,) and I, spent our time in
extreme misery; often times being obliged to our friendly keeper
and his wife for a breakfast and dinner: a breakfast and dinner:—
indeed, I must acknowledge Matthews's civility, who relaxed much
from the severity of the character of the keeper of a lock-up-
house with regard to me: suffering my poor friend to share my bed,
without any extra charge, and inviting us to dine, sup or
breakfast, whenever he observed us in want of cash.—While I
remained there, the widow of a captain P——d also joined our
society, a beautiful sentimental woman, who soon connected herself
with one of the first Portrait-painters in Europe, a Mr. W—— R——n,
by whom she proved pregnant. It may not be incurious here, to
inform my readers, of some anecdotes of this celebrated artist,
who once kept his carriage and suite of servants, and lived in the
greatest style. A Mrs. M—— a married lady, and one of the most
beautiful of women, sat to him for her portrait; which when
finished, he refused giving her, saying,—"He could not think of
parting with it, as like another Pygmalion he had absolutely
fallen in love with the work of his own hands."—"That is something
strange," replied the lady, "when you might so easily gain
possession of the original."—"Why madam," said the painter, "I
always understood you had been married to Mr. M——?" "So I was,"
said she, "but our marriage was never consummated, nor never will,
for he is totally impotent; we have been married now upwards of
five years, and he never had any more connection with me than you
had."—The painter took the lady at her word; a separation legally
and immediately took place, and thy were indissolubly joined in
Hymeneal fetters, to both their satisfaction. She soon after the
birth of her first child, shared her favours with a certain judge,
long since defunct; to the no small grief of Mr. R——n, who
perfectly adored her:—during his confinement at Matthews's, his
lady never paid him a visit, however he retaliated upon her, for
her indifference, by his close attachment to the agreeable widow,
who afterwards died in child-bed, in consequence of that amour;—
and R——n and his wife, her paramour the judge, being dead, as I
mentioned before, are gone to Philadelphia, where by what I can
learn, they live in happiness and splendour. As Mrs. R——n never
had any connection with any person but her husband, save the
honourable judge, with whom she appeared publicly about from place
to place, and sometimes to the knowledge of poor R——n; sleeping
with him at his lodgings, and entertaining him for days and nights
together in R——n's own houses, both in town and country; for he
had built many elegant houses, and was in the receipt of near two
thousand pounds a year, when he married her.—I need not depict to
my fair readers my dreadful situation; though at the same time I
must premise that had I not reformed, I would not have been thus
abandoned and distressed. While I led a vicious course of life I
had friends in abundance, but the moment I turned my thoughts to
virtue, I was deserted by all, except a few of the worthy citizens
of Dublin, with whom I had honestly dealt for a number of years,
and indeed I must own that Providence, in whom I put my entire
confidence did not totally desert me:—One evening as Mrs. Edmonds
and I were drinking tea with our landlady, a prisoner was
introduced, at first I took no sort of notice of him, not even
lifting up my eyes at his approach; and as for my part, I was so
entirely altered both in dress and appearance, that it was
impossible for him to distinguish the gay, the volatile Peg
Leeson, in wretchedness, misery and rags, in a lock-up-house:—at
last upon Mrs. Matthews pressing me to take another cup: I
ventured to look up, and to my inexpressible astonishment, beheld
in the person of the prisoner my friend Purcell, with whom I had
spent so agreeable, so ecstatic a day on Plummer's Island;—the
instant I recollected him our guilty commerce flashed on my senses
like an electric shock, and I fainted away, when he running to my
assistance, at last recollected the features of the woman, with
whom not many years since he had spent such agreeable days; he
also remembered Edmonds, whom he had often seen with me at
Killarney; and after recovering me from the fit, and kindly
embracing me, and saluting Edmonds, he gave us to understand, how
sorry he was to meet us in that situation: assuring me I should
never want a shilling, while he had one, and that he would divide
his last guinea with me.—After making him a suitable return for
his kind enquiries, good wishes and offers; I made him a low
distant courtesy, and retired: but I was not long in my apartment,
when he followed me and taking me aside, hoped I had no objection
to give him part of my bed; which I peremptorily refused, but not
with any degree of resentment; as how could I be displeased with
such a request from a man who had so often enjoyed all my charms
unrestrained? — A man whose caresses I met more than half way; no,
I argued with him in a mild manner, I told him my resolution had
been fixed as fate, and that for the remainder of my wretched
life, no man should ever take the smallest liberties with me:—that
I was really a thorough penitent, and should die so.—When he found
I was determined, he dropped his suit with the proviso, that as I
would not share my bed with him, I must at least submit to suffer
him to share his purse with me. With which proposal, with great
reluctance I complied:—on which he reckoned the contents of his
purse, which amounted to twenty-five guineas; thirteen of which he
threw into my lap. The next morning I sent Edmonds out to redeem
some necessaries of ours, that she had pawned since our
incarceration, and which indeed we could very badly do without.—
The addition of Mr. Purcell's company much enlivened our society,
as he was a very agreeable entertaining man, who abounded with
anecdotes; he also sung very pleasingly, and had a pretty taste
for poetry; which he proved by the following impromptu;—which he
sung upon receiving a visit from a Miss Dorothea A——g of the
county Clare, — to the tune of the well known song, of the


	PRISONER'S WELCOME.


I.
"Welcome, welcome sweet Dorinda,
To this gloomy dismal place;
You illumine more than window,
By the bright'ning ray, your face.


II.
Grieve not at my situation,
Nor repine at Heaven's decree;
Providence, my preservation,
Will me from this prison free.


III.
Breathe to him a fervent prayer,
Innocence does claim regard;
Heaven will grant your boon sincere,
And your friendly aid reward.

IV.
I feel the aid, implored already,
Comfort sent me from the skies;
Such as charm'd my heart sweet lady,
When I first beheld your eyes.


V.
Smile on charmer, since in smiling
You can happiness diffuse;
Stranger to the art beguiling,
Smile on Purcell and his muse."

And so she did, for in a few days the dear man was liberated, and
finding me inexorable (as I am certain his attachment to me
prevented him from entering into any matrimonial engagement,) he
seriously paid his addresses to the divine Dora, as he called her,
who had a large independent fortune, and led her to the altar of
Hymen:—after which he went down with his charming bride to Ennis
in the county Clare; where they are settled for life: but not
before he made me another very liberal present with solemn
assurances of future protection, and assistance; with an offer of
an asylum in the county Clare, if I could be prevailed upon to
accept of one; he also behaved very genteely to poor Edmonds, and
promised her, she should not want a friend while he lived, on
account of her fidelity to me and my ruined fortunes.

After his departure I employed one John F—— a scoundrel, who had
been several years a prisoner at Matthews's and elsewhere, and had
been indulged by Matthews to walk out, in consequence of becoming
a setter for him, and upon occasion a bailiff: but this nefarious
wretch, than whom a greater does not exist, served me as he did
the unfortunate proprietor of the Phoenix, who unwittingly took
him into his employment as a clerk, and in consequence was
destroyed by his art and practices. This fellow after receiving
several sums of my money, had himself removed by Habeas Corpus
into the Four-courts Marshalsea; obtained the benefit of the late
Insolvent act, and now with my property figures away as an eminent
Pawn-broker, under pretence of having being left a fortune by a
relation of his in the county of Kilkenny: worthless fellow, who
was bred up a shoe-boy, and a pot-boy to a paltry ale-house;—and
has lived upon rapine and plunder ever since.

"An upstart miscreant fit for any job,
To tuck a felon, or to head a mob."

In vain was it that I sent about to all those who were indebted to
me, and wrote melancholy letters to them descriptive of my 
deplorable situation; not one of them would deign to send even an
answer to any of my supplicating epistles:—and I must have
inevitably perished had it not been for (as I said before) the
humanity of my keepers, and the benevolence of certain persons
whom I had formerly dealt with; Mr. Kennedy, of the Waterford
glass-house, Mr. Tinkler paper-stainer, and Mr. Corbet, of Great
Britain-street: I also received some assistance from many of my
old friends, Mr. T. Swords, Mr. Courtney and Mr. Frank Higgins,
Mr. David Weir, the two Mr. Marsh's, Mr. Lefavre, Messrs
Blackwoods, Mr. Stanley, all the Beresfords, &c. &c.—the humanity
of these gentlemen to me was beyond praise, and which I
acknowledge with heart felt gratitude, and I am sure I,

"Can plead no title to their favours past,
And only wish for worth to make them last."

Mr. Henegan of Mount Brown, Mr. Manders of James's-street, the
worthy captain Ormsby, governor of the Four-courts Marshalsea, the
Rev. Mr. K—— and Doctor McD—— of the Meeting-house, Doctor T——,
counsellors V—— and McN——, with those great luminaries of the law
counsellors Egan and Curran: Mr. John Magee of Swift's hospital;
and all the principal gentlemen in the Printing and Bookselling
trade, who not only encouraged the sale of my Memoirs, but greatly
contributed by their exertion and recommendation to get the whole
impression sold. These gentlemen also, were so kind as to set a
subscription afloat for me, which produced a tolerable sum (great
indeed,) in my present situation.

Qui nunc prescribere longum est.

Some weeks after to add to my misfortune of imprisonment, which
was with this blow advanced to the very zenith, my amiable friend,
the good, the kind, the humane Betsy Edmonds, breathed her last in
my arms; she died of a decline in the thirty fifth year of her
age, in consequence of the severe usage she met with; and had it
not been for the humanity of Captain Eyre, then a prisoner in the
Four-courts Marshalsea, I should not have known how to accomplish
the interment, being again reduced to want: but I was determined
this noble minded generous creature, should have every respect and
attention paid to her remains; the kindness of the humane Captian
enabled me to do so, and very handsomely.

Sweet Betsy, "whose like I never shall behold again—Peace to her
gentle manes—She is gone to that country from whose bourne no
traveller returns."

After the loss of my Betsy, no human misery could equal mine, I
gave myself up entirely to despair and often invoked the Almighty
to take me to himself.—My spiritual comforter frequently called to
see me, and in his discourses I found my only consolation. In this
situation I was meditating on my past life, when I was told a
gentleman wished to see me in the parlour, and what was my
surprise when on coming down I perceived my friend Falvey, who had
kindly undertaken to settle my affairs without my knowledge and
had compounded with all my creditors for about forty guineas,
which he had collected, and above thirty more from the Whig-club.—
As he had undertaken my deliverance, he declared he would never
quit me, till he brought me out, and accordingly, after settling
with my kind keepers, who behaved very generously on the occasion,
he called a coach, and ordering the driver to proceed to the Rock,
where he had taken apartments for a month; to my inexpressible
rapture; (for all was surprise to me, in fact like a dream,) he
led me into an apartment where the first object that struck me,
was his sweet, affectionate, affable, unassuming wife, who
received me in the most friendly manner:—she informed me they had
been in town (on law-business, which was happily terminated in
their favour,) for near three months, that Mr. Falvey had made
many enquiries about me and poor Mrs. Edmonds to no purpose, till
at length he luckily called to see a friend of his, who was in the
same sponging-house with me, where he heard of the death of Mrs.
Edmonds, of my melancholy situation and exemplary life; and
immediately came to the resolution of having me liberated, though
obliged to do it at his own expense:—and accordingly the next day
after dining with a member of the Whig-club, he introduced my
story, and immediately collected from these worthy characters
upwards of sixty guineas:—his next object was to go among my
creditors, and compound my debts, which was easily done, as they
had given up all hopes of receiving anything, thinking I must be
shortly relieved by an Insolvent act, or by a wooden habeas, i.e.
a coffin, as they were by no means unacquainted with my ill state
of health. And here I must say that very few knew of my
imprisonment, as it was generally rumoured and believed in the
city, that I had paid the great debt of Nature; which circumstance
was even mentioned in the public papers, this report I by no means
contradicted, as it was more flattering to my pride (and I still
possessed a share notwithstanding my misfortunes,) that the idea
of my death got abroad, than that the public should be acquainted
with the true cause of my sequestration from the world.—My dear
friend detained me at the Rock, but quite incog. for about three
weeks, when they were obliged to set off in the Limerick stage, on
their way to Kerry, but not before they had settled me in a
comfortable lodging in Clarendon-street, and had taken care I had
money sufficient, to serve me in a moderate manner for a month or
two; at the same time advising me by all means to publish the
third volume of my Memoirs without loss of time, assuring me they
would use their endeavours to procure me a number of subscribers
in the counties of Limerick, Cork, Kerry, Waterford, Tipperary and
Clare;—and desired I would as soon as possible send them a number
of my proposals, with proper receipts annexed.


CHAP. XXXVI.
ON THEIR departure I seriously set to work, and in less than three
months had the materials for the volume ready for transcription;—
living all the time quite retired, and seeing no creature except
my priest and amanuensis,—the former of whom being of a liberal
education, had the kindness to look over my manuscript and correct
it: he told me the public were by no means well pleased with my
former production, and that whoever my editor was, he did not
avail himself of my hints and copy, as he should have done, and
much regretted that he had not at that period the satisfaction of
knowing me, as he should have endeavoured to render the work more
worthy the public attention. There were a few more friends who had
assisted me in my distress, and whom it would have been the
highest ingratitude to be denied to: the only lady of my former
acquaintance, who made any enquiries about me was Miss Love, who
sent me several presents from time to time, and offered me (with
the consent of her kind keeper,) an apartment in her house, if I
thought proper to accept of it: But I was determined for the
remainder of my life not to give the world the least handle to
take hold of—I knew very well, That

"On eagles' wings immortal scandal fly,
Whilst virtuous actions are but born and die."

And had I gone to lodge with the generous good-natured Miss Love,
it would be immediately imagined that I had turned (like the dog
to the vomit) to my old vicious course of life.—I judged with
Caesar, that "it would not be sufficient for me to be honest, if
all the world did not believe me to be so."—Indeed I became so
bashful, and had contracted within these few months past, so much
of the mauvaise honte, as the French call it, that I absolutely
was ashamed to be seen abroad; and I could not if I was offered a
thousand pounds for it, sit one hour in my own quondam favourite
box at the Theatre Royal: in fact from being a bold masculine
termagant, I became one of the most timid mild creatures on earth,
quite sentimental,—without a sentence tending to lewdness or
blasphemy.—This will show what custom can do: I, who had been in
the habit of every vice for the space of thirty years and upwards,
to be so reformed in the course of about a year and half:—Indeed I
can attribute my wonderful reformation as supernatural, and an
inspiration from the God of nature himself; only to conceive, that
the whole wonderful work should originate, with my reprimanding
two fashionable swindlers for dishonesty; and this puts me in mind
of a story I heard at Bath, when I went there for an importation
of impures:—A remarkable profligate, and a great blasphemer, was
riding by a Catholic chapel, under very heavy thunder and
lightning, and on seeing the poor people, on the road contiguous
to the mass house, crossing and blessing themselves, he began to
turn them into ridicule, by crossing his horse, cursing, swearing
and gibing, when a flash of lightning struck him to the ground,
and killed him on the spot; this caused a great alarm through the
country, and everybody concluded,—the impious blasphemer was
overtaken by the vengeance of Heaven, and of course would be
damned. But on the Sunday following, to the amazement of the
gazing multitude, there was found growing on his grave (by the bye
I believe it to be all fable,) a beautiful leaf, with the annexed
exhortation and verse in letters of gold:

Don't judge, lest you should be judged. For,

"Between the stirrup and the ground,
I mercy craved, and mercy found."

There can be no doubt of repentant sinners' finding mercy with
their maker:—and I was determined not to trust in Chesterfield's
wicked lines:

"Sin then, dear girl for Heaven's sake,
Sin on, and be forgiven;
Sin on, and by repentance make
A holyday in Heaven."

As I could not with propriety make a personal application, I was
determined to send my proposals everywhere; and accordingly thro'
the medium of the Penny-post, enclosed them to every creature
whose name I found in Wilson's Directory and Watson's Almanack;
and from numbers received very handsome subscriptions:—I often
wished I had as much bronze in my face, as Mrs. J—— E—— M. the
English poetess, who certainly is a credit to the kingdom she came
from; then should I by my exertions, have realized a handsome
fortune; but poor Mrs. B——tt——r herself, that elegant charming
sentimental writer, was never more timid or backward in forwarding
a subscription than I was, I could certainly address any person by
letter, but it was death to me to make a personal application. One
evening in the dusk I muffled myself up, and ventured for the sake
of the air, to take a walk in Stephen's-green, which was within a
few yards of my lodging, and on my return, to my utter
mortification and surprise, found a deserted unprotected girl I
had hired to go of errands for me, had carried off all my clothes,
with a small tea-chest, in which I had upwards of thirty guineas;
being the full amount of the subscriptions I had received from
friends, to whom I had enclosed my proposals, this was a severe
blow I was by no means prepared for: Gracious God! exclaimed I, to
what further miseries am I reserved! To have my all, I may say,
taken from me, by an ungrateful wretch, whom I had taken in for
charity;—the very identical Mary Neill, whom the unaccountable
Hamilton Rowan, made such a ridiculous rout about.—All I had left
now was the two guineas, and a few shillings I had in my pocket,
when I walked out, with the bare clothes on my back, which were
the very worst I had, as I only wrapped an old plaid about me; the
vile creature, who by what I learned afterwards was viciously
inclined, did not even leave me a change of linen.— Mrs. T——
indeed, my good-natured landlady, did all she could to comfort me,
assuring me I should not want while she had it, bidding me trust
still in a Divine Providence, who never deserts those who merit
protection, and reminding me of my own expressions to herself,
when I had so often been relieved:—and indeed the words were
scarcely out of her mouth, when I received a letter from the Earl
of Bristol,—that patriotic, eccentric, little prelate,—with an
enclosure of fifty pounds:—My acquaintance with this noble and
reverend Peer was short but singular — about sixteen years before,
when I had been in London, he was introduced to me, and his lively
manner made such an impression on me, that I consented to have him
for a bed-fellow for one night:—The morning after, he made a
thousand apologies for his want of cash, and solemnly promised I
should not be a loser by indulging him;—however I thought no more
of it, nor possibly ever would, only the pressure of misfortunes
fell heavy on me, in consequence of which he occurred to me, and I
made enquiry for his address, and wrote to him a few months
before, among a number of my old acquaintances, without ever
expecting any answer, or that he even would recollect such a
person as I ever existed;—the event proved I was mistaken, and
skewed the generosity and gratitude of this worthy and honourable
Peer.—The rara avis in terris. Oh! Providence divine, exclaimed I
(dropping on my knees,) thou wonder working God, how has the
wretched Plunket merited this goodness?—After some little time in
fervent prayer, I arose up and embracing my landlady acknowledged
the truth of the observation she made, declaring I would never
again, let what would befall me, distrust in a divine and watchful
providence. The next morning as I was at breakfast, I was most
agreeably surprised at a visit from Debby Dowd, my generous
charitable smuggler, who so critically relieved Mrs. Edmonds and I
in the height of our distress. She came, she told me, to know if I
wanted anything in her way, and if I did I was extremely welcome
to take what I pleased till I could pay her: and accordingly I
bought a few yards of muslin from her, the making of a cloak, and
two pounds of Gunpowder tea, at prime cost, as she would receive
no more; and paid her the money she had lent me; but all I could
do, I could not prevail on her to take payment for the tea and
other matters, she had given poor Mrs. Edmonds and I.—She told me
her situation was vastly improved since she had seen me last, that
her husband whom she honestly owned, she never could endure was
dead, and that she was then married to one O'Connor, a very
eminent shop-keeper in Castleisland; and that in fact, she was
under no necessity to travel, but that as she had for a long time
been used to it, she could not avoid now and then taking an
excursion; however, she said, she travelled then in a little
cabriolet, which she drove herself, with her goods under her, and
only once or twice a year:—on her road to this city, when she came
to purchase goods, stopped at such towns, as she thought might
turn out to advantage; she also pressed me to take an airing with
her and spend the day in some outlet or other, and accordingly to
gratify my generous benefactress, who would take no denial, I
complied, and we spent the day at the Three-tun-tavern at the
Black-rock, where the worthy landlord, Bishop, paid us every
attention, and gave us every delicacy (and unquestionably his
house, independent of his own civility and accommodating manners,
is the best place of entertainment in that charming place) the
season could afford, and at a very moderate price. On our return
to town it was rather late, we were stopped near Baggotrath Castle
by three armed villains, who were proceeding to rifle our pockets,
when two gentlemen, who I had formerly known, a Mr. P——l and Mr.
W——, hearing our cries, galloped up to our assistance, and rescued
us from our assailants, who took to their heels and made their
escape, but not without loss of blood, as one of our deliverers
fired at the most desperate of the rogues, on his snapping a
pistol at him, and wounded him; as appeared by the tracts of his
blood for a considerable length of way, and notwithstanding all
our enquiries and endeavours, the three by some means or other
escaped; this adventure appeared in the public prints the next
day, in the most delicate manner, without mentioning any name;—
indeed since my misfortunes thickened upon me, all the Printers in
the city have treated me in the genteelest manner, never
mentioning my name with disrespect, the account of the robbery was
merely this:


"Last night as two ladies were returning from the Rock rather late,
their carriage was stopped by three armed foot-pads, who would have
robbed them, had it not been for the timely interference of two
gentlemen who happened luckily to ride up, just as the miscreants
were proceeding to violence; one of whom was desperately wounded,
notwithstanding which they all escaped, though closely pursued for
a considerable way."

Though my name was not announced in the papers, yet it was
generally believed I was one of the persons who had been stripped;
and Mr. Daly the generous manager of the Theatre Royal, who was
not only my very great admirer once, but particular friend,
hearing of my melancholy situation, intimated to me, that he would
give me a benefit free of every expense; not in my own name, as
that would damn the business among the ladies of the ton; but in
that of a distressed lady, &c. &c.—You may judge I accepted of
this generous offer, and once more intruded on my particular
friends, by written applications, and inclosing them bills and
tickets, in consequence of which as both play and entertainments
were got up with all the strength of the company, which was an
excellent one, I cleared upwards of ninety pounds, and would have
a good deal more, had I not been cheated by a number of buckeens
and swindling blackguards, my former acquaintances, who actually
forced their services on me, to stand, sell and receive tickets at
the different doors; and to my cost, when it was too late, I was
acquainted with the motive of their disinterested offers; humanity
alone prevents me from giving these jockeys' names at full
length:—the most specious of these friendly swindlers were Mr. M——
of High-street, Tom C—— of Francis-street, and Mr. S—— of Ormond-
quay; there were many more who kindly interfered to sell tickets
for me, and ungenerously pocketed the produce, and never accounted
with me for one of them; particularly one C——, formerly a Small-
beer Brewer, a quondam keeper of the Sheriff's prison,—the Rev.
Mr. K——, a valiant priest, who accompanied Colonel D—— to the
Continent as a priestly recruiting crimp, to annihilate the
French,—the widow of poor N—— of poetical memory, who insinuated
herself into my good graces, and pretended to be my friend;—a Mr.
Johnny G——n a shoe-maker, and a great devotee; and a number of
others who are not worth animadverting on.


CHAP. XXXVII.
I WAS now as to pecuniary matters tolerably easy, I had what would
support me and my servant girl, with decency for some time;
exclusive of which I was every day receiving subscriptions for my
third volume, the first two having been bought up with the
greatest avidity:—I now began to lead a life of some comfort, my
circumstances were good, my health in some measure reinstated, and
my mind in a perfect calm; I regularly attended to my devotions,
and was constantly visited by my spiritual guide a Mr. L——d, who
was not only the good priest but the gentleman, and who spared no
pains to bring me not only to a proper way of thinking, but to a
good opinion of myself, and indeed to this gentleman I in a great
measure owe my preservation; else I certainly should through
desperation, have been guilty of the horrid sin of a second time
attempting to make an end of my poor self.—In this situation I
happened accidentally to meet with a woman, in whom I placed much
confidence, she came to me recommended very strongly, and I hired
her on my own terms:—she was a very fine elegant woman, of about
thirty years of age, though perfectly grey; she told me she was
the daughter of a respectable Farmer in Roscrea, that she had very
early privately married the Valet de chambre of M—— B——, Esq; near
Borrisokane, and that her husband having saved a little money in
that poor gentleman's service (whose wife a lovely woman, eloped
from him with a military Cornuter,) brought her up to Dublin, and
set up an alehouse in Essex-street, where they had not carried on
business for above three years when her husband failed, was
arrested and thrown into the Four-courts Marshalsea, where they
both remained in great distress, until he was liberated by the
benefit of the late Insolvent act; when the base villain, her
husband, deserted her (under pretence of jealousy, insinuating
that she had granted favours to a married gentleman then in
prison) and entirely quit the kingdom; in consequence of which,
she applied in her distress to the gentleman whom Collins her
husband pretended to be jealous of, who told her it would be
ridiculous in the extreme, not to give the miscreant cause for his
unjust suspicions; and the gentleman having been very kind to her
when in the prison, which gave rise to Collins's surmises, and
having buried his own lady, she gave way to his desires, and
proved pregnant by him; which he for some time could hardly give
credit to, as from her snowy head he conceived she was an old
woman; however at last he was thoroughly convinced, on her being
brought to bed of a fine boy, as like himself as one egg to
another:—however as his circumstances were greatly deranged, Mrs.
Collins was obliged to put her child into the Poor-house, and to
go to a service herself, which he provided for her, by
recommending her to his own sister; with whom she lived till about
a month before that angelic woman died; when she gave her the
discharge; on the strength of which I agreed to hire her. This
poor pretty woman proved a great comfort to me, as I found her
intelligent, faithful, sober, discreet and honest; indeed when my
distresses became too severe for human nature to bear, I found
every consolation in my poor dear Peggy Collins, who never forsook
me; and very shortly after my hiring her, I had great occasion for
a trusty, faithful friend, who would sympathize in my uncommon and
unheard of misfortunes.—Peggy and I continued together in
tolerable tranquillity for several months, until one evening I
took it into my head to take a walk towards Drumcondra, to see my
old poetical friend Mrs. H——, and took poor Peggy with me as a
safeguard; and on our return in the dusk of the evening, we were
attacked by five ruffians, who dragged us into an adjoining field,
and after stripping us to our shifts, and robbing us of what cash
we had about us, actually compelled us by force to comply with
their infamous desires, and otherwise used us most cruelly, as we
made as much resistance as was in our power; particularly poor
Mrs. Collins, who in her rage thrust her scissors, into one of the
villains' bellies at the very moment he was enjoying her, after
they severally satiated their brutal appetites, they left us as I
said before, stripped to our shifts, carrying off even our shoes
and stockings, and indeed was it not for one of them, who had less
ferocity than the others, they would have taken away our very
shifts;—in this wretched situation we were obliged to return to
Mrs. H——, who kindly procured for us from her friend Broadhead's,
shoes and stockings, with two old plaid cloaks; and in this
miserable plight we arrived at our lodgings, very much cut and
bruised, at about two o'clock in the morning: Mrs. T—— was
astonished when she saw us, and when we related the way we had
been treated, she absolutely shed tears of compassion, and would
not let us retire till she made us take some warm punch, at the
same time giving us every consolation in her power.—Poor Peggy and
I went to bed, but not to rest, and what was a greater affliction
to us than all, in a few days afterwards, we found we were
infected with the most wretched of disorders; in fact we were
injured by the nefarious villains in the most virulent degree, and
this in all my round of pollution was what I never experienced
before;—almost frantic, and not knowing what to do; I was at first
resolved to lie under the foul disease till it should terminate my
wretched existence, but then on reflection I considered my poor
Peggy's case, and at last determined to send for either blind
Billy J——ns or Surgeon B——r, but in sending a note to the former,
I found he had been for a considerable time a Sunday beau, and the
poor surgeon was to my great grief in durance vile, for large sums
of money;—I therefore applied to my worthy friend Mr. Brady, who
was obliged, our diseases were so virulent and obstinate, to put
us both in a salivation,—in which we were for near three months,
at the end of which time, we found ourselves reduced to skeletons,
all our money exhausted, deeply involved with Mrs. T——, our
landlady, and our clothes in pawn:— A glorious situation for two
poor miserable repentant sinners, who had not by any crime of
their own, in any shape contributed to bring on these unheard of
misfortunes; what to do we knew not, and what was still worse (as
misfortune seldom comes alone) Mrs. T——, and who could blame her,
gave us warning to quit her house, at the same time assuring me
she never would ask me for what I owed her, which amounted to
about ten pounds, but that her husband wanted the room, we
occupied, and she hoped that I would not take it amiss, in
requesting me to provide myself by that day week at the farthest.
I told her I was far from being displeased; on the contrary, I
should ever hold the many obligations I lay under to her in
grateful remembrance, and that I would provide as soon as
possible, though very unequal to the arduous task, as I was so
debilitated, as to be unable to stand, and was not worth

"a ducat in the world."

Just as Mrs. T—— had left me, my apothecary Mr. Brady called upon
me, to whom I related the result of my interview with my landlady;
a consultation upon this took place, upon which it was resolved
Mr. Brady should immediately call to Mrs.  W—— of Temple-bar, who
had lodgings to let, and who some few years before had received
some favours from me; a very good-natured sort of woman, Brady
also knew her, and that she had one or two furnished rooms vacant;
he accordingly immediately went to her and settling every matter
with her, Peggy and I took possession of our new apartments; where
we lived in extreme want and misery, enduring both cold and
hunger, and entirely indebted to our hospitable landlady for our
support:—poor Peggy Collins soon recovered strength, but as for my
part, I became weaker and weaker every day, and from anxiety and
uneasiness, I fear I have contracted a fever; as poor Brady who
has just left me, on feeling my pulse and inspecting my tongue
declared I was not in a condition to sit up.—Though I found my
head light, I had recollection enough to know my situation; and I
candidly confess I had forebodings of my speedy decease, however
by the proper use of doctor James's fever powders, I got rid of my
disorder; but for a considerable time felt a languor on my
spirits, and a weakness in all my limbs:—I deeply regretted my
present situation, not for fear of death as I was perfectly well
reconciled to meet it with fortitude, but to be taken away when I
was on the eve of handsomely repaying all my friends for their
trouble; my volume now being not only finished, but nearly
transcribed for the press: and as the public had generously
encouraged my former publication, beyond what I could hope or
expect, I had sanguine hopes the present volume, being more
interesting, would be very productive,—and thereby enable me to be
not only just, but generous; I hoped at least it would bring me in
five hundred pounds clear;—but while I write I feel a gradual
decline, from a broken heart and a destroyed constitution!
Destroyed alas! near the last moments of my life; and in the most
shameful barbarous manner. Good Heaven! my fingers refuse to do
their office:—Oh! I am sick at heart,—my very brain wonders,—I
fear it is dooms day with me! The Lord God of mercy, take
compassion on me, oh! oh! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . !!!


THREE LETTERS RELATING PEG'S DEATH AND FUNERAL

TO EDWARD J——, Esq.

My dear, dear friend,

I am now to inform you, that my poor dear companion Mrs. Leeson,
is in the last stage of a decline, and not expected to live: two
or three of the most eminent of the faculty, who have attended her 
these three months past have all given her over, they said her
strength was entirely exhausted, and she was in that state from a
decay of nature, that all human art could not recover her, and
desired I would prepare for her speedy dissolution.—Poor dear
woman! a greater penitent never left this world; she has this
three weeks past never been easy except when the good and worthy
Doctor L——d is by her side, and indeed the humane man pays her the
greatest attention;—oh! my dear Mr. J——, we have experienced the
greatest distress, and had it not been for the humanity of the
medical and clerical gentlemen, who attended; and the goodness of
our kind hostess, she antl I must have perished, —must have died
for want! — But hark I am called; adieu for the present, Heaven
preserve the poor dear penitent.
Margaret Collins.
Temple-bar,
March 18th 1797.

From the Same to the Same.

My dear friend,

THIS morning at about four o'clock, my poor friend paid the great
debt of nature, she died without the smallest evident pain, nature
being completely exhausted;—with a firm reliance (from her
unfeigned penitence, great trials and resignation to the divine
will,) of salvation, notwithstanding the irregularity of the last
forty years of her life; her last words were taken from
Rochester's Elegy, whose works, and works of the sort, no doubt in
her time she made too great use of,

"All Nature's works, now from before me fly,
Live not like Leeson,—but like Leeson die."

Poor creature, she made a will, leaving all her property,
amounting to upwards of three thousand pounds in the bonds, notes
and I.O.'s of a parcel of Black legs, Wh——s, Swindlers, and
unprincipled men (who shamefully borrowed money with an intention
of never paying,) in legacies, among her particular friends, after
paying all her just debts, giving me for my life sixty pounds a
year; poor mistaken creature, all the effects she has left on
earth would not be sufficient to bury her, exclusive of her
apothecary's bill, the sum due to Mrs. T——, and which she felt
particularly uneasy about in her last moments, and her rent to
poor Mrs. W——, where she died; exclusive of a number of Grocers'
and Hucksters' bills, which I was obliged to contract on her
account, or she might have perished;—Mr. H—— of St James's-street,
the worthy man, gave me credit to a large amount, for teas,
sugars, wines, &c. and yet he did not, like citizen D——, with poor
Moll Hall, place keepers on the house the moment the breath parted
from her body; on the contrary, he generously offered his
assistance towards her burial, as did many other friends, Mr. T——r
of Great George's-street, and little M——y the cheese-man, Billy W—
—n the facetious and luxurious printer, Miss Love the protégée of
little Harry H——, with many other friends; in short though she has
so much money due to her, I would not know how to accomplish her
interment, but for the kind assistance of the above humane
individuals.
I remain your ever faithful
Margaret Collins.
March 22d 1797.

From the Same to the Same.

My dearest friend,

ALL is over; poor Leeson was this morning genteelly interred in St
James's church-yard,—many respectable citizens attended the
funeral obsequies, which was conducted in the most regular manner,
and though quite private yet it was simplex munditiis, what the
Romans called, "plain and neat."—As for my part I am thrown upon
the world without a friend on earth, or even a recommendation; for
you know to have lived with Mrs. Leeson, would be but an
indifferent introduction to a discreet family, and notwithstanding
for the time I was in her service, I never met with a more
exemplary, pious, worthy, charitable woman. Could I have the
pleasure of seeing you at the Old Kennel in Thomas-street, I want
much to consult you about my future hopes and pursuits, and am in
every situation of life
Your very grateful
Margaret Collins.
March 25th 1797.


IMPROMPTU, On the Death of Mrs. MARGARET LEESON
who departed this mortal Life the 22nd Day of March 1797, in the
70th Year of her Age.

COME all you vot'ries of the Cyprian queen,
In silent sadness, join the mournful train:
Your lady Paramount is now no more;
Untimely wafted to the Stygian shore.
Though to her share some grosser failings fall,
Read her sad life and you'll forgive them all:
Poor Peg, though meretriciously inclined,
Possess'd a noble and a generous mind;
Good-natured, friendly, affable and gay,
What pity 'twas she ever went astray;
Though all must own Peg Plunket had her day.
If to relieve the mendicant distress'd,
If to pour balm, into a mind oppress'd,
If to act up to Nature's sacred laws,
If innate honesty, can gain applause,
If true repentance for your errors past,
And cruel hardships e'er you breathed your last,
Can gain redemption, from great mercies God,
Leeson; you must acquire a bless'd abode.

THE END
