The Quakers' Spiritual Court Proclaimed
By
Nathaniel Smith

First Published 1669

Published by The Ex-Classics Project,
2020
Public Domain

Title Page

THE
QUAKERS
Spiritual Court
PROCLAIM'D

Being an exact NARRATIVE of two several Trials had before that
New-High-Court of Justice,  at the Peele in St. John's Street;
Together with the Names of the Judges that sate in Judgment, and
of the Parties concern'd in the said Trials: Also sundry Errors
and Corruptions, in Principle and Practice among the QUAKERS,
which were never till now made known to the World. Also a
Direction to attain to be a QUAKER, and Profit by it. All which,
with many new matters and things of Remark among those Men, are
faithfully declared and testified.

By Nathaniel Smith Student in Physick, who was himself a Quaker, and conversant among them for the space of about XIV. Years.


LONDON,
Printed for L. C. and are to be Sold by
the
Book-Sellers of London, 1669.

Dedication

To the Right Honourable
GEORGE,
LORD DELAMER
OF
Dunham-Massey, in the County Palatine of Chester.


Although the Author of the following treatise doth give the world a
good account, concerning a court spiritual, lately erected among the
men called Quakers, by their own usurped prerogative royal; yet I
hear no news of any court of honour, held in that society, except
that sordid principle and practice of theirs be one whereby they
arraign, censure, and condemn all great and honourable names, by
which the King (the critical fountain of honour) is pleased to
dignify, and distinguish many noble, reverend, and worthy persons in
Church and State. Shall I therefore (my Lord) have leave to offer a
few words from the scriptures of truth, to these men in
justification of titles, gestures, and other significations of
honour; which I apprehend myself somewhat concerned to do for these
three reasons:

1. That I might give you your due and proper title (my Lord) not by
way of flattery and complement, but according to duty and judgement.
And
2. That these great pretenders to light (if possible) might be
enlightened, in the point of honour, which they have been taught
(but not of God) to disuse, yea, to despise and vilify.
3. That I may maintain the honour and reputation of true
religion which doth not teach men to be clowns, but is in truth the
best breeding, and most exact education in the whole world; teaching
us how to behave ourselves with reverence and Godly fear towards
God, and with all due respect to all men, especially to superiors in
church, state, and families. Let Jacob, a person of signal piety
towards God, and of very great civility to man, be well weighed by
those that profess to be in his seed.

Moses in his first book called Genesis in the 32 and 33 Chapters,
has recorded at large the prudent, decent, civil, courtly carriage
of Jacob towards his brother Esau, when Esau and he were on their
march to meet each other, and at their meeting and interview. It is
to be seen in those two chapters, that Jacob did call himself five
times Esau's servant; and called Esau eight times, my Lord Esau; and
bowed himself seven times to the ground when he came into the
presence of Esau.

To me (my Lord) it is very evident that this lofty language, and
lowly gesture of Jacob, came only from his great prudence; thus to
pacify the imposed displeasure and wrath of Esau, and from his well-
informed conscience, which told him, it was his duty to honour his
elder brother Esau, upon the account of seniority, and
primogeniture. For,

1. The Love of God mentioned in Malachi, and the promise made to
Rebecca, as recited by St. Paul, Rom. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, seem to
single out, and solely refer to the person of Jacob, not of Esau.
When Rebecca had conceived by one, even by our Father Isaac, it was
said unto her (by the Lord himself, Gen. 25.23,) The elder shall
serve the younger, as it is written (Mal. 1.23,) Jacob have I loved,
but Esau have I hated.This promise and declaration of God, seems to
absolve Jacob from all service and homage to Esau, and to oblige
Esau to serve and bow before Jacob, as his Lord and superior; but it
is apparent, that though the names of the two twins, Jacob and Esau,
are only named, yet not their persons, but their respective
posterities are intended, as any man may easily see, that will
compare Rom. 9.10. &c; Mal. 1.2, 3; Gen. 25 21, 22, 23; that Jacob
understood the promise made to his mother, not of any personal
election of Jacob, or reprobation of Esau; nor of personal
subjection and submission of the elder brother to the younger,
Jacob's fact fully shows: who did, notwithstanding the promise
aforesaid, serve and honour Esau, as he was Jacob's first-born
brother; and as Esau has now grown great, rich, and potent.
2. It was not want or necessity that made the good man bow
before Esau; for God had blessed Jacob also with a very fair and
plentiful estate at this time; the very present sent to Esau, was a
good estate of itself, Gen. 32.13, 14, 15.
3. Jacob was now distressed, and greatly afraid (Gen 32. 7,11)
of Esau's real force, and suspected violence, looking every moment,
when he and all his should be slain by the hand of Esau, who was now
not far off with 400 men at his heels; and would so good, so holy a
man as Jacob dare to die dissembling and lying? No certainly, not to
save his own life and lives of all his.
4. Jacob prayed earnestly to his God for deliverance; and is
it reason or charity, to thank that a soul so devout as his was,
would call out God in truth, (as doubtless he did, Gen. 33.10,
11,12) and multiply lies in reiterating my Lord, etc. thy servant,
etc. to Esau at the same time?
5. God did so graciously appear to Jacob at this juncture that
he saw God face to face, Gen. 32. From verse 24 to 32. And durst he
tell to Esau so many lies? And look to God of Truth in the face at
the same time? Surely no, except we will suppose him much more
profane than Esau, who is for a far less offence than lying, called
profane, Heb. 12.16.
6. (And lastly,) Let it be considered; That Jacob is said in
scripture, to be a plain man; it may be said of the Quaker I confess
in short, Planus est, which is plain enough in the narrative; but
honest, holy, conscientious Jacob was vir integer, Gen. 25. 27.
Therefore his words and gesture towards Esau, were in singleness,
and integrity of heart.

I have (my Lord) said the more upon this subject, because this
dedication will (wish the Book) come to the view of the sort of men
mentioned in St. Jude, v.8, who despise dominion (Kyriotyta,
Lordship), and speak evil of dignities, though the very same stupid
souls do dignify themselves with a more arbitrary power, than the
papal supremacy; witness, their bull, and sentence of
excommunication against Nathaniel Smith, the author of the following
account.

Now I come (Right Honourable) to tell; first, why this narrative
touching the Quakers, is dedicated to your Lordship: And secondly,
how the dedication came to be drawn by my Pen.

1. You may (my Lord) please to remember that I did the last month,
show you the manuscript, and left it in your hand to be perused at
your leisure, in order to its publication; and about a week after, I
again attended you, to know your thoughts, concerning the copy: you
were then pleased to tell me, it was your opinion it ought to be
printed, and not yours only, but likewise the sense of another noble
Lord, the Right Honourable William Lord Brereton of Brereton in
Cheshire; your Lordship having it seems showed it to that person of
honour: it was no small encouragement towards the printing, to have
the imprimatur of two so virtuous, learned and solid Lords; which
was in part the reason of this dedication to you honour.
2. The Author was born in the County of Chester, and there he
first took the infection of Quakerism, which he did not only
profess, but industriously publish in those parts: Wherefore he
thought fit to direct his recantation thither, under the patronage
of your noble name.

As to the last query: How came I to pen this epistle dedicatory? I
answer. 1. The Author (who was always infirm) fell sick, and died
shortly after I have received his manuscriptt from your Lordship:
Who, though he had lived a Quaker too long, yet died not the death
of those self-righteous men, but departed this life like St.
Stephen, calling upon the same Lord and Saviour, to whom Stephen
prayed, and in the same words which that great Saint and proto-
martyr used in his last prayer: for he called (I question not) upon
the true and only Lord and Saviour, with a true and contrite heart.
He did (my Lord) a little before his departure, desire me to prepare
a dedication to your Lordship, which I have accordingly done, to
gratify the desire of my deceased friend and countryman.

Secondly, I was willing (my Lord) to attempt this public epistle, 
that thereby I might the better declare and dignify, that I heartily
love and honour your Lordship; Wishing you and your noble,
courteous, and religious lady, all happiness in this world, and in
that to come: And to subscribe myself your Lordship ever obliged and
very faithful servant,

London Feb. 13. 1668
Randolph Yearwood.

The Epistle to the Reader

Courteous Reader,
It having pleased God to raise up in me a true soul towards
him, and also to give me an understanding, to understand those
things which are just and true; by which means he has taught me, To
do unto all men as I would be done unto; therefore it has caused me
to write these few lines unto thee, as also this following, not that
I have done it out of envy unto this people, but out of love; for it
may please God, that by these means, they being publicly reproved,
may cause them to relinquish some of their grand errors, and not at
any time publish them anymore, or per adventure quite disdain them
in the radix of the same; but however, I hope that thou, who ever
thou art, that art inclinable unto that way, when thou hast read
over this ensuing, and doth understand those things which is here
discovered to thee, that thou will have a care of running into those
grand errors, and that thou will endeavour to overturn them, as not
fit to be spoke amongst any that believe that there is a God; for to
deny that there is either angels, spirits, or souls of men after
this life, they may as well deny that there is a God; and if there
be no punishment after this life, then what need men care what they
do whilst they live in this life, or what care should they take for
an immortal being hereafter; but I hope that thou will have a care
of this, and flee from it, as thou wouldst flee death, or the most
destructive dragon, or deadly poison; for this is as poison to the
soul, ans leadeth to eternal death.

For if thou believe that what thou doth in this life, is also
punished in the same, and there shall be no further account given of
it, then are the Ranters and heathens in the best condition; for
there is nothing that doth trouble them, for they believe that there
is no God, and so no punishment after this life, and therefore no
matter of conscience unto them what they do; and if ever thou come
to believe, as some of the Quakers do, then thou doth believe as the
heathen do; but my desire is, that thou and all others may fear the
Lord, and walk uprightly before him, and fear to offend him, knowing
that he hath power to punish after this life, and to cast the soul
into eternal flames, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

Whereas I have given thee an account of their courts, it is but to
let thee understand , that all sects, forms, or other dispensations,
if thou please to call them so, (or by what name soever) after they
have raised to themselves a considerable number of people, then they
go about to set up themselves, and make to themselves laws, whereby
they may govern, and bear rule over one another; for these people
called Quakers, were the only people that did speak against this,
and said, that man ought to fear God, and to walk justly before him,
and be taught by him; but now they have a rule or a light to walk
by, (or rather a law) and if any do not observe this, then he is
cast out from amongst them, as not being one of the flock of God.

Lastly, I have given thee an account of the way, and manner, how
thou mayest attain to be a Quaker, and profit by it, in which thou
must only understand, that is to discover to thee, that under any
sect, or form, the most have an outward show; and if they want any
of those outside appearances, then they shall not be looked upon, as
any that hath any part in God, but as those that God hath cast off;
but they have all those things, then shall they be highly esteemed
of by those of the same sect; and by these means, there are many who
go amongst them only for profit, and by that means advance
themselves, and their estates; and many times this is done by
pretence of having a great measure of the spirit, when they have
nothing but deceit in them, and seek only to deceive.

As for the rest, which thou shalt find written, which hath not been
spoken of, I shall leave to they own genius to make constructions of
it, hoping that though wilt take it in the best sense; and if there
should be any errors, either through my weakness, or want of
correction, if thou do the like to them, shalt thou ever engage thy
servant.
Nathaniel Smith,
Student in Physic.

CHAP I.

Wherein are Discovered my Inducements, to follow this sect of people
called Quakers

Having from my youth, an earnest desire after those things that were
just, honest, and good: I set myself to find out those means that
might conduce hereunto, if by any means I might satisfy my doubting
soul; notwithstanding, I found no satisfaction for some years. At
last, came a people which were called Quakers, declaring, That the
kingdom of heaven was in man, and there was a light, or
understanding in every man, which did show both good, and evil; and
that this was a divine light, or measure, which was given to all
men, to rule, guide, and govern themselves by it, and sufficient to
bring them to knowledge of God, and the mysteries of godliness.
These things I pondering in my heart, and considering that swift
witness in my breast, which did condemn me, when I did what was
unjust, and justify me, when I did that which was good; these things
wrought in me a strong belief, that what they spoke, was truth.
Further, they declared, that we were sons of Adam, made of the same
mould, and it was only the pride and ambition of men, that they
sought to bear rule over one another, and to bring their fellow
servants into subjection, by oppression and cruelty, if they refused
to submit; affirming, that all ought to live soberly and
righteously, without opposition or oppressing one another; for as we
were all the sons of Adam, so there ought to be no respect of
persons amongst us; but that we should live soberly one among
another, as brethren and children of the same parent; that we ought
not to look upon one another as Lord or Master, but to be of one
heart and mind, worshiping God in singleness of heart, without
lordship or dominion one over another; that none should bear rule
over another's conscience, that all should live together in love,
without backbiting, or speaking evil of one another; that love and
unity might abound amongst us, and we become a choice of people to
God. These, and the like doctrines, did so exceedingly work upon me,
(being at that time about 19 years of age) that I resolved to
acquainted myself farther with them, and with their doctrine; and in
order hereunto, I did frequent their meetings, where I heard them
declare, that man ought to do unto all men as he would that they
should do unto him; also, that they ought to fear the Lord,
refraining from evil, and all ungodly actions: and as I said before,
that men should not lord it over one another, by reason of their
great estates; for all Kings, Princes and Nobles of the Earth, are
no more in the eye of the Lord, that the beggar on the dunghill:
that God did delight as much in the meanest person, if they walk
righteously before him, as he did in the greatest potentates: so
that all worshiping and preferring of one before another, was
contrary to truth. All these things I considered in myself, and
finding nothing in them then but what was consistent with their
teaching, I joined with them, and with much fervency of spirit, did
endeavour to instruct others in the same, that they might walk
uprightly and soberly before their creator, that so they might find
rest to their souls, when time shall be no more; but for this time
of this terrestrial being, they could not expect but to have trouble
and tribulation; but this was but for a time, and this time was soon
past, and they should have rest for their souls for ever.

This is the whole scope of what which I did intend by it, (that is
to say) That man was composed of soul, body, and spirit; and at the
dissolution of this body, that the soul should still remain a
spiritual body, which should be capable of joy, or of sorrow. This
resolution, faith and belief, I was resolved to stand to, and that
none should move it; As also, all that man could do, in speaking and
teaching, was but to direct them to Christ, and that he alone was
the only help and way to salvation; and by him the soul should be
redeemed from sin; and that he was the rock of ages, and all
generations that put their trust in him, and fall down before the
greatness of his Majesty, with humble and contrite submission of our
sins, and time repentance, which was not to be repented of; further
declaring, that there was none able to give a remission for sin but
Christ; and that all those did pretend to forgive sins were out of
the truth, and that all laws made or holden upon that account, were
erroneous, false, and out of the truth; and all those that did
pretend to remit any sins or transgressions, were out of the truth;
and were of Antichrist, and that old serpent the Devil; for they had
no power to call any to account for sin, and to remit at their
pleasure.

Of the Quakers self-contradictions, abuses, backbitings, and false
accusing one another; as also, of their active persecution.

Now after some time I had spent upon this account, being not 
burdensome to any, for I never took money, nor money's worth off any
person; whereas, there were some that did take both silver and gold,
with other things; but I laboured with my own hands for my bread,
and money that I spent, and was not beholding to any.

Now, after a short time, there crept in amongst them, some who
looked after their interest; and whereas some of them were poor
before, now begin to thrive in the world, and then they were on with
their ministry with more courage; and if they were cast into prison,
then they had all their business done for them, better than others
could have done; for their moneys, and all things were provided for
them, as well as if they had been at home: by this means their
ministry was no burden to them; for the rich would help them with
money, horses and ways, and the poor with labour, so that there was
nothing wanting. But this, in a short time, did beget some heart-
burnings amongst them; for those that did do the most for them,
those were the only men in their eyes, and were the most esteemed by
them; here one may see how gifts blind the eyes of the wise.

But this turned to heart-burning in some, seeing others to be so
much esteemed, not that their righteousness did exceed others, but
that their gifts did purchase favour and affection; the other
notable to do the like, did speak privately one to another about it,
and said, this thing ought not to be: some, as amongst all others,
were too ready to carry tales, which is better taken with these
persons, than if they had brought them a present according to their
ability; the others seeing also that the backbiters and talebearers
did come in favour, did stumble at it; but they might as well keep
silence, for if they did complain, they told them that they had lost
their first love, and were clouded, and darkness was come over them,
and that they must mind their own conditions, and not look out at
others. Some that were but weak, did think all that they did say was
true, and that they could not err; therefore they betook themselves
to their repentances, and after, learned better manners: but some
others that did understand better, and knew that those things were
not right, stood to it; so that this begat much contention amongst
them. But while these were speaking one against another, the others
that believed the Ministers could not err, they were repenting of
their own miscarriages for speaking against their Ministers, and the
other that took their part, which were able and sufficient men, of
good repute, and might be serviceable unto them that were poor. And
now by this time they are coming into the unity again; but the
others stand in the same, telling them that those actions are like
the world, and that it is not according to the truth to respect
persons: but them comes these new penitents, which are again
reformed, and these take the part with the other, and begin to
reprove them that stand out, telling them that they themselves were
in the same state as now they are, and they, through the goodness of
God, came to see their loss, and how they lost the unity; and if
ever they thought to come to peace, they must condemn that in
themselves, for speaking against the Ministers, and the other good
friends that stand in the unity and love, and that they must shrink
down and mind their own condition, and judge that down which is the
cause of the breach of unity, and then they should have peace.

But the other being of a more single judgement, still stand to it,
which causes their Minister to look strange upon them, and will not
own them; and if it chance, at any time, the Ministers take them by
the hand to give them a gentle reproof, they will but touch the tip-
ends of their fingers; and this is a sign to all the rest of their
friends; and this person or persons so saluted with the right hand
of fellowship, had lost his condition, and is now falling from the
truth; then all that observe this, begin to be strange to him: then
this man perceiving their unjustness in these things, and feeling
their partiality, doth withdraw and leave them off, but for modesty
sake pass it over, and with silence. But now I pray you, which of
these four are the justest men? Whether he that give it to purchase
favour, or he that receives to show it? Or he that once spoke
against them, and now is sorry for it? Or that stands to his
principles?

These contentions were not only amongst the common sort, but also
among their Ministers; for when they had been forth for some certain
country, where they had raised a people to themselves, then some
other of them came that way; and peradventure, he was in more favour
than the first which had taken all the pains, and many times
suffered long imprisonment in those parts; then when those which
came after, were the most in respect amongst them; the other seeing
this, that the other got the fruit of his labour, he was much
dissatisfied, that the other should after this sort have his
bishopric taken from him, and another to enjoy the fruit of the
same; and, as it were, to carry to the fame of it himself: these
many times would fall to words; but sometimes it fell out, that the
first, through dissatisfaction, returned home, and went to visit his
people no more.

I beholding all these carriages amongst them, did put me something
in a stand, but thought that it was their weakness; but then I was
resolved to observe all transactions, hoping that in time all these
things would be at an end, and so it was as unto that; for after,
they did not take so much notice where they had been at the first;
but for all this, some of them got amongst those, that which they
did never deserve, and made it beneficial unto them for many years
after.

Not long before this, they spoke against marriage and said, that it
was for lust; and that men ought to live soberly, For all lust come
of the devil; and so they spoke against marriage in general; but
this continued not above three or four years, at which time they
began to marry in prison: and there was the first marriage that I
ever knew of.

After this, that their Ministers did marry in prisons, then the
common sort would marry in the meeting: and it was after this
manner; those two that were resolved to go together, (and many times
there was not one that did know it besides themselves,) the man and
the woman would stand up in the midst of them, or in some convenient
place; the man declaring after this manner, I take this woman to
wife: and after, departed and went together as man and wife.

There were some also which were dissatisfied about some things which
the other did hold, whereupon, these grew such dissentions amongst
them, that the one party would acknowledge the other neither to be
of God, nor of the truth; with some of these George Fox did
encounter himself, but that would not overturn them, but still
remained in their obstinacy; whereupon, there was, as it were, open
war between them, endeavouring to overthrow each other; but George
Fox got the greater party on his side, and then did he with all his
might endeavour to overthrow the other; and if any of the other went
to preach, or speak, in any place or meeting, he sent others of his
Ministers to proclaim against them, and said, the he would follow
them, that they should have no rest in England.

After this manner, when they were a little at rest from their
persecution of others, then they begin to persecute one another;
that being about five or six years ago, they had no court; by which
means there was such broiling, judging, condemning, and backbiting
one of another, that it would have made a civil man that understood
not their ways, to have abhorred them for ever, to hear what
accusations they brought one against another; and 'tis to be feared,
that the greatest part of them was true: but all this while I was
resolved to take neither the one, nor the other parts, but to make
peace if I could, which I knew would not be any offence to either.
But before this quarrel was fully end, George Fox was case into
Lancaster Castle, and there to remain as long as please his Majesty.

The first cause of my dislike, as to the Quakers; and chiefly, of
certain principles holden by George Fox, and other.

In March 1664, or 1665. I hearing that George Fox was at Lancaster
in prison, I was resolved to go to the place, and there to remain
for a certain time; as also, to have some discourse with Geo. Fox.
After some few days were spent, Geo. Fox had heard that I held the
Earth to be round; and that when it was day with us, it was night in
other places; he was then desirous to convince me of this my error,
(as he thought) and to make me relinquish all such tenets: I being
come to the castle where he was, he came to me, and Jo. Stubs told
him of my principle concerning the earth, and its roundness;
whereupon, Geo. Told me that it was flat, and brought arguments for
it; that let a man travel never so far, he shall not see the Earth
to bend round; he also affirmed, that when it was 12 of the clock
with us, that then it was 12 of the clock all the world over. Then I
asked him, whether there was a new sun every day? He answered, no,
there was but one sun; then said I, what becomes of it in the night?
Or doth it give light or not? Or doth it go down into the sea so to
cool itself? He said it went cross back again some way. But when he
could not hold his discourse, then he begun to father all this his
errors upon his spirit of revelation; and said, that it was revealed
to him that it was so, and therefore it must stand for truth, (he
thinking that I would submit to that as many others do, which
believe all that he and some other say is a divine truth, and must
not be contradicted by any;) but at the last, reason did overpower
these divine revelations. This was in the great room or hall in
Lancaster Castle.

At another time, I spoke of spirits, and said, that there were
spiritual bodies and angels; but he denied all; and said, that there
was light and darkness; and the one was of God, and the other of the
Devil,) and that there was no distinct spirits nor angels, for he
could never see them in the divine light. And further, did affirm,
that if there were any, he should have seen them; but he never saw
any, therefore there was none. This and the like words he spoke and
held forth to me, to have me to believe, and become an atheist or
Ranter; for they both hold the same, and it is their principle; and
whosoever holds the same, is of the like principle. This was spoken
in Margaret Fell's room in the aforesaid castle.

Then I discoursed with him about the soul; and I affirmed, that it
had a spiritual body after this life. He answered, that it was the
breath of God, and that in wicked men it was oppressed with sin, but
it should be redeemed, and return to God that gave it; (that is)
that all souls shall return to glory, peace, and happiness, and not
to answer for any sin after this life.

After this, Jo. Stubs and I being together in my chamber, we did
discourse about the soul of man after this life; he said, that he
did believe that there was punishment after this life, and that
which was in this life was for disobedience to the light; and
further, he said, that as all died in Adam, so in the second Adam
(that is Christ) all were made alive, and that all should go one and
the same way when they were dead, and that they should not have any
punishment for sin hereafter; but what was, it was in his life; and
that the soul should go to God that gave it. And further, he said,
it was not his principle alone, for Geo. Fox did hold the same; and
Geo. said, that those that did believe any other ways, were of the
old opinion. But this must be kept secret, lest it should cast a
stumbling block before the weak; but as they came to grow up in the
truth, they would come to see it in the light.

But I was altogether against him, and brought this scripture of the
Apostles against them; which said, if we have hope but in this life
only, we are of all men most miserable. But let me say what I could,
I could not persuade him from it, because Geo. Fox held the same,
which I found too true, by discoursing with him.

After this, I discoursed with George Fox about the beasts of the
field, and creeping things; he did affirm, that they had reason as
well as man; and that all the differences between man and them, was
only, than man was fallen from his first estate, and that the beast
were not; than man was worse than the beast. I asked him, what
difference there was between the soul of a man, and of a beast? He
said, that God breathed into man the breath of life, and so he did
into all creatures; and that all the virtue in all things were of
the light; and when they were at an end, they did return to God
again. For he looked upon God, not as being a spirit, but a great
light, as the light of the day; and the night, as the Devil; and
that these are two great beings of themselves, and are without any
cause as the day has; for the sun is the cause of the light, and its
absence may understand that there is a God, which the first moving
cause of that divine light; and also, that there are angels, or
Devils; all which, he and others that believe not the same, may come
to know the truth of it too soon, for if there were nothing else but
what he believes, then what need men learn anything and certainly if
this be true as the faith, then it must needs be true that this is a
new light which he has, for it is not like that which the Prophets
and Apostles had, for they believe that there were angels which are
spirits, and also Devils that are spirits: but how any such as one
can truly know God, and teach his truth, all though truths which
belong to that great divine power, I know not, but leave it for
others to judge.

After this, when I understand that this was taking root amongst some
of the chief of them, I was resolved, that wherever I found them
holding these tenets, or the like to it, I would use my best
endeavour to overturn, if possible I could, lest in time it might
grow, and so bring them into Arantism; this I resolved in myself,
and in part put it forward; for meeting with some that were already
infected by it, by such arguments as I brought against it, were
something convicted that there was spirits, and that man should have
a being after this life.

Then these things put me to a stand, whether I should come amongst
them or not, seeing they were falling from the scripture, and from
truth itself, for this would lead into all errors; but then again, I
thought that it might be possible that I might overturn this grand
error, and by that means might do much good; but there were many of
the chief of them which held the same, and when I would discourse
with them, then I must submit to them, and almost must repent before
it before them, if I should speak of it again to any of them, by
reason they thought I should set them one against another; for there
are some amongst them that do believe that there are spirits; and
angels, and that there is an immortal soul, which shall be received
either into joy and glory, or into woe and misery: but they thought
if this should come forth, that they would question them about it,
and then they must either maintain themselves by lies, or the other
would declare against them.

Yet for all this I was resolved to keep this wrapped up in the close
garment of secrecy, and not to declare it to others, left at last it
should come forth to the ears of all men, and so turn a reproach to
me, I being one of them; but still false deluding fancy did more and
more work in them, by reason that they had fallen from the truth
into these errors as aforesaid, and as you shall see further.

CHAPTER II.

In the year 1665, when that great affliction or judgement (with
which God was pleased by his hand to afflict this great city) did
begin; having sent his messenger the plague and pestilence, then
when the Lord first stretched forth his hand to touch some, that so
the rest might prepare themselves for him; at that time there being
many of the Quakers in this city, the Lord spared them at the first,
and struck not the first stroke at them; at which time they boasted
themselves, and would undertake to prophesy all the Kingdom over;
and to declare it to all people, that the hand of the Lord was
against this city for their persecuting them; and as I have heard,
they were so bold, as to give it forth in print, that they were the
servants of the Lord; and that he would cover their heads in this
his day of judgement; and that it was only for the wicked, and that
the saints of the saints of the Most High should have their heads
covered in that day, and that those that were faithful unto the Lord
should be kept safe; and that now the Lord was appearing to stretch
forth his mighty arm, and would destroy the wicked persecutors; and
that there should not any Friends die, for now the Lord would show
who were his, in preserving them that were unspotted, and blameless;
that this his judgment should not come near their dwelling place.
They appropriated this to themselves, and pretended the revelation
of the spirit for it: but let all judge whether God himself seemed
not angry with them for their boasting of themselves; for in a short
time after, there died more of them than of any other people,
considering the number of them, and the number of others; but this
it is, man is too much prone to boast of himself and his own
righteousness; but it is a very sad thing, when he pretends to speak
by the spirit of prophecy, and doth lie against the Lord.

At this time I was at Lancaster, where the same spirit of prophesy
was in the most Friends (as they are called) persuading others of
them to the same; whereupon they declared the same (that is) that no
Friends should have the plague, but that the Lord would preserve
them; and this was generally believed amongst them, but I for mine
own part was resolved to speak my judgement, not pretending that I
had it from the spirit, as they did: I told them, that as they were
corruptible bodies, they were as subject to change as well as
others; that if the sickness did increase, (as I heard it did) that
they should not be free from it any more than others; but some of
them said, my opinion was like me; but however, it was most like to
the truth; for within a month after, it proved as I said; and what
they said of it, was false; (then whereas they would scarce look
upon me, because they thought that I did it to cross what they had
said; and they did believe what they had said, would come to pass,
and that I was out of the Truth;) then when it came to pass, I was
received into favour again. But for all this, I was neither exalted,
nor cast down, but did desire with all my heart to reform these
absurdities, and false visions, and counterfeit sights, by which 
they did pretend to see and discern; but I for my part did desire to
fide these things under the coverlid of love, and to wrap them up in
the secret corner of my heart; hoping, that in time they would
understand better; and that then they would esteem those that had
been constant lovers of that which was just, and look upon them as
their best Friends; for what I said, was out of the simplicity of my
heart, and not for favour, or for envy.

II.

In April 1667, I came to London, and within ten days after, I became
acquainted with Hilkiah Bedford at the Angel in Hosier lane, a
mathematical instrument-maker, of whom I had heard so much fame in
the North, and what service he did here for Friends in London; and
not only for those that were in London, but also in other parts of
the kingdom; for he was a man of a bold spirit, and could go to the
King at any time, where others could not possible come to speak with
him; and that he was ready at all times to go to the King, to
deliver either letter, or any message, according as he had orders or
directions; whereby, he became very serviceable to all Friends; and
he was a faithful good Friend himself; then I thought myself in no
small happiness, for coming to visit him: I often found George Fox
with him, and sometimes while I stood or sat by him), George Fox
would come and enquire of him about business that he had done at the
Court; then I thought myself more happy than ever, that at the first
I should light with so good an acquaintance: and understanding that
George was great with him, I thought by this means, I might get some
preferment, and come to great credit; by which means, I might get
patients, which fell out even as I thought in myself; for in a few
days after, by this means, I had two or three patients: but alas,
many times when a man thinks himself most happy, then is he more
miserable; and then a man thinks himself the best befriended, then
many times is he mot abased: now I thought myself happy, and in very
great bliss and felicity, and how sweet it was to me in this city,
to have acquaintance; how pleasant it was to me, that was a stranger
to get such acquaintance: but alas, how soon did it all turn to my
ruin and destruction, (as they think) not only to the loss of my
friends, new acqaintance, and patients; but at the last, cast out
from amongst men, and to become one that is not fit to keep company
with men, as will appear by this discourse.
Now I must come to speak of these my new friends in this city of
London: first, of their abuses and carriage towards me; and
then of the trial in their High Court of Justice; how they
first cast me out from amongst them; and after that, from the
society of men; and also, the proceedings amongst themselves.

First of Hilkiah Bedford, when he had been acquainted with me short
time, and understanding that I was not married, he commended a widow
to me of good credit, and civil behaviour; telling me, that she was
a fit match for me; and withal, he told her the same; and further,
he said, that if we were married, he did hope to have a chamber with
me; I told him he should, when that was done; then he endeavoured as
much as in him lay, to bring it to perfection: but after a time, he
thought that I did not visit the party so often as he thought I
should.

I coming to his shop, he asked me when I was with the widow, and
whither I would go to her then? I said, yes; so I went to her, and
he came after me, and found us together; then he took our hands in
his hand, and joined them together, and said, Those that God hath
joined together, let no man part in sunder; then made as though that
were enough.

But time passing away, and he saw little hopes of this his intended
marriage, he blamed me for my negligence; but however, there was no
danger, but that it might be accomplished, if one thing did not
hinder it, and that was her covetousness, and for his part, he knew
not my estate, nor desired to know, but if I would take his counsel,
he would do well enough for all that; but then I must keep his
counsel, and do as he would instruct me; I asked of him, what that
was? He told me, he would have me to buy four or five hundred pound
bags, (if I had not so many;) I enquired what I must do with them;
he said, I must go to Hackney high-way, and there fill then with
little pebbles (I asked him what they were, he told me little
stones) and bring them home, and set them in my closet; and then I
must invite him to my chamber, and when he came there, I must set
open my closet door, that he might see them, and when he returned,
he would pretend to her that it was so many bags of money, and then
there was no doubt but that she would have me: but I abhorring all
such cozening devices in my heart, I did not condescend to it.

Now the glass of time running away, and by this time several weeks
were already spent, and there no more hopes of it, than at the
first, he told me that I must observe the old proverb, I enquired of
him what that was, then he told me, that He that would woo a maid,
must feign, lie, and flatter; but he, that woos a widow (rehearsing
these words several times over, I sitting as if I understood him
not) must down with his britches and at her.

But after all this his endeavours, labour and counsel, he thought he
should lose his labour, and also his lodging, with other
conveniences; and now knowing what he had done and said, he was, as
I suppose, afraid, lest I should betray him; certainly he thought
that it would be his wisest course to begin first, which took well
with his own fancy, that now he proceeds, and goes presently to
George Fox, and told him, that I was going to take an heathen to
wife, and that I would be married by a priest, and also that I was
at his house, and offered abuse to his sister or kinswoman: thus
spake he against me to George Fox, that he might incense him against
me, and then he thought he was right.

After some days were past, George Fox met with me at the Pewter
Platter in St. John's Street, and he told me he should speak with
me; then said he, I hear a bad report of thee; I asked him what it
was, he said, that he heard I was going to take a heathen to wife,
and that I said I would be married by a priest: I answered George,
and told him, that it was not true; and also told him, that I knew
who it was that told him, for it was Hilkiah Bedford, and that it
was he that first motioned us together, and that he joined our hands
together, and said, That they whom God had joined together, let no
man part in sunder; then George Fox said, he heard also that I was
at Hammersmith at Hilkiah Bedford's house, and that I offered some
abuse to his sister or kinswoman: I answered, that for my part I
knew them not, any more than those I never saw; and further I told
him, that to my best knowledge, I did not salute them; but if I did,
that was the most: within a few days after this, George Fox went out
of the town.

Then Hilkiah Bedford set himself wholly against me, and called me
rogue and knave, and that he would prove me a knave, and a drunken
cheating fellow; and that I was not fit to come into an honest man's
house, for I was forewarned several sufficient houses already, and
that if I come there again, they would thrust me out of their doors;
and this he spread abroad amongst all that knew me, inso much that I
was ashamed to go through that part of the city; for many believed
him, because he was so eminent a Quaker.

And that he might further put this in execution, wherever he came he
did the like; as in Old Street at one Meakens, he came there, when I
was there upon business; it was to see one of the daughters of the
house that was sick, and being in the kitchen by the fire, he went
by into the parlour, and a stranger with him; I asked who it was
that went by, and they told me that it was a good Friend; and as he
came forth again, I saw the other, which I knew then, and enquired
who it was that was with him, and he said, Hilkiah Bedford: I not
having any malice or spleen against him, went to him, and desired
him to come to his friend that was with me; so he came, but would
not speak to me; but when he went out of the door, he said, thou
hast gotten a large mornings draught, and so goes his way: this was
about Michaelmas, 1667, and about 10, or 11 of the clock in the
morning, and I was in my lodging till nine of the clock in the
morning the same day, and all that I drank that day was part of two
flagons betwixt four or five of us; judge therefore whether I could
be drunk by that time, and with so little. By this time Margaret
Meakens was come home, she for whom I waited, she desired me to walk
into the parlour, so I did, and left my cloak on the back of the
chair whereon I sat; then came her daughters to her, and whispered
her in the ear, what Bedford had said; but I being then in haste,
would not sit down; but after I had done what I came about, I went
forth to take my cloak in the kitchen, it being in my way, but when
I came there, it was gone, and not to be seen; I was then vexed to
see how I was abused: then I asked for my cloak, Margaret Meakens
replied, she was sorry for me; I asked her for what, she told me I
was so fuddled, that I knew not what I did I with my cloak; this she
had from Hilkiah Bedford by her daughters: I told her also I was not
so much over-taken, but I knew what I did with my cloak, for I left
it on the back of the chair, and her daughters had hid it; she said,
she was confident that they had it not, but that (being as I was) I
had lost it; then I said I would have it, for it was in the house;
then she calls one of her daughters, and she denies it; then she
charged them all to bring it, if they had it; so at last they
brought it: by that time came one John Middleton, he asked me how I
did, I answered him I knew not how, he desired to know why I said
so, I told him that I was fuddled; he said; "Why sayest thou so? I
see no such thing;" I said, "Margaret Meakens saith so, and it must
needs be true:" "I pray thee, saith he, wilt thou go along with me,
and help thy country-men sell their cheese, thou didst use to help
them;" so I went along with him, and did my endeavour in sending for
chapmen; so it cost me money and time, but that was not so much to
me, as the abuse put upon me.

When I had done what I could do for them, then I thought it was best
to kill the cockatrice in the egg, if it were possible; whereupon I
went to the Peel (where I had several times been before) to complain
of him for abusing me, and to desire them to call him to an account,
why he did so; but all was in vain, although I told them I was a
stranger, and that they ought to do right to strangers, except they
could find any just cause against them: but he being their orator to
his Majesty, and so great at the Court, was the cause that they were
so unwilling to question him; but now I was resolved to put it on to
the uttermost of my power: with this resolution I went again to the
Peel in St. John's Street, where they kept their court, and being
come, I charged them with injustice, and withal told them what
abuses and affronts I had met with that day by Hilkiah Bedford, and
through his means; whereupon at the last I had admittance to speak
for myself, so I rehearsed those things that are above written; then
they told me I should have a hearing that day fortnight, and I was
to warn them in.

Before the time came, I went to him, and told him how he had done by
me, and that he must appear there at the time appointed; he told me
he did not care, for he had those that would justify what he had
said: but I told him that I could prove these things were false; but
said he, what Margaret Meakens said, should be believed, although I
could bring a thousand witnesses, or any other that came constantly
to the meeting; but for my part, I came not constantly, therefore I
should not be believed: after that I went to one in Houndsditch, she
liveth at the Wheatsheaf, where Thomas Salthouse useth to lodge; but
when I came there, she was not within; but they told me where Thomas
Salthouse was gone; then I went after him, and found him; I told him
the occasion of my coming to him, and also to warn in the Mistress
of the house where he lodged; for I did understand that she had
called me a drunkard, and that she was to be at the Peel, at the
time appointed; he desired me to forbear, for they would all hold
together, and it was better for me to refer it to George Fox: then I
told him all the manner of it, and how I was wronged; he said, it
was no matter for all that, for they would hold together, let it be
right or wrong, because I was a stranger; but if he could stay in
town, he would come and speak for me himself, but that he was going
out of town that day, I said I did not fear them all, for I would
stand to that which was just and true; and if they would not do that
which was true, I would declare against them; but he desired me not
to pluck up the wheat with the tares, for (said he) you know that
there were some amongst them that were honest and just, and for
their sakes he desired that it might be deferred, until George Fox
came to the town, to which at the last I condescended, but withal I
told him, that if they should hold together in those things that
were unjust, then I would not favour any of them, but however I must
appear, because I had warned them in already; but when I came there,
I would not do as he had required me, upon which we departed each
from other.

The next day being the time appointed, I came there, and a short
time after came Hilkiah Bedford and John Boulton, being then the
chief judge to determine all matters that came before him; I still
waiting when I should be called, for there were many that were
called and judged according to the manner of their court, but I was
not called at all; I suppose they had no mind to do me right, and
were afraid to do me wrong, lest I should set them forth; but when
they had done, the clerk of the court stood up, and said, that if
there were any that had any complaints to make, they might speak,
and they should be heard the next court day, which was to be there
that day fortnight: after a time of silence, I stood up and said,
that whereas that day fortnight, I had made a complaint against
someone in that place, I was resolved to let rest till George Fox
came to town.

Then John Boulton, which was that day judge, said,
that if I did so, they had something against me.

Asked of him what that was; he told me, that the last time I was I
there, that I commanded them to do justice, did I think that they
would not do justice? Did I repent for that? I told him, that I must
first see it done, and then I would speak more to him; but as yet I
had no cause to repent, before I did see it done.

Jo. Boulton: But thou said, that thou wast at the Pewter Platter
this day fortnight all the afternoon; it is not for thee to stay so
long there, what did thou there all that while, sitting drinking
there?

Answ. I will nor thoroughly resolve thee, unless thou wilt go
through all and begin at the beginning, then I will give thee an
account of it. [It was to help some of my acquaintance, that lived
in the same parish which I was born in, to sell their cheese.]

J. B. But thou art found in a fault since the other was done, and
therefore by the law [that is, by their own I judge] thou must
answer for it first, or else we shall not hear thee.

Answ. I will not, except thou wilt call this man to an account for
these things which he hath done against me, and see whether he or I
am in the greatest fault, and let him that is found in the fault be
reproved.

J. B. These are but frivolous things, and we take notice of no such
things; but thou didst charge us with injustice. Dost thou repent
for that, else we shall not hear thee, for we shall not stand to
dispute it with thee.

Here one may observe, that they take no notice of abominable cheats,
that's nothing amongst them, otherwise they would have reproved him,
for persuading me to it, as is before said. Neither of whoredom, if
it be not known; if they had made conscience of it, they would have
reproved him; but they confess they take no notice of such frivolous
things, but to question their justice, is a great crime.

After this, he held his peace for a short space, then (looking on
me) he said, dost thou repent?

Answ. No; not except thou wilt begin at the beginning, and so
examine all things as they are.

But after a certain time, he looked up and said, dost thou repent?
And so likewise the third time (after a little pause) lifting up his
head, said, dost thou repent?

Answ. No. Then (saith he) thou art not to come any more amongst us.

I told him, that if it were not for the promise I had made, I would
post him up in the Exchange; but here again you may understand, that
he is more rash and severe than the papists, or any others in their
courts; for they will give them some days, weeks, or months to
consider of it, before they cast them forth; but he will not give
one hour, but they must be thrown to the devil head long, without
time of consideration.

No sooner was I got forth, but two of them came to present me with
the riches of this world, so that I would but hold my peace, and say
nothing against them, nor take no notice of what had been done; for
they told me, that if I would join with them, that they would all be
my patients, and that they would persuade all others that were not
Friends, to come to me, and would cry me up for an able physician.

I told them, that I would speak those things that were true, and
would not be hired to deceit. Here you may see what they would do,
rather than be discovered in their unjust court; for right or wrong,
if they say it, it must be so; and so some they fright into it, and
others, that have a better understanding, that know that they have
not the keys of heaven at their command, to shut out whom they
please, these they entice by the deceitful riches of this world, as
they would have done by me. At another time, one of the chief of
them did blame me much, that I was so as I was, to stand out against
fiends; I told the party, they might do their worst, I did not care;
but said, they should do no more, for if they did, the laws of the
nation would take hold of them. By this I understood, that there was
the spirit of persecution amongst them, and if they could, (and the
law of the nation not take hold of them) then my excommunication
should not have served my turn, but must either have been
imprisoned, banished, or else not suffered to live.

Is not this contrary to your own declaration at the first? And did
not you speak against all these courts, and papists' laws, and
against forcing men to religion? Did you not say, that it did but
increase hypocrisy and deceit, and that it was but the making clean
the outside of the cup or platter? Are you become platter-wipers? Do
you leave the power of the ministration of the spirit, for external
things? And are you going to make a monarchy of your selves? Do you
not return to the world again in these ceremonies? Certainly you
have forgotten yourselves, and the first declaration that you made
against those things, which you are going about to set up, and have
in part set up; certainly you were in an error at the first, for
speaking against such things, or now for setting of them up, I judge
you not, but I think you have cause to judge yourselves, either for
the first, or last.

A description of the Quakers' court, the manner of it, and how they
confess their sinners, and of their pardon.

Now I have a leisure-time betwixt my trials, I will speak something
concerning the manner of their court, lest anyone should think that
I had not seen it, and that it was an invention of mine own to term
it so, and that there was no such thing amongst them; for they are a
people that deny all such things, therefore some may suppose that
this was spoken out of envy and malice; but those that think so, I
leave them to their own mistakes. And appeal to that great divine
power, to judge betwixt them and me, whether many times I have not
been grieved for their ignorance, and would have reformed some
errors amongst them, if I could, but they were stubborn, and would
not: but to proceed,

First of all, when the court begins, there cometh the clerk with his
green bag, like one of the clerks of the peace, and he draweth forth
his papers, and layeth them before him, and then sometimes some give
him more papers, which he receiveth; and after a little time, when
there are many come, then he that is chief amongst them that day,
(or judge) commandeth him to call over by name the transgressors;
which being done, some of them answer to their names, or some other
for them, which faith, that they are in the house; so they choose
some from amongst the court, or company, to go to them; then they
take them into a little room, and there they confess them; and if
they be tractable, and do submit, and say they repent, (or before
they will stand out, if they do but say they be sorry for it, that
shall serve) then they shall be forgiven, and their name shall be
blotted out from amongst the wicked, and be restored to the saints;
but if they justify themselves, then they shall be still in the
hands of the devil, and the world, to further judgment.

Now as for paritors, and other officers, they want not, nor for
tale-bearers, for there are too many of them; for many times one
shall have a dozen of them together, for I was ever scarce in their
companies, but there were two or three of them together; nay, many
times, rather than they will be out of favour, (as is aforesaid)
they would all turn to be tale-bearers; for I know of my own
knowledge, that the greatest part of their discourse, when they are
together, is to talk of others' faults, and to back-bite them; for
they that are so spoken against shall not know it, except he be
called to the court: this manner of back-biting, and marriage, is
their private divine discourse; for these several years, I have not
heard scarce at any time, any other discourse. But to return.

If they refuse to confess, and repent, then they summon them in
before the court, there to answer; which if they do not, they go to
them the third time; if they stand out then, they pass sentence on
them, that they are not to come amongst them: but to me they did not
grant this privilege, but cast me forth at the first time, without
letting me consider. Here they broke their own law, but I shall
forgive them, although they would not me.

After they have been once cast out, and then be found in any fault,
then they are to be called as at the first, to their confession and
repentance; but it they stand it out, then they are to be cast out
from the society of all men, as they did I me, as you shall
understand by what is hereafter written, (I suppose, if they had
power, and that the law of the nation would not take hold of them,
as aforesaid) then they would banish them into some wilderness,
where no man inhabits; but however, it must stand in the fence of
the same, for no man must have any commerce with such a one, as is
thus ex communicated, as he tendereth his own good, and the favour
of the church; but there is mercy for him, for if he will send his
submission to them, signed with his own hand, then they will pardon
him, and receive him amongst the saints again, (but very
doubtfully): but after the third transgression, there is no more
remission for him, for he is never to be received into the church
again, although his repentance be never so great.

But here we may understand, that they are not like unto God, for he
will forgive seventy tines seven; but there is the end of their law,
and their charity cannot extend itself any further. But where George
Fox found this law, I know not, except he found it in some old
chronicle, when he fought to find the beginning of the pope, and the
rest of his saints; but this I am certain of, that as soon as he had
made an end of that piece, which he put forth in the year 1667,
concerning the Pope and his laws, and of the beginning of his
ceremonies, with other things, as is declared at large in his book,
that as soon as he had done it, he set up this law, and I know it
was not before that time; but for my part I shall leave it to the
judgment of others, whether he had it there or not; or whether he
did only pick the best of them for himself, and left the other for
the Pope; or whether it was by the same spirit of revelation, which
revealed to him that the world was flat, and that when it was 12 of
the clock with us here, then it was 12 all the world over: but as
for this spirit of revelation, and George Fox's judgment upon it, (I
leave to the geographics to judge) and in both be silent. I have
here but given you a hint of the court, with other things, but it
may so fall out, that you may have it more at large hereafter.
Of George Foxs coming to town, and my address to him, with his
answer.

I hearing of George Fox's coming to this city, I was resolved to
apply myself to him, as I had before determined; and upon the 15 day
of October, I went to him and informed him of all things that had
passed, as also concerning Hilkiah Bedford; but his answer was, that
those were but light things, (as the other did, as you heard before)
but he would give me the hearing of it; but he was desirous that it
might be in private, because it was not convenient that others
should hear: I told him, that as it had been done in public, so it
was most fit that it should again; but however he pleased, it should
be at my chamber, or any place where he pleased; he would have had
me let it alone, but I told him how he had abused me, and was
resolved that he should judge betwixt us: his answer was, he would
give us the hearing of it, but he would not judge of it, but we
might agree betwixt ourselves; but he spoke not truth neither, for
in the first, he would not let me speak what I had further to say,
except I would plead guilty: and as unto the last, he spake not the
truth, in that he himself cast me forth, and commanded the clerk to
write the excommunication, and the cause of it, as you shall hear by
and by: at last, he told me he would hear me that day week at the
Peel, and I must warn them in, if they would appear; and according
to his order, I did, as is here at large inserted, as followeth.
October 22. 1668.
Concerning the second trial before George Fox, Hilkiah Bedford, and
John Boulton, which being my first judge, and both present to make
their plea against me, and what was brought against me, which I knew
not of.

This day being come, which was much desired by me, and with much
patience waited for, I then (betwixt hope and despair) waited for
the hour appointed, I went to the peel; now when I was come into the
great room, or rather (at that time) court of judicature, (where
they pretend, that righteousness should overflow, and run like
streams) I then expected that some reproof should have been given to
those absurdities and abuses, but there was no such thing done, but
rather commended, as you shall hear; after I had sat there about a
quarter of an hour, my adversaries being come, and George Fox in
presence, he spoke to me, as followeth.

G. F. Thou mad'st a complaint to me, concerning Hilkiah Bedford;
thou mayst speak, what is it?

Answ. George, I told thee of it, and what it was about, and thou
knowest it as well as I, therefore I desire thee to question him
about it, and see what he can say for himself.

G. F. Thou mad'st the complaint, therefore thou art to speak first,
and: say what thou hast to say, and then he shall speak for himself.
(they had concluded what to say before, as will plainly appear by
their proceedings in their court.)

Answ. George, thou knowest Hilkiah Bedford made a complaint to thee
concerning me, that I was going to take a heathen to wife, and would
be married by a priest; it is thus, this party he motioned me to her
and likewise her to me; but some time being spent, and I not
frequenting the party so often as he thought I should, spoke to me
to go there, I did so as he required me, then he comes after me, and
finding us together, he took our hands in his, and joined them
together, pronouncing these words, Those that God hath joined
together, let no man put asunder; making, as if the marriage was
already done: after this, at another time he and I went to the
cook's shop in Smithfield to dinner, and being at dinner, he was
still pressing me to this party, but withal told me, that she was
covetous; but if I would take his advice, he would do well enough
for that, but I must keep his counsel, and do as he would tell me. I
asked him what it was, and he said, that I must buy four or five
hundred pound bags, and go to Hackney Highway, and fill them with
little pebbles: I asked him what that was, and he told me, they were
little stones, and bring them home to my lodging, and set them in my
closer, then I must invite him to my chamber, and when he came, I
must open the closet door, and let him see them, and he would
pretend to her, that they were money; but I abhorring all such
deceit in my heart, did not condescend to it. After this, another
time at the same house, we being at dinner, he blamed me that I went
no oftener to the party; and said, that he would teach me; and it
was this, That he that would woo a maid, must feign, lie, and
flatter; but he that would woo a widow, must (rehearsing these words
several times) down with his britches, and at her. After this, with
many other persuasions, which he used, and perceiving that I would
not do as he would have me, he began to exclaim against me, and call
me all he could devise, and also inforrned thee against me, as thou
knowest.

G. F. Hast thou any more to say against him?

Answ. Yes; but I would have him to answer to this first, and leave
the other for another part; this is enough at once for him to answer
to, and when he hath so done, he shall hear the other.

G. F. I would have thee to say all thou hast to say first.

Answ. No, I will not, he shall answer to this first.

G. F. But there is another thing thou didst at his house, thou wast
uncivil there, and offeredest some abuse to his kinswoman, or
sister.

Answ. I know not his kinswoman, or sister, any more than him whom I
never saw in my life; nor I know not that I did anything to them
that was uncivil, that I remember; and if I did salute one, or both
of then, it is more than I can remember; but it may be I did, and
that was all. To this Hilkiah Bedford made no reply, to say whether
it were so or no, and so it was let alone.

G. F. Come Hilkiah, make answer to what he hath said against thee;
is it true, or not?

H. B. That is the Devil, or it come of him, for he is the father of
all such (and looking upon me) lies; for that which he hath said, is
false, and there is no truth in it.

G. F. Speak to the first; is that true or not?

H. B. It was not as he said, but it is true that I came there, and
found them together, and said, what, you want one to join your hands
together: so I took their hands, and in a light vain manner, put
them together, and I blame myself for it.

G. F. Thats well said, thou dost well to confess the truth, and to
be sorry for it: but what dost thou say to the other, concerning the
stones?

H. B. The truth is, that I could never see anything in him, but
lightness and vanity; I thought it was no matter of conscience in
him, because he was so bad, and so I said to him, canst thou not do
so? But for the rest it is false.

G. F. Thou dost well to confess the truth, but what sayest thou to
the last?

H. B. There was some idle discourse stirred up bv his vain mind,
which made me speak some vain words; but what he saith, is false,
and he lies.

G. F. Thou dost well to confess thy faults, and not to stand in
then, I commend thee for it.

But yet for all his well-doing, and saying, and for this
commendation of George's, he did but praise a liar; for he spoke not
the truth in anything, as it was done at the first.

Then I said to him, that he had not spoken the truth, but did lie.

H. B. If they were the last words that I should speak, they are
true; but he spoke after that, therefore he did lie.

I answered, if there be any truth in heaven above, or in the earth
beneath, that which he hast spoken, is false; then they blamed me
for bringing that in question, upon such light occasion, and spoke
well of him for yielding to the truth, whereas it was but to his own
lies that he yields to. This being ended, as you have heard, then he
was to accuse me of things, that I am not sure whether ever I spoke
them to him, however, I shall place them as they were spoken to me.

G. F. Hilkiah, hast not thou something to accuse him of about James
Sparkes?

H. B. Yes: he said, he had proved James Sparkes' ministry false, and
he a liar; and he said, that George Fox took his part also, and
called James Sparkes a raw boy.

G. F. But there is something concerning Jo. Boulton?

H. B. Yes, he boasted, and said, that he disputed him, and routed
him, and put him in such amaze, that he could not find the way to
the meeting; and further said, that if the ministers were in any
dispute, they must be beholding to him to help them out.

G. F. What dost thou say to this? What, art thou sorry for abusing
him?

Answ. George, I desire to have leave to speak how it was: this which
he speaketh of was done at Lancaster, upon a time when he came from
Bristol; I having lived there formerly, desired to know how Friends
did there; they told me they were well; I asked also for George
Bishop, and whether he were in prison, or not; they said, yes; I
enquired in what prison he was in, they answered, in none, but in
Thomas Gouldney's new house; then said I, Thomas Gouldneys new
house is his prison: then they thundered plagues and damnation on
me, for saying Thomas Gouldney (a very good Friend) should build
houses for prisons for Friends: I told them again, that I did not
say, that Thomas Gouldney did build it for a prison; but if George
Bishop were prisoner, the place that did contain him, by virtue of
the law, was his prson: but they told me there was no virtue, nor
life in me, nor in anything that I did; then I told them they did
lie, and that I would prove virtue in a post; then they said, that
the plagues and vengeance of God was for me, and hanged over my
head, and with many speeches of exclamation against me, they went to
their chamber, and I likewise went to mine; and when I was entered
into it, I wept bitterly, to think how long a time they had
professed the truth, and pretend that they had the divine teaching
of the spirit, and yet should be so foolish, as not to understand
reason, nor moderation.

After that came Jo. Stubs into my chamber, and found me there
weeping; he asked me what was the reason of my weeping, then I told
him I would turn a Diogenes, before I would be so abused by them; he
told me it was their weakness, and that he would inform George of
it: the next morning he went to the castle, and when he came back,
he told me that he had informed George of all the discourse; and his
answer was, that James Sparkes was a raw boy in those things, and
that he must not meddle with those things that did not concern him;
and this Jo. Stubs told me, that George had laid, as is aforesaid.
Now as concerning his ministry being false, and he a liar, it was
thus; James Sparkes having been at home a certain time, came again
to Lancaster, where there being many other Friends of my
acquaintance, I came into the room where he was, and he asked me
what I came among them for, giving me some of the same language, as
he had the time before; adding also, that I was a Ranter, and said,
that he had the spirit of discerning; I told him that he lied, and
withal, I told him that I would prove him one sooner than he could
me; but withal, he told me that I had no light nor virtue in me;
then I left him, and went up to the castle, where many came about
me, and blamed me much for speaking against a minister, as they
called him; but I told them, that one man was no more to me than
another, further than they spoke the truth; then they said to me,
what, would I offer to say that he that was a minister, did not
speak the truth? I answered, that he either was a liar, or his
ministry false, and that I would prove it, and they themselves
should judge; then I told them, that they themselves heard him say,
that there was no life nor virtue in me; and yet in his ministry, he
said, that it is in every man; and I am sure that I am a man, and
yet he saith, it is not in me; therefore he is either a liar, or his
ministry false; judge ye.

G. F. We shall take no notice of these private things betwixt James
Sparkes, and thee: but dost thou think that thou didst well to bring
this story two hundred miles, to tell it in this city? What sayest
thon to that?

Answ. I blame myself for that; but it is true, and I do not repent
that I did so by him.

George said, that that word (raw boy) was out of the truth, and he
was certain he never said so; but for my part, I know not whether he
did or no; but this I certainly know, that Jo. Stubs told me so.

G. F. But what sayest thou concerning Jo. Boulton? Did he lose his
way to the meeting?

Answ. Yes, he knew not where he was, until he enquired.

G. F. But thou saidst that he was lost, and in amaze?

Answ. Yes, he knew not where he was.

G. F. John Boulton, didst thou go to the meeting after, or not?

J.B. Yes, I did, but it was nigh half done, before I came there.

G. F. Dost not thou see what an untruth thou hast spoken here before
us? Thou saydst that he was lost, and yet he came to the meeting
after that, art not thou a liar?

Answ. George, thou art now upon critics; but what if a man should be
lost in a wood or desert, and after that should be taught the way
home; was he therefore not lost?

G. F. Why, but he went to the meeting that day; therefore he was not
lost.

Answ. But he knew not where he was, until he did ask.

J. B. I was out of my way, because I came in lower than I use to do;
for I came in at the hollow-way, or hog-lane under the windmills.

Answ. Now let all judge betwixt thee and I, whether or no thou wast
not both lost, and in amaze, when thou knowest not from that time,
to this very day, where thou wast; for we never came near the
windmills, nor in that lane;, for thou wentest strait out of Old
Street, along that lane to Shoreditch church; didst thou take that
for a windmill? Certainly the windmill, it was in thy head at that
time.

J. B. But thou sayest, I went not to the meeting, but that I left
thee at the alley, and so I did.

Answ. But I brought thee first into thy way, before I left thee, I
wish thou mayest keep in a right way.

G. F. But art thou sorry that thou hast done this by him, in telling
it again?

Answ. I am sorry I ever told it Hilkiah Bedford.

G. F. That is, because thou art caught in it, and questioned for it:
but dost thou condemn the thing in thyself for evil?

Answ. George, I came not here to condemn myself, I came here to be
judged of you, and to hear your judgment; for I know myself, and
what I am guilty of, better than you can tell me; I came here to
have a trial of those things I was accused of, that you might be
judges betwixt us, to see who were in the fault, that they might be
reproved which were found guilty.

G. F. But here is Jo. Boulton, who is an ancient citizen, and a
sufficient man, and well known, and hath suffered much, and there
are none to speak against him; art thou sorry for what thou hast
said?

Answ. There is more that I have to say, which hath not yet been
spoken of, let us go through with that, and then I shall answer you
to your desire.

G. F. But thou must answer to this first, or else thou art not to go
any further, for we will clear things as we go?

Answ. I remember that the last time I was here, he served me after
this manner, which I condescended to, and then he would not let me
speak any further; but that I must repent of that, or else I must
not come amongst them; therefore I will not.

Then answered Docttor Gray, and told me, that I said that I had
drinked that day.

Answ. That I do every day, and eat also when I can get it, or have a
stomach to it, (this is another petty judge:) but all this while I
had forgotten the woman with her apish tricks, for she seemed to me,
as if she would have commanded me silence, with shaking of her head,
grinding of her teeth, and mumbling her lips, and making of ill-
favoured faces at me; I never saw the like before, except it were a
jackanapes; but I commanded her to speak what she had to say, but
she was silent; but for some of the rest of the women, I leave them
to their merry conceits, which they had gotten in a corner. But to
return:

Then there stood up a country man, and began to speak.

G. F. Asked me, whether I would stand to his judgment, for he was my
country-man?

Answ. Yes, I will stand to any one's judgment; for I came hele to
the same intent.

G. F. Come Friend, speak.

Coun. Country-man, it is thy boasting proud spirit in thee.

G. F. Dost thou stand to his judgment?

Answ. Yes, I said before, that I would stand to your judgment, but
Friend, what country-man art thou? He answered, a Staffford-shire,
as I did understand; then said I, thou art none of my country-man:
Geo. blamed him for speaking, (but I suppose, and so may all others)
that it was, because Geo. would not have himself to be found in an
untruth, as here he was; otherwise, it had been no matter.

G. F. But dost thou blame thyself, and condemn it in the bottom of
thy heart?

Answ. Geo. I told thee before, that I did repent, and was sorry, in
that I told it Hilkiah Bedford; and I know not whether I did tell it
to any other; but I must tell thee, that at that time he cast out
some words, that I thought to have told it to thee; and if I had
done so, I should not have repented; but in telling it where it was
not expedient or convenient, I am sorry, and repent for it.

 G. F. But art thou sorry for it? And dost thou condemn thyself? If
thou dost, then we will proceed to the other: let me persuade thee,
for if thou stand in it after this manner, thou art not to come
amongst men, nor to discourse, nor have any familiarity with man;
and what wilt thou do then? Thou must be undone, because thou wilt
not yield to this; it were better for thee to submit to Jo. Boulton.

Answ. I have said enough I think, if you would have me say anything
else, tell me what I must speak, I shall say it.

G. F. We must not spend our precious time thus, for we have other
things to do, and to wait upon the Lord; and if thou wilt not
submit, then thou must go from amongst us.

We had more words, which were to no effect, and cannot well be put
in order, because they were like a horse in a mill, still running 
round, but come to the same place.

Then G. Fox commanded the clerk to write; that whereas Nathaniel
Smith hath spoke evil of Jo. Boulton behind his back, and will not
submit to him; therefore, he is not to have any communication with
any man, or any man with him. This he was to record against me; but
let all judge, whether I did not submit enough to him; or whether he
or I was in the greatest fault; or whether he had not cause to have
repented, or submit to me for his judgment the last trial: but all
that they did aim at, was to have me to condemn myself, that so they
might the better have done it hereafter; and that he might rule and
bear domnion over others.

Then G. Fox commanded me to go from amongst them, for they had other
things to do; but that good saint, Hilkiah Bedford, was received
again, and suffered to be as one of them; but I departed at his
command. Some few days after this, I came to some of their houses,
and they took occasion to speak to me of the last trial, and said,
that I must bear with Friends.

I told them, that I had born with them these 10 years, in hopes,
that in time they would grow in the truth, and righteousness, and
then they would cast off all such ceremonies, and conceits, as they
had got amongst them, as you shall here further in my reply to their
answer, if they make any; if not, I shall let it rest. There was
some others that said, I must forget and forgive, for that was
according to the truth, and not take notice of such things, and that
I ought to bear with others.

I know that all this is true: but what is the reason they observe it
not themselves? They lay burthens upon others, that they themselves
will not bear; for this is the first they have to accuse me of, but 
I have to accuse them from time to time.

Yet I have born with, and forgiven it; but if they be not satisfied
in it, they shall have it the next time, when they desire me to
answer them to their propositions.

But now G. Fox begins to clear himself of this court, that he is not
guilty: for we (saith he) cast out none, but they cast out
themselves through their wickedness; for we do not receive them in,
therefore we cannot cast them out: what then was that sentence that
the clerk of the closet drew up? But you preach, teach, and speak,
whereby to bring them in; and then if they will not observe your
ceremonies, then you do your endeavour to do it; and to my own
knowledge, by words you have passed sentence upon them, as you did
by me, and others you have carried out by violence, and here it
appears you do; for I myself did not leave you till Jo. Boulton
commanded me not to come: here it doth appear that there is a
different spirit amongst them, and so it can't be said that I cast
out myself by reason of wickedness; for I came to complain against
the wickedness of some of you; but you had rather destroy any person
than your jugglings should come to light, as it hath done in this:
but how G. Fox will clear himself that he doth not cast any forth,
and yet did it by me; and said, that it was better for me to submit
to Jo. Boulton (as I suppose) that Shoreditch church was a windmill,
and that he was not lost, nor then out of his way, neither in amaze:
if I would have submitted to this, then the sentence should not have
been passed against me, n?r I cast out; but it doth appear to me
something like them, in old time, when they cast them forth, and
imprisoned them, and put them to death; yet they said, it was their
own fault, and that they brought all upon their own heads; for in
all times, those that were the persecutors, would ever clear
themselves of it, as far as their tongue or pens could reach; and
many times they would reach over many kingdoms to beguile the
ignorant.

Geo. But this is the trimming of the vineyard, and the plucking up
of the tares out of the wheat, and so it is lawful. But yet, George,
there is something more in it; for thou must have a care when thou
trim or prune the vine, for thou mayest as well destroy it as cure
it, in cutting off when it should rather have been nursed up, and
the briars and thorns that did choke it, have been cut down before
that thou hadst meddle with it; then mightest thou have had
abundance of fruit; whereas thou now art like to be pricked by that
which thou haft cherished, in not rightly understanding of it, to
discern between good and evil; but it may be, that it is thy
resolution to pluck up the tares from amongst the wheat, and set the
rest of thy servants to do the like; but thou must receive a greater
call than those did which Christ reproved; and said, that the wheat
and tares must grow together, lest they should destroy the wheat
also: but I understand, that this is no great burthen to tread down
the wheat if every blade do not please you, although the wheat be
good in itself, yet it is the outside that must be fair, neat, and
clean. For some of them that keep the court constantly, and observe
what is done, and do help you themselves, yet for all that, when I
have laid this close to them, they have said they did believe that
they did cast some out that were better than five amongst
themselves; but in that, they did carry it fair to the world, they
could not meddle with them. Now see whether yours be not a making
clean of the outside, and a plucking up of the wheat. But by reason
I am cast out from amongst men by you, and that I understand that
you can well dispense with hypocrites; give me leave to write to the
world, and peradventure they will furnish you with good store, now
they know your minds, and that you will advance their fortunes, as
you would have done mine. If you will be willing to observe them in
all things, and give way to such as Hilkiah Bedford, and Jo.
Boulton, and to extol Boulton to be a man more perfect than David
was: for David might be reproved by a prophet, but Jo. Boulton by no
manner of person must be spoke against: but I leave him to answer
for himself, and proceed.

A few words of instruction, to all those that are desirous to come
into the society of the Quakers; and to be received by them:
I mean not them only that comes out of conscience, but all
sorts, whether it be them or not, they shall all be received, 
although it be only for preferment, and in time be taken for
the faithful; therefore I desire you to come near, and
understand what I shall write to you.

In the first place thou must become acquainted with someone of them
that goes constantly to meetings, and speaking lovingly to him; not
theeing or thouing of him at the first, but speak well of them in
general; then it may be that he will invite thee to go with him; do
so, and when all is done, then praise him that spoke, although he
spoke nothing else but nonsense; then the other good Friend that
went with thee will say yes, he is a precious man, or a good Friend,
or such like words; then thou must be desirous to hear him, or
another: so be sure the next Sunday, to call upon him before he go
to the meeting, and go along with him; and there perchance, thou may
light upon one that was a greater dunce than the first, and that was
bad enough; then be sure to keep close to thy neighbour, and go with
him back again to his house, and there begin to admire him that
spoke, and praise him as highly as thou can, and then thou shall see
how the other man will admire him also: and then thou must be more
desirous than ever, to go to the next, and speak and act as
aforesaid; and perhaps that some woman may be the teacher, or else
someone that has little reason as a woman; but however thou must
take it in good part, and say, that without all doubt this is the
truth: for now there is this scripture fulfilled, which God said
should come to pass, that he would pour forth his spirit upon all
flesh, and his sons and his daughters should prophesy; then the
other will say, blessed be the goodness of the Lord, that he has
been pleased to hide those things from the wise, and to deliver them
to the foolish of this world. But if thou doth but observe a while,
thou shall find them cunning enough, if not too cunning for thee,
except thou has a care; and thou must bless God for opening thine
eyes to see the truth: now by the next meeting thou may begin to
thee, and thou; but be sure thou move not thy hat, if thou should
meet the chiefest man in the city, for if thou doth, all thy labour
is lost thus far.

What they are to observe; and how to carry themselves before the
rest of their brethren.

First as I told thee before, be sure to watch the door of thy lips,
that these proceed not forth yes, but yea; nor no, but nay, nor you,
but thou; nor yours, but thine, to any single person; these must be
truly learned and practised; for in them there is wrapped up a great
mine, or a great mystery of godliness: therefore be sure that thou
have this little knacks, or else thou doth nothing; but if thou has
it, then thou shall see what wonders there may be done by it.

Now when thou has done this, then thou must be very courteous to
them, but not with the hat; neither must thou salute them with a
kiss if they be women; although at the first it was common amongst
them, both men and women; but in a short time, it did some hurt to
some of the women, for they got great bellies by the bargain; and
therefore it was left off by both men and women. Now when thou has
attained to this great perfection, thou must go amongst them at
other times, and in the weekdays; but if thou chance to ask me what
great perfections these were that I spoke of; I answer, thou knows
as well as I; but if thou has not these, thou canst not be looked
upon as a good practice, or a faithful Friend. But to proceed:

After thou has been a constant goer to the meeting about a quarter
of a year, then some of the heads will come to visit thee; they
being come, thou must get the best things the house can afford; and
if thou has not such things as thou would desire, then send for it
presently: and give them more kind entertainment then thou would do
to thy father and mother, or the dearest friend thou hast; then
after they have eat and drank with thee, they will depart and report
thee to be a very loving Friend, and that there is abundance of love
raised in thee in a short time: but thou must be sure to observe the
rules which before I have given thee.

They then will report it to their Minister, what a good Friend there
is lately come into the truth; and then in a short time thou shall
have him come and give thee a visit, (especially if thou be a rich
man, for of others they have too many already;) and now thou must
show forth thy parts, and make much of him; and if thou has no wine
in thy house, be sure to send for some, with other things agreeable
to it, and to thy estate; it may be he will seemingly blame thee for
sending for the wine, but at last he will take it in good part, and
if it be good wine, he will like it very well: but thou must be sure
to have a care, that if thou should meet them in any place, not to
invite them into any public house, as tavern, inn, or ale house; for
then they will look upon thee as one that is profane: but behave
thyself as I have instructed thee, and then thou shall get fame
amongst them.

Of their buying or selling; and of the carriage that may be used in
either buying or selling.

Thou must come to a word in thy buying and selling, and to plainness
of speech, as thou was taught before; but if it change, that by thy
constant going to meetings, thou want one more to be in thy shop; or
by reason that now thou art at more charity with thy new friends
than thou was before; thou may know how thy wares were wont to be
sold; and now thou may raise it a half-penny in a shilling, and this
will serve thy extraordinary expense; and this will scarce be
discerned by the buyer; and if he question it, thou must say thou
art at a word, and thou cannot bate a farthing of it; so the party
is well contented, and judge that this is as cheap as he could buy
it elsewhere; and he has a better conceit of it, because it came
from thee.

And by this means thou may come into great esteem, and that all will
believe thee; and thou may begin to look after an estate and riches
in this world, and all thy friends, both Ministers and others will
say, the Lord doth bless thee for thy faithfulness; but thou must be
sure to observe this one thing that I shall teach thee, otherwise,
all that they say of thee may be false; that is, when thou has
gotten this name of an honest man, then thou may raise another penny
higher in the shilling, and then go on with courage, and this will
quickly raise thee a great estate; and then thou shall be as much
admired, as thou admired at the first; and by this means thou shall
purchase thyself more liberty than at first thou had; for by this
time, if thou had a good customer, thou may you him, and say, if it
please you; but if thou ask me why is it so, that thou may do it now
and not before, I will tell thee thou must at the first learn the
rules and grounds of it, or else thou can never be perfect, but thy
weakness will be discovered; for those that will learn any language,
they must first learn the grounds of it, or otherwise, they can
never be perfect; and another reason is, that thou art now come near
to perfection in this way, and none is to meddle with thee; or
however, thou has gotten an estate, and so thou art winked at.

But now thou has money at command, and credit at pleasure, thou may
make thy best market; and if thou see or hear of any bargain, that
money may be gotten by it, although it be not in thy way of trade,
and that one came to thee to desire thy assistance in it; and that
thou knows that he must of necessity have it, yet nevertheless, buy
it out of his hand, and it may be the next day he will give thee 14
or 15 pounds more than thou givest. And by this means thou may have
money to buy lands, and build houses, and then thou shall be great
with all the chief of them; and their Ministers and other divine
people amongst them will cry up thy name, and say, the Lord has
blessed thee in a wonderful manner, one may see what it is to be
faithful. And thus, may then purchase to thyself-honour and wealth.

And then if though drink plenty of wine, or of any other liquor to
comfort thy spirits, and make thy heart glad, they will say the
creatures are good in their places, and they are only for the
faithful, and so lawful only for thee.

But if sometime thou should light on a customer that will not
believe thee, but will put thee hard to thy trumps, by reason he
understands it as well as thou doth, and he will give thee a price
whereby thou may get sufficiently, and it may be the next that
comes, may not give so much, neither pay in so short time, and that
thy word has past, that thou will have so for it, and when thou
considers that thou shall not have so much, then to save thy word
thou may take some more of the same ware, that is as good or better
than the other, and say, that if he will take both together, he
shall have them so, or any other thing he has occasion for; and if
thou can but carry all on after this manner, then thou art come to
perfection, and then there is none must speak against thee; and if a
thousand should bear witness, they should not prevail, though it be
never so true; let them speak never so much reason, it shall be but
like chaff driven upon the mountains, and thou shall stand as firm
as a rock against all their assaults.

Now when thou has any occasion to buy of the merchant, or painful
tradesman; thou knowest beforehand what it is worth, he will not ask
thee much out of the way, because thou art his chapman, and uses to
take some of thy money, he sets thee a price, but thou tells him
that thou canst give no more, if thou should'st , thou could not
live by it, therefore he will take less, for he knows he may be sure
of his money, and that thou canst not do as others do, to ask twice
the price, and sometimes catch many men so and sell cheaper (to
those that know what it is worth) that thou canst afford; and this
they do, that they may be looked on as honest men; but many times,
though they get a great deal by their dishonest dealings, yet they
spend it other ways, there is a curse upon it, and it prospers not
in their hands, so that many times they break and run away, and so
all is lost; but as for thee, thou need not to fear, but that thou
will pay every man to a farthing: and by this means thou brings down
their price, and they look upon thee as an honest man, and so thou
gettest on both hands, and becomest greater than thy neighbours.
Then thou must be sure to bless and praise thy God for it, and say,
that he lends thee good things: but yet this thou must observe to
thyself, that it is the God of this world whom thou loves so well,
that hath given thee all this; but the vulgar people understand not
this, but think that God sends it to these privately, and so thou
art secure enough, and they think themselves blessed, if they can
but come under the shadow of thy roof; which if they do, tis two to
one if thou makes not them pay for it; but thou must let this rest
in silence, and not betray thy good fortune.

Reader, thou may see by this time, if thou art not blind, how under
a cloak of religion, many men get great estates, and the simple
people understand it not; but this I must say, that all are not so,
but generally all those that get such great estates, do worship the
God of this world, and only make the true God a stalking horse, to
cover themselves withal; but I leave them to the true God to be
judged at the last day, although many of them believe it not, as I
showed you before.

There is one thing more that I have known to be carried on with
security, and never mistrusted; if thou has a report, it's no matter
any further, for if thou should buy a parcel of goods, then thou may
take out about a fifth or a sixth part, and convert it to thy own
use; and when a chapman comes to buy the other, then thou may
declare to him, that thou will tell him to a penny what it cost
thee, and he shall know that thou will deal fairly and plainly with
him, and that thou will not cheat any man, but thou must have
profit, and that shall be very reasonable, thou will refer thyself
to him. This man seeing thy fair dealing, as he judges, gives thee
good profit, and here thou gains on both hands also; for that which
thou took forth was sufficient for thee to get, and the other that
thy chapman gave thee, was clear gains. This have I known a very
good Friend do, and if ever thou thinks to be a good Friend, thou
must imitate the best.

I have two or three rules more to instruct thee in, and I will leave
thee to thy new way of conformity, hoping that if at any time I have
occasion to request thee to deliver me a message to the church, thou
will do it, and by this means thou doth engage one to instruct thee
further.

First, thou must know, that he that is a man, must be so in all
parts, for if anything be wanting, he is not esteemed, for if a man
want his apparel, he is not taken for such a person of honour as he
is; therefore thou must have a special care that thou art well
provided, or else all that thou has done, is but in vain, therefore
thou must observe that thou must cross the world in their fashions
of clothes; for in this there is a weighty matter, and no small sin
in the shape of garments, although in the matter thereof there is
none, save only in the form; for if it be made like the worlds, it
is judgeable, and not fit to come amongst Friends, (although the
prophets and apostles, and saints in old time stood not upon this,
but went like them of their own nation) yet this is nothing to thee,
for these are a people that comprehends all the prophets, and other
saints; yea, and God himself, only they could never comprehend an
angel, nor any other spirit, yet they could profess without either
angel or spirit, but which way forever it was done, it was strange
to me: But to proceed, first, when this way came first up, there was
long toed shoes, and high crowned hats; then they must wear short
shoes fit for their feet, and low crowned hats, which were more fit
for their heads: But now when others come to wear these, then thou
must leave them off, and betake thyself to a great crowned hat, big
enough for an ass's head, and broad toed shoes, contrary to the
world, and then thou doth right; and if thou didn't wear thy cloak
without a cape, it would be the more out of the high world's
fashion, and so the better accepted with them, although it would be
worse for thy shoulders; but thou must not regard that, if it be
according to the truth.

The second thing is, that thou have no ribbons nor lace about thee;
for if thou has, Lucifer, the Prince of pride, will keep his court
there in the fight of the whole world; and if though has any
affection for him, thou may set open the door of thy heart, and let
him sit there, and that will please him, and friends also; for he
will cause thee to carry thy mind very high, at to conceit thyself
to be some extraordinary creature, and more pure and sublime than 
any other, that thou may stand in authority, and rule, to trample
and tread all others (that faith and dosh not as thou says and doth)
under thy feet, and by this means purchase to thyself great fame.

I would have thee take a pattern of Dr. Gray, for he is as perfect
in that, as any I know; as also of his discourse and carriage: but
thou must pretend to some extraordinary revelation, as he did when
he was cast into prison that through the everlasting goodness of
God, he had revealed to him the secrets of physic.
