Radical Pamphlets from the English Civil War
Published by the Ex-Classics Project, 2016.
Public Domain

Contents

Introduction

Bibliographic Note and Acknowledgements

Ranters
A Fiery Flying Roll and A Second Fiery Flying Roll: Abiezer Coppe
A Single Eye: Laurence Clarkson
A Rout, A Rout: Joseph Salmon
His Second Part Of His Theous-Ori Apokolipikal: TheaurauJohn Tany

Diggers
Light Shining In Buckinghamshire: Gerrard Winstanley
A Mite Cast into the Common Treasury: Robert Coster.
The Brotherly Request of those that Are Called Diggers -  A Letter
to Colonel Fairfax
A Declaration of the Grounds and Reasons (Wellinborrow)
A Declaration of the Grounds and Reasons (Iver)

Levellers
London's Liberty in Chains Discovered: John Lilburne
Tyranipocrit discovered (Anonymous)
The Mournful Cries of Many Thousand Poor Tradesmen (Anonymous)
The Baiting of the Great Bull of Bashan: Richard Overton

Muggletonians
A Transcendent Spiritual Treatise:  John Reeve & Lodowick Muggleton

Quakers
The Discovery of the Great Enmity of the Serpent against the Seed
of the Woman: William Duesbury
The Lamb's Officer is Gone Forth with the Lamb's Message: George
Fox
A Woe against Kendal: Francis Howgill
The Serpent's Subtlety Discovered: Ambrose Rigge

Fifth Monarchists
The Bloody Vision of John Farley: Arise Evans
The Resurrection of the Witnesses: Mary Cary


Introduction
During the English Civil War and in the republic which followed, a
wide range of radical ideas and movements flourished. There were
Seekers and Ranters, Diggers and Levellers, Quakers, Fifth
Monarchists and Muggletonians; and a flood of remarkable pamphlets
promoting their ideas poured from the printing presses. Christopher
Hill's classic The World Turned Upside Down draws heavily on these
in order to elucidate the nature and spread of radical ideas during
the ferment of the English Civil War. The effective ending of
censorship facilitated the production of a mass of cheap pamplets
and leaflets, and the many different strains of radical thought all
took advantage of this situation to promote their ideas. Hill cites
dozens of these, not all of which we have been able to track down.
Our selection of eighteen representative works should however give a
taste of the diversity of this rich store of radicalism.



Bibliographic Note and Acknowledgements

The originals of the pamplets reprinted here are all in university
or National libraries, and have rarely been reprinted. Most if not
all of them are available as page scans via the Early English Books
Online; http://eebo.chadwyck.com/home – however this is confined to
University libraries, and they make it clear that others will not be
given access. (The organizers seem to be as fanatically determined
to restrict it to the academic priesthood as the Catholic Church
were to make sure only the clergy had access to the Bible.) The
texts provided here have been scraped together from a diversity of
printed and online sources; the particular one is given at the
beginning of each.

Spelling and capitalization have been standardized. Latin has been
translated.

We would like to thank Mikke Sennekke and Richard Schneider for
providing us with a copy of Digger Tracts, 1649-50, published by
John the Red Nose, Seattle?, 1996.




Ranters

A Fiery Flying Roll and A Second Fiery Flying Roll:
Abiezer Coppe

Source:
http://faculty.history.wisc.edu/sommerville/367/Coppe%20Fiery.htm
and https://archive.org/details/fieryflyingroll00coppuoft

Title Page
A Fiery Flying Roll
A
Word from the Lord to all the Great Ones of the Earth, whom this may
concern: Being the last WARNING PIECE of the dreadful day of
JUDGMENT.
For now the Lord is come

	{1. Inform}
to	{2. Advise and warn} The great ones.
	{3. Charge}
	{4. Judge and sentence}
As also most compassionately informing, and most lovingly and
pathetically advising and warning London.
With a terrible word, and fatal blow from the Lord, upon the
gathered CHURCHES.
And all by his most excellent MAJESTY, dwelling in, and shining
through auxilium patris, alias Coppe.
With another FLYING ROLL ensuing (to all the inhabitants of the
earth). The contents of both following.
Isa. 23.9, The Lord of hosts (is) staining the pride of all glory,
and bringing into contempt all the honourable (persons and things)
of the Earth. O London, London, how would I gather thee, as a hen
gathereth her chickens under her wings, &c.
Know then (in this thy day) the things that belong to thy peace——
I knew the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not,
but of the synagogue of Satan, Rev.2.9.
Imprinted at London, in the beginning of that notable day, wherein
the secrets of all hearts are laid open; and wherein the worst and
foulest of villainies, are discovered, under the best and fairest
outsides.1649.
THE PREFACE
An inlet into the Land of Promise, the new Jerusalem, and a gate
into the ensuing Discourse, worthy of serious consideration.
 My Dear One.
 All or none.
 Everyone under the Sun.
 Mine own.
 My most excellent Majesty (in me) hath strangely and variously
transformed this form.
 And behold, by mine own Almightiness (in me) I have been changed in
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the trump.
 And now the Lord is descended from Heaven, with a shout, with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the trump of God.
 And the sea, the earth, yea, all things are now giving up their
dead. And all things that ever were, are, or shall be visible?are
the grave wherein the King of glory (the eternal, invisible
Almightiness) hath lain as it were dead and buried.
 But behold, behold, he is now risen with a witness, to save Zion
with vengeance, or to confound and plague all things into himself;
who by his mighty angel is proclaiming (with a loud voice) that sin
and transgression is finished and ended, and everlasting
righteousness be brought in with most terrible earth-quakes and
heaven-quakes, and with signs and wonders following.
 Amen.
 And it hath pleased my most excellent Majesty (who is universal
love, and whose service is perfect freedom) to set this form (the
writer of this Roll) as no small sign and wonder in fleshly Israel;
as you may partly see in the ensuing Discourse.
 And now (my dear ones!) every one under the Sun, I will only point
at the gate; through which I was led into that new City, new
Jerusalem, and to the spirits of just men, made perfect, and to God
the Judge of all.
 First, all my strength, my forces were utterly routed, my house I
dwelt in fired; my father and mother forsook me, the wife of my
bosom loathed me; mine old name was rotted, perished; and I was
utterly plagued, consumed, damned, rammed, and sunk into nothing,
into the bowels of the still eternity (my mother's womb) out of
which I came naked, and where hereto I returned again naked. And
lying a while there, rapt up in silence, at length (the body or
outward form being awake all this while) I heard with my outward ear
(to my apprehension) a most terrible thunderclap, and after that a
second. And upon the second thunderclap, which was exceeding
terrible, I saw a great body of light, like the light of the Sun,
and red as fire, in the form of a drum (as it were) whereupon with
exceeding trembling and amazement on the flesh, and with joy
unspeakable in the spirit, I clapped my hands, and cried out, Amen,
Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Amen. And so lay trembling, sweating, and
smoking (for the space of half an hour) at length with a loud voice
(I inwardly) cried out, Lord, what wilt thou do with me? My most
excellent majesty and eternal glory (in me) answered & said, Fear
Not, I will take thee up into mine everlasting Kingdom. But thou
shalt (first) drink a bitter cup, a bitter cup, a bitter cup.
Whereupon (being filled with exceeding amazement) I was thrown into
the belly of hell (and take what you can of it in these expressions,
though the matter is beyond expression) I was among all the devils
in hell, even in their most hideous hue.
 And under all this terror, and amazement, there was a little spark
of transcendent, transplendent, unspeakable glory, which survived,
and sustained itself, triumphing, exulting, and exalting itself
above all the fiends. And, confounding all the blackness of darkness
(you must take it in these terms, for it is infinitely beyond
expression.) Upon this the life was taken out of the body (for a
season) and it was thus resembled, as if a man with a great brush
dipped in whiting, should with one stroke wipe out, or sweep off a
picture upon a wall, &c. After a while, breath and life was returned
into the form again. Whereupon I saw various streams of light (in
the night) which appeared to the outward eye, and immediately I saw
three hearts (or three appearances) in the form of hearts, of
exceeding brightness; and immediately an innumerable company of
hearts, filling each corner of the room where I was. And methought
there was variety and distinction, as if there had been several
hearts, and yet most strangely unexpressably complicated or folded
up in unity. I clearly saw distinction, diversity, variety, and as
clearly saw all swallowed up into unity. And it hath been my song
many times since, within and without, unity, universality,
universality, unity, Eternal Majesty, &c. And at this vision, a most
strong, glorious voice uttered these words: The spirits of just men
made perfect. The spirits, &c. with whom I had as absolute, clear,
full communion, and in a twofold more familiar way, than ever I had
outwardly with my dearest friends and nearest relations. The visions
and revelations of God and the strong hand of eternal invisible
almightiness was stretched out upon me, within me, for the space of
four days and nights without intermission.
 The time would fail if I would tell you all, but it is not the good
will and pleasure of my most excellent Majesty in me, to declare any
more (as yet) than thus much further: That amongst those various
voices that were then uttered within, these were some: Blood, blood,
Where, where? upon the hypocritical holy heart &c. Another thus:
Vengeance, vengeance, vengeance, Plagues, plagues, upon the
inhabitants of the Earth; Fire, fire, fire, Sword, sword &c. upon
all that bow not down to eternal Majesty, universal love; I'll
recover, recover, my wool, my flax, my money. Declare, declare, fear
thou not the faces of any; I am (in thee) ammunition of rocks &c.
 Go up to London,<Note: It's not being shown to me, what I should
do, more than preach and print something, &c. Very little expecting
I should be so strangely acted, as to my exceeding joy and delight,
I have been, though to the utter cracking of my credit, and to the
rotting of my old name of which it damned, and cut out (as a toad to
the dunghill) that I might have a new name, with me, upon me, within
me, which is, I am——Auxilium Patris> to London, that great City,
write, write, write. And behold I writ, and lo a hand was sent to
me, and a roll of a book was within, which this fleshly hand would
have put wings to, before the time. Whereupon it was snatched out of
my hand, & the Roll thrust into my mouth, and I eat it up, and
filled my bowels with it, (Ezekiel 2:8, &. ch. 3:1,2,3) where it was
bitter as wormwood; and it lay broiling, and burning in my stomach,
till I brought it forth in this form.
 And now I send it flying to thee, with my heart,
And all,
 per AUXILIUM PATRIS
THE CONTENTS
CHAP. 1. Several strange, yet true and seasonable informations to
the great ones. As also an apologetical hint of the author's
principle, &c.
CHAP. 2. Several new, strange, yet seasonable and good advice, and
wholesome admonitions, and the last warning to the great ones, as
from the Lord.
CHAP. 3. Several dismal, doleful cries, & outcries, which Pierce the
ears and heart of his excellent Majesty, and how the King of Kings,
the King of Heaven charges the great ones of the Earth.
CHAP. 4. How the judge of heaven and earth, who judgeth righteous
judgment, passeth sentence against all those great ones, who like
sturdy Oaks & tall Cedars will not bow, and how he intends to break
them, and blow them up by the roots.
CHAP. 5. A most compassionate information, and a most loving and
pathetical warning and advice to London.
CHAP. 6. A terrible word and fatal blow from the Lord upon the
gathered Churches, who pretend most for God, yet defy the Almighty
more than the vilest.
The Second Flying Roll.
CHAP.1. The author's commission to write. A terrible woe denounced
against those that slight the roll. The Lord's claim to all things;
together with a hint of a twofold recovery, where through the most
hypocritical heart shall be ripped up, &c.
CHAP. 2. How the Lord will recover his outward things (things of
this life) as money, corn, wool, flax, &c., and for whom: and how
they shall be plagued that detain them as their own. Wherein also
are some mystical hints concerning Saint Michael's day, and the
Lord's day following it this year; as also of the Dominical letter
D, &c.
CHAP. 3. A strange, yet most true story, under which is couched that
lion, whose a roaring shall make all the beasts of the field
tremble, and all the kingdoms of the world quake.
Wherein also (in part) the subtlety of the well-favoured Harlot is
discovered, and her flesh burnt with that fire which shall burn down
all churches, except that of the firstborn, &c.
CHAP. 4. That the author hath been set as a sign and wonder, &c. as
well as most of the Prophets formerly; as also what strange postures
that divine majesty (that dwells in his form) hath set the form in;
which is the most strange and various effects thereof upon the
spectators. His communion with the spirits of just men made perfect.
And with God the judge of all hinted at.
CHAP. 5. The author's strange and lofty carriage towards great ones,
and his most lowly carriage towards beggars, rogues, prisoners,
gypsies, &c. Together with a large declaration what glory shall
arise up from under all these ashes. The most strange and most
secret and terrible, yet most glorious design of God, in choosing
base things, to confound things that are: and how, a most terrible
vial poured out upon the well-favoured Harlot; and how the Lord is
bringing into contempt not only honourable persons (with a
vengeance) but all honourable holy things also.
 Wholesome advice, with a terrible threat to the Formalists: and how
BASE things have confounded base things: and how base things have
been a fiery chariot to mount the author up into divine glory and
unspeakable Majesty: and how his wife is, & his life is in that
beauty, which maketh visible beauty seem mere deformity.
CHAP. 6. Great ones must bow to the poorest peasants, or else they
shall rue for it; no material sword or human power (whatsoever) but
the pure spirit of universal love, who is the eternal God, can break
the neck of tyranny, oppression, and abominable pride and cruel
murder, &c. A catalogue of several judgments recited, as so many
warring-pieces to appropriators, impropriators, and anti-free
communicants.
CHAP. 7. A further discovery of the subtlety of the well-favoured
Harlot, with a parley between her and the spirit. As also the horrid
villainy that be hid under her smooth words, and sweet tongue (in
pleading against the letter and history, and for the spirit and
Mystery, and all for her own ends) detected. Also upon what account
the spirit is put, and upon what account the letter, &c. And what
true communion, and what the true breaking of bread is.
CHAP. 8. The well-favoured Harlots clothes stripped off, her
nakedness discovered, her nose slit. Her lusting after the young man
void of understanding, from corner to corner, from religion to
religion: and the spirit pursuing, overtaking, and destroying her,
&c.
 With a terrible thunderclap in the close.
A word from the Lord to all the great ones
of the Earth (whom this may concern) being the
last warning piece, &c.
1. The word of the Lord came expressly to me, saying, son of man
write a roll, and these words, from my mouth, to the great ones,
saying, thus saith the Lord:
 Slight not this roll, neither laugh at it, lest I slight you, and 
cause all men to slight and scorn you; lest I destroy you, and laugh
at your destruction, &c.
2. This is, (and with a witness, some of you shall find it, to be)
an edged tool; and there is no jesting with it, or laughing at it.
 It's a sharp sword, sharpened, and also furbished–
 No sleepy dormouse shall dare to creep up the edge of it.
 Thus saith the Lord, you shall find with the witness, that I am now
coming

	{1. Inform	}
to	{2. Advise and warn} You, O ye great ones.
	{3. Charge}
	{4. Judge and sentence	}
CHAP. 1.
Containing several strange, yet true and seasonable informations to
the great ones. As also an apologetical hint of the author's
principle, standing in the front.–
1. Thus saith the Lord, I inform you, that I overturn, overturn,
overturn. And as the bishops, Charles and the Lords have had their
turn, overturn, so your turn shall be next (ye surviving great ones)
by what name or title soever dignified or distinguished whoever you
are that oppose me, the eternal God who am UNIVERSAL LOVE and whose
service is perfect freedom and pure libertinism.
2. <Side Note: An apologetical hint concerning the author's
principle, the result—is negative; he speaks little in the
affirmative because not one in a hundred, yea even of his former
acquaintance, now know him, neither must they yet.>
 But afore I proceed any further, be it known unto you, that
although that excellent majesty which dwells in the writer of this
Roll hath reconciled ALL THINGS to himself, yet this hand which now
writes never drew sword or shed one drop of any man's blood. I am
free from the blood of all men, though (I say) all things are
reconciled to me , the eternal God (IN HIM) yet sword-levelling or
digging-levelling are neither of them his principle.
 Both are as far from his principle as the East is from the West or
the Heavens from the Earth (though, I say, reconciled to both as to
all things else). And though he hath more justice, righteousness,
truth and sincerity shining in those low dung-holes (as they are
esteemed) than in the Sun, Moon and all the stars.
3. I come not forth (in him) either with material sword or mattock,
but now (in this my day?) I make him my sword bearer, to brandish
the sword of the Spirit, as he hath done several days and nights
together through the streets of the great City.
4. And now thus saith the Lord:
Though you as little endure the word LEVELLING as you could the late
slain or dead Charles (your forerunner, who is gone before you?) and
had as lief hear the Devil named as hear of the Levellers (men-
levellers) which is and who (indeed) are but shadows of most
terrible, yet great and glorious good things to come.
5. Behold, behold, behold, I the eternal God, the Lord of Hosts who
am that mighty leveller and coming (yea, even at the doors) to level
in good earnest , to level to some purpose, to level with a witness,
to level the hills with the valleys and to lay the mountains low.
6. High Mountains! Lofty Cedars! It's high time for you to enter
into the rocks, and to hide you in the dust, for fear of the Lord,
and for the glory of his Majesty. For the lofty looks of man shall
be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the
Lord ALONE shall be exalted in that day; for the day of the Lord of
hosts, shall be upon everyone that is proud, and lofty, and upon
everyone that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. And upon
all the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all
the Oaks of Bashan; and upon all the high mountains; and upon all
the hills that are lifted up, and upon every High tower; and upon
every fenced wall; and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all
pleasant pictures.
 And the LOFTINESS of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness
of men shall be laid low. And the Lord ALONE shall be exalted in
that day, and the idols he shall utterly abolish.
 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves
of the Earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his
Majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the Earth.
 In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and idols of
gold——to the bats, and to the moles. To go into the clefts of the
rocks and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the Lord,
and for the glory of his Majesty. For the Lord is now RISEN to shake
terribly the Earth, Isa. 2. 10. to the end of the chapter.
7. Hills! Mountains! Cedars! Mighty men! Your breath is in your
nostrils.
 Those that have admired, adored, idolized, magnified, set you up,
fought for you, ventured goods and good name, limb and life for you,
shall cease from you.
 You shall not at all be accounted of (not one of you) ye sturdy
Oak, who bow not down before eternal majesty, universal love, whose
service is perfect freedom, and who hath put down the mighty
(remember, remember your forerunner) and who is putting down the
mighty from their seats and exalting them of low degree.
8. O let not (for your own sakes) let not the mother of Harlots in
you who is very subtle of heart
 Nor the beast (without you) what do you call 'em? The ministers,
fat parsons, vicars, lecturers &c. (who for their own base ends, to
maintain their pride and pomp, and to fill their own paunches and
purses) have been the chief instruments of all those horrid
abominations, hellish, cruel, devilish persecutions in this Nation,
which cry for vengeance. For your own sakes (I say) let neither the
one nor the other bewitch you or charm your ears, to hear them say,
these things shall not befall you, these Scriptures shall not be
fulfilled upon you, but upon the Pope, Turk and heathen princes &c.
9. Or if any of them should (through subtlety for their own base
ends) creep into that Mystery of that forementioned Scripture (Isa
2.10)
 And tell you, Those words are to be taken in the Mystery only, and
they only point out a spiritual inward levelling. Once more for your
own sakes, I say, believe them not.
10. 'Tis true, the history, or letter, (I speak comparatively) is
but as it were hair cloth; the Mystery is fine flax. My flax, saith
the Lord, and the thief and the robber will steal from me my flax,
to cover his nakedness, that his filthiness may not appear.
 But the hold, I am (now) recovering my flax out of his hand, and
discovering his lewdness——verbum sat——
11. 'Tis true, the Mystery is my joy, my delight and my life.
 And the prime levelling, is laying low the mountains, and levelling
the hills in man.
 But this is not all.
 For lo I come (saith the Lord) with a vengeance, to level also your
honour, riches, &c. To stain the pride of all your glory, and to
bring into contempt all the honourable (both persons and things)
upon the earth. Isa. 23. 9
12. For this honour, nobility, gentility, propriety, superfluity,
&c. hath (without contradiction) been the father of hellish horrid
pride, arrogance, haughtiness, loftiness, murder, malice, of all
manner of wickedness and impiety. Yea, the cause of all the blood
that ever hath been shed——from the blood of the righteous Abel to
the blood of the last Levellers that were shot to death. And now (as
I live saith the Lord) I am come to make inquisition for blood, for
murder and pride, &c.
13. I see the root of it all. The axe is laid to the root of the
tree (by the eternal God, Myself, saith the Lord). I will hew it
down. And as I live, I will plague your Honour, Pomp, Greatness,
Superfluity, and confound it into parity, equality, community; that
the neck of horrid pride, murder, malice, and tyranny, &c. may be
chopped off at one blow. And that myself, the Eternal God, who am
Universal Love, may soon the Earth with universal Love, universal
peace, and perfect freedom; which can never be by human sword or
strength accomplished.
14. Wherefore bow down, bow down, you sturdy Oaks, and tall Cedars;
bow, or by myself I'll break you.
 He cause some of you (on whom I have compassion) to bow &c. and
will terribly plague the rest.
 My little finger shall be heavier on them, than my whole loins were
on Pharaoh of old.
15. And maugre the subtlety and sedulity, the craft and cruelty of
hell and earth, this levelling shall up.
 Not by sword; we (holily) scorn to fight for anything. We had as
lief be dead drunk every day of the week, and lie with whores in the
market place, and account these as good actions as taking the poor,
abused, enslaved ploughman's money from him (who is almost
everywhere undone and squeezed to death, and not so much as that
plaguy, unsupportable, hellish burden and oppression of tithes taken
off his shoulders, notwithstanding all his honesty, fidelity, taxes,
free quarter, petitioning &c. for the same,) we had rather starve, I
say, than take away his money from him for killing of men.
 Nay, if we might have Captain's pay and a good fat parsonage or two
besides, we would scorn to be swordsmen or fight with those mostly
carnal weapons for anything or against anyone or for our livings.
16. No, no, we'll live in despite of our foes; and this levelling
(to thy torment, O mighty man) shall up, not by sword, not by might,
&c. but by my spirit, saith the Lord.
 For I am risen, for I am risen, for I am risen, shake terribly the 
Earth, and not the Earth only, but heavens also, &c.
 But here I shall cease informing you. You may for your further
information (if you please) read my roll to all the rich inhabitants
of the earth.
 Read it if you be wise, I shall now advise you.
CHAP. II
Containing several new, strange, yet seasonable admonitions and good
advice, as the last warning to the Great Ones of the Earth, as from
the Lord.
1. First Admonition to great ones. Sero sapiunt Phryges, sed nunquam
sera est ad bonos mores via. ("The Phrygians became wise too late,
but it is never too late to live morally.")
 Thus saith the Lord: be wise now therefore, O ye rulers, &c. Be
instructed, &c. Kiss the sun, &c. Yea kiss beggars, prisoners, warm
them, feed them, clothe them, money them, relieve them, release
them, take them into your houses, don't serve them as dogs, without
door, &c. 
 Own them, they are flesh of your flesh, your own brethren, your own
sisters, every whit as good (and if I should stand in competition
with you) in some degrees better than yourselves.
2. Once more I say, own them; they are yourself, make someone with
you, or else go howling into hell; howl for the miseries that are
coming upon you, howl.
 The very shadow of levelling, sword-levelling, man-levelling,
frighted you, (and who, like yourselves, can blame you, because it
shook your kingdom?) But now the substantiality of levelling is
coming.
 The eternal God, the mighty Leveller is coming, yea come, even at
the door; and what will you do in that day.
 Repent, repent, repent, bow down, bow down, bow, or howl, resign,
or be damned; bow down, bow down, you sturdy Oaks, and Cedars, bow
down.
 Veil too, and kiss the meaner shrubs. Bow, or else (by myself saith
the Lord) he break you in pieces (some of you) others I will tear up
by the roots; I will suddenly deal with you all, some in one way;
some in another. Wherefore
Each beggar that you meet
Fall down before him, kiss him in the street.
 Once more, he is thy brother, thy fellow, flesh of thy flesh.
 Turn not away thine eyes from thine own FLESH, lest I pull out
thine eyes and throw thee headlong into hell.
3. Mine ears are filled brimful with cries of poor prisoners,
Newgate, Ludgate cries (of late) are seldom out of mine ears. Those
doleful cries, bread, bread, bread for the Lord's sake, pierce mine
ears, and heart, I can no longer forbear.
 Wherefore hye you apace to all prisons in the kingdom.
4. Second Admonition to great ones. Bow before those poor, nasty,
lousy, ragged wretches, say to them, your humble servants, Sirs,
(without a compliment) we let you go free, and serve you, &c.
 Do this, (or as I live saith the Lord) thine eyes (at least) shall
be bored out, and thou carried captive into a strange land.
5. Third admonition to great ones. Give over, give over, thy odious,
nasty, abominable fasting, for strife and debate, and to smite with
the fist of wickedness. And instead thereof, loose the bands of
wickedness, undo the heavy burdens, let the oppressed go free, and
break every yoke. Deal of thy bread to the hungry, and bring the
poor that are cast out (both of houses and synagogues) to thy house.
Cover the naked: hide not thyself from thine own flesh, from a
cripple, a rogue, a beggar, he's thine own flesh. From a
whoremonger, a thief, &c. He's flesh of thy flesh, and his theft,
and whoredom is flesh of thy flesh also, thine own flesh. Thou
mayest have ten times more of each within thee, than he that acts
outwardly in either. Remember, turn not away thine eyes from thine
OWN FLESH.
6. Fourth admonition to great ones. Give over, give over thy
midnight mischief.
 Let branding with the letter B alone.
 Be no longer so horridly, hellishly, imprudently, arrogantly,
wicked, as to judge what is seen, what not, what evil, and what not,
what blasphemy, and what not.
 For thou and all thy Reverend Divines, so-called (who divine for
Tithes, hire, and money, and serve the Lord Jesus Christ for their
own bellies) are ignorant of this one thing.
7. That sin and transgression is finished; it's a mere riddle that
they with all their human learning can never read.
Neither can they understand what pure honour is wrapped up in the
King's motto Honi soit qui mal y pense. Evil to him that evil
thinks.
 Some there are (who are accounted the off-scouring of all things)
who are noble knights of the Garter. Since which——they could see no
evil, think no evil, do no evil, know no evil.
 ALL is religion that they speak and honour that they do.
 But all you that eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and
have not your evil eye picked out, you call good evil, and evil
good; light darkness, and darkness light; truth blasphemy, and
blasphemy truth.
 And you are at this time of your father the Devil, and of your
brother the Pharisee, who still say of Christ (who is now alive) say
we not well that he hath a Devil.
9. Take heed, take heed, take heed.
 Filthy blind Sodomites called Angels men, they seeing no further
than the forms of men.
10. There are Angels (now) come down from heaven, in the shapes and
forms of men, who are full of the vengeance of the Lord; and are to
pour out the plagues of God upon the earth, and to torment the
inhabitants thereof.
 Some of these angels I have been acquainted withal.
 And I have looked upon them as Devils, accounting them Devils
incarnate, and have run from place to place, to hide myself from
them, shunning their company; and have been utterly ashamed when I
have been seen with them.
 But for my labour, I have been plagued and tormented beyond
expression. So that now I had rather behold one of these angels
pouring out the plagues of God, cursing and teaching others to curse
bitterly (Rev. 15, Judges 5, Revel. 10, Neh. 13.25)
	And had rather hear a mighty angel (in man) swearing a full-
mouthed oath, and see the spirit of Nehemiah (in any form of man, or
woman) running upon an unclean Jew (a pretended Saint) and tearing
the hair of his head like a mad man, cursing and making others fall
a-swearing, than hear a zealous Presbyterian, Independent or
spiritual Notionist pray, preach or exercise. (This will come in
request with you next; you may remember that Independency, which is
now so hugged, was counted blasphemy, and banishment was too good
for it.)
11. Well! To the pure all things are pure. God hath so cleared
cursing, swearing, in some, that that which goes for swearing and
cursing in them, is more glorious than praying and preaching in
others.
 And what God hath cleansed, call not thou unclean.
 And if Peter prove a great transgressor of the law, by doing that
which was odious as killing a man; if he at length (though he be
loath at first) eaten that which was common and unclean &c. (I give
but a hint) blame him not, much less lift up a finger against or
plant a hellish ordinance–against him, lest thou be plagued, and
damned to, for thy zeal, blind religion, and fleshly holiness, which
now stinks above ground, though formerly it had a good savour.
12. But O thou holy, zealous, devout, righteous, religious one
(whoever thou art) that seest evil, or any thing unclean; do thou
swear, if thou darest, if it be but (i' faith) I'll throw thee to
hell for it (saith the Lord) and laugh at thy destruction.
 While Angels (in the form of men) shall swear, Heart, Blood,
Wounds, and by the eternal God, &c. in profound purity, and in high
honour, and Majesty.
13. Well! one hint more; there's swearing ignorantly, i'th dark,
vainly, and there is swearing i'th light, gloriously.
 Well! Man of the Earth! Lord Esau! What hast thou to do with those
who swear upon the former account?
 Vengeance is mine, judgment, help, wrath, &c. All is mine (saith
the Lord) dare not thou to set thy foot so impudently and arrogantly
upon one step of my throne: I am judge myself——be wise, give over,
have done——
14. And as for the latter sort of swearing, thou knowest it not when
thou hearest it. It's no new thing for thee to call Christ Beelzebub
and Beelzebub Christ; to call a holy angel a Devil, and a Devil an
Angel.
15. I charge thee (in the name of the eternal God) meddle not with
either, let the tares alone, lest thou pull up the wheat also, woe
be to thee if thou dost. Let both alone (I say) lest thou shouldst
happen of a holy swearing angel, and take a lion by the paw to thine
own destruction.
 Never was there such a time since the words stood, as now is.
 Thou knowest not the strange appearances of the Lord, nowadays.
Take heed, know thou hast been warned.
16. Fifth Admonition to great ones. And whatever thou dost, dip not
thy little finger in blood any more, thou art up to the elbows
already: much soap, yea much nitre cannot cleanse thee, &c. 
 Much more have I to say to thee (saith the Lord) but I will do it
secretly; and dart a quiver full of arrows into thy heart; and I
will now charge thee.
CHAP III.
Containing several dismal, doleful cries, and outcries, which pierce
the ears and heart of his Excellent Majesty, the King of Kings, and
how the King of Heaven chargeth the great ones of the Earth.
1. Thus saith the Lord, be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord; be
silent; O lofty, haughty, great ones of the Earth.
 There are so many Bills of Indictment preferred against thee, that
both heaven and earth blush thereat.
 How long shall I hear the sighs and groans, and see the tears of
poor widows; and hear curses in every corner; and all sorts of
people crying out oppression, oppression, tyranny, tyranny the worst
of tyranny, unheard-of, unnatural tyranny.
 ——O my back, my shoulders. O tithes, excise, taxes, pollings, &c. O
Lord! O Lord God Almighty!
 What, a little finger heavier than former loins?
 What are they engaged my goods, my life, &c., Forsook my dearest
relations, and all for liberty and true freedom, for freedom from
oppression, and more laid on my back, &c.
2. Mine ears are filled brimful with confused noise, cries, and
outcries; O the innumerable complaints and groans that pierce my
heart (through and through) O astonishing complaints.
 Was ever the like ingratitude heard of since the world stood? What!
Best friends, surest friends, slighted, scorned, and that which
cometh from them (in the basest manner) contemned, and some rewarded
with prisons, some with death?
 O the abominable perfidiousness, false heartedness; self-seeking,
self-enriching, and kingdom-depopulating, and devastating, &c.
 These, and divers of the same nature, but the cries of England.
 And can I any longer forbear?
 I have heard, I have heard, the groaning of my people. And now I
come to deliver them saith the Lord.
 Woe be to Pharaoh King of Egypt.
 You Great Ones that are not tacked nor tainted, you may laugh and
sing, whom this hitteth it hitteth. And it shall hit home.
 And this which followeth, all whom are concerned with, by what name
or title soever dignified or distinguished.
3. You mostly hate those (called Levellers) who (for aught you know)
acted as they did, out of the sincerity, simplicity, and fidelity of
their hearts; fearing lest they should come under the notion of
Covenant-breakers, if they did not so act.
 Which is so, then were they most barbarously, unnaturally,
hellishly murdered; and they died martyrs for God and their country.
 And their blood cries vengeance, vengeance, in mine ears, saith the
Lord.
4. Well! Let it be how it will. These Levellers (so called) you
mostly hated, though in outward declarations you owned their tenets
as your own principle. (Once more, know that sword——levelling is not
my principle. I only pronounce the righteous judgments of the Lord
upon the Earth as I durst.)
 So you mostly hate me, saith the Lord (though in outward
declarations you profess me and seem to own me) more than a thousand
whom you despise, who are nearer the kingdom of heaven than
yourselves.
 You have killed Levellers (so-called) you also (with wicked hands)
have slain me the Lord of life, who am now risen, and risen indeed,
(and you shall know, and feel it with a witness) to level you in
good earnest. And to lay low all high hills, and every mountain that
is high, and lifted up, &c.
5. Well! Once more, read Jam 5. 1 to 7——ye have killed the just——ye
have killed, ye have killed, ye have killed the just.
 The blood crieth in mine ears, vengeance, vengeance, vengeance,
vengeance is mine, I will recompense.
 Well! What will you do with Bray, and the poor prisoners elsewhere?
You know not what you do.
 You little know what will become of you.
 One of you had best remember your dream about your father's Moule——
6. Neither do I forget the one hundred spent in superfluous dishes
(at your late Greater London feast, for I know what——) when hundreds
of poor wretches died with hunger.
 I have heard a sound in mine ears, that no less than a hundred died
in one week, pined, and starved with hunger.
 How will you great ones, for all that feast-day's dole, &c. hear
your doom.
CHAP IV.
How the judge of heaven and earth, who judgeth righteous judgment,
passeth sentence against all those great ones, who (like Oaks and
tall Cedars) will not bow. And how he intends to blow them up by the
roots.
1. Thus saith the Lord: all you tall Cedars, and sturdy Oaks, who
bow not down, who bow not down——this sentence is gone out of my
mouth against you, MENE, MENE, TEKEL.
 Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.
 God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it.
 And thou, and all the join with thee, or are (in the least degree)
accessory to thy former, or like intended pranks, shall most
terribly and most strangely be plagued.
2. There is a little spark lies under (that huge heap of ashes) all
thine honour, pomp, pride, wealth, and riches, which shall utterly
consume all that is uppermost, as it is written.
 The Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall send among his fat ones,
leanness; and under his glory he should kindle a burning, like the
burning of the fire, and the light of Israel shall be for a fire,
and his holy one for flame, and shall burn and devour his thorns,
and his briars in one day.
 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful
field, both soul and body (i.e. this shall be done inwardly and
outwardly, and shall be fulfilled both in the history and mystery)
and the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a child
may write them.
 And the Lord, the Lord of hosts, shall lop the bough with terror,
and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the haughty
shall be humbled. And you shall cut down the thickets of the forest
with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one, Isa. 10.
3. Behold, behold, I have told you.
 Take it to heart, else you'll repent of every vein of your heart.
 For your own sakes take heed.
 It's my last warning.
 For the cries of the poor, for the oppression of the needy.
 For the horrid insolency of proud man, who will dare to sit in my
throne, and judge unrighteous judgment.
 Who will dare to touch mine anointed, and do my prophets harm.
 For these things sake (now) I am arisen, saith the Lord
 In Auxilium Patris
CHAP V
1. O London, London, my bowels are rolled together (in me) for thee,
and my compassions within me are kindled towards thee.
 And now I only tell thee that it was not in vain that this form
hath been brought so far to thee, to proclaim the day of the Lord
throughout thy streets, day and night, for twelve or thirteen days
together.
 And that I have made such a sign and a wonder before many of thine
inhabitants' faces.
2. Many of them, (among other strange exploits,) beholding me fall
down flat at the feet of cripples, beggars, lazars , kissing their
feet, and resigning up my money to them; being several times over-
emptied of money that I have not had one penny left, and yet have
recruited again?
3. And now my heart! You have been forwardly in all the appearances
of God,
 There is a strange one (now on foot) judge it not, lest you be
judged with a vengeance.
4. Turn not away your eyes from it, lest you (to your torment) hear
this voice——I was a stranger, and you took me not in.
 Well! Bow down before eternal Majesty, who is universal love, bow
down to equality, or free community, that no more of your blood be
spilt; that pride, arrogance, covetousness, malice, hypocrisy, self-
seeking, &c. may live no longer. Else I tremble at what's coming
upon you.
 Remember you have been warned with a witness.
 Dear hearts farewell.

CHAP VI
 1. He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the spirit saith
against the churches.
 Thus saith the Lord: woe be to thee Bethaven (The house of vanity)
who call us thyself by the name Bethel (the house of God.), it shall
be more tolerable (now in the day of judgment,) for Tyre and Sidon,
for those whom thou accountest, and callest heathens, than from
thee.
2. And thou proud Lucifer, who exaltest thyself above all the stars
of God in Heaven, shalt be brought down into hell; it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, for drunkards and whoremongers,
than for thee. Publicans and Harlots shall, publicans and Harlots do
sooner enter into the kingdom of heaven, than you.
 I'll give thee this fatal blow, and leave thee.
3. Thou hast affronted, and defied the Almighty, more than the
vilest of men (upon the face of the earth) and that so much the
more, by how much the more thou takest upon thee the name of Saint,
and assumest it to thyself only, damning all those that are not of
thy Sect.
4. Wherefore be it known to all tongues, kindred, nations and
languages upon Earth, That my most excellent majesty, the King of
glory, the eternal God, who dwelleth in the form of the writer of
this Roll (among many other strange and great exploits) hath in the
open streets, with his hand fiercely stretched out, his hat cocked
up, his eyes set as if they would sparkle out, and with a mighty
loud voice, charged 100 of coaches, 100 of men and women of the
greatest rank, and many notorious, deboist, swearing, roistering,
roaring Cavaliers (so called) and other wild sparks of the gentry,
and have proclaimed the notable day of the Lord to them. And that
through the streets of the great City and in Southwark. Many times
great multitudes following him up and down, and this for the space
of 12 or 13 days: And yet (all this while,) not one of them lifting
up one finger, not touching one hair of his head or laying one hand
on his raiment.
 But many, yea, many notorious vile ones in the esteem of men (yea,
of great quality among men) trembling and bowing to the God of
Heaven, &c.
 But when I came to proclaim (also) the great day of the Lord (among
you) O ye carnal Gospellers.
 The Devil (in you) roared out who was tormented to some purpose,
though not before his time.
 He there showed both his fangs and paws and would have torn me to
pieces and have eaten me up. Thy pride, envy, malice, arrogance &c.
was poured out like a river of brimstone, crying out, a blasphemer,
a blasphemer, away with him: At length threatening me, and being at
last raving mad, some took hold of my coat on one side, some on
another, endeavouring to throw me from the place where I stood (to
proclaim his Majesty's message) making a great uproar in a great
congregation of people: Till at length I wrapped up myself in
silence (for a season) for the well-favoured Harlot's confusion &c.
 And to thine eternal shame and damnation (O mother of witchcraft
who dwelleth in gathered churches) let this be told abroad. And let
her FLESH be burnt with FIRE.
 Amen, Hallelujah.
FINIS
A SECOND 
Fiery Flying Roll
TO
All the inhabitants of the earth; specially to the rich ones.
OR,
A sharp sickle, thrust in, to gather the clusters of the vines of
the Earth, because her grapes are (now) fully ripe. And the great,
notable, terrible, (yet glorious and joyful) day of the LORD is
come; even the Day of the Lord's recovery and discovery. Wherein the
secrets of all hearts are ripped up; and the secret of little unease
of the holy whore, the well-favoured Harlot (who scorns carnal
ordinances, and is mounted up into the notion of spirituals) is
discovered: and even her flesh burning with unquenchable fire. And
the pride of all glory staining.
Together with the narration of various, strange, yet true stories:
and several secret mysteries, and mysterious secrets, which never
were afore written or printed.
As also, that most strange appearance of eternal wisdom, and
unlimited Almightiness, in choosing base things: and why, and how he
chooseth them. And how (most miraculously) they (even base things)
have been, are, and shall be made fiery chariots, to mount up some
into divine glory, and unspotted beauty and majesty. And the glory
that ariseth up from under them is confounding both heaven and
earth. With the word (by way of preface) dropping in as an inlet to
the new Jerusalem.
These being some things of what are experimented.
Per AUXILIUM PATRIS
Howl, rich men, for the miseries that are (just now) coming upon
you, the rust of your silver is rising up in judgment against you,
burning your flesh like fire, &c.
And now I am come to recover my corn, my wool, and my flax, which
thou hast (thievishly and hoggishly) detained from me, the Lord God
Almighty, in the poor and needy.
Also howl thou holy whore, thou well-favoured Harlot: for God, and
I, have chosen base things to confound thee, and things that are.
And the secrets of all hearts are now revealing by my gospel, who am
a stranger, and besides myself, to God, for your sakes. Wherefore
receive me, &c. Else expect that dismal doom, depart from me ye
cursed, I was a stranger, and ye took me not in.
Printed in the year 1649
CHAP 1.
The author's commission to write, a terrible woe denounced against
those that slight the roll. The Lord's claim to all things; together
with a hint of a two-fold recovery, wherethrough the most
hypocritical heart shall be ripped up, &c.
1. The word of the Lord came expressly to me, saying, write, write,
write.
2. And ONE stood by me, and pronounced all these words to me with
his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in this paper.
3. Wherefore in the name and power of the eternal God, I charge thee
burn it not, tear it not, for if thou dost, I would tear thee to
pieces (saith the Lord) and none shall be able to deliver thee; for
(as I live) it is the day of my vengeance.
4. Read it through, and laugh not at it, if thou dost I'll destroy
thee, and laugh at thy destruction.
5. Thus saith the Lord, though I have been a great while in coming,
yet I am now come to recover my corn, and I will, and my flax, &c.
And to discover thy lewdness, Hos. 2.
 Thou art cursed with a curse, for thou hast robbed me (saith the
Lord) of my corn, my wool, my flax, &c. Thou hast robbed me of my
tithes, for the tithes are mine, Mal. 3. And the beasts on a
thousand hills, yea all thy bags of money, hay-ricks, horses, yea
all that thou callest thine own are mine.
6. And now I am come to recover them all at my hands, saith the
Lord, for it is the day of my recovery, and the day of my discovery,
&c. And there is a twofold recovery of 2 sorts of things, inward,
and outward, or civil, and religious, and through both, and grand
discovery of the secrets of the most hypocritical heart, and ripping
up of the bowels of the well-favoured Harlot, the holy whore, who
scorns that which is called profaneness, wickedness, looseness, or
libertinism, and yet herself is the mother of witchcraft, and of all
the abominations of the Earth.
 But more of this hereafter.
7. For the present, I say, thus saith the Lord, I am come to recover
all my outward, or civil rights, or goods, which thou callest thine
own.

CHAP 2.
How the Lord will recover his outward things (things of this life)
as money, corn, &c., and for whom: and how they shall be plagued
that detain them as their own. Wherein also are some mystical hints
concerning Michaelmas day, and the Lord's day following it this
year; as also of the Dominical letter D, this year.
1. And the way that I will walk in (in this great notable and
terrible day of the Lord) shall be thus. I will either (strangely, &
terribly, to thy torment) inwardly, or else (in a way that I will
not acquaint thee with) outwardly, demand all mine, and will say on
this wise.
2. Thou hast many bags of money, and behold now I come as a thief in
the night, with my sword drawn in my hand, and like a thief as I
am,——I say deliver your purse, deliver sirrah! Deliver or I'll cut
thy throat!
3. Deliver MY money to such as poor despised Maule of Dedington in
Oxonshire <Note: for some special reason this poor wretch is here
instanced.> Whom some Devils incarnate (insolently and proudly, in
way of disdain) cry up for a fool, some for a knave, and madman,
some for an idle fellow, and base rogue, and some (trulier than they
are aware of) for a prophet, and some arrogant fools (though
exceeding wise) cry up for more knave than fool, &c. when as indeed,
there is pure royal blood runs through his veins, and he's no less
than a King's son, though not one of you who are Devils incarnate; &
have your eyes blinded with the God of this world, know it.
4. I say (once more) deliver, deliver, my money which thou hast to
him, and to poor cripples, lazars, yea to rogues, thieves, whores,
and cut-purses, who are flesh of thy flesh, and every whit as good
as thyself in mine eye, who are ready to starve in plaguy gaols, and
nasty dungeons, or else for myself, saith the Lord, I would torment
thee day and night, inwardly, or outwardly, or both ways, my little
finger shall shortly be heavier on thee, especially on thee thou
holy, righteous, religious Appropriator, than my loins were on
Pharaoh and the Egyptians in time of old; you shall weep and howl
for the miseries that suddenly coming upon you; for your riches are
corrupted, &c. and whilst impropriated, appropriated the plague of
God is in them.
5. The plague of God is in your purses, barns, houses, horses,
murrain will take your hogs, O (ye fat swine of the Earth) who shall
shortly go to the knife, and be hung up i'th roof, except——blasting,
mildew, locusts, caterpillars, yea fire your houses and goods, take
your corn and fruit, the moth your garments, and the rots your
sheep, did you not see my hand, this last year stretched out?
 You did not see.
 My hand is stretched out still.
 Your gold and silver, though you can't see it, is cankered, the
rust of them is a witness against you, and suddenly, suddenly,
suddenly, because by the eternal God, myself, it's the dreadful day
of judgment, saith the Lord, shall eat your flesh as it were fire,
Jam. 5. 1. to 7.
 The rust of your silver, I say, should eat your flesh as it were
fire.
6. As sure as it did mine the very next day after Michael the
Archangel's, that mighty angel, who just now fights that terrible
battle in heaven with the great Dragon.
 And is come upon the Earth also, to rip up the hearts of all bag-
bearing Judases. On this day purses shall be caught, goats led out,
men stabbed to the heart, women's bellies ripped up, specially
gammer Demase's, who have forsaken us, and embraced this wicked
world, and married Alexander the coppersmith, who have done me much
evil. The Lord reward him, I wish him hugely well, as he did me, on
the next day after Michael the Archangel.
 Which was the Lord's day I am sure on't, look in your Almanacs, you
shall find it was the Lord's day, or else I would you could; when
you must, when you see it, you will find the dominical letter to be
G. and there are many words that begin with G. at this time (GIVE)
begins with G. Give, give, give, give up, give up your houses,
horses, goods, gold, lands, give up, account nothing your own, have
ALL THINGS in common, or else the plague of God will rot and consume
all that you have.
 By God, by myself, saith the Lord, it's true.
 Come! Give all to the poor and follow me, and you shall have
treasure in heaven. Follow me, who was numbered among transgressors,
and whose village was more marred than any man's, follow me.

CHAP III.
A strange, yet most true story: under which is couched that lion,
whose roaring shall make all the beasts of the field tremble, and
all the kingdoms of the world quake. Wherein also (in part) the
subtlety of the well-favoured Harlot is discovered, and her flesh
burnt with that fire, which shall burn down all churches, except
that of the first born, &c.
1. Follow me, who, last Lord's day Septem. 30. 1649 met him in open
field, a most strange deformed man, clad with patched clouts: who
looking wishly on me, mine eye pitied him; and my heart, or the day
of the Lord, which burned as an oven in me, set my tongue on flame
to speak to him, as followeth.
2. How now friend, art thou poor?
 He answered, yea master very poor.
 Whereupon my bowels trembled within me, and quivering fell upon the
worm eaten chest, (my corps I mean) that I could not hold a joint
still.
 And my great love within me, (who is the great God within that
chest, or corps) was burning hot toward him; and made of the lock
all of the chest, to which the mouth of the corps, again to open:
thus.
 Art poor?
 Yea, very poor, said he.
 Whereupon the strange woman who, flatterers with her lips, and is
subtle of heart, said within me,
 It's a poor wretch, give him two-pence.
 But my EXCELLENCY and MAJESTY (in me) scorned her words, confounded
her language; and kicked her out of his presence.
3. But immediately the WELL-FAVOURED HARLOT (whom I carried a not
upon my horse behind me) but who rose up on me, said:
 It's a poor wretch give him 6d. and that's enough for a squire or
knight, to give to one poor body.
 Besides (saith the holy Scripturian whore) he is worse than an
infidel that provides not for his own family.
 True love begins at home, &c.
 Thou, and my family are fed, as the young ravens strangely, though
thou hast been a constant preacher, yet thou hast abhorred both
tithes and hire; and thou know us not aforehand who will give you
the worth of a penny.
 Have a care of the main chance.
4. And thus she flattereth with her lips, and her words being
smoother than oil; and her lips dropping as the honeycomb, I was
fired to hasten my hand into my pocket; and pulling out a shilling,
said to the poor wretch here give me sixpence, here's a shilling for
thee.
 He answered, I cannot, I have never a penny.
 Whereupon I said, I would fain have given thee something if thou
couldest have changed my money.
 Then saith he, God bless you.
 Whereupon with much reluctancy, with much love, and with amazement
(of the right stamp) I turned my horse head from him, riding away.
But a while after I was turned back (being advised by my Demilance)
to wish him called for sixpence, which I would leave at the next
town at one's house, which I thought he might know (Saphira like)
keeping back part.
 But (as God judged me) I, as she, was struck down dead.
 And behold the plague of God fell into my pocket; and the rust of
my silver rose up in judgment against me, and consumed my flesh as
with fire: so that I, and my money perished with me, I being cast
into the lake of fire and brimstone.
 And all the money I had about me to a penny (though I thought
through the instigation of my quondam mistress to have reserved
some, having rode about 8 miles, not eating one mouthful of bread
that day, and had drunk but one small draught of drink; and had
between 8 or 9 miles more to ride, ere I came to my journey's end:
my horse being lame, the ways dirty, it raining all the way, and I
not knowing what extraordinary occasion I might have for money.) Yet
(I say) the rust of my silver did so rise up in judgment against me,
and burnt my flesh like fire: and the 5 of James thundered such an
alarm in mine ears, that I was fain to cast all I had into the hands
of him, whose visage was more marred than any man's that ever I saw.
 This is a true story, most true in the history.
 It's also true in the mystery.
 And there are deep ones couched under it, for it's a shadow of
various, glorious, (though strange) good things to come.
7. Well! To return——after I had thrown my rusty cankered money into
the poor wretch's hands, I rode away from him, being filled with
trembling joy, and amazement, feeling the sparkles of a great glory
rising up from under these ashes.
 After this, I was made (by that divine power which dwellest in this
Ark, or chest) to turn my horse head——whereupon I beheld this poor
deformed wretch, looking earnestly after me: and upon that, was made
to put off my hat, and bow to him seven times, and was (as that
strange posture) filled with trembling and amazement, some sparkles
of glory arising up also from under this; as also from under these
ashes, yet I rode back once more to the poor wretch, saying, because
I am a King, I have done this, which you need not tell any one.
The day's our own.
This was done on the last LORD'S DAY, Septem. 30. in the year 1649,
which is the year of the Lord's recompenses for Zion, and the day of
his vengeance, the dreadful day of judgment. But I have done (for 
the present) with this story, for it is the latter end of the year
1649.

CHAP. IV.
How the author hath been set as a sign and wonder, as well as most
of the Prophets formerly. As also what strange postures that divine
majesty that dwells in his form, hath set the form in; which is the
most strange and various effects thereof upon the spectators. His
communion with the spirits of just men made perfect, and with God
the judge of all, hinted at.
1. It is written in your Bibles, Behold I and the children whom the
Lord hath given me, or for signs and for wonders in Israel, from the
Lord of Hosts, which dwellest in Mount Sion, Isa. 8. 18.
 And amongst those who are set thus, Ezekiel seems to be higher than
the rest by the shoulders upwards, and was more seraphical than his
predecessors, yet he was the son of Buzi (Ezek. 1.) Which being
interpreted is the son of contempt; it pleases me (right well) that
I am his brother, a son of Buzi.
2. He saw (and I in him see) various strange visions; and he was,
and I am set in several strange pastures.
 Amongst many of his pranks——this was one, he shaves all the hair
off his head: and of his beard, then weighs them in a pair of
scales; burns one part of them in the fire, another part he smites
about with a knife, another part thereof he scatters in the wind,
and a few he binds up in his skirts, &c. And this not in a corner,
or in a chamber, but in the midst of the streets of the great city
Jerusalem, and the man all this while neither mad nor drunk, &c.
Ezek. 5. 1.2.3,4 &c. As also in several other chapters among the
rest, Chap. 12. 3. &c. Chap. 4. 3. Chap. 24. 3. to the end. This
Ezekiel (to whose spirit I am come, and to an innumerable company of
Angels, and to God the judge of all.)
3. (I say) this great courtier in the High Court of the highest
heavens, is the son of Buzi, a child of contempt on Earth, and set
as a sign and wonder (as was Hosea, who went into a whore, &c.) Hos.
2. When he (I say) was playing some of his pranks, the people said
to him, which though not tell us what these things are to us, but
thou dost do, Ezek. 24. 19. with the 3. Verse and so forwards, when
he was strangely acted by that omnipotentcy dwelling in him; and my
that eternal, immortal, INVISIBLE (indeed) Majesty, the only wise
God, who dwells in this invisible form, the writer of this roll,
(who to his joy) is numbered among transgressors.
4. The same most excellent Majesty (in this form) had set the form
in many strange postures lately, to the joy and refreshment of some,
both acquaintances and strangers, to the wonderment and amazement of
others; and to the great torment of the chiefest of the sects of
professors; who have gone about to shake off their plagues and if
they could, some by crying out he's mad, he's drunk, he's fallen
from grace, and some by scandalising, &c. And only one, whom I was
told of, by threats of caning or cudgelling, who meeting me full
with face, was ashamed and afraid to look on me, &c.
5. But to waive all this.
 Because the Sun begins to peep out, and it's a good while past
daybreak, I'll creep forth (a little) into the mystery of the former
history, and into the inside of that strange outside business.

CHAP. V.
The author's strange and lofty carriage towards great ones, and his
most lowly carriage towards beggars, rogues, and gypsies: together
with a large declaration what glory shall arise up from under all
this ashes. The most strange and most secret and terrible, yet most
glorious design of God, in choosing base things, to confound things
that are. And how. A most terrible vial poured out upon the well-
favoured Harlot; and how the Lord is bringing into contempt not only
honourable persons, with a vengeance, but all honourable, holy
things also. Wholesome advice, with a terrible threat to the
formalists. How base things have confounded base things: and how
base things have been a fiery chariot to mount the author up into
divine glory &c. And how his wife is, and his life is in, that
beauty, which makes all visible beauty seem mere deformity.
1. And because I am found of those that sought me not. And because
some say, wilt thou not tell us what these things are to us, that
thou dost so?
 Wherefore waiving my charging so many coaches, so many hundreds of
men and women of the greater rank, in the open streets, with my hand
stretched out, my hat cocked up, staring on them as if I would look
through them, gnashing with my teeth at some of them, and day and
night with a huge loud voice proclaiming the day of the Lord
throughout London and Southwark, and leaving divers other exploits,
&c. It is my goodwill and pleasure (only) to single out the former
story with its parallels.
2. (Viz.) In clipping, hugging, embracing, kissing a poor deformed
wretch in London, who had no more knows on his face, than I have on
the back of my hand, (but only two little holes in the place where
the nose uses to stand.)
 And no more eyes to be seen than on the back of my hand, and
afterwards running back to him in a strange manner, with my money
give yet to him, to the joy of some, to the affrightment and
wonderment of other spectators.
3. As also in falling down flat upon the ground before rogues,
beggars, cripples, halt, maimed, blind, &c. kissing the feet of
many, rising up again and giving them money, &c. Besides that
notorious business with the gypsies and gaolbirds (mine own brethren
and sisters, flesh of my flesh, and as good as the greatest Lord in
England) at the prison in Southwark near St George's Church.
 Now that which arises up from under all this heap of ashes, will
fire both heaven and earth; the one's ashamed, and blushes already,
the other reels to and fro, like a drunken man.
4. Wherefore thus saith the Lord, Hear O heavens, and Harken O
Earth, I'll overturn, overturn, overturn, I am now astining the
pride of all glory, and blinking into contempt all the honourable of
the Earth, Esa. 23. 9. Not only honourable persons, (who shall come
down with a vengeance, if they bow not to universal love the eternal
God, whose service is perfect freedom) but honourable things, as
Elderships, Pastorships, Fellowships, Churches, Ordinances, Prayers,
&c. Holinesses, Righteousnesses, religions of all sorts, of the
highest strains; yea, Mysterians, and Spiritualists, who scorn
carnal Ordinances, &c.
 I am about my act, my strange act, my work, my strange work, that
whoever hears of it, both his ears shall tingle.
5. I am confounding, plaguing, tormenting nice, demure, barren
Mical, with David's unseemly carriage, by skipping, leaping,
dancing, like one of the fools; violent, base fellows, shamelessly,
basely, and uncovered too, before handmaids,——
 Which thing was S. Paul's tutor, or else it prompted him to write,
God has chosen BASE things, and things that are despised, to
confound——the things are.——
 Well! Family duties are no base things, they are things that ARE:
Churches, Ordinances, &c. Are no BASE things, though indeed
Presbyterian Churches begin to live i'th womb, but died there, and
rotten stink there to the death of the mother and child. Amen. Not
by the Devil, but (by God that's a base thing) it's true.
 Grace before meat and after meat, are no BASE things; these are
things that ARE. But how long Lord, holy and true, &c.
 Fasting for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness,——(and not for taking off heavy burdens, breaking every
yoke, Esa. 58.) And thanksgiving days for killing of men for money,
I know BASE things, these are things that ARE.
 Starting up into the notion of spirituals, scorning history,
speaking nothing but Mystery, crying down Carnal ordinances &c. is a
fine thing among many, it's no base thing (nowadays) though it be a
cloak for covetousness, yea, though it be to maintain pride and
pomp; these are no base things.
6. These are things that ARE, and must be confounded by BASE things,
which S. Paul said, not God has connived at, winked at, permitted,
tolerated, but God hath CHOSEN &c. BASE things.
 What base things? Why Mical took David for a base fellow, and
thought he had chosen BASE things, in dancing shamelessly uncovered
before handmaids.
 And a barren, demure Mical thinks (for I know her heart saith the
Lord) that I chose base things when I sat down, and eat and drank
around on the ground with gypsies, and clipped, hugged and kissed
them, putting my hand in their bosoms, loving the gypsies dearly. O
base! Saith mincing Mical, the least spark of modesty would be as
red as crimson or scarlet, to hear this.
 I warrant me, Mical could better have borne this if I had done it
to ladies: so I can for a need, if it be my will, and that in the
height of honour and Majesty, without sin. But at that time when I
was hugging the gypsies, I abhorred the thoughts of ladies, their
beauty could not bewitch mine eyes, or snare my lips, or entangle my
hands in their bosoms; yet I can if it be my will, kiss and hug
ladies, and love my neighbour's wife as myself, without sin.
7. But thou Precisian, by what name or title soever dignified, or
distinguished, who would blow a kiss to thy neighbour's wife, or
dare to think of darting one glance of one of thy eyes towards her
if thou darest.
 It's meat and drink to an Angel (who knows none evil, no sin) to
swear a full mouthed oath, Rev. 10. 6. It's joy to Nehemiah to come
in like a madman, and pluck folks' hair off their heads, and curse
like a Devil——and make them swear by God,——Nehem. 13. Do thou O holy
man (who knowest evil) lift up thy finger against a Jew, a church-
member, call thy brother fool, and with a peasecod on him; or swear
i'faith if thou darest, if thou dost, thou shalt howl in hell for
it, and I will laugh at thy calamity, &c.
8. But once more hear O heavens, hearken O Earth, thus saith the
Lord, I have chosen such base things, to confound things that are,
that the ears of those (who scorn to be below independence, yea the
ears of many who scorn to be so low as Carnal Ordinances, &c.) that
hear thereof shall tingle.
9. Hear one word more (whom it hitteth it hitteth) give over thy
base nasty thinking, formal grace before meat, and after meat (I
call it so, though thou hast re-baptised it——) give over thy
stinking family duties, and by Gospel Ordinances as thou callest
them; for under them all there lies snapping, snarling, biting,
besides covetousness, horrid hypocrisy, envy, malice, evil
surmising.
10. Give over, give over, or if nothing else will do it, I'll at a
time, when thou least of all thinkest of it, make thine own child
the fruit of thy loins, in whom thy soul delighted, lie with a
whore——before thine eyes: that that plaguy holiness and
righteousness of thine might be confounded by that base thing. And
thou be plagued back again into thy mother's womb, the womb of
eternity: but thou mayest become a little child, and let the mother
Eternity, Almightiness, who is universal love, and whose service is
perfect freedom, dress thee, and undress thee, swaddle, unswaddle,
bind, loose, lay thee down, take thee up, &c.
 ——And to such a little child, undressing is as good as dressing,
foul clothes, as good as fair clothes——he knows none evil, &c.——And
shall see evil no more,——but he must first lose all his
righteousness, every bit of his holiness, and every crumb of his
religion, and be plagued, and confounded (by base things) into
nothing.
By base things which God and I have chosen.
11. And yet I show you a more excellent way, when you have passed
this.——In a word, my plaguy, filthy, nasty holiness hath been
confounded by base things. And then (behold I assure you a Mystery,
and put forth a riddle to you) by base things, base things so-called
have been confounded also; and thereby have I been confounded into
eternal Majesty, unspeakable glory, my life, myself.
12. There's my riddle, but because neither all the Lords of the
Philistines no nor my Delilah herself can read it,
 I'll read it myself, I'll (only) hint it thus.
 Kisses are numbered amongst transgressors——base things——well! By
base hellish swearing, and cursing (as I have accounted it in the
time of my fleshly holiness) and by base impudent kisses (as I then
accounted them) my plaguy holiness hath been confounded, and thrown
into the lake of fire and brimstone.
 And then again, by wanton kisses, kissing hath been confounded; and
eternal kisses, have been made fiery chariots, to mount me swiftly
into the bosom of him whom my soul loves, (his excellent Majesty,
the King of glory.)
 Where I have been, where I have been, where I have been, hugged,
embraced, and kissed with the kisses of his mouth, whose loves are
better than wine, and have been utterly overcome therewith, beyond
expression, beyond admiration.
13. Again, lust is numbered amongst transgressors——a base thing.——
 Now fair objects attract spectator' s eyes.
 And beauty is the father of lust or love.
 Well! I have gone along the streets impregnant with that child
(lust) which a particular beauty had begot: but coming to the place,
where I expected to have been delivered, I have providentially met
there a company of Devils in appearance, though Angels with golden
vials, in reality, powering out full vials, of such odious
abominable words, that are not lawful to be uttered.
 Words enough to deafen the ears of plaguy holiness.
 And such horrid abominable actions, the sight whereof were enough
to put out holy man's eyes, and strike him stark dead, &c.
 These base things (I say) words and actions, have confounded and
plagued to death, the child in the womb that I was so big of.
14 And by, and through these BASE things (as upon the wings of the
wind) have I been carried up into the arms of my love, which is
invisible glory, eternal Majesty, purity itself, and unspotted
beauty, even that beauty which maketh all other beauty but mere
ugliness, when set against it, &c.
 Yea, could you imagine that the quintessence of all visible beauty,
should be extracted and made up into one huge beauty, it would
appear to be mere deformity to that beauty, which through BASE
things I have been lifted up into.
 Which transcendent, unspeakable, unspotted beauty, is my crowning
joy, my life and love: and though I have chosen, and cannot be
without BASE things to confound some in mercy, some in judgment,
though also I have concubines without number, which I cannot be
without, yet this is my spouse, my love, my dove, my fair one. Now I
proceed to that which follows.
CHAP. VI.
Great ones must bow to the poorest peasants, or else they must rue
for it.
 No material sword or human power whatsoever, but the pure spirit of
universal love, which is the eternal God, can break the neck of
tyranny, oppression, abominable pride and cruel murder, &c. A
catalogue of several judgments recited——as so many warning-pieces to
appropriators, impropriators, and anti-free-communicants, &c. The
strongest, yea purest propriety that may plead most privilege shall
suddenly be confounded.
1. Again, thus saith the Lord, I in thee, who am eternal Majesty,
bowed down thy form, to deformity.
 And I in thee, who am durable riches, commanded thy perishable
silver to the poor, &c.
 Thus saith the Lord.
 Kings, Princes, Lords, great ones, must bow to the poorest
Peasants; which men must look to pull rogues, or else they'll rue
for it.
 This must be done two ways.
 You shall have one short dark hint.
 Wil. Sedgewick (in me) bowed to that poor deformed ragged wretch,
that he might enrich him, in impoverishing himself.
 He shall gain him, and be no great loser himself, &c.
2. Well! We must all bow, and bow, &c. And MEUM must be converted.——
It is but yet very little while; and you shall not say that aught
that you possess is your own, &c. Read Acts. 2. towards the end,
CHAP. 4. 31. to the end, with CHAP. 5. 1. 2. to the 12.
 It's but yet a little while, and the strongest, yea the seemingly
purest propriety, which may mostly plead privilege and prerogative
from Scripture, and carnal reason; shall be confounded and plagued
into community and universality. And there's a most glorious design
in it: and equality, community, and universal love; shall be in
request to the utter confounding of abominable pride, murder,
hypocrisy, tyranny and oppression, &c. The necks whereof can never
be chopped off, or these villains ever hanged up, cut off by
material sword, by human might, power, or strength, but by the pure
spirit of universal love, who is the God whom all the world (of
Papists, Protestants, Presbyterians, Independents, Spiritual
Notionists, &c.) ignorantly worship.
3. The time is coming, yea now is, that you shall not dare to say,
your silver or gold is your own.
 It's the Lord's.
 You shall not say it is your own, lest the rust thereof rise up in
judgment against you, and burn your flesh as it were fire.
 Neither shall you dare to say, your ox, or your ass is your own.
 It's the Lord's.
 And if the Lord have a need of an ass he shall have him.
 Or if 2 of his disciples should come to unloose him, I will not
(for a 1000 worlds) call them thieves, lest the ass should beat my
brains out, my bread is not mine own, it's the Lord's.
 And if a poor rogue should ask for it——the Lord has need of it——he
should have it, lest it should stick in my throat and choke me one
way or other.
4. Once more, Impropriators! Appropriators! Go to, weep and howl,
&c. Jam. 5. 1. to the 7. The rust of your silver shall rise (is
rising up) against you, burning your flesh as it were fire, &c.
 That is (in a word) a secret, yet sharp, terrible, unexpected, and
unsupportable plague, is rising up from under all, that you call
your own, when you go to count your money, you shall verily think
the Devil stands behind you, to tear you in pieces: you shall not
put bread in your mouths, but the curse shall come along with it,
and choke you one way or other. All your former sweets shall be
mingled with gall and wormwood: I give you but a hint.
 It's the last days.
5. Well! Do what you will or can, know you have been warned. It is
not for nothing that the Lord with the strong wind cut off (as with
a sickle) the fullest, fairest ears of corn this harvest, and
droppeds them on purpose for the poor, who had as much right to
them, as those that (impudently and wickedly, thievishly and
hoggishly) style themselves the owners of the land.
6. It's not for nothing that such various strange kinds of worms,
grubs, and caterpillars (my strong host, saith the Lord of Hosts)
have been sent into some grain: neither is in vain, that I the Lord
sent the rot among so many sheep this last year; if they had been
resigned to me, and you had kept a true communion, they had not been
given up to that plague.
7. It's not in vain that so many towns and houses have been lately
fired over the heads of the inhabitants: neither is it in vain, that
I the Lord fired the barning and ricks of a miser in Worcestershire
(this year) the very same day that he brought in his own, as he
accounted it.
 On the very same day (I say) his barning and ricks were fired down
to the very ground, though multitudes of very expert men in the
employment came to quench it.
 Of this the writer of this Scroll was an eye-witness.
8. Impropriators! Appropriators! Misers! A fair warning. More of you
shall be served with the same sauce.
 Others of you I'll deal withal in another way more terrible than
this, saith the Lord till you resign.——
 Misers! 'Specially you holy Scripturian Misers, when you would say
grace before and after meat, read James 5. 1. to 7. & Hosea 2. 8, 9,
10.
CHAP. VII.
A further discovery of the subtlety of the well-favoured Harlot,
with a parley between her and the spirit: As also the horrid
villainy (that lies hid under her smooth words, and sweet tongue in
pleading against the Letter and History, and for the Spirit and
Mystery, and all for her own ends) detected. Also upon what account
the spirit is put, and upon what account the letter. Also what the
true communion, and what the true breaking of bread is.
1. But now me thinks (by this time) I see a brisk, spruce, neat,
self-seeking, finicking fellow, (who scorns to be either Papist,
Protestant, Presbyterian, Independent, or Anabaptist) I mean the Man
of Sin, who worketh with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness, 2.
Thess. 2.
 Crying down carnal ordinances, (Note: Down they must, but no thanks
to him.) And crying up the spirit: (Note: up it must, but no thanks
to him.) Cunningly seeking and setting up himself thereby.
 I say, I see him, and have ripped up the very secrets of his heart
(saith the Lord) as also of that mother of mischief, that well-
favoured Harlot, who both agree in one, and say on this wise to me.
2. 'Ah! Poor deluded man, thou hast spoken of the wisdom of God in a
mystery, and thou hast seen all the history of the Bible mysterized.
 'O fool! Who hath bewitched thee, Art thou so foolish as to begin
in the spirit, and wilt thou now be made perfect in the flesh? Keep
thee to the spirit, go not back to the letter, keep thee to the
Mystery, go not back to the history.
 'What? Why dost talk so much of James 5. and Hosea 2. Those words
are to be taken in the Mystery, not the History: they are to be
taken in the spirit, not as they lie in the letter.'
 Thus you have a hint of the neat young man's, and of the well-
favoured Harlot's language.
3. But now behold I am filled with the Holy Ghost, and resolved
(Acts 13. 8, 9, &c.) to set mine eyes on her and him, (who are no
more twain, but one) and say:
 'O full of all subtlety and mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou
enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the right
ways of the Lord?
 'Be it known to thee, O thou deceitful tongue, that I have begun on
the spirit, and will end in the spirit: I'm joined to the Lord, and
am one spirit. The Spirit's my joy, my life, my strength; I will not
let it go, it's my delight.
 'The Mystery is mine, (mostly) that which I most delight in, that's
the jewel. The history is mine also, that's the Cabinet. For the
jewel's sake I will not leave the Cabinet, though indeed it's
nothing to me, but when thou for thine own ends, standest in
competition with me for it.
 'Strength is mine, so is weakness also.'
4. I came by water and blood, not by blood only, but by blood and
water also.
 The inwardness is mostly mine, my prime delight is there; the
outwardness is mine also, when thou for thine own ends, standest in
competition with me about it, or when I would confound thee by it.
5. I know there's no Communion to the Communion of Saints, to the
inward Communion, to communion with the spirits of just men made
perfect, and with God the judge of all.
 No other communion of saints do I know.
 And this is blood-life-spirit-Communion.
6. But another Communion also I do know, which is water, and but
water, which I will not be without: my spirit dwells with God, the
judge of all, dwells on him, sups with him, in him, feeds on him,
with him, in him. My humanity shall dwell with, sup with, eat with
humanity; and why not (for a need) with Publicans and Harlots? Why
should I turn away mine eyes from mine own flesh? Why should I not
break my bread to the hungry, whoever they be? It is written, the
Lord takes care of oxen.
 And when I am at home, I take great care of my horse, to feed him,
dress him, water him and provide for him.
 And is not poor Maul of Deddington, and the worst rogue in Newgate,
or the arrantest thief or cut-purse far better, than 100 oxen, or
1000 such horses as mine?
7. Do I take care of my horse, and doth the Lord take care of oxen?
 And shall I hear poor rogues in Newgate, Ludgate, cry bread, bread,
bread, for the Lord's sake; and shall I not pity them, and relieve
them?
 Howl, howl, ye nobles, howl honourable, howl ye rich men for the
miseries that are coming upon you.
 For our part, we that hear the APOSTLE preach, will also have all
things common; neither will we call any thing that we have our own.
 Do you (if you please) till the plague of God rot and consume what
you have.
 We will not, we'll eat our bread together in singleness of heart,
we'll break bread from house to house.
CHAPTER VIII.
The well-favoured Harlot's clothes stripped off, her nakedness
discovered, her nose slit, her lusting after the young man, void of
understanding, from corner to corner, from religion to religion, and
the spirit pursuing, overtaking, and destroying her, with a terrible
thunderclap in the close, &c.
1. And we will strip off thy clothes, who hast bewitched us, and
slit thy nose thou well-favoured Harlot, who hast (as in many
things, so in this) made the nations of the earth drunk, with the
cup of thy fornications: as thus.
 Thou hast come to a poor irreligious wretch, and told him he must
be of the same religion as his neighbours, he must go to church,
hear the Minister, &c. and at least once a year put on his best
clothes, and receive the Communion——he must eat a bit of bread, and
drink a sip of wine——and then he has received, &c. And then he hath
been at the Communion.
2. But when he finds this religion too coarse for him, and he would
fain make after another, then immediately thou huntest after him,
following him from street to street, from corner to corner, from
gross Protestantism to puritanism, &c. At length from cross in
baptism, and common-prayer-book to Presbyterianism, where thou
tellest him he may break bread, with all such believers, who believe
their horses and their cows are their own; and with such believers,
who have received different light from, or greater light than
themselves; branded with the letter B, banished, or imprisoned 14
weeks together, without bail or mainprize.
3. And I could tell a large story, that would reach as far as
between Oxonshire and Coventry.
 But though it be in the original copy, yet it is my goodwill and
pleasure, out of my great wisdom, to waive the printing of it, and I
will send the contents thereof, as a charge and secret plague,
secretly into their breasts, who must be plagued with a vengeance,
for their villainy against the Lord.
 Well! To return from this more than needful digression, to the
discovery, and uncovering of the well-favoured Harlot.
 Thou hast hunted the young man void of understanding, from corner
to corner, from religion to religion.
 We left him at the Presbyterians——where such a believer, who
believes his horses and his cows are his own, may have his child
christened, and may himself be admitted to the sacrament——and come
to the communion.
 And what's that?
 Why after a consecration in a new form, eating a bit of bread, and
drinking a sip of wine perhaps once a month, why mother of mischief
is this Communion?
 O thou flattering and deceitful tongue, God shall root thee out of
the land of the living, is this Communion? No, no, mother of
witchcrafts!
5. The true Communion amongst men, is to have all things common, and
to call nothing one hath, one's own.
 And the true external breaking of bread, is to eat bread together
in singleness of heart, and to break thy bread to the hungry, and
tell them it's their own bread &c. Else your religion is in vain.
6. And by this time indeed thou seest this religion is in vain. And
wilt therefore hie thee to another, to wit, to Independency, and
from thence perhaps to Anabaptism so-called.
 And these are the well-favoured Harlot will follow thee, and say
thou must be very holy, very righteous, very religious.
 Allother religions are vain.
 And all in the parish, or in the country, yea all in the kingdom,
and all in the world (who are not of thine opinion) are without, are
of the world.
 Thou, and thy comrades are saints.
 (O proud Devil! O Devil of devils! O Beelzebub!)
 Well! (saith she) thou being a saint must be very holy, and walk in
Gospel-ordinances (saith the well-favoured Harlot) aye and in envy,
malice, pride, covetousness, evil surmising, censoriousness, &c.
also.
 And on the first day of the week, when the Saints meet together, to
break bread, do not thou omit it upon pain of damnation.
 By no means omitted, because thou hast Gospel Ordinances in the
purity of them.
 ——Papists——they give wafers.——
 Protestants——give——to all i'th' parish ragg ragg, and his fellow if
they come.
 But we are called out of the world, none shall break bread with us,
but ourselves, (the Saints together, who are in Gospel Order)
 Besides the priests of England cut their bread into little square
bits, but we break our bread (according to the apostolical practice)
and this is the right breaking of bread (saith the well-favoured
Harlot.)
 Who hath stepped into this holy, righteous Gospel, religious way,
(Gospel-Ordinances so-called) on purpose to dash to pieces the right
breaking of bread and in the room thereof thrusting in this vain
religion.
7. A religion wherein Lucifer reigns, more than in any.
 And next to this in the Independents (so-called) both which damn to
the pit of hell, those that are 100 times nearer the kingdom of
heaven than themselves: flattering themselves up in this their vain
religion.
 But take his hint before I leave thee.
[8.] He that hath this world's goods, and seeth his brother in want,
and shutteth up the bowels of his compassion from him, the love of
God dwelleth not in him; this man's religion is in vain.
 His religion is in vain, that seeth his brother in want, &c.
 His brother——a beggar, a lazar, a cripple, yea a cut-purse, a thief
i'th' jail, &c.
 He that seeth such a brother, flesh of his flesh (in want) and
shutteth up the bowels of his compassion from him, the love of God
dwelleth not in him; his religion is in vain: and he never yet broke
bread——that hath not forgot his (meum.)
9. The true breaking of bread——is from house to house, &c.
Neighbours (in singleness of heart) saying if I have any bread, &c.
It's thine, I will not call it mine own, it's common.
 These are true communicants, and this is the true breaking of bread
among men.
10. And what the Lord's supper is, none know, but those that are
continually (not weekly) but daily at it.
 And what the true Communion is, those and those only know, who are
come to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to God the judge
of all; all other religion is vain.
 Aye, saith the well-favoured Harlot (in the young man void of
understanding) I see Protestantism, Presbytery, Independency,
Anabaptism, are all vain. These coverings are too short, too narrow,
too coarse for me; the finest of these are but hardened sheets, and
very narrow ones also.
 I'll get me some flax, and make me both fine and larger sheets, &c.
I'll scorn carnal Ordinances, and walk in the Spirit.
 Aye, do (saith the well-favoured Harlot) speak nothing but Mystery,
drink nothing but wine, but blood, thou needest not eat flesh, &c.
12. And so my young man starts up into the notion of spirituals, and
wraps up a deal of hypocrisy, malice, envy, deceit, dissimulation,
covetousness, self-seeking in this fine linen.
 Being a hundredfold worse devils than before.
 But now thy villainy, hypocrisy, and self-seeking is discovering,
yea discovered to many with a witness.
 And though the true and pure levelling, is the eternal God's
levelling the mountains, &c. In man. Which is the
Blood-Life-Spirit levelling.
 Yet the water, or weak levelling, which is base and foolish, shall
confound thee.
 And hereby, as also by several other strange ways, which thou art
least of all acquainted withal. I'll discover thy lewdness, and show
the rottenness of thy heart.
 I'll call for all to a mite, to be cast into the outward treasury.
 And will bid thee lay down all at my feet, the Apostle, the Lord,
and this is a way that I am now again setting up to try, judge, and
damn the well-favoured Harlot by.
 Cast all into the Treasury, &c. Account nothing thine own, have all
things in common.
 The young man goes away sorrowful,——&c.
 The well-favoured Harlot shrugs at this.——
13. When this cometh to pass, a poor wretch whose very bones are
gnawn with hunger, shall not go about 13 or 14 miles about thy
business, and thou for a reward, when thou hast hundreds lying by
thee.
 I will give day but one hint more, and so will leave thee.
 The dreadful day of judgment is stealing on thee, within these few
hours. Thou hast secretly and cunningly lain in wait, thou hast
craftily numbered me amongst transgressors, who to thy exceeding
torment, and indeed a friend of Publicans and Harlots.
 Thou hast accounted me a Devil, saith the Lord.
 And I will rot thy name, and make it stink above ground, and make
thy folly manifest to all men.
 And because thou hast adjudged me, I will judge thee (with a
witness) expect it suddenly, saith the Lord.
per AUXILIUM PATRIS
A Single Eye:
Laurence Clarkson

Source: Reprinted in "A Collection of Ranter Writings", ed. Nigel
Smith, 1983 & 2014.
Title Page

A
SINGLE EYE
All light, no darkness; or light and darkness One:
In which you have it purely Discussed,
1. The Original of darkness.
2. What darkness is.
3. Why it is called darkness.

As also,
What God is Within, and what Without; how he is said
to be One, yet Two; when Two and not One, yet
then One, and not Two.

Likewise
A Word from the Lord touching the only Resurrection
of the Body, In, From, and To the LORD.

With a certain parcel of Queries to be answered from
Heaven or Hell,

----------------------------------------------------
This revealed in L. C. one of the UNIVERSALITY.
-----------------------------------------------------

Imprinted at LONDON, in the Year that the
POWERS OF Heaven and Earth Was, Is,
and Shall be Shaken, yea Damned, till
they be no more for EVER.
Behold, the King of glory now is come
T'reduce God, and Devil to their Doom;
For both of them are servants unto Me
That lives, and rules in perfect Majesty:
Though called God, yet that is not my Name,
True, I be both, yet am I not the same:
Therefore a wonder am Ito you all,
So that to titled Gods ye pray and call.
Oh then my creature, let me speak to thee;
Thy Worship, and thy God, shall die truly.
Why dote ye Worldings? up and down being hurled,
As he is, so are we even in this World;
And so are all things perfect, just, and good;
Yea, all are saved by's Cross, his wounds, and blood.
Where else is heaven, but in our present peace
From him? or hell, but when that this doth cease?
Fie then for shame, look not above the Skies
For God, or Heaven; for here your Treasure lies
Even in these Forms, Eternal Will will reign,
Through him are all things, only One, not Twain: 
Sure he's the Fountain from which everything
Both good and ill (so termed) appears to spring.
Unto this Single Eye, though Adam's two
Cannot perceive, to Such, to All
Adieu.

Having experience that his Majesty, the Being and Operation of all 
things, appeareth in and to the creature under a two-fold form or
visage, by which that becometh real with the creature, which is but
a shadow with this Infinite Being: So that from hence it ariseth,
the creature supposeth God to be that which is not, and that not to
be, which is God.

Therefore hath his Majesty divulged his pleasure, that thereby he
may take occasion to unfold himself in and to the creature under
such a prospect, that the creature may know God, as he is known of
God, that so from the clear appearance of God, the creature may
behold purely what God is, which as yet is manifest, the creation in
this nation inhabiteth in no other region than the woman of Samaria:
And therefore it is the cry of his Majesty is not fulfilled and
obeyed, but by Churches, Saints, and Devils opposed and contemned:
So that rare it is to find the creature that is awaked out of his
deep sleep, that hath shaked off the covering, so that he can from
the clear appearance of God say, the veil is taken away, and that he
believeth the truth as it is in his Majesty.

In answer to this, I have travelled from one end of England to
another, and as yet could find very few that could define unto me
the object of their worship, or give me a character what that God
is, so much professed by them; yet notwithstanding I could come into
no city, town, nor village, but there I heard the name God under one
form or another, worshipped that for God, which I had experience was
no God: So that in the period of my pilgrimage, I concluded there
was gods many, and lords many, although to me but one God: Therefore
at my return, I was carried out by God to hold forth to the
creature, the God yesterday, to day, and for ever.

To that end, in the perusal of his Majesty's pleasure, you may
notice what is intended, or rather, in the ensuing treatise
recorded, having for the present but only presented to you a map, in
which you may take a full view what that God is thou pretends to
worship, whether he be Infinite, or Finite; whether he be subject to
passion and affection, whether he behold the actions of the creature
as the creature esteem them, and whether he can be changed by thy
prayers, so as to expiate a judgement, or produce a deliverance, yea
whether he be all, and in all, or but all in part, that is to say,
whether one act be good, another evil, one light, another darkness;
and if so, reason from scripture declareth, God is passionate, God
is affectionate, and if either, then changeable.

But by forms and spiritual God like forms he is professed, and so
worshipped as a God that beholds evil and good; so passionate with
the one, and affectionate with the other, so that in conclusion they
imagine him as themselves, not infinite, but finite, therefore it
is, one act in God is conceived two in themselves, to wit, one act
adultery, another honesty; when if reason were admitted, and thereby
scripture interpreted, then should they observe in that act they
call honesty, to be adultery, and that act so called adultery, to
have as much honesty as the other, for with God they are but one,
and that one act holy, just, and good as God; This to me by reason
is confirmed, and by scripture declared, That to the pure all things
are pure: So that for my part I know nothing unclean to me, no more
than it is of itself, and therefore what act soever I do, is acted
by that Majesty in me, as in the ensuing treatise will appear what
acts they are, the nature of acting them; and in the period: how I
esteem them: So that I weigh not how I am judged, in that I judge
not myself So to conclude, the censures of scripture, churches,
saints, and devils, are no more to me than the cutting off of a
dog's neck,
	Vale.
ISAIAH 42.16.
I will make darkness light before them.
The God of gods hath cast me on this Subject, to the end he may take
occasion to unfold himself what he is in himself, and how he maketh
out himself in his appearance to the creature.

To that end, be pleased to peruse the precedent verses, and you will
find what occasioned these terms in this text; In brief, you may
behold the original thereof arise from the present state of the
Gentiles, they being then as it were prisoners, and in the state of
darkness; So that in reference to their bondage, Christ called the
Son of God was promised, to redeem them from the region of darkness;
that notwithstanding they had worshipped that for God which was no
god, yet now is the time come, now is the day that God will plunder
them of their idols, that God will enlighten their dark
understandings, as in my text, God will make darkness light before
them.

Notwithstanding it may be supposed by some, that the connexion
hereof doth only concern the Gentiles, yet let me tell thee, I find
that God is not so limited in his pen, ink, and paper, but that he
can and will make the darkness of the Jew light, as well as the
Gentile; yea, the darkness of you as any other: for never was there
more superstition, more darkness in the Churches than now, therefore
never more need to have the light of God expel those dark mists that
at this time is spread over all opinions in the Kingdom: So that now
doth the time draw near that the sayings in this Text shall appear
in the unfoldings of the Spirit, I will make darkness light before
them.

Being now arrived at the wished haven, all the difficulty will be
how to unload the Vessel fraughted with such hidden pearls, how to
make merchandise of them, how to unfold this

Subject to your capacity, how to give you the mind of God, in such
terms as God appears in you.

And that the more, I find these unfoldings of God in this, seem to
appear contrary to most that is quoted in the History; I will make
darkness light; How is it possible, when there is no communion, no
correspondency but enmity? Yea, so great, that they cannot dwell in
one house, lodge in one bed, but devour one another; for where
darkness is, light is not, and where light appeareth, darkness is
gone; yet notwithstanding you hear, he will make darkness light.

So that the first thing I mind from hence is, That he will not take
darkness away, and in the room thereof place light, but that which
in Scripture is called darkness, and by the creature believed
darkness, shall be made light.

Secondly we shall enquire, Whether that in Scripture, or by the
creature entitled darkness, be darkness with God or no?

To this end you may read light and darkness are both alike to God.
So then it appeareth but a darkness in the creatures apprehension,
so but an imagined darkness; for saith the Text, God is light, and
in him no darkness. So that you see, whatsoever or howsoever it is
called darkness in Scripture, yet it is none with God. Then

Thirdly, I shall search, Whether that in Scripture or by the
creature called God, admit of any other Title but unus (to wit) One
himself, and if I find there is but one Being, one God, and that all
that is be light with God, then shall I not cease till I find the
Original of darkness, what it is, and why it is called darkness, &c.

First, I find in his Divine Being, in his Essence, there is but one
God; the history declareth the same. I am what I am: I am the Lord,
and there is none else: There is no other God beside me: with
varieties of Scriptures to this purpose. So then, it is deer by the
History, That the Being and Essence of God admits not of the plural
but singular.

So that there is but one God, whose name is light, so called God;
for, that which God is, is God (to wit) God is light, then that
light is God; for what God saith he is, that is himself, but God
saith, He is light, therefore light is God; so from the Scripture
where God said Let there be light, it is no more than if he had
said, Let there be God, and there was God, for God is light. For,

You have heard the Scripture holds forth but one God, which God is
light; yet the same Scripture holds forth not only light, but
lights; as verse 14. Let there be lights, and that lights in the
Firmament of the Heaven: So that God made two great lights, that is
to say, The light of the Sun, the light of the Moon, Stars, fire,
and candle. From hence take notice, that though but one God, yet
divers lights, and that all made by God; for he that said Let there
be light, said Let there be lights; therefore he is called The
Father of lights, &c.

But then how shall we do with that place, for God is light, not
lights; either he must be as well lights as light, or else, that all
other lights but one hath a Being and Original besides God.

And if it appear that all lights, or that which is called light,
though the light of the candle, be made by God, then the light of
the candle is the light of God; but if all that is called light, to
wit, the light of the Sun, Moon, stars, fire, and candle, have not
their being in God, then not made by God; So it will follow, that
there is not only one, but two gods.

But the Scripture saith, That God made the light, and God made the
lights: So that both light and lights were made by God, then had
they their being in God; for all that he made were in him, of him,
and to him, as well the Sun as the Moon, the stars, the fire, and
the candle, as any of them; So that in making of these, he made
nothing but himself; for God is light, as well the one as the other.

But then, If God be light, then lights; so that we may as well say
Gods, as God; a God of the Sun, another of the Moon; for in that God
is light, he must as well be the light of the Moon, as the light of
the Sun, the light of the fire, the candle, as the stars.

Not denying but God is as well the light of the one, as the light of
the other; yet notwithstanding that, God is but one light, and
although called lights by God, yet they are but one light in God; to
that end he is called The Father of lights, but one Father, though
many lights. So that why they are but one light in God, or God one
light, and yet by God called lights, are in reference to their
distinct appearance in those several bodies (to wit) the body of the
Sun, the body of the Moon; that as you see notwithstanding several
beams from one Sun, yet in their rise from the Sun, they were but
one in the Sun; nay indeed, they were nothing but the Sun, but after
they are issued out of the Sun, one this way, another that way from
the Sun, then according to this divers appearance, it is no more
called a Sun, but a Beam, not only Beam, but Beams, which when
reduced to their being, they are no longer called a Beam, but a Sun.

So why they are called lights, and yet but one light with or in God,
who is light, it is but according to its divers appearance, which in
the being is but one appearance, because he that is the being of the
light, is the appearance of the light, in what kind or degree
whatsoever.

So that now you may take notice, and in some measure behold what God
is, and what is to be understood by those terms, God is light, and
light is God; which if it be that light is God, to wit, the light of
the Sun, Moon, stars, fire, and candle, which if the light appearing
in these, and held forth by these, be the light of God, Why may not
the whole creation say with their brother Jacob, Surely God were in
these, and we knew it not?

But maybe you will say, the light that is there recorded, is not to
be understood the light of the Sun, Moon, &c. but a light that is
quoted in these several Scriptures, to wit, a divine and Scriptural
light, by which a creature beholds and enjoys God.

However God that is light appeareth in you, discovering to you that
the light in the creature is not the same light of the Sun, yet the
appearance of light in me, showeth me (and that from Scripture
declareth to me) that one is as much divine as the other; no more
precious (simply in itself) than the other: for as you have heard,
though lights, yet but light with God: so that all that is light, is
nothing but God; for light is light, and God is light: this may be
will in some measure be believed. But now to the matter in hand, I
will make darkness light, and crooked things straight, &c.

Whether it is intended the darkness of the night to become the light
of the day, or it is the dark, as in several portions of Scripture
is recorded: yea it is intended that you call the darkness in the
creature, which darkness is sin, hell, and misery: this darkness he
will make light, Heaven, and felicity; for in God is no darkness,
sin, nor misery; yet this will he make light. So that now I am come
to the place where I told you I would show you the rise of darkness,
what it is, and why it is called darkness.

To this end you shall find in Scripture a two-fold power, to wit,
more powers than one, yet notwithstanding there is no power but of
God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God. From hence you may
observe the connexion hereof run in the plural, not power, but
powers; a power of darkness, a power of light, a power in the
wicked, a power in the Godly; yet you have held forth in the same
Scripture but one God.

So then, as it hath been proved, and I believe by you all will be
granted, that the power of light, Life, and Salvation, cometh from
God; the power that acteth in the Godly, hath its rise from God; but
then, What shall we say to the power of darkness, that power in the
wicked? for in them is a great power, as saith the Prophet, I have
seen the wicked in great power, (instance) the power in Esau, in
Pharaoh, the power in Herod and Pilate, by which they crucified
Christ, from whom came this power? the Scripture saith, from above,
(to wit) from God: yet this was the power of darkness, of sin: was
it not a sinful act to crucify Christ? that I know you will all
conclude it was a wicked act; and yet this act was according to the
will of God, as saith the history, By the power of God the Kings of
the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together, against
the Lord, and against his Christ. &c. What had they power from God
to destroy the Son of God? was this the will of God? so saith the
scripture, by the power of God they gathered together: What to do?
Nothing but what thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be
done.

Well friends, consider this power in Pilate, was a dark, sinful
power, yet it came from God; yea, it was the power of God, as is
recorded: I form light, I create darkness, I form Peace, I create
evil. So that let it be a power, whatsoever, in whomsoever, whether
in flesh or spirit, wicked or Godly, it is the power of God, yea,
came from God. So that in time, he will make this power of darkness
a power of light; that whereas you have called and condemned one
power for a dark sinful power; you shall have it appear to you, as
now it is to me, that it is a power of light; for you heard this
power came from God, this power of darkness: yet God is light, and
in him is no darkness.

So that consider, though two powers, yet they have but one womb, one
birth; to both Twins, both brethren, as Esau and Jacob, then if
Twins, if brethren, then one Flesh, one Nature, yea, of the self-
same Nature of God, from whom they came; as well Esau as Jacob,
Pharaoh as Moses, Pilate as Christ: I say, although these be
distinct, in reference to their several operations, as two streams
runneth contrary ways, yet they are but of one nature, and that from
one fountain: Herein it appeareth but a seeming opposition; instance
the tide, what striving for victory; yet but one water, yea and that
from one ocean. So is the case with these powers, one opposite to
the other, contending for victory, till at last, one overcomes
another, as the tide the stream.

Thus you may take notice from whence darkness hath its rise, only
from God. Secondly, What darkness is; nothing but light with God.

Thirdly, Why it is called darkness, is but only in reference to the
creatures apprehension, to its appearance; so nothing but imagined
darkness: therefore his meaning is, that which appeareth now under
the form of darkness, shall ere long appear in a Visage of light, as
saith the Text, I will make darkness light before them.

Again, it may be granted by you, as it hath been by some, that the
power or powers are of God; yea that power by which Pharaoh
persecuted Israel; that power by which Pilate crucified Christ, yet
it will not be granted that God gave the power so to do; neither was
it the power, but a corrupt thought, or sinful imagination arising
from the Devil, and their own wicked inventions.

Answer. Being now surrounded with the black regiment, whose
commander is the Devil, and the whole legion consisting of the
imaginations of the whole creation, I have no way to escape this 
camp and bottomless gulf, but by breaking through the bulwark and
stronghold fortified against me.

So that being armed with a weapon of Majesty, I doubt not but that
God in me shall cast down those strong holds and imaginations, yea
everything that exalteth itself against the power of the most high.

To that end attend the nature of your objection, the sum thereof is
to this effect, that a sinful act, or an act that is sinful, hath
not its being in the power of God, nor produced by the power of God;
no not that act of crucifying the Son of God, but from the Devil,
and their sinful imaginations.

If thou by whom the objection was raised, didst nakedly understand
the truth therein contained, I should not in the least molest thee,
but in that thou declarest truth not knowing it, I am engaged to
unfold the same, that thou mayest know it, for whereas thou sayest a
sinful act is not produced by the power of God, it's Truth: for that
which is not in the power, cannot be acted by the power: but an act
that is sinful is not in God, nor the power of God, therefore hath
not its being in God, nor acted by the power of God, for God is
light, and in him no darkness: but sin is darkness, therefore sin is
not in God.

So that yet, notwithstanding that, I must tell you as before I have
related, that as all powers are of God, so all acts, of what nature
soever are produced by this power, yea this power of God: so that
all those acts arising from the power, are as Pure as the power, and
the power as Pure as God.

So from hence it comes, there is no act whatsoever, that is impure
in God, or sinful with or before God.

Yet say you, there is a sinful act, or acts that are sinful; so that
if all that is an act be produced by the power of God, then why not
the act that is sinful arise from the same power, so sinful in and
with God.

As I have said, so I say again, that those acts, or what act soever,
so far as by thee is esteemed or imagined to be sinful, is not in
God, nor from God, yet still, as I said, all acts that be are from
God, yea as pure as God.

And yet, notwithstanding that act, or so much of the act that thou
apprehendest sin is not in God, nor simply in thyself: for indeed
sin hath its conception only in the imagination; therefore; so long
as the act was in God, or nakedly produced by God, it was as holy as
God: but after there is an appearance in thee, or apprehension to
thee, that this act is good, and that act is evil, then hast thou
with Adam eat of the forbidden tree, of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, then hast thou tasted of that fruit, which is not in
God; for saith the text, Out of the mouth of the most High
proceedeth not evil, and good: good but not evil; for God is good,
and good is God: therefore it was he made all things good: yea that
which by you is imagined evil, he made good: so that thou
apprehending that from God which is not in God doth of all his
creatures most abuse God, in making God the author of that which is
not in God, (to wit) sin. But to the matter in hand, Thou hast heard
all acts that are, had their being and birth from God, yea acted by
God, to be plain those acts by thee called swearing, drunkenness,
adultery, and theft, &c. These acts simply as acts, were produced by
the power of God, yea, perfected by the wisdom of God.

What said I, a swearer, a drunkard, an adulterer, a thief, had these
the power and wisdom of God, to swear, drink, whore, and steal? O
dangerous tenent! O blasphemy of the highest nature! what make God
the author of sin? so a sinful God! Well friends, although the
appearance of God in me be as terrible to you, as it were to Moses
in the mount, yet notwithstanding, that what I have seen and heard,
I do not in the least tremble, but rejoice, that I have this
opportunity to declare it unto you; however it may be received by
you.

To that end consider what I said those acts called swearing,
drunkenness, adultery and theft, those acts, simply as acts, not as
they are called (and by thee imagined) drunkenness, adultery and
theft, that is in and from thy imagination; for there is no such act
as drunkenness, adultery, and theft in God; though by his power and
wisdom thou executest this act and that act, yet that appearance by
which thou apprehendest and esteemest them to be acts of sin, that
esteemation was not in God, though from God.

For indeed, it is but imagination, which is not, yea nothing in
this, infinite being; for as I said before, so I say again, the very
title Sin, it is only a name without substance, hath no being in
God, nor in the creature, but only by imagination; and therefore it
is said, the imaginations of your hearts are only evil continually.
It is not the body, nor the life, but the imagination only, and that
not at a time, or times, but continually. Herein sin admitting of no
form in itself, is created a form in the estimation of the creature;
so that which is not to God, is found to be in a something creature;
as you have it related, One man esteemeth one day above another,
another esteemeth every day alike: what to one is pure, to another
is impure; herein it appeareth but a bare estimation.

To this end (saith Paul) I know and am persuaded, by the Lord Jesus,
that there is nothing unclean of itself, but to him that esteemeth
anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean.

So that the extent thereof is in reference to all things, as well as
meats and drinks; let it be what act soever. Consider what act
soever, yea though it be the act of swearing, drunkenness, adultery
and theft; yet these acts simply, yea nakedly, as acts are nothing
distinct from the act of prayer and praises. Why dost thou wonder?
why art thou angry? they are all one in themselves; no more
holiness, no more purity in one than the other.

But once the creature esteemeth one act Adultery, the other honesty,
the one pure, the other impure; yet to that man that so esteemeth
one act unclean, to him it is unclean: (as saith the History) there
is nothing unclean of itself, [but] but but to him that esteemeth it
unclean: yea again and again it is recorded that to the pure all
things, yea all things are pure, but to the defiled, all things are
defiled: yea the prayer and praises of the wicked are defiled, as
saith the History, The Prayers of the wicked are abomination to the
Lord.

Observe not the act nakedly, as the act, for we find the prayer and
praises of some to be pure, though to others impure: impure to those
acting, in relation to the title his apprehension, his Conscience in
the improvement of them is defiled and condemned for a swearer, a
drunkard, an adulterer, and a thief.

When as a man in purity in light, acts the same acts, in relation to
the act, and not the title: this man [no this man] doth not swear,
whore, nor steal: so that for want of this light, of this single
pure eye, there appeareth Devil and God, Hell and Heaven, sin and
holiness, damnation and salvation; only, yea only from the
esteemation and dark apprehension of the creature.

I will make darkness light, rough ways smooth; not half light and
half darkness, not part rough and part smooth; but as it is said,
Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee. Observe, all
fair my Love; in thee only is beauty and purity, without,
defilement: my love my dove is but one, thou one, not two, but only
one, my love: Love is God, and God is Love; so all pure, all, light,
no spot in thee.

So that consider what act soever is done by thee, in light and love,
is light, and lovely; though it be that act called adultery, in
darkness, it is so; but in light, honesty, in that light loveth
itself, so cannot defile itself: for love in light is so pure, that
a whore it cannot endure, but enstranges itself from darkness from
whence whoredom has its first original. Light is so pure, that it
will not lodge with two; but treads the steps of the Apostle,
saying, Let every man have his own wife: when as darkness is not
ashamed to lie with his neighbours wife: for in light I declare that
whoredom is the fruits of darkness; therefore no companion for
light, who scorns the society of a whore indeed. Light is like
Susanna, that had rather die, than be defiled with harlots. Yea,
innocent Susanna, uncorrupted light, must be accused, arraigned and
condemned, for that her accusers are guilty of: Yet fear not
Susanna, thou shalt be vindicated, and thy accusers condemned.

So that this is my Majesty's pleasure to declare, again and again,
that what acts soever is done by thee, according as thou esteemest
it, yea according as thou believest it, so be it done unto thee;
that is to say, if thou hast committed those acts in Scripture
recorded for swearing, drunkenness, adultery and theft; and so
acting apprehendest them, let me deal plainly with thee; to thee it
is sin: and for so sinning, thy imagination will pursue thee,
arraign thee, and condemn thee for a swearer, an adulterer and a
thief.

When as on the contrary, thou are persuaded that those titles in
scripture, and thy apprehension recorded, for swearing, adultery,
and theft, be no such acts with thee, but only titles without thee;
neither dost thou apprehend them any other, but pure acts, without
title: then I declare, according to thy esteemation so is the act to
thee, and for so doing, thy imagination, will not, cannot condemn
thee, but say with the Apostle, We know that an idol is nothing:
what thou esteemeth idolatry, to us is none: So that whatsoever I
act, though it be that act you call swearing, adultery, and theft,
yet to me there is no such title, but a pure act, for there is
nothing that I do that is unclean to me, no more than it is unclean
of itself.

And yet notwithstanding this, my privilege doth not in the least
approbate thee, yea thee that apprehendest the title to swear, whore
or steal, &c. because to thee it is unclean, therefore not lawful
for thee: neither canst thou upon the bare report hereof, say, Well,
if it be but as man esteems it, then I will esteem it so too.

Alas friend, let me tell thee, whatever thy tongue saith, yet thy
imagination in thee declares sad things against thee, in that thou
esteemest them acts of sin, thy imagination will torment thee for
this sin, in that thou condemnest thyself, thou art tormented in
that condemnation; with endless misery: so that I say, Happy is the
man that condemns not himself in those things he alloweth of.

No matter what Scripture, Saints, or Churches say, if that within
thee do not condemn thee, thou shalt not be condemned; for saith the
history, Out of thine own mouth, not another's, will I judge thee:
Therefore, remember that if thou judge not thyself, let thy life be
what it will, yea act what thou canst, yet if thou judge not
thyself, thou shalt not be judged; For, I came not into the World to
condemn, but to save the World. But if the reproach and slander of
saints and churches do cause thee to question thyself, then art thou
ready to say within what they report without, I am guilty of what
they accuse me: So that true is the saying, O Adam, thy destruction
is of thyself.

But before I conclude touching how darkness is made light, sin
holiness, and so all deformity converted into its own pure nature,
it was my pleasure to treat something concerning the nature of this
loss, that whether darkness in Scripture recorded, and by the
creature believed, be cast out as distinct from light, and so said
to be damned, in that it is not light, not pure, but defiled.

In answer to that, the Lord declares that those filthy abominable
works of darkness (by thee so apprehended) shall be destroyed and
damned; But how, or where they shall be damned? that is in the
sayings of this text, I will make darkness light: Oh that this were
purely minded, then thou wouldst see that sin must not be thrown
out, but cast within, there being in the vat, it is dyed of the same
colour of the liquor; as saffron converts milk into its own colour,
so doth the fountain of light convert sin, hell, and devil into its
own nature and light as itself; I will make rough ways smooth: Now
it is dammed and rammed into its only centre, there to dwell eternal
in the bosom of its only Father: This, and only this, is the
damnation so much terrifying the creature in its dark apprehension,
that it shall be robbed and carried it knows not whither, crieth out
I am damned, I am damned, being carried out of its former knowledge,
now knoweth not where it is, therefore lamenting, Master, Save me, I
perish, perished in its own apprehension, yet saved in the
essential. Thus much concerning I will lead the blind by a way that
they know not, and in paths they have not known: I will make
darkness light, crooked things straight, &c.

A Word from the Lord touching Resurrection, there being reports not
a few that I should deny the Resurrection of that body consisting of
flesh, blood and bone. I answer, If I should not, reason would
arraign me for a mad man, Scripture would declare me anti-
scripturist, in favouring such a palpable tenent of darkness, which
if rightly understood, affirm no such thing as the resurrection of
this body: both which affirm, that what the body is made of, that is
the life, perfection, and happiness of the body; but thy body
consisting of flesh and bone, is made of the dust of the earth,
therefore when thy body is reduced to its centre, then (and not till
then) is thy body alive, perfected in its happiness; now for thee to
raise this body, it would declare thee a tyrant; for as it is
destructive for the fowl to live in the water, or the fish in the
firmament, so to raise thy body to a local place called Heaven,
would to thy body become a Hell; for as the earth would become a
Hell to the spirit, so that place called heaven, would become a hell
to the body, for after laid in the grave, it is buried in its
heaven, glory, and happiness, where it shall rot and consume into
its own nature for ever and ever.

Yet not denying but that body quoted in the history shall rise,
which body hath several denominations, as earthly, corruptible,
dishonourable, weak, vile, and natural body; all which doth but make
one clear prospect, in which you may take a full view of what that
body is made of that shall rise, whether a visible body consisting
of flesh and bone, or invisible body, consisting of the sensitive
within this body; To this end the history speaketh on this wise,
That we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the
redemption, to wit, our Body.

So that in light I declare, that the corrupt senses must put on
incorruption, thy mortal apprehension must put on immortality, that
whereas before thou wast alive to five, and dead to one, now thou
shalt be dead to five, and alive to one, that lovely pure one who
beholds nothing but purity, wheresoever it goeth, and whatsoever it
doth, all is sweet and lovely; let it be under what title soever,
thou art risen from title to act, from act to power, from power to
his name, and that only one name, pure and undefiled; so that now
thou art of purer eyes than to behold any iniquity, so that Devil is
God, Hell is Heaven, sin holiness, damnation salvation, this and
only this is the first resurrection.

Yet here is no lodging, no safe inhabiting, in that thou art yet on
the borders of Egypt, only with Moses on Mount Hermon, only
verbally, not practically, so short of the second Resurrection which
is the life and power what thou saw, for till thou be delivered of
that thou wast risen to, thou canst not say, Death, where is thy
sting? Grave, where is thy victory?

Wonder not at me, for without act, without birth, no powerful
deliverance, not only the talkers, but the doers; not only your
spirit, but your body must be a living and acceptable sacrifice;
therefore till acted that so called sin, thou art not delivered from
the power of sin, but ready upon all alarums to tremble and fear the
reproach of thy body.

Therefore my beloved ones, that supposeth your service is perfect
freedom, by having only light into another's life, know this, that
if light without life, thy service will be perfect bondage; and
therefore it is when a creature is drawn forth to act in another's
life, instead of triumphing over sin, he will be conquered in sin;
so that I say, till flesh be made spirit, and spirit flesh, so not
two, but one, thou art in perfect bondage: for without vail, I
declare that whosoever doth attempt to act from flesh, in flesh, to
flesh, hath, is, and will commit adultery: but to bring this to a
period, for my part, till I acted that, so called sin, I could not
predominate over sin; so that now whatsoever I act, is not in
relation to the title, to the flesh, but that eternity in me; So
that with me, all creatures are but one creature, and this in my
form, the representative of the whole creation: So that see what I
can, act what I will, all is but one most sweet and lovely.
Therefore my dear ones consider, that without act, no life; without
life, no perfection; and without perfection, no eternal peace and
freedom indeed, in power, which is the everlasting Majesty, ruling,
conquering, and dancing all into itself, without end, for ever.
The ensuing Queries

What that God is so often recorded in scripture, and by the creature
believed.
First, whether he admit of a corporeal substance (to wit) flesh,
blood and bones; and if so, (as by some of the creation is believed)
then the question will be Where his habitation hath been, is and
will be, to the end of the world? I say, if God admit of a corporal
substance; whether then any other but a local place can contain that
substance, or that he can be omnipresent in all places, and with all
creatures at one time, in that substance, &c?
Secondly, Whether God admit of any other but a Spirit, so invisible?
And if so, (as by others of his creation believed,) the query is
then, where its region hath been, is, and will be? I say, if God
admit of no corporal substance, form, nor image, but only a spirit,
whether then any other but an invisible habitation, an infinite
boundless region can contain an invisible infinite boundless spirit.
Thirdly, If God be a spirit, then whether a spirit can be confined
from any thing? And if confined, then must we observe these two
things
1. What He is confined from, or confined in?
2. What is it that doth confine God?
Fourthly, If God be a spirit, and cannot be confined, then whether
God be not infinite and omnipresent in all places, and in all
things: as well Hell as Heaven, Devil as angel, sin as holiness,
darkness as light?
Fifthly, If God be infinite in all things; then whether all things
be not finite in God? That if God be subject to nothing, then
whether all things be not subjected to God, so as to do nothing
without God, nor against God; but in the performance of the will of
God, as well Esau as Jacob, Pharaoh as Moses, Pilate as Christ; yea,
sin, Devil, or any other instrument whatsoever?
Sixthly, Whether a creature living in God, so as to know God, as he
is known of God, be not infinite with and in God; and so all things
finite unto him, as unto God; subject unto him, as unto God whether
Devil, Hell, sin, death, or any other thing whatsoever?
Seventhly, If God be in all things, as in all men, the wicked as the
godly, wherein then is the state of the wicked worse than the godly?
Yea, if God be in both, why have they not both one title, but one
wicked, another godly?
Eighthly, If God be in all things, then in all creatures that hath
live whatsoever, so that wherein is man better than these, or hath
any pre-eminence above these? Yet if he have, by whom is it given;
and the reason of so being given?
Ninthly, If God be in all, the wicked as the godly, why is not the
wicked saved with the godly? But if not saved, what is that in the
wicked more than the godly, that is damned? With the place where,
and the nature of that damnation.
Tenthly, If God be in all, why are not all things one in God? And if
they be all comprehended as one in God; how cometh it they are two
distinct from God, yea so titled from the scripture? Now if
scripture were indited by God the question will be, why it speaks
not of these things, as they are in God, but relates two distinct
titles, two opposites; the one for God, the other against God? And
whether that scripture so contradictory be not the original or
instrumental cause by which the creation becomes blinded, divided,
yea destroyed; in worshipping that for God, which in the original is
no God? I say, the query will be, whether the contradiction in the
scripture be not the contradictions in the creation: and so long as
there is not this scripture, there will be religions, and religious
forms, not spirit, war, not peace, envy, not love; the teachings of
men, not the teaching of Godyea in conclusion there will be gods,
and not God: no not that God that is all in the Alpha and Omega; the
God yesterday, and today, and forever.
FINIS.
A Rout, A Rout:
Joseph Salmon

Source: Reprinted in "A Collection of Ranter Writings", ed. Nigel
Smith, 1983 & 2014

Title Page

A Rout, A Rout;
Or some part of the
ARMY'S QUARTERS
BEATEN UP,

By the DAY of the
LORD
Stealing upon Them.

Wherein is briefly discovered
the present cloudy and dark Appearance
of God amongst them.

=========================================================
By JOSEPH SALMON, a present
Member of the ARMY.
=========================================================

He that hath an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit saith.
Arise ye, and depart, for this is not your rest; it is polluted, &c.
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, 
to beat down strong holds, &c.

London, Printed for G. C. 1649.1
A WORD to the Commanding Power in the ARMY.

By your leave, Gentlemen,

I Hope, in these days of Liberty, I may be free to speak a word to
my fellow soldiers: I shall not trouble you with much at the
present, for I know you have more trouble already upon your spirits,
then you can well tell how to be rid of. My speech is intended
especially (as I said before) to my fellow soldiers, those of the
inferior rank and quality; I have very little from the Lord to
declare to you as yet: All that I have to say, is this; That you go
on as fast as you can with the work you have begun, for the time
draws nigh that is allotted you: Make haste (I say;) yet not more
haste than good speed: Make a short work; but cut it short in
righteousness; for the Day is at hand, wherein he that helpeth and
they that are holpen shall fall together. Gentlemen, you are the rod
of God, yea, the rod of the Lord's anger in His own hand, the
Almighty Arm acts you; and so it appears; for no manly glory can
encounter with you: in this day of the LORD'S Wrath you strike
through King, gentry, and nobility, they all fall before you: You
have a commission from the LORD to scourge ENGLAND'S oppressors; do
it in the name of God, do it (I say) fully, hotly, sharply; and the
same measure you mete, shall be met to you again; for the Lord will
ere long cast his rod into the fire of burning and destruction: It
will be a sweet destruction, wait for it.

Gentlemen,
Under an abrupt form I subscribe myself
Yours in life and death,
JOSEPH SALMON.

TO The Fellowship (of SAINTS scattered) in the ARMY.

Dear Hearts,

I Know it will be a wonder to some of you, to behold this
frontispiece faced with my character; and truly it is as much my
wonder as yours: I little thought that ever God would have called me
hither. Friends, I am yet amongst you, I own you, I can say Amen to
your proceedings, although I cannot close with you in the managing
of them. I have a fellowship with you in the Lord: but I am distant
from your dark and fleshly enterprises.

You are a scattered seed amongst tares, and it is your name that
upholds the fame of the whole: You are that little leaven hid in the
meal, whose reputation seasons the whole lump; if it were not for
you, this power of the sword, would vanish and be annihilated.
Behold, I show you a Mystery, it is yet hidden from many, yea most
of you; Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, The day is coming, and now is,
when I will gather up my jewels in the Army (from under this dark
and carnal form of the sword) into myself; where I will be unto them
life, liberty, privilege and satisfaction, the fullness of arrears,
and plenty of accommodation; when they shall no more contend with
the world for outward interest, but beholding all in Divine
fullness, shall in the enjoyment of it sit down contented. And this
I partly see fulfilled in myself and others.

But now it may be you will wonder why I yet remain amongst you,
seeing I am brought hither; I am sure many of your verdicts will
pass upon me, I shall not want the censure of most. But it is no
matter; Cast all your cruelty and malice upon me; the Lord in me is
mighty to bear it: I will own it all, being willing to become sin
for you, though the Lord in me knows no sin; that you, together with
me, may be presented in the Lord an eternal righteousness.

I have but this at present to say: I am now with you, as Mary at the
sepulchre, waiting to see the Lord: but he is risen. Your carnal
affairs are the sepulchre where the Lord is buried to me; he is not
here, he is certainly risen, but where to see him in his next
appearance, I wait: I must stand at the sepulchre till the voice be
uttered behind me, which I believe will be shortly, both to me and
many others. Till the day break, and the shadows flee away, Farewell
my beloved, be thou as a Roe, or a young Hart upon the mountains of
Bether.
Sirs, I am yours,
JOS: SAL.

A ROUT, A ROUT,
OR,
Some part of the Army's Quarters beaten up, by the DAY of the LORD
stealing upon them.

That Power (or Mystery) which acts all things, and by which whole
man (in his counsels, actions and engagements) is led out and
disposed according to divine will and pleasure; I say, this Power
(which is God) comes forth and offers itself in a diversity of
appearance, and still (by a divine progress in the affairs of the
earth) moves from one power to another, from one dispensation to
another, from one party to another; hereby accomplishing his eternal
decreed design in and upon the Creature. This is manifest in all
dispensations, civil and spiritual.

Time was, when God had faced the Jewish Ceremonies (those carnal
manifestations) with a great beauty and splendour of divine Majesty:
the Lord was there seen under that form to veil and hide his beauty
and glory. In a time appointed he departed from them, went out of
them, he would dwell there no longer; but he casts off that form or
garment, and clothes himself with another, swallowed up that glory
in another, the lesser in the greater; and then all the brightness
and lustre of divine appearance resided in, and dwelt upon the flesh
of the Son, as being a more true pattern, and exact resemblance of
God the divine Power. But the Lord was not here in his appearance
where he would be neither; and therefore having no resolution
eternally here to tabernacle or abide, in the fullness of time he
lays this form aside also. Though he was the Son, the dear Son, the
only begotten Son, a Son so like the Father, yet he must not be
spared, he must be crucified, the Lord will move hence also: whence
note, That this divine power (or mystery) admits of no eternal
habitation in anything below itself.

Now as this power [God] hath a daily motion out of one dispensation
spiritual into another, so also it is in civil or outward
dispensations.

This I have found in my own experience, (by tracing this divine
power, in its going forth amongst the sons of men) that it sometimes
owns this, sometimes that form; sometimes this, sometimes that
party, daily moving from one to another as it pleaseth: now the Lord
lives in all these, though in some darkly, in others more purely;
and all these motions are as so many footsteps of God, whereby he
gradually ascends out of the creature, into a more complete image or
likeness of himself.

Time was, when God dwelt amongst us in the darkness of absolute and
arbitrary Monarchy: the face and beauty of divine mystery lived in
it, deny it who can, that sees God in all things.

In this form of Monarchy God hath veiled his beautiful presence with
a thick cloud of darkness: He hath made darkness his secret place,
and his pavilions round about him have been thick clouds of the sky.
Though the image and brightness of God have dwelt in it, yet under
such black darkness that man could never discern it. Tyranny,
persecution, opposition, will, nature and creature, hath been (as it
were) that veil betwixt God and man in this dispensation; all this,
and whatever you will call evil in Monarchy, the Lord was pleased to
hide himself under, while resident in this carnal form. I know it's
difficult to see God in this darkness, the bright Sun under this
black cloud: the naked and pure Spirit, under this foul habit and
filthy attire; but he that cannot here discern God is blind, and
sees not afar off.

God (having hitherto walked under this form) is now (and hath in
these last days) come forth to rend this veil in pieces, to shake
this form, to lay it waste, and clothe himself with another.

How God hath and does destroy Monarchy, and what it figures out to
us.

The power and life of the King, and in him the very soul of Monarchy
sunk into the Parliament, and here it lost its name barely, but not
its nature; its form, but not its power; they making themselves as
absolute and tyrannical as ever the King in his reign, dignity and
supremacy; yet the Lord ascended a little nearer himself, by taking
off this form (the Parliament) and hereby made way for his after-
design.

We see in a short time, he lays aside that glorious show and idol
(the Parliament) and clothes himself with the Army: And thus, both
King, Monarchy and Parliament fell into the hands, and upon the
swords of the Army: and thus the Army are to be the executioners of
that beast (Monarchy) which they had formerly wounded, and whose
wound the Parliament had healed and salved over by a corrupt and
rotten treaty: all which doth figure out to me the stain of the
glory of all flesh; as Monarchy (or arbitrary regal power) falls by
the sword, so also shall that kingly and imperial power of all flesh
be cut in sunder by the stroke of Divine Justice; for by his fire
and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain
of the Lord shall be many: The Lord will kindle a burning under that
glory wherein he hath formerly appeared; God himself shall be the
burning, the holy One shall be the flame, and all fleshly regality
in us shall be the fuel which shall be burnt up and consumed. But we
shall hence proceed to our former discourse, and shall next in order
consider

How God lives in the ARMY.


Thus far we see God hath moved from party to party, and sits down at
present in the Army; and here also God makes darkness his secret
place, living under a poor, low, carnal form, and few can behold his
beautiful presence under the power of the sword. The Lord here
besmears himself with blood and vengeance, deforms his own beauty,
hides his amiable presence under a hideous and wrathful form.

And now in as much as God hath called me forth (from an impartial
spirit) to declare my light; I shall (from some clear experience of
the Army's present condition) discover that dark and cloudy
appearance of the supreme Power [God] amongst them, whereby may be
discerned how far below the pure appearance of the spirit, their
present station renders them. And I am very confident, that which I
shall say, the Lord will testify and bear record the truth of the
same upon the hearts of many amongst them. Friends! Look about you,
for the Lord is now coming forth to rip up your bowels, to search
your hearts, and try your reins; yea, to let loose the imprisoned
light of himself in you; and if the Lord by this doth not shake many
of you, then say, That I have prophesied lies in the name of the
Lord. Then let him that hath an ear to hear, hear what the Lord,
that Spirit saith.

Thus saith the Lord, yea the Lord saith it:

That the present condition of the Army, or the present appearance of
the supreme Power amongst them, renders them in darkness, and far
below the pure Light and Life of God.

That it is so, I offer my appeal thus.

First, let them and all others (who are spiritually wise) consider,
by and from what principles God acts these men; I mean you heroes of
valour in the Army, you grandees of the present power in the
Kingdom: In patience possess ye your souls till I shall race your
foundation, and discover your principles, which God hath hitherto
and still does act you in: they are either public or private, common
or (more properly) peculiar; your common and public principles, are
the outward liberty and freedom of the Nation, the establishment of
outward laws, liberties, and privileges; and some outward form of
government; which may correspond with your sense of Justice: what no
farther yet? This is poor earthly Tabernacle, which God at present
hath taken up in you; I wish I might not have cause to say, It is a
speckled pretence under which your private interests resides: For I
know this is the main spur that drives you on, (self-preservation:)
This is your Delilah, your proper, private and peculiar principle:
resolved you are to save your lives, and preserve your self-
interest, though in this expedition you destroy all other powers and
interests whatsoever: Herein, (though you walk, as men, very
carnally) yet, Dear hearts, I blame you not. I know God acts you in
this cloud, he goes out with you in this darkness, and lets out his
presence through this veil of self-preservation amongst you, he hath
crowned you with fame, success and victory, while you have lived and
acted in this earthly body of outward liberty. But how far inferior
and below this is, to a life in the purity of Divine light, (now God
hath disclosed himself) I am in some measure able to discern.

You know not yet what it is to be dead to your own interests, though
you have professed a great deal of self-denial, yet I profess many
of you never knew what true self-denial was; and what it is truly to
be dissolved and dye out of your own carnal Interests: I know your
honour and dignity is great in your hearts, your renowned
enterprises call for merit: Your lives and safeties are also dear to
you; it is so, so it must be, God will have it so: he lives in these 
low concernments, and yet your hearts cannot be embittered or
disengaged from them: you hug them, you prize them, they are an
object of your embraces. But I tell you (Sirs) God is going about to
unbody himself in you, whiles you are embracing this body of self-
safety and outward liberty, he is dying and departing from it,
though you see it not. And this know, That God will ere long leave
you exceeding dark and dead in your enterprises: I was alive once as
well as you, and in my life I laboured amongst you (in my sphere) as
much as another; but I am now dead with the Lord; I am at rest from
my labour; Ah happy death! oh blessed loss! how far better is it O
Lord to be dissolved and gathered up into thy rest, than to live the
life of a worldly and carnal labour? and I know also that the hour
of God's judgement is come upon many of you: some of you have
received your mortal wound already; I see you gasp and struggle in
your confused and dark enterprises. Let this silver probe but sink
to the bottom of your wounded hearts, and something, without
question, will speedily be discovered.

Ah Friends,—

If you saw your interests in the Lord, your lives and liberties in
the Lord, if you saw all yours in the Lord, you would think it a
beggarly thing to contend for anything, or to plead God's quarrel
with any that shall demand them of you. Doubtless, it is a poor,
low, base, earthly Spirit, that raises contests, and seeks after the
ruin and blood of creatures, for the enjoyment of that which at best
is but a bitter-sweet, a well-being subject to all manner of
casualties. Lo, This is the principle that God at present acts you
by: It is the Lord in you, inhabiting his secret place; and because
I see it is the Lord, I can embrace it, I can tender you in my
bosom-affections, while you are carried forth in this carnal
dispensation. Nevertheless, I will in part discover to you how far
some are dead to their own Interest, and whither shortly you must be
brought.

Those that live in the more pure knowledge and Life of God, see
themselves (their Lives, Liberties, and all outward enjoyments) not
their own, but the Lords, and theirs in the Lord, not a jot below
him, or at the least distance from him,

If we have the Lord, we have enough, because he is all to us, and we
the same fullness e in him: Lo, this is life, liberty, and
satisfaction. Now no outward loss or misery can make us unhappy: we
may be persecuted, yet not forsaken, cast down, yet not destroyed; 
dying, and behold we live, in bondage, yet free; because the Lord is
all this, and more to us. To live, to us is Christ, and to die is
gain. If we have a portion of outward safety amongst others, we see
it is the Lord; if not, it is the Lord; and where the Lord is, there
is Liberty: God is to us light in darkness, glory in shame, beauty
in deformity, liberty in bondage, we possess nothing, yet enjoy all
things; suffering is our crown, death our life; yea, we live upon
death daily, we cannot live without it.

Again, We are also contented with the dispose of providence in
anything that may be called ours: If any party or power command us,
our lives, liberties, or interest, it is the pleasure of the Father
in us to give up all to them: we see a divine call in it, and can
with alacrity yield obedience. Oh, it is a sweet smelling sacrifice,
acceptable with the Father, when we (the son) are thus drawn forth
to offer up our dearest interests for the world. It may be you
cannot in this apprehend me: it is no matter, the Father willeth it
should be a mystery.

Yet farther:

Our Interest of life and liberty is at your service; if you call for
it, take it; we are contented to be prodigal of it, to satisfy the
blood-thirsty spirit of any man in the Kingdom.

While we are in the enjoyment of these outward things, we use them
as if we used them not, being free to throw them off at the first
demand: we are as free to suffer, to be trampled upon, to hang and
burn, as to enjoy that outward liberty which you (so seriously and
resolutely) press after. I tell you, Sirs, suffering is our
conquest; While we are ground to pieces under any power whatsoever,
all this while we trample upon them: debasing is our exalting; in
that which you call misery and calamity, we are more than
conquerors: We dare meet you (even you, whose courage hath excelled,
whose fierce countenance makes the earth to tremble, you who are the
present terror of the Nation) and appear in a naked posture before
you; yea, throw yourselves, lives, liberties, and all upon the edge
of your cruelty; and we are sure, if you dare encounter with us
here, we shall overcome you. Ah Sirs! When you see this way of
conquest, you will throw your swords behind you in an holy despite
and scorn; you shall lay all your honour in the dust, and by that
sweet spirit of meekness shall destroy and subdue your enemies.

But secondly:

I wish you might be carried forth into a serious view of the manner
of your present actings. As your principles are poor and beggarly,
so also the manner of your Engagements is dark and fleshly. This
cloudy and veiled appearance of God amongst you, puts you upon
preposterous designs, upon low and carnal Enterprises: You have
taken away Charles his life, because otherwise he would (it's
likely) have taken yours. True, it is the good will of the Lord it
should be so, I have nothing to say against it; the Lord in this
cloud leads you forth to it, and in this you have plaid the parts of
men acting under a fleshly discovery of things. You are led forth in
a way of vengeance upon your adversaries; you sentence and shoot to
death at your pleasure; it little moves you to trample upon the
blood of your enemies; this is your victory, glory and triumph. All
this is well; you must tarry here till God moves higher amongst you.

I have only this to say to you:

Is it not a poor carnal thing for Saints, so high in profession as
you have been, to stand brangling with the world for a few carnal
enjoyments? What, the sons of everlasting peace, and engaged in a
carnal combat? Well, it is the Lord; I am satisfied. But oh, that
sweet and meek Spirit of Christ! Who, when he was reviled, reviled
not again; was persecuted, but with patience underwent it, and
committed himself to him that judged righteously. You cannot, you
dare not commit yourselves, your cause, your lives and liberties to
the Lord, and nakedly, without any carnal opposition, surrender your
interest to a divine dispose: Nay rather, Shall not your swords soon
be sheathed in the bowels of those who obstruct, or impede, your
furious march in the road of self-preservation? Poor dear hearts! It
is the lowness, weakness and darkness of God by which you are led
forth and acted. The Lord, ere long, will come forth in another
appearance amongst you; he is coming out of darkness, his secret
place, into a light and open view; he will let out a more pure glory
upon you, when, in an holy shame, you will reflect upon your present
employments.

I tell you, dearly esteemed, it is a scorn to us, either to pick, or
plead a quarrel with any party, for an outward or carnal interest;
The Lord hath showed us (and will shortly manifest to you) a more
easy and sweet way of victory; we can overcome by being conquered,
we can lose all, and yet be savers in the conclusion.

Again, for I draw homewards.

The manner of your present actings is in much fear, dread, darkness
and confusion; it is your daily thoughts and care how to complot
your designs, and lay out your work so, as that you may save
yourselves, your honour and reputation, but all is too little, you
must shortly part with all; your name, fame, success and victory
must all be forgotten, yea, you yourselves shall rejoice at your own
overtures.

You are very fearful and jealous of your defamation; you are afraid
to think of it: your spirits are involved in confusion and
distraction, for fear lest your design should betray you. These are
your imprisoned thoughts, I am very certain, but spiritual wisdom
can discover them. The Lord knows that you lie under a sad weight of
fear, terror and distraction: Fear, the pit, and a snare have taken
hold on you, disorder and confusion abounds amongst you: You grope
for the wall like the blind; you aim at liberty and privilege, but
you grope blindly after it, as knowing not which way to accomplish
it; and thus many times you sit down weeping by the Rivers of
Babylon; you are oft so overwhelmed in these troubled waters of
liberty and privilege, that you are constrained to sink under the
waves of sorrow and darkness: I know the Lord judges many of you,
and throws you down by the sad and serious consideration of your
actings; He turns your hearts, ways and enterprises upside down
before you, and I know you are under daily convictions of spirit.
Thus the dark presence of God shuts you up in fear, and keeps you
under bondage: The thick cloud of horror and confusion veils that
sweet presence, and bright splendour of peace and liberty from you;
but in an appointed time the mystery of light will break out in you,
and upon you, when in the shinings of Divine Majesty, you will
clearly and purely behold things in a naked appearance, when you
shall see no cause of fear or trouble in anything.

Those that live in love to all, see no cause to fear any; for there
is no fear in love, perfect love casts out fear: If you were in
charity with all men, you would fear no man; for charity thinks no
evil, it knows none, it fears none: All things are not yet
reconciled to you, earth and heaven are not yet agreed; but you
labour under a body and bulk of cursed enmity, and hence is the
spring of all your fear and jealousy: If you could see all men, all
interests, all power in the Lord, you would be offended at none, you
would not fear any, but would, with a sweet, patient, contented, and
quiet spirit, lie down under anything coming from a Divine dispose.
We see and behold ourselves (as in the Lord) without fear or
jealousy, because we are really reconciled to all men, all designs,
all interests; and all they that know us are carried forth in a
spirit of Love towards us. The reason why we are hated, despised,
and trampled upon, is, because the world knoweth us not, they know
not the Father in us.

In this state of ignorance we are the objects of scorn and contempt,
and it is our freedom and liberty to be so: The Lord in us, and we
in the Lord, and with him, travel together under the worlds
infirmities, and because we see it the Father's will, it is our meat
and drink to do it; we love to sweat drops of blood under all men's
offences: Throw all the wrath, malice, envy and scorn of man upon
us, we fear it not, but in the Lord we are able to bear all, and
suffer under it. Lo, thus we fill up behind the measure of the
sufferings of Christ in our flesh, the dyings of the Lord are
manifested in us daily: Here, O here's a way to bring forth peace
and unity: the Lord is coming, (he is coming) to discover it: For by
this death we ascend to a life, in all men's hearts and affections;
after this cross of hatred, we are crowned (as most choice and
precious) in all men's love and esteem, when the spirit shall
descend from on high, and be poured out upon them; they shall look
upon us (whom in the Lord they have pierced) and mourn over us with
a spirit of love and tenderness: Then shall we see of the travel of
our souls, and be therewith satisfied.

Ah my dear friends! my Soul travels again in birth with you, till
the Lord be thus formed and brought forth in you: I know many of you
are almost spent under your burthen; you are so lost in a wilderness
of confusion, That you desire and seek after a retired rest; you
begin to loath your husks, and to have some desire after your
Father's table: I say no more, he that does come, will come, and
will not tarry; behold, he comes with a recompense: you are afraid
to lay down your swords, lest you should lose your liberties; but
the Lord will recompense this seven-fold into your bosom, he is
coming forth to make you free to suffer a blessed freedom, a
glorious liberty, a sufficient recompense for the loss of all
outward glories: Is it the loss of your honour, fame and dignity
that you are afraid of? The Lord is coming to make you glad to part
with it, and with a holy rejoicing to throw it all behind you: Ah
friends! The Lord will honour you with meekness; you shall be the
fame of the world, for true valour and spiritual courage; yea (now
and not before) shall the desire of the Nations be towards you,
their lamb-like spirits of meekness and innocency will be an
enforcing invitation to the lion-hearted devourers of the world to
feed together with you in your green pastures, and to drink of your
quiet and still waters: when you are become children of this new
birth, you shall be able to play upon the hole of the asp, and to
dwell with the cockatrice in his den, oppression and tyranny shall
be destroyed before you; the sons of your afflictors shall come
bending to you: that sweet spirit of love and subjection, that God
shall bring forth in you, shall attract the hearts of the world
towards you, they shall throw down their crowns at your feet; and
shall take hold of that skirt of righteousness which is upon you,
and say, We perceive of a truth, that the Lord is in you and amongst
you. But in the meantime, you, together with the world, are shut up
in darkness, and not truly discerning one another: you fear the
world, and they are afraid of you; you are at a distance, involved
in a bloody contest, an earthly, lustful, and carnal warfare.

Where Live and Lie, and die together,
Yet but a while, it's not for ever.

Farewell.?
Post-script.

Friends,

But one word more, and I have done. I told you before, and now I say
it again, That your reputation is the fame and glory of this present
Army; you (I know) are the main supporting pillars of it. I will
tell you what I see in this, more plainly than I have hitherto
declared. I see the Lord, our spiritual Sampson, hath laid his hands
of almighty power upon (You) these Pillars of this wooden fabric, he
will disjoint you, and shake you all to pieces, and in you the whole
edifice of this swordly power shall be annihilated: the Lord will
die with it, in it (or rather out of it, and from it) and in this
death he will destroy more than you have done all your lives' time.
The Lord will here take you napping, as you are eating and drinking,
marrying, and giving in marriage to strange flesh, and the lake of
divine burning shall consume you. Oh, it will be a glorious day;
wait for it.

I have here offered a few things to a public view, I know the wise
ones amongst you will slight it, and disregard it; the form, method
and language invites not the curious and nice spirit of any man; it
hath no beauty upon it, though a great deal in it, which the Princes
of this world cannot discern. It is indeed the foolish language of
the Spirit; if you do not like it, return it again, and I will carry
it where I had it; you are like yet to have no better from me. I was
once wise as well as you, but I am now a fool, I care not who knows
it: I once also enjoyed myself, but I am now carried out of my wits,
a fool, a mad man, besides myself; if you think me any other, you
are mistaken, and it is for your sakes that I am so.

And now Friends, In him that was, is, and is to come, I take my
farewell of you: Remember what I say, (is, was, and is to come.) The
Lord was, when you were lowest; he is, now you are highest; and he
is to come, when you shall be nothing. Even so, come Lord Jesus,
come quickly.

FINIS.

His Second Part Of His Theous-Ori Apokolipikal: TheaurauJohn 
Tany
Source: https://play.google.com/books/reader?id=DH1mAAAAcAAJ 
and 
The Refiner's Fire: The Collected Works of Theaurau John Tany 
ed. Ariel Hessayon.
Title Page

THEAURAUJOHN TANI 
His Second Part 
OF HIS 
Theous-Ori 
APOKOLIPIKAL: 
OR, 
God's Light declared in Mysteries.

For which Epistles I was six months falsely imprisoned; as by 
judgement of my Lord Chief Justice Rolls, and the rest of his 
brethren the Judges upon the Upper Bench is declared.
And what I have written, I will maintain against all the 
Learned men in the world: And I challenge the whole 
Universities, and their adherents, to answer the Books, if 
they be able, or to a fair Dispute before the people. And if 
none dare appear, then I conclude that they are in the dark, 
and dare not come to the light.
 
Wrote by me
MAGI TANI EST







London, Printed by J.C. and are to be sold by Richard Moon 
in Paul's Church-yard, at the sign of the Seven Stars, 
betwixt the two North-doors. 1653.

To the Reader.

Friends and Enemies, 
Beloved, whereas in my first Book Theous ori I did promise 
unto the world speedily the second part, being then wrote, for 
both the first and second were wrote in one scene of light, 
but by reason of my false imprisonment for writing the copy, 
and the tossing from one prison to another, two of the copies 
I could not find until now lately, which were in a friend's 
hand: these things with other necessities which were laid upon 
me, was the cause that I could not discharge my promise.
Now thus much I do protest before God and His holy angels; I 
was forced to write, I neither understood nor knew what I 
wrote, and when it was wrote, I could not rest till it were 
delivered unto the people. Now what I thus wrote, Captain 
Robert Norwood did read, and by his wisdom dispute; but I 
would not have you for to conclude a oneness in us two, for 
what the Captain hath done, or doth, that is upon his account, 
and what I have done, and what I do, that is upon mine 
account; for when I was a child, I held by any thing; but now 
childishness is departed, and counsel is established on her 
throne, as a short time will manifest.
Now let the wise and prudent weigh in their secret and 
judicious judgements, and I leave it to the whole to consider 
what they could cast me in prison for, it will appear mad rage 
in them, if they have condemned me for the things they 
understood not; but blessed be the Lord, who now hath given me 
understanding in the book; and without the book, that I in my 
Master's name Jehovah, do challenge the whole clergy in the 
world to dispute in any created appearance, or any spiritual 
or divine intendant, or in the secret operating of the watery 
abyss unto, and in the bonds of Orion; or in the fruitful 
odoriferous influences of the Pleiades; or the Helm of the 
Sun; or the celestial order of the Stars central, and the 
Stars fugitive, or motional; or in the scene of angels; which 
is God's first day's work, which is not to be expressed in the 
created voice, but by hieroglyphics the scene may be somewhat 
illustrated.
Theauraujohn Taniour  
Recorder unto the Jews.

Epistle Dedicatory.
Dearly Beloved, ye select Jews, whose rising glory is as the 
Aurora in his beautiest morning, to you is this epistle 
dedicatory, for the eye of beauty it is, in the select unity, 
and not to be seen but in the evangelical scene, which is not 
the created voice, but the scene is in the source or awsome 
bottom abyss bottomless, which maxims being in their full 
import weighed, it is no less then the abyss Deity.
So Beloved, though I am in the body, my eye is in the scene of 
the Deity; from whence, as from my sun, I reflect upon my dead 
corporality; Essiam quia caelum non terra in etate.
Beloved, these confounding maxims are let down to confound the 
wisdom of men in this wise, but simple age; for the world is 
lost, and a law of restoration is sounded forth, for the 
return of the captivity of the Jews, and the again building 
the Temple, and how so impossible it seemeth unto men, yet by 
him that liveth for evermore it shall be accomplished; unto 
which verification I subscribe my name Theauraujohn High-
Priest and RECORDER to the thirteen Tribes of the Jews.
Dearly Beloved brethren, both Jews and Gentiles, the Awsome 
Abyss of my declarative, it reaches in its includement the 
celestial centre, where there is no voice but the scene of 
angels in the perfectest perfection in the scene of the Deity.
O Beloved, that you were but weighed out of your ponderous 
earth, then you might behold my scene; in which Phiriattical 
expression, I denote the illustrious beauty of the Abyss 
Deity.
O Hallelujah ori am assi selat oramus voce: The English is but 
darkness to light in comparison of the state, but here is to 
what the English will bear; O praise Jehovah in the 
acclamation of the evangelical orators, in the abyss darkness 
of this earth. There is what the English will hold.
O Beloved of God, my soul pants for your reducement, that is, 
from your dark and dead idols of your weaved traditional 
Records: and that you may be inlightened to serve the true and 
living God, the Creator of all things, who is not tied to your 
forms of names, but he dwelleth in the truth of things, which 
is the living life of all things, but in man and woman by a 
destributive love: for God is love, and where you see love 
acted, (behold all people) even there God dwelleth, and 
nowhere else, for God is love.
This state I have confirmed with an Exce, that you (the dark 
world) may know in what estate you stand that act not in love: 
woe unto you, ye are bound up in your iniquities, ye are 
sealed unto the day of vengeance, and ye now lie in the bonds 
of iniquity, and the gall of bitterness.
Now know, I cannot charge ye fighters against God so high as 
ye deserve, because deceit is your master, vanity your mind, 
rotteness your heart, corruption is your doom, and there, on 
you, wrath shall abide and remain a time, Video exce.

Yours, 
Theauraujohn Taniour 
Recorder to the 13 Tribes of the Jews.

Thus far is lately wrote.

Epistle 11.
Eltham April the 21, 1651.

The word of the Lord came unto me; Salem on arri ne, Sele mem 
in re fasiebat al denior, Sabat alli el.
The derivasy, or the English:
The God of glory from the Sky, 
Beholding humane misery; 
He sent a Son a Saviour to be, 
Behold your riddle unriddled mistery.
Thus Christ was, and is no less then the life of God, his life 
is our living life, if we are in life, else we are dead though 
we are living. Now Beloved, I come to set all things out of 
joint; That the joining joint, may be his true self, without 
man's coined inventions; for the incarnation of Christ, it is 
wrote by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, but what we have 
inserted, is neither Matthew's nor none of the rest's, you 
have not the name of many of their words, and then the 
knowledge in the Spirit, that was their light, you are very 
far from, no nearer than light to darkness: the name to the 
thing is darkness to light. Now before I begin, I desire you 
desire of God, that a clear manifest discovery may be made 
known unto you, as the truth is in Jesus, who is the light and 
life of the Father, the beauty of excellency. Now know I come 
not to asperse the true Scripture, but to take of man's 
invention, that is inserted for the true Scripture, for all is 
not Scripture that is written in the Bible, and the new 
Testament, for the truth in them both is but one truth, and 
one entire Scripture; now it is said, that Christ his second 
coming is to illustrate to the view the clear discovery of the 
wisdom of God, and reconcile the differences betwixt the Jews 
and the Gentiles, which lies in the abstract of the Old and 
New Testament. But the veil is upon both Jews and Gentiles, 
concerning the main reconcilement of both in this main maxim; 
that is, Massah El Jah, or Jehovah; but to come to the 
beginning, that is the Incarnation of Emmanuel or Jesus or 
Christ. First he was very God, equal with the Father, what was 
equal with the Father but himself? for he is, was, and shall 
be one entire essence, in himself, before all, and in product 
from him all came, even this Son which is the true Image of 
the Father.
Now I beseech you mind, the world was Christ, I am the life of 
the world, these are his words essentially, for he was the 
maker of it and all things, and let all people and nations 
know, that the maker of all things could not die, for with him 
must die all the things made in heaven and earth.
But to begin, Thus God sent forth his Son made of a woman. 
What was that? That woman was no less than the life created of 
himself; that is to say his whole creation, and he is the 
light of the whole creation. But to come to state one entire 
state, sayeth one text a woman shall compass a man: now the 
truth in that text is this hevah alsiel agroanea selma, that 
is thus much, the strength of God taketh weakness into it, 
this is the meaning of the Spirit in that text. Another text 
translated is in Isaiah, a Virgin shall conceive and bring 
forth her first born, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, 
that is God with us, this text I deny in the coherence, 
additional: thus is the words in the truth of words, alsiel 
reme a sadi el dolorum in re fasisti nebat al dele a saous in 
re a pher sele Emanuel, the English of the true text, and the 
Spirit's meaning is this; A Virgin pure doth bring forth unto 
God that living life Emmanuel; now how can you confine these 
words that are a living life operating through the whole 
creation in every figure? Now how comes this Emmanuel to be 
enclosed or the included, in the alone womb of one entire 
Virgin, when Emmanuel is the Virgin Spirit? That is, the life 
of God, living in man by operation? Now you add to that state, 
to bring in your fleshly humanity, Thus much, a Virgin shall 
conceive, and so bring it to the relation of our capacity, 
that a Virgin brought forth Jesus, the same say I, but the 
manner and meaning must be truly understood; Thus I say, them 
words have a spiritual interpretation as well as an outward 
signification.
Now mind, Mary that word is perfection, Emmanuel is perfection 
also. So they be two names, but the whole Creation that 
knoweth, knoweth that there is but one perfection. Now I say, 
that Mary the Virgin brought forth Jesus, and I say, and you 
in truth cannot deny, but that Jesus brought forth Mary, for 
without Christ made the Father nothing that was made. (Now) 
mind this state, Mary brought forth Christ, Thus Mary is 
Christ, and Christ is Mary, for both Mary and Christ they be 
perfect names, of one entire and alone thing, the Caldean 
Tongue is thus read, Osagodo dolma maret eltah assi salos 
sabdi, the English is Jesus the Saviour is that pure alone 
thing, that cannot conjoin into any one thing, for he is the 
life of the whole.
O Beloved of God, my soul pants after you, that you might be 
enlightened by the Spirit of truth, but Beloved you are so 
married to the dead letter, of whose Translations you know 
not, neither what (bait) is laid in the mystery, you know its 
originiality was not wrote in English; and let me tell you, 
that without the truth in that Spirit to the wisest man 
living, the record in Scripture is but a dark riddle. Was not 
the Jewish Rabbis as deep learned in the Scriptures in their 
literal expressions, as you great learned ones are in these 
blind times, though we may think a great light is in us, when 
indeed it is only a learned notional lie, for all learning is 
the lie, and it is the whore that John saw rise out of the 
bottomless pit; for know what man can learn in the divine 
thing, it is but to speak a curious name of he knows not what, 
for the Spirit's teaching is a turning and a converting 
teaching, which man's words is but the dead name of that 
living life, acting in power to the overturning all 
oppositions. This is the Gospel that is a powerful substance, 
compelling obedience unto itself.
Now Beloved, I come to let down the state to your capacity, 
and let no man asperse my words, but let them take a copy from 
what is inserted, that freedom I allow to all men, for my 
inserted shall not be barred from any man, and to what I have 
wrote, I shall be willing to render an account to any. How 
have I all along desired the Priests my brethren to a fair 
dispute, in giving the state or taking the state, from them to 
answer to them, yet never could obtaine it, which doth declare 
that they are in darkness, and dare not come to the light; for 
light is not ashamed, but darkness and a lie seeketh shelter.
Now mind I beseech you my brethren, for I shall put in the 
lever that raises the whole foundation. I beseech you mind, 
Christ as he is stated in your Testament, could not be born, I 
say it is blasphemy, to hold it forth according to the written 
inserted. I entreat your attentions, and be ye like the noble 
Bereans, that searched whether the things were so or no that 
were declared. Now mind, what do I seek for at any man's 
hands, or any thing that any one of you have; but blessed be 
the Lord, that hath spared me a little of that abundance, that 
he had committed to my trust, for in my washing is my 
refinement.
Now know Christ could not be properly said to be born, that 
was the birth and glorious creator of all.
Secondly, He could not be born in one, that was the life and 
strength of all.
Thirdly, He could not be begotten, that out of him all things 
was produced.
Fourthly, He could not be flesh properly, for God is the 
Spirit of life in the whole Creation.
Fifthly, He could not descend into flesh as we account,' but 
he is a Spirit, and his decent is spiritual into our spirit's, 
whereby he raises a resurrection unto himself, and by degrees 
our natural man is subjected, to the spiritual man, which is 
Christ the Lord, the life and glory of excellency in that word 
Ci. is implied union.
Sixthly, He out of whose product all was, is, and to come, 
could not, was not, nor cannot be enclosed or included, for 
know a living life in all things cannot be properly said to be 
only in one thing, or womb of a woman; If so, then where is 
the life of all the rest, that are and cannot be nowhere 
consistent but in Jesus their Saviour.
I beseech you mind, I will give you your own words, thus say 
you, the same say I, Jesus Christ was brought forth of the 
Virgin Mary, and lived on earth as man doth, till the 
appointed time of the Father, then the Spirit did descend; 
that Spirit is Jesus, even that is the holy anointing above 
his fellows.
But we have brought the humanity to be very God in the earthly 
form, which is absolute blasphemy. For thus, man to confine 
his maker into his own thing made, is to undeify God and deify 
himself, this is Antichrist in the highest degree, as to ungod 
God, and make man God. So life in this sense made death, and 
death is made life. For Ephuseos in Re ar allia-a-am in re 
fatisty nebat agoas am sele mem derata al. The derivasy, or 
the English, The Lord the God that dwells on high, cannot nor 
will not be confined to mutability; though all things created 
have their time and change, yet still he that is their 
changer, he changeth not. For his unchangeableness is their 
changeableness from better to better, not from worse to worse, 
but they are changed from glory to glory. Beloved look into 
your own selves with the enlightened eye, and when you see 
yourself begin to change you change in the beholding the glory 
of your changer, for the beginning change is the end change, 
for our beholding is our changing us into his image, or us 
into himself. So Beloved we are changed from one glory to 
another degree, but still wrought by the same Spirit, for God 
who changes all, is that only one that cases from himself, and 
changes that cased [symbol] into himself, from whence it and 
all things had their origin. Selos in Re fasisti ex in ar 
Sallu vivat in reme obbisus in re ex id in per ko non olemus 
servat, The English is this, The heavenly light is God, in the 
appearing thing, and not the appearing thing, and that that 
appeareth, is not the thing, and that that appeareth not, that 
even that is the thing of things, that is God the glorious 
creator of all things, For God is a Spirit and cannot be seen.
Now Beloved many of you would be pleased, so that I would 
prove what I declare, by that you make your God that is the 
called Scripture, for to lay down a point and run to fetch the 
Scripture, as you account it, to justify what you have laid 
down, when many times that is a lie you have laid down, and 
that is a truth in Scripture, in its own place; yet that 
Scripture by you is made a lie by your producing it. I prove 
it thus, For me to state a lie, and produce a truth to witness 
or bear out my lie, the truth is truth in itself, yet a lie in 
me, thus I name (the) name, and know not the thing.
Again, The Scripture is true, I am the lie, thus the Scripture 
is the life of God in me, I sound out from that principle by 
my voice, the acting from within, that voice is a lie though 
it be from the true Spirit of God within. For thus that that 
is a sound of, or from the thing, is not the thing, and that 
that is not the thing, is but the sound of the thing, which is 
the lie in the whole creation.
Now ye priests in England, who have sounded from Antichrist, 
and not from the true Christ; you have been and are a lie, 
thieves and robbers, deceivers, for your substance you sounded 
from was and is a lie, mistake me not, the intent is truth. 
Now I shall declare to the whole people, that that hath not 
his root in the root of Christ, is Antichrist and the false 
prophet that deceiver, that accuser, that manslayer, that 
murderer, that locust that rose out of the bottomless pit.
Now I came to unveil and unmask your deceiveableness, I 
beseech you all people, mind, know as the root is in the 
eternal being, such are the branchings forth in the 
appearances. Now ye clergy in England, this metaphorical 
expression is, and will hold a large extent, Alma amaret assa 
alui denat allo oni Sele arkat apsi find assisi negat alterum 
in Re aplaph, in sabai el. The English, The high sound from 
truth itself, is but a lie; for it is sound or name of the 
thing, and not the true thing, the sound of a lie is nothing 
in the centre, neither any thing in the product but confusion 
to unstable souls.
Now ye priests my brethren by creation, but I dissent from you 
in declaration, and turn you to your own weaved invention, 
which is your trade of lies in these nations, these nations is 
a word proper, for the lie is but one in all nations, the word 
is proper in his restriction, for it confines all under, and 
into one head or Redi.
O how have you lift up your living trumpets, for the effecting 
your own self ends. O who would not fight for the Gospel, and 
murder his brethren, he could not be of God.
When the true Gospel you knew not, but sounded out your own 
lying hearts, covered with that glorious name Gospel.
Now you have miserably ruined the Nation, and is it not just 
you who should have been lights in goodness, should be 
partakers in the work you have wrought?
Now you have declared yourselves, for by outward acts are the 
true declarations, what is done in men and acted by men: for 
as the heart is, so are the declarations. I speak your own 
words because ye should understand me. Now I shall show you 
what the Gospel is, and I shall leave the decidement betwixt 
you and me, to be decided by all people.
First, I say, That the Gospel cannot be preached by another, 
but by itself it is the declarer and declared, it is the truth 
in the root or foundation, from that root, or foundation flows 
forth the outward sound, from the inward significant. Now the 
truth within is the root of God, but the sound outwardly is 
man's voice; that is, the lie, it is Antichrist, for it 
speaketh great names, and it is but a sound, and nothing, 
which is but an airy lie fomented by man's invention.
But now if this be granted, which cannot in truth if duly 
considered cannot be denied, then priests where are you with 
your (Nomen) that name Gospel, that whore that you have decked 
up by the peoples' spoil? if the sound from the true light be 
a lie, I pray ye what is that ye sound from, that hath no 
centre in truth, but a lie in the root, and a lie in the 
branchings forth?
I speak in term that you may understand what I say. Now I 
begin to call to you for proofs from your Scripture, to 
justify your actings, or else you have not taught the Gospel, 
as you call it, but I will give you one hint to help you with; 
It is that you tax me for, because I do not cite the 
Scripture, to prove my delivered or expressions by. To which I 
answer thus, That that is not against Scripture, is the 
Scripture, so sayeth Christ; though the words do not bear the 
same expression, know all truth is but one Scripture, and all 
Scriptures make up being spelled together makes up the 
expression of but one only truth. But know when I cite a true 
maxim, and would produce a Scripture to confirm it to you, the 
translation is false in that state, and the maxim stands alone 
in strength, being its basis is founded on the truth, and it 
needs not the lie in the translation to help to uphold it.
There is a plain reason in English, but brethren ye priests, 
this is the light in me expressing itself, for to unveil your 
gross lying darkness.
But to come to prove yourselves preachers of the Gospel of 
Christ or Ambassadors. Brethren this word to ye priests, I 
will open from its original, not by learning, for I am 
unlearned in what I declare, but by the Spirit of Jesus that 
hath made me the true Jew, brought forth of the Tribe of 
Ruben, the anointed of God for the carrying back of the 
captive Jews from the North, O selat arri reme Rex sede sophim 
in absolemus in se Sopatar arma legagit el donior al. The 
English, O the heavenly light that will appear in the 
beautiful excellency of itself, in bringing together again his 
dispersed people to himself, and glorify them with his own 
glorious excellency. This is the Spirit's lettings down to ye 
poor Jews my brethren, for whose sake I have forsaken all, 
that I might seek thy wellfare with my own, both being wrapped 
in union. Thou Buteous dafter Sion Seron el, though thou art 
not gathered yet, mind thy beauty remains and the crown of thy 
glory is now a setting on.
Now to open the word Ambassador, as I promised, the words is 
connected in divers significants, as thus Em is proper Hebrew, 
Bas is Hebrew wrote in [symbol] kof derived from Koahsh. Now 
Koahsh is a various maxim; the signification is thus, 'tis the 
strength in letting down the strength, in caseing away the 
strength, in restoring or taking up in strength; it is read 
both an Affirmative and a Negative. The word is proper thus: 
Em-bas-dor, that word is singular, 'tis Hebrew Dor, 'tis 
knowledge or generation, for generation implies the single 
knowledge, which is one knowledge, that is all knowledge which 
is God the Lord, I write it in three Syllables, as thus, Em 
bas dor that is perfect Hebrew. Now you great learned Rabbis, 
will not quarrel yet untill I cipherate the significants, and 
never a one doth give a sound literally in the decipheration 
in its adherent, the word I write in three significants 
Hebraic, the radiacies is this that is Resh Jod and Caph.
Now you are all lost and will say, that no one radical doth 
give a sound in the word Em bas dor, E is the proper English 
radical: I say, that them three are the true radices in 
England, radices is the proper word: Resh Jod and Caph, are 
the true radices being wrote in Mophes, that is in the modish 
methodical method thus: Resh is God's wisdom in himself in 
man, Jod being stated behind, Resh is read negative et 
affirmative, that is negation and affirmation, thus God doth 
elusterate in Jod through Resh, and Resh combines in the 
insert with Jod, so that these two in their proper state 
stated, in this insert is thus much, God his wisdom, now add 
Caph that is an impead granted by all, now add Caph on the 
left hand, or the left point, and then she makes man, for in 
that word radical, is exact three distincts centred in one, 
that is Jod his strength and his weakness, that is the Impead 
or (Shrine) in which the divine doth shadow itself, now this 
mystery is fetched from the radical root: now close Resh Jod 
and Caph, then the truth is God's strength declared in 
weakness, which is proper in this word Em bas dor.
Now I come down from the Oriental view unto the lower 
derivasy, that you derive from this word, and its figure is 
Emissio, that word is not Latin, though it be read from that 
root, the true significant is to know, or sent; for sent, is 
knowledged as well as the word Knowledge, now the word 
concected is Bas, that word in the Hebrew is strength, and 
hath not a word of connection in any place, but the word in 
Spanish is Basshau, that is his proper sphere though used in 
Turkey, but I speak the place of the word in its proper 
regency by a created-dex-sela, which word Basshau signifies 
great, or high in esteem, the import lies in the Hebrew Bas-
shau is but a declaration from Bas, for Bas if truly 
understood doth carry in its circumferance, all that is 
strength, and strength that is life, and light doth declare 
itself.
Now Dor is read Dora, now the proper significance of Dor is a 
generation, knowledge, or knowledge in generation. Dora is 
thus much, the increase of generation, the word Dora is a 
flock, a multitude; it is wisdom, it is strength, 'tis beauty, 
'tis all, add but to Dor Aleph Hebraic, then read what you 
will of excellencies, that word Dora will bear the state. So 
you are deceived in the import of the word Dorau V or Vau give 
him but the full word, and grace in grace of word, that is in 
our English Dorau, but in Hebrew it is Vaudorau, it must be so 
wrote to bear the state, I have stated upon the maxims, that 
is to say, Dor Dorau, now spel all together Embasdor, that is 
thus much, in import a true witness bearer, that is the 
Spirit's denotation in the world Embasdor.
Now Brethren, I have found your name in its Origini. I shall 
find your declarative nature, and examine you to the true 
examination, for you are troubled at Theaurau John, and I am 
troubled at you priests, that say you are the Ambassadors of 
Christ, that word of will suit the most of you, for ye are of, 
and not in Christ.
Now I come to lay down the first ground, that is this, When 
God gives a name, he gives something with that name; it is not 
as we give our children names, but God doth give a substance, 
for he is the substance; and where he gives a name, he gives 
something else, that is himself, in his Son.
Brethren, Time will manifest it to you all, what TheaurauJohn 
is, but to come to you priests my brethren, that say you are 
called and sent, and say you are Ambassadors of Christ. Now I 
deny you to be called or sent, neither are you Christ's 
ambassadors, but thus your call is a lie. For 'tis learning, 
and learning is that whore that hath deceived the nations,' 
for it hath completed the work of Antichrist, for who is an 
Antichrist but he that denieth the Father and the Son; that is 
thus much, the Father is God, and the Son is God, and cannot 
be learned.
Now you by your learning, You have as it were made stairs, to 
pass up to heaven or to go to God, when God is a Spirit, 
infusing himself into the simple to make them wise. By this 
cheat you have deceived the nations. O how you have tortured 
and tormented the poor members of Christ, that would not allow 
your wills and fancies, if not say Amen to what you said, then 
presently they were heretics and blasphemers, when indeed 
yourselves were the men. O then you would cause the 
caterpillars, to fly from your named spiritual corts, to smite 
the poor upright, simple innocent and harmless men, then you 
would toss a man upon the horns of your altar, while he was 
forced to seek Bread.
Nay further, the strictest of your trade, was put them to 
death that opposed you, or would not be conformable to your 
Gospel will or will Gospel, that was and is your holy calling, 
or your called Jure Divine.
Brethren is not this true, that you have acted this openly, 
preached it openly? may you not be ashamed of what you have 
done? but to colour all this is your shrine, you say that the 
priests lips preserveth knowledge, I say that text is false 
translated, and them words thrust in to strengthen in your 
trade of lies. Thus I prove the priest, that is the true 
priest is knowledge, and he hath no lips nor body, for it is 
the Spirit of God dwelling in man; that is, God's image in the 
earthly form or body of man.
That that preserveth knowledge giveth knowledge, Judge ye all 
people, If the priest can give or preserve knowledge. But one 
more to open clear, that that is knowledge is a substance, and 
a substance is not a sound, and that is all the priests are, 
for they are but a sound and no more, and that that is stated 
in that text is only of a thing, and not of the thing.
Indeed the priests are quicker at their learned names than 
other men are, because it is their trade, for he is not fit to 
make a priest on, as we make priests among us men, except he 
be quick, nimble and acute, and a good scholar. Look into this 
endowments ye priests, which is your fabric you build from, 
Now thus qualified, then to the University, and there you are 
installed a priest, then you are sent to preach the Gospel as 
you call it.
But a lie you have learned, a lie you have conceived, and a 
lie you have declared; the root a lie, and the branchings 
forth they are the same.
I affirm this against all the learned priests in the world, I 
am a priest unlearned, yet knowledged; I have no learned 
tongues, yet in any state coherent to the intendant, I know 
all tongues, and will with the deepest you can pick out 
amongst all your flock of priests, I will engage in any 
material matter or divine, and spiritual intendant, and what I 
had I received in seven days, but not at your Universities.
Now priests if ye were not so mightily wrapped in partiality 
to yourselves, I would show you that miracle that you have no 
mind to see, It is a poor weak mechanic, I please you in that 
word, but to see him preach that you like not, though he 
holdeth forth to the clear view of the enlightened the Divine 
and sacred expressions, is not this a miracle? I say it is, I 
prove it so to be, and a greater than if the Spirit of God 
should take one of you from your trade of lies, and plant 
himself in you, who is truth, I tell you that the discernative 
were hard to be discovered, by reason of the lie you were 
grammared in before: for where the person is weakest and 
unfittest, there is the power of miracle most illustrated, but 
this you like not, because it spoile your engrossed trade of 
lies. Let me but come to you, and hear your sermon; I will 
show them how you oft say and unsay again, is not this lying? 
I leave to the people to judge of who are judicious.
I will state one thing that hath a great light and influence 
upon the peoples' persons and purses at this day, it is not 
taken off yet, that is, this great trouble in which the nation 
lies involved. Have not you priests piped and the people have 
danced, that dance to their own ruin and misery, & do you not 
unpipe that piped dance, but the act is too ponderous to be 
reduced. For the first piping hath killed and slain the 
people, and the second piping cannot revive again the slain. 
Look in all lands if that Babylonish whore hath not bewitched 
the people, to murder one another for the clergy's own ends, 
which is but to deceive the people more for their own rise, by 
their rule murder all, till their wills is gotten into 
Regency; this is the Clergy's work, the lying Clergy, the 
lying priests. Behold I see a day coming that these priests 
locust, or locust priests, shall be chained up or swept out of 
the Land.
For this I know, that the true Teacher shall erect his throne 
in the inward man, which is the true teacher, substance, 
priest, and voice, and act, for ye shall all be taught of God.
Priests, where will be then your lips that should preserve 
knowledge? But that lie was let in to entwine one strength to 
the priests Cabale to make it Ackkor or strong, Hoso Auallo o 
on oli sabdi, the English is, how and what shall be your high 
calling ye priests, when the Spirit is the true teacher 
dwelling in the heart of man? Then I Theauraujohn say, which 
is thus much being spoken, God's light sayeth to ye priests, 
pack and away with your trade of lies, that hath brought this 
destruction upon the people, this murdering the nations, this 
distractions in kingdoms, this oppressing one another, this 
Hatred, this unchristian like, all this hath its root from ye 
priests, Question me, I will make it good to your greater 
shame, there shall not one priest stand as now is instituted, 
and know from this very day the sharp contest doth begin, and 
the fire shall never be quenched till it hath consumed the 
whole clergy in England. O that that generous nobility were 
but planted in our state in England, that they would but 
search the root from whence all our misery flows, for know 
there can be no safe settlement unless it be upon a sure 
foundation, and there is no sure foundation, but truth itself.
Now though men cannot settle truth, nor set in truth, yet thus 
much may be done. The palpable lie may be secluded from place 
of regency, which is the clergy in England, and I will prove 
them liars, cheaters, deceivers, robbers, murderers, 
oppressors, blasphemers, covetous.
And are these men fit men for Gospel ministers? Let them that 
are thus proved be put down, and their lying silenced, and if 
I prove not the insert that is here written, I will die the 
death willingly; for I am a young Eliah amongst Baal's lying 
priests, as will shortly appear.
Brethren, would you have me to speak the truth, as it is the 
truth in Jesus? it is even thus, God's power is even at the 
very door, to overcome and overturn lying learning. For I 
beseech you mind, truth by man cannot be learned, he may by 
learning get the name, or eloquent expression of the thing by 
learning, but he is the farther off from the truth by that he 
hath learned, for truth is gotten neither by hearing nor 
learning, for it is the descent from God into our spirit's, 
that raises the resurrection of our spirit's into life, which 
is his truth, and from that root of truth within our spirit's 
being watered with the influences of his fullness, we that are 
babes grow in and by his strength till we be taken into 
himself, his takings are them of his own teaching.
Now Beloved I beseech you mind, and I will lay down the 
perfect model of every one of you, that is, what man is, and 
how composed and how actuated and how and from what operating.
Now I beseech you mind attentively, for it is the greatest 
mystery that never yet was wrote to the full, as I shall leave 
to be viewed of all authors or historiographers, who have seen 
the opinion of many learned men.
Now I Theauraujohn am unlearned and unread, in any microcosm 
or definitive adjuncts thereunto belonging, but to speak to 
all capacitites the word is this, the description of the 
little world in man or Sabastanaies, that is the same in this 
Tongue.
Now I begin, Oli cede el. The English is this, The light of 
God set in man, that is the first state.
Sede oli el Vau. The English, The light of man is set in God 
only.
There is the two states laid down. I beseech you mind, for we 
have had great disputes about this little world Man or 
Sabastanaies in his first principle. But now God hath been 
pleased to let down the state more fuller and plainer.
Now mind, First God is the Reigning Essence, or Regency 
Essence in himself alone.
Secondly, Man is a derivative essensied in that reigning 
essence, for in him we live, move, and have our being:' then 
know, that that is and doth wholly depend upon another is 
Essensied in that he doth depend upon. Now know you cannot 
give any thing to hold semblance with the Essence of God, and 
the living life of man, that is in the true propriety of 
speech, the Essence of God in man. Brethren, many of you 
cannot bear that word, but thus the Soul of man, which is the 
very same in its originallity. Now we will look into this 
descent from God to make man thus: the Soul in man is the 
angel of God, that is, the pure divine evangelical 
quintessence, which is the same in the fore-cited state.
Now the reigning Essence, or God doth cause out of himself a 
Voice Life, that abstracted out of the four Elements, a 
composure of appearances of all things, as well as the 
material or bestial body of man.
Now there is a body, there is an Essence from whom this living 
life or soul came to be placed in the abstracted four 
elements, in a visible corporal body, now there is set down 
the case, the derivative cased, the abstract of the the 
bestial body corporal.
Yet here wants the spirit of man, that the whole world cannot 
tell what it is, where it shall cease, whether in Heaven or 
Hell, now this spirit of man is to be fetched forth: for it is 
the all, that is either in bondage or in freedom.
Now priests where will your learning fetch this Spirit, that 
is the trouble of all, nay the trouble of itself. Now mind, 
this spirit of man is the quintessence of the four elements 
motional, and is always operating in the body as the coherents 
it was abstracted from, and is continually motional. Now know, 
that that giveth more motion to this quintessence of abstract 
elementary, it is the conjunction of, and with the celestial 
bodies, for their ingredients doth cooperate in the abstract, 
and of these alone, is truly the spirit of man and composed 
actuated and operated, though he thinks that himself is the 
cause of acting, so it is but subordinate to the operating of 
the celestial bodies predominance, for in truth that that doth 
act and the cause or motion be in another, the other may be 
properly be said to act, & not that that doth appear in the 
thing. Now let me tell you that this poor innocent beast or 
body of clay, doth nothing, but the Spirit of God and of man, 
them two do operate every man, under heaven. Thus I open that 
I have abstracted in three, though I know them all three to be 
trines, that is nine, but in three I lay the state down, 
because all may understand. Thus the Soul, the Spirit and the 
Body. Now as in God's regency essence their spirit is proper, 
but in his derivative essence, soul is the proper word, and 
holds thus much, Oli el the light of God in man, not of man. 
Now the Spirit of man is proper thus, because 'tis the 
quintessence abstracted out of the elementary motions with its 
recedings from the celestial influences, and thus is man's 
composure.
But now comes the main matter, I say, that the living life, 
which is the Soul of man returns to God, and cannot detract 
his ti or essence, and with obeying the inward dictatings of 
that living Life, The Spirit of man is taken into the called 
Paradise or Heaven, or Evangelical Living, and for not obeying 
the inward dictatings of that living life within the spirit of 
man, is cast forth unto utter darkness, which is counted Hell. 
Now what is this Hell or darkness? 'tis a Separation from an 
enjoyment that it was capable of; that is, Hell, and devil, 
and liar, and false prophet, they shall not come forth till 
they have paid the uttermost farthing, then shall they receive 
mercy; for know that God is good, and just, and merciful, and 
he will not punish a finite thing infinitely.
Now there is more in that Popish Tenet, than the Papish know 
of, but that they hold is a mere fantinated thing from that 
local place feigned Purgatory, Reme el Salu in re. The 
English, Mind, the height of the declarative doth undation the 
search, but this expression from the tongue you understand 
not, but thus the high notation of hell doth unbottom it. Thus 
that that hath such a high and great name that causes fear, 
'tis darkness, and darkness is not knowledge; now that that is 
not known cannot have a centre, and that that hath no centre 
cannot have a being; for if a being, it must be in God. I 
prove it thus, God is the being of all beings, and they 
refined return to their centre, from whence was their original 
fountain. Now this Hell or locality of place, I desire all the 
English Clergy, with their Essence Clergy; that is, Rome's 
called priests. For brethren you are but Rome's derivacy, and 
Rome's derivacy is from the Greek tongue, and the called 
testament, in which testament is many snares and fears to 
uphold the Pope's supremacy, and their and your trade of lies; 
and this local Hell and the Devil are the fearful 
constellations, from whence ye furiously thunder to make men 
afraid, that you may thereby strengthen yourselves by the 
people's submission unto you, and that whore learning that you 
have set up.
Now priests in short, I desire to know how you came by your 
apostolical calling, for you to say you are priests, and are 
of the apostolical institution: that I shall try, and leave it 
to the people to judge of whether ye are so or no; If it prove 
you are not, then are ye blasphemers, and that harlot's locust 
that hath deceived the nations.
And the first maxim I do lay down to prove it by is this. Hos 
se add me nelle one Sem albat as o su seon hassbu peloct adba 
deleous in re. This is the English maxim to the height it will 
bear, all people mind, for I am putting a lever into the 
priests' roots, to unbottom them from that lie, called 
apostolical calling, which they hold Juri divino. Brethren ye 
priests, here is a deep search making into your roots or 
bottoms: now comes the English from the Hebrew citation; that 
is this, I pray you mind, How flew the apostolical foreseeing 
to ye named priests, and the world never heard of it? This is 
one state in that maxim, there is two more states in that 
citation.
Now Scholars is it not strange, that from one abstract of 
language to read in English three states; as an affirmative 
and a negative, and both their derivatives in one entire 
essence. The second state though negative read is affirmative. 
I Theauraujohn Eval alsiel do declare that ye priests are 
liars and deceivers, neither have you any thing to do in, or 
with the Apostolical function, for ye are not anointed by God, 
as all and every one of his true Messengers were and are. This 
I know by what the Lord hath made know unto me.
Now if you are what you say, and would have us so to esteem 
you so, your derivative must be the cords binding us up unto 
that belief: which must be miracles signs and wonders; for 
thus you must be witnesses of his second coming, then you know 
it must be in greater appearances in glorious manifestation, 
this you cannot deny.
Brethren ye priests, I do not come to flatter you; but to hew 
and cut you up by the roots.
Another query I desire that the clergy may answer, What peace 
or reconciliation hath issued from your called Gospel in 
Europe? but woeful murdering one another for your prating and 
lying quarrels. If ye were ministers of the Gospel, then peace 
would follow your declarings: but who more ready then the 
priests to ingage the people one against another, for your own 
hellish ends. O that God would be pleased to open the eyes of 
our States, that they would but look into the clergy's black 
bottom, from whence our misery arises, for there cannot be 
peace in England till that caterpillar locust be swept out of 
the place of Regency.
Now priests you will run to the secular power, and there lies 
your cable of strength to uphold you, you say such men are 
blasphemers, and cry out upon them; and then to the Magistrate 
to help you to hold up your trade.

Now know that can be no Gospel, 
That must be upheld by a humane Law; 
But it is the Lie in the whole earth: 
For the Gospel is Love, and then no Law;
But the Law makes it a trade, and the Law is your strength.
Now show me how many converts did your Master Christ inforce 
into his congregation by a human Law? but love was the tying 
cord that bound his together.
The Law is an inforcement to idolatry, but not to the Gospel; 
because the Gospel is love.
Now priests I shall desire no favour at your hands, but that 
we may come before the state and people; and if I do not prove 
your calling a trade of lies and deceit, I will be content to 
suffer for my aspersing you, if so it be found: but I must not 
have priests to accuse, and priests to judge; this is not with 
the privilege, nor liberty, nor freedom of our Nation.
For the Bishops are gone, and I Theauraujohn say, that the 
clergy shall not long stand, therefore your rage is great: ye 
priests I pray you tell me, how many sides and turnings would 
you take, so that at last you might but turn in your own 
design, all that can be imagined. One more, how came you to 
have your holy calling conferred unto you? I deny any man can 
confer the holy gift, or holy anointing from generation to 
generation sixteen hundred year and more together. This I 
answer, If man can confer God's gift, I affirm he is as great, 
nay greater than God himself. I prove it thus, God gave his 
Spirit in fullness to Christ, being the first in the Trine, 
descending in Vive Vosa, the Apostles they were endued with 
the same Spirit, but not in that full measure. These mysteries 
no man under heaven knows yet; but that light in me who is the 
true discoverer of his own secret intendants.
One more, ye priests that have drawn unto you a congregated 
company, called members of a Church, nay you would be called 
the Church apostolical, or according to the apostolical 
institution. Now I deny any man to be a priest according to 
the apostolical institution; as for the decidement I refer to 
the judicious people to judge of. Now I say that there was 
not, nor is not any true visible Church, select in any visible 
appearance since the Apostles' time: Thus, there is true 
members but not a true gathered Church apostolical, in that 
you are deceived thus, and in this ye take the name of their 
words, but the power that did recede and accompany them words 
is retracted, and hath been since that revolution of the 
Apostles, for that manifestation was confirmed, for the 
bringing in the heathen to the acknowledgment of God, and was 
confirmed by miracles signs and wonders: Then the Spirit did 
detract, as of the detraction Christ's death was the figure.
Now I will show you what a Church apostolical was and is; the 
people are gathered by the Spirit of God, by which Spirit they 
are made a seeing and a discerning people: Then the priest 
ought to be the discerning East, and the seeing East of them 
people; then that is a head and members of which temporal 
figure Christ, and the evangelical spirit's is the truth in 
the true centre in perfection. As Moses was commanded, See 
thou make them like the pattern I showed thee in the Mount: 
Know he must be in the Mount with God, that doth take his 
pattern from God in his declarative.
Them words were wrote long ago, and now are coming forth in 
glory to be made good, which is proper to Christ's second 
coming in visible power, in signs and wonders; of which 
declarative I Theauraujohn am the morning light, declaring the 
peaceful tidings at hand.
Now ye congregated priests what a brazen whorish forehead have 
you put on yourselves, that you dare assume to yourselves the 
hight of the apostolical foreknowledge, in that you dare act, 
and give, and deliver up to Satan? Now in this you have 
declared yourselves to be Antichrist in his full lusture, in 
appearances; as I shall open plainly before all people.
First, I demand of you in my masters name Jehovah, that you do 
produce your precedent for the matter of excommunication: for 
mind, where that delivering up to Satan was acted forth by the 
Apostles, in them did the Spirit reside, and dwell, and rest 
with them in the power of sign and miracle, which is not 
declared, neither is in the called Church, and called priests: 
for what is more in you and your congregated companies then is 
in Antichrist or that Babylonish whore that is spoken of in 
Scripture? For she deceived the nations by her enchantments, 
sorceries, and witchcraft, which is but thus much. I entreat 
you mind, it is this, The word confined to men, confined to 
time, and confined to place. I beseech you to take true notice 
what Antichrist is and his sorceries; it is the confining the 
word to men, to time, and to place.
I pray mind but this citation that is stated, and it will 
unbottom and excommunicate all ye priests from your trade of 
lies. Thus prove yourselves to be any more then ye have 
learned; then so far ye are in knowledge, yet no priests; for 
let me tell you, ye know not what a priest is, Nor what that 
word priest meaneth in his full import; a priest is God's 
representative in righteousness, that is the image of God in 
man, that is the priest: now let me tell you all, even ye 
gathered Churches ye shall all be broken, and God will gather 
unto him the holy seed, from amongst you into one fold.
And now for men to assume to be priests and members, when 
indeed he is no priest, neither they all true members: for 
know that appearances doth make members, and doth not make 
true members in the intentant Church, which I deny to you, for 
ye are they that are deceived, that have got the dead name; 
but ye are not the true living thing, yet ye will take 
authority to name over men that name, and the namer is an 
abomination before God.
Therefore I desire you, that you would but look into your own 
ways, and search into the bottom; for it is darkness which is 
devilish, and ye have grievously sinned and blasphemed in 
taking and assuming unto yourselves that glorious name: when 
that is God's glorious free gift or anointing upon man, which 
is God's inscription wrote upon man Holiness to the Lord, and 
from this Institution and this engraftment in the true thing,' 
which is God's mercy.
Brethren by creation ye priests, ye are exorcists that take up 
words and names to name over and upon the people of Christ and 
his Apostles: ye intimate the name thinking by them names, to 
do miracles, which is but a mere forged falsehood; for ye 
yourselves are but the dead name; and they the Apostles were 
the true living thing in the true root: That was, I may say 
God in the bottom or root, from whence in strength that voice 
had power to cast down, and cast forth, and raise up; this was 
God's voice from the root, that overthrew all opposition; but 
for man to name them words, and the effects not follow it, is 
but Antichrist and a lie.
Brethren be not deceived, you are in better case than thus, 
you think you are rich and need nothing; when in truth you are 
but a name, and poor, and blind, and naked, and yet know not 
the lie is in your right hand, and hath deceived you; for ye 
name a name that in truth ye know not.
But now I pass to the apostolical effects; for the effects 
followed the sound or name: That was this, the blind received 
sight both in spirit and body; for the spirit is the healer of 
the same body man, and men were weaned from the love of the 
world to sell all, and distribute to every necessity as the 
pastors saw fit and needful.
But to answer this before I go any further. Ye priests are 
engrossers to yourselves greatness and pre-eminency, and you 
are Directives to your Congregations so to do: for know, the 
priest ought to be the people's eye: Then I beseech you people 
look what a directive eye you see withal, do you think your 
eye doth see apostolically or hypocritically? these two I 
leave you and the whole world to judge of.
Now I come to matter of more concernment, that is this, And 
behold I saw a new heaven and a new earth, the first heaven 
and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more 
sea; And I Theauraujohn saw the holy City, new Jerusalem come 
down in Oli-el Emasanet from God out of heaven, prepared as a 
Bride trimmed, adorned, beautified, selected, for her Husband.
Now the mystery that lies buried within them faint words or 
weak expressings, they are words of life, and power, and 
wisdom.
O sapuit ad amalum in re amantur seba oli Aneratory Salma 
magit legi amamus sede oli mem oluani saluite Te egromene 
selmat am al sede oli bene am Salu el odi selose in re. This 
is the English of the connexion, abstracted from the true 
original.
O the Wisdom free from evil, it is God himself, in his 
Reigning Essence: But man is weakness, that is evil; yet God 
doth take this weakness into strength, and adorn it with 
beauty and excellency.
That is thus much, 'tis letting down the New Jerusalem, whose 
beauty is so excellent, that it turns all the beholders of it, 
into itself.
Now I come to Ephata, and open the mysterious words which are 
these. I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first 
heaven and the first earth were passed away. I beseech you 
mind what was my brother John's meaning in this strange and 
Phiriattical expression: was it of these elementary Heavens 
that Paul spake of, the third Heaven? Or what was his meaning? 
for the word is translated into the singular number, that is 
to say, one heaven and one earth.
Now to know his and the Spirit's meaning in them words, I 
affirm he wrote that he did not understand in many places; for 
thus it is many times, the mystery is a sealed book to the 
penman of it.
The meaning of his insert, was not as it is translated, for 
the word Sabas is read Saba, and is derived from Shin, which 
imports weakness.
Now the true meaning was and is, that the first Heavens was 
passed away, and the Earth also; which is thus much, if truly 
viewed in that alone light it was wrote; It was the Jews' 
ceremonies, typifying the height of the transcendent pattern 
celestial, their abrogating and non-residence amongst men on 
Earth.
And the Earth was that beauty and delight that man had in 
these earthly celebrations of joy and rejoicing.
Now I state the last first, and the first last; Now the new 
heaven and the new earth was the Gospel of Jesus in power, 
turning all things into itself; that was the power that John 
saw should accompany the declared Truth: but it is not yet 
made good, neither could it be, until time time, time, and an 
half time; which is Christ his second coming, to reduce  both 
Jews and Gentiles, and their two dispensations into one 
radical root; which is unto the Jews Hassa Massah: I leave the 
knowledge locked in them two words, hid both from the Jews and 
Gentiles, till time can bear it on both sides into one radical 
root or Church of the first born.
Now for the word Sea, signifies a severation or partition from 
one another; or in some places the word Sea, it is understood 
properly of people.
Now if the people be all reduced into one fold, then there is 
no more Sea, that is, difference or severation; this is the 
Spirit's meaning of the new Heaven and the new Earth, wherein 
shall dwell righteousness; for they shall be reduced into one 
root, and they shall all be taught of God, that is love, and 
they taught of God shall act in love for ever. And I saw the 
holy city new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven, 
prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband: what was the 
meaning of this expression? it was the beauty of excellency 
that the spirit was beautified withal, that was so beauteous 
that it did attract to its loveliness all the beholders; for 
the Spirit operative is let down from God to man, and returns 
from man to God with its effects, or message, and marriage, 
taking man into union with God, this is that new Jerusalem 
that is ever and always the same in operation. For God is, & 
is is always no less nor greater, but the same holy for ever.
O Beloved, were we but capable of the great change at hand, O 
how ought we to walk in love one to another, not in envy and 
deceit!
Now one word to you Churches Congregated so called, do not you 
speak evil of the things you understand not; for know the word 
doth hold forth the second appearing of Christ, in a more 
visible glory then ever yet was revealed, which is the 
bringing in the Jews, and the preaching the everlasting 
Gospel, which must raise out of the Grave of oblivion the 
buried truth, and abstract that and the letting down of the 
Spirit, these two yet one in the centre, must be inserted 
together, that all Nations may flow to the City Jerusalem, for 
they shall say, of a surety God is with his people, we will go 
up to worship in Jerusalem, the Mount of God, even in Horeb. O 
avallo hesseon andi dele selose in re averietar sebat. The 
English. O the rich mercy of God shall be letten down for the 
restoring of his ancient people the Jews, to cause their 
return to their own land. Selah selalah, Selah; this 
Englished, Praise, praise, praise ye the Lord; these words do 
bear other imports as well as praise the Lord.
Wrote by me Theauraujohn high priest, Eval alsiel allal al 
Sabbah. 
Skribaiael Tani the Jew.

Epistle 12.
Wrote at Eltham, but the intendant of the delivery of this 
Epistle was at Saint Pauls Church.
O Behold, behold ye desolate stones, a resurrection, a 
resurrection is now entred into the celestial influences, for 
thy restoration: O all people behold the desolate stones, they 
are the true emblem of Sion's scattered sons and daughters; 
bur behold the accomplishment of thy sufferings the Lord hath 
finished. Behold O ye Jews, the fishers, the fishers, the 
fishers are casting forth their nets to draw thy draughts into 
multitudes, for the Lord thy God will gather thee from all 
Coasts, whither the Lord disposed thee for a time, time, time, 
and an half time, that the Lord might do his great work, for 
to give glory to his great name before the face of all 
Nations.
Kabrioses in se oli asaphim, Senebattoi shener olorico sedomen 
a sabat al et el in-re cabuisse segat alli selorum in rem 
madad alvah semmam addoremus in re faciebat olo on. The 
English of this state is this. The kabrious or gathering the 
holy people is at hand, for God will turn to her he hath laid 
by for a season, but now he will cause her to return in 
triumph's glorious majesty; and from the North her power shall 
pass unto the holy Mount; and there the Lord will feed them as 
in the days of old, and they shall reverence him with holy 
worship, even in their own land, Hosea chap. 5. and vers. 8. 
Blow ye the trumpet in Gibbeah, and the shawm in Ramah, cry 
out at Bethaven, after thee, O Benjamin. This citation binds 
not much the confirmation; but we will look into its bottom, 
for it is the eternal Spirit's citation. Now this cry out at 
Gibeah, it was a place of and in the Jews inheritance; now cry 
out, or blow the Trumpet, st is one an the same distinction: 
but as there was a literal calling upon to them people, so the 
same is now, for the return of the Jews is at hand; for whose 
sake I am sent forth, for to proclaim Israel's return: as is 
thus much in the import of my name, which is thus, The-aurau-
john, that is, God his declarer of the morning, the peaceful 
tidings of good things.
Scholars, you know Theus, then Aurau, you know them two names, 
and John is the Beloved Dove, Beloved of God, Beloved of Noah.
Brethren ye priests, though I am not learned, I begin to have 
knowledge without any books of and in your learning, but 
shortly I shall unlearn your learning, and bring in the 
influence of knowledge, unto this poor distressed and wearied 
Nation. O behold a root, a root of Jesse in the North; a 
stranger, a stranger shall return home to his own place, 
appointed of the Lord,
O apellaram in abbatorum semaim in abaalluisse in segorum 
remat ally oreneus in a salem arri beneal adoremus in se 
saluat orieba halilujah sola nos et nos-in se rogat alli dele 
mem montra baieter-in se olat addoniel Selma et salem in re. 
The English is this. O all people proclaim the great day of 
Jubilee through the land of your captivity; Say aloud that 
Sion's God comes in strength to deliver his afflicted people 
out of the Northern Iron, that hath held them long by reason 
of its strength in the yoke; but now peace and joy is coming 
from God, to do his wondrous works before the sons of men. O 
all ye people, fear the Lord, praise him, for his mercy is 
coming forth, in the deliverance of his people, like unto a 
full flowing sea, that shall drown all the opposers of his 
people; yet his inheritance they shall be safely preserved in 
these great seas of trouble that is coming upon the earth, 
even in the great storms is Israel's return, for his deliverer 
is the God the Lord, who is mighty in battle. O Beloved, God 
will reduce the nations for your sake, O ye Jews, ye holy 
seed; ye sons of Jacob, nay Israel. O salem, O salem, O salem 
ad te Israel, from thy God, who will magnify thee with beauty 
of excellency, he shall comfort thee according to the time 
wherein he hath afflicted thee, Selah.
Treas trinitatas ad me in locabit el et in se avaret sebenius 
in re orcat al dereus in se sabat allilujah in sem abatar 
aluat. The English. Three in one, to me is one, and in that 
one his only name, I speak to ye my brethren the Jews, for I 
am not sent unto the Gentiles, but unto the Jews, the Jews ye 
holy seed, the holy rock my brethren; yet ye Gentiles shall 
rejoice with his people. O Jerusalem, thou liest desolate, but 
strength is come from thy God, and the veins of thy children 
begin to receive nutriment or nourishment. Behold ada ada, thy 
watchman sees that is felicity to thee, O loving daughter 
Sion, the birds begin to feel the heat of thy Spring, for thy 
nuptials are at hand.
O diamanim hakkarim in se-el selat ori abraet addonier sela on 
abba selorum deme mentracis selat araura aluat apphi selat in 
re. The English. O the triangle of beauty is adorative, for 
thee thou poor Shulamite, for God will honour thee before all 
the nations, they shall come forth refined gold, in the midst 
of thee is holiness, thy priests shall be clothed in 
righteousness from the Lord, and an immediate answer shall go 
along with thee, that thou shalt slide no more: thy watchman 
is the holy one that will incompass thee, and under his shadow 
shalt thou sing unto thy God in safety. There is the 
Postscript Englished to a tittle, but 'tis read affirmatively 
and negatively, but it is itself without man's polluted 
invention, O seve sapuit al bene mem delos in re sebestiana 
aluat oli ponderanet allugostli albanum in re. The English 
both affirmative and negative. O the seat of wisdom is in God 
himself, that is perfection, and his showing to his people, 
they thereby are enwrapped into himself by the beauty of his 
excellency, this is affirmatively. Now to read this insert 
negatively, it is this, God doth take to himself a holy 
people, that he will gather out of all Nations through the 
strength of his own power, and he will beautify them with his 
own beauty: this is negative and affirmative, for it is God's 
will, and that is all.
As for the creature, it is as a drop of a bucket, or the dust 
of the balance. O that the creature would but truly be content 
with what he truly is, then would show forth declaratives that 
he was a citizen, engrafted into the new Jerusalem, which 
engraftment flowing forth from that root, it is Love, Peace, 
Joy and Charity. Now I desire we that are named Christians of 
the Gospel of Christ so called, would but look every one into 
himself, and see if this word Charity be in our root, and be 
not deceived, for no Christians without charity be our root, 
neither Gospel except charity, for charity is the Gospel's 
root and foundation.
Now I will show you (though I am unlearned) the original of 
this word charity, it is the word of words, and a word of the 
greatest concernment that is named in the true Scripture, for 
the word charity imports or denotes binding, the word in the 
Hebrew is Rokas, it is wrote in Sambah or Sameck, the true 
Greek word to be taken out of his Essence, which essence is 
Rokas: the Greek word derived from that Essence, it is Kias: 
the Latin word in truth, is to make these three words one 
single meaning or signification; the Latin word is Christus: 
But Scholars, I say Christos, that is the proper word in the 
Latin; now in English it is Christ, this is charity, for 
charity is Christ: Now I prove it thus, Christ in Hebrew, 
Greek, and Latin, and in English, is but one entire and alone 
root, from whence flows forth in operation one entire act or 
acting, that is, love in truth, and truth in love is charity, 
and charity in truth is Christ, the Lord ruling in love, and 
distilling in beams of mercy, so Christ is Christos Kias and 
Rokas, that is only the distinct names in their tongues of one 
very true thing, that is Charity, or Christ, or love, or 
mercy, or righteousness.
Now Beloved is it not strange that a circumcised Jew should 
bring unto the view of the world the true declarative of 
Christ the Lord, and preach Jesus the Saviour to both Jews and 
Gentiles, for the reconcilement of both into one root? and let 
me tell you ye Gentiles, that boast yourselves in your Gospel, 
and in the name Jesus; as the Lord lives, there is not one in 
ten thousands of people, nay further, not one in ten millions 
of people, knows truly what Jesus their Saviour is, and ye are 
all lost in your supposed knowing, for ye are deceived with 
the name, Jesus is the substance thing, and let me tell you, 
it is not your knowing him by name stands you in any stead, 
but it is his mercy that takes you, of his free mercy into 
himself; nothing that you can learn, neither any thing you can 
do, that purchases any favour or anger; but it is his free 
alone mercy that taketh his thing made, which is man, and the 
creation, into himself, from whence in strength it in beauty 
issued forth, and being become weak in and of itself, yet by 
God it is taken into his stable strength, there to remain in 
glory. O ollo-avallo soam arby selos in sabietar alma 
onosauruva al allat oli bene am addoremus sebat allilujah 
selorum aphaet al dele mem. The English is this. O the height 
of mercy in God, that after detraction of his thing made, he 
renews strength into His image, and so doth overcome weakness 
by its submitting to strength, and so an union is made in the 
perfection; that is to say this much, God doth cause obedience 
in the creature, and that obedience is acknowledgement of 
digression, and that acknowledgement wrought from that root 
obedience, which is truly Christ in the Soul, for he causes an 
acknowledgement, God is satisfied through him, the Spirit of 
obedient man is taken into perfection or heaven. Do not 
deceive yourselves; God is not like partial men, for God is 
love, mercy, and compassion.
Now let me show unto your view one place of Scripture so 
called, that you, and I myself, in the days when I knew not 
God was much troubled at, that is a text translated corruptly, 
from which place, that place in the Romans doth hold coherent, 
the text is this as you read it, Jacob have I loved, and Esau 
have I hated, and this was before the children were born: now 
I plainly see the Sarbax or strength, that that place in the 
Romans fetches, that is implied thus much, that it might stand 
with God's decree, according to God's election, as I have 
declared, them words were none of Paul's.
But now brethren I beseech you by the mercy you have received, 
lay by all prejudiced opinions, and mind exactly and directly, 
for it is the main asperse, that lies upon the holy, and just, 
and glorious God, it is laid upon him by the invention of man, 
first I will read the true text in the truth of words, to 
express the entire union significant; which is this, Eval-
silo-reme-arn sardet a salu odoniel. In that word odoniel is 
the main mistake, for it is rendered addoniel, the English of 
odoniel is the all-saving mercy of God, and addoniel is God in 
his declarative of Justice. Now I read the whole text coherent 
in the intendant, which is this, Jacob I love, Esau I hate. 
Now let me tell you that these two are in every man and woman 
under heaven; For Jacob is God's delight, that was as much in 
that day or time as Christ with us, for the maxims full drawn 
is both one, for it is in truth no less then the Spirit of God 
in man, or Christ in flesh. Now Esau is the Spirit of man, 
that was denoted in this word Esau, which word in the original 
signifies a searcher or pryer, or deceit, or weakness, which 
is indeed that Spirit, that Paul sayeth is enmity against God, 
or higher, it is one with the Devil: I prove it thus, Esau was 
and is that searching Spirit, that would pry into the secret 
of God, which was a Spirit of disobedience, that was and is to 
be cast forth. Now Jacob is an Hebrew word, scholars, it is 
wrote with three radices in Sambah or Sameck, that is the name 
which is denominated in the highest strength in pronunciation; 
that is the meaning when I say such a thing is wrote in Sambah 
now the characters decyphering out of this state are Resh, 
Caph and Jod. Now scholars you quarrel with me because the 
radices do not give the true tune or sound, let me demonstrate 
unto you that are the highest learned in the world in the 
state or citation, take notice and do you know, that in the 
Caballesterial insertion the true knowledge in that mystery 
lies in the very averets or Frame in the rough materials; that 
is knowing them in their true descendant, Littere, thus much, 
to know every radiace in his proper weight, in his (centre) 
original, and to know him in his true original centre; that 
is, both negatively and affirmatively, and then to know the 
true state of all his combinements in himself, and with all 
others in their various and dubious imports and compounds; 
this is one hint of Theauraujohn unto you learned ones, though 
I myself am unlearned. Now to show you Resh, Caph and Jod 
denotes Jacob, it is thus much, Resh is wisdom, Caph doth 
impede that wisdom, Jod doth illustrate through Caph and Resh, 
so to draw the consort into one entire insert, it is thus 
mnch, God's loveliness in man, or the image of God in man, 
this is Jacob, for he sayeth the inserted Scripture was the 
figure of Christ. Now I have shown you Jacob, now I come to 
show you rough Esau, he is wrote with three radices that are 
these, Sin, Zain and Hea. Now people I entreat your patience, 
while I do define this state to our great learned ones: Now 
you great learned Rabbis, If I according to your learning, had 
but stated Sambah in Shins stead, then there had been some 
sound in the pronunciation, and do but read the state 
contrary, then you might have made the stated state sounded 
Heza, and now it sounds Hezin. Now I will show you the 
original of them three radices, I hold in the Hebrew term, or 
else radax in English is the proper word: Now Hea is weakness, 
Heth is her essence,  Zaine is a fugitive compound in any 
state according to the truth in the methodical method, Shin is 
weakness, her essence lies in Sambah or Sameck, now shut these 
together, then it is the fugitive Spirit in weaknesses, that 
is the rebellious Spirit in Man, which indeed is the Devil in 
man, unto which Spirit Christ spake when he said they were of 
their Father the Devil, whose works they would do; because 
they were guided by that fugitive Spirit, that deceiver, that 
Antichrist, which hath prevailed over all nations, and now 
reigns in England in his predominatest sphere, yea and in the 
clothing of holiness, or holy zeal, and the obeyers of him are 
deceived, and know not that the Lie is in their right hand, 
and hath deceived them.
But now to come to clear the goodness of God from that charged 
partiality by man's false conception of his knowledge of him. 
I entreat you mind, First, I say as I have declared, God could 
not choose when all was wrapped in the womb of union; how 
could he choose, when nothing was produced but himself alone, 
in his alone and entire Essence? I beseech you mind, for it 
will, if duly considered, take off a great deal of trouble, 
out of both heads and hearts of many people, who lie under 
cruel bondage of this corrupt and false conception, that God 
had from eternity ordained some unto salvation, and some unto 
damnation, which is absolute blasphemy: I prove it to be 
blasphemy thus, that that can or will be partial, it is not 
God, for God is just, and just doth not nor cannot admit of 
partiality, then let all the world know that God will not act 
that himself, that he commands man being his representative to 
be warned of, which is these words spoken by God to man; that 
is this command, do just without partiality.
Now you will say, are we not as the Pots in the hand of the 
potter, and may not God do what he will? who shall say why 
doest thou so to his Maker? I pray you mind, I entreat you, I 
say no, the comparison is weakness, and it is false, I prove 
it thus, First, God is just, and he cannot be otherwise, as 
for man he is corrupt, and must be changed, to be made like 
unto God in God's righteousness: Now do you and all the world 
know, that God who I know is just, and all people will say God 
is good and just and righteous; then how can this God act 
partiality or weakness? thus, if God do condemn partiality in 
man; and if it be as you say, that God did ordain some to 
salvation, and some unto damnation, is not he partial? I say 
he is, if it be true that you affirm: but I say it is a lie 
and false that you affirm, and father it upon Paul, and God is 
wholly just and without partiality, neither did he decree any 
to damnation or salvation, as you say and affirm; but that 
point I open not yet, though I know that there is nothing that 
is wrote but shall be abstracted into truth; in which original 
it was first let down. But you will say thus, God made us, and 
he may do with us what he pleases; I answer no, for he hath 
but one attribute in that matter, and that is just mercy to 
save his thing created, and no more, I say that God had just 
mercy to create the creature, and just mercy to save the 
creature, being made, and no more, not a little. Now you in 
your weakness will say that I limit God, or confine the holy 
one; I say no, do you but truly understand what that word just 
is, and I tell you it will keep you in your own bounds, 
without censuring me, or judging God; for know just is 
perfection, neither admitting nor degating; that is to say, 
neither more or less but itself, that is in the word just. Now 
I tell you Jacob was ever saved, and ever loved; I say Jesus 
ever saved, ever a Saviour; I say Abraham ever saved; I say 
the Image of God in man, the same ever saved, by reason it is 
one entire with itself in a derivative, and will be one in 
essence at the unmodelling of every figure: For man dies, and 
the Spirit returns unto God that gave it. Now I prove of Esau 
there shall be saved; that is of that wicked or evil Spirit, 
that is the Children of the Devil, nay devilish children, Hos 
si selat-ar-al. The English is this, The Spirit of darkness 
shall be made light and saved. Non quantum sed magit sed maxci 
sele mem. The English is this. Not much nor little, but the 
thing shall be taken into rest.
Now I beseech you mind what the Spirit sayeth in this 
citation; not much nor little, but the thing; what is that 
thing, and what is the much and little? The much and little is 
nothing, but the sound of the thing in appearances; the thing, 
that is the Spirit in that much and little made obedient, it 
shall be taken into perfection or heaven, so that the 
disobeying Devil shall be made obedient, and thus indeed and 
in truth: do not flatter yourselves, for every one of us 
present is in our weak dark and blind condition, which is 
guided and ruled by the Devil, for his servants you are to 
whom you give obedience; and whom do we obey until light 
arises in us, through the operation of his powerful 
resurrection in us?
Ola ollo osonno romi deleous in se sabat al ogo olemus sebat 
arbatar allah ak obediah sab al oli mem. The English derivacy 
is this, the darkness is made light by obedience, that will in 
obedience is Christ the interceder for the accounted elect, 
but the proper word is chosen, and obedience is the choice-
maker in the marriage, and upon that knot, lock or tie doth 
the whole centre stand. Now Beloved let me entreat you but to 
consider one Scripture, as you call it, it is thus much; the 
Elect cannot be deceived. Now what that is, and where it doth 
centre, I will show you, it is in these two Hebrew words, Oli 
al, that is the height of God in man; that is the Image of God 
in man, that cannot detract nor be deceived. This point is 
held by many, but the truth in the thing is not understood.
Now mind I beseech you, was Christ sent to preach unto that 
that could not be deceived, it was vain folly so to think, and 
the greatest weakness so to think, but Christ came to cast 
forth the Devil, and to convert him that was cast forth; now 
how is this doctrine to be understood? Selam arba a sadit al 
oli mem durata sebat al oh mene seam abstrakcit oh senebassai 
elma avadet selose in re semmam. The derivacy in English is 
this. The thing accounted Devil and darkness, and perdition, 
is the false conception in man of and in the true thing; that 
is God, who is both light and darkness, neither light nor 
darkness, but the conjunct of both them two named semblances, 
that is to say light and darkness, he doth bring both them 
into one original centre, which is in God himself, from whence 
they had their issuing forth. Beloved it is not what we 
account and conceive in our weak apprehensions, but God is, 
and that is God acting in sight and dark appearances: though 
that be Devil and darkness and afflicted for sin, yet let me 
tell you 'tis light to God, for that that is to us a burden, 
'tis light from him to make us like himself, enlightning our 
Devil or darkness, which is one and the same in their 
accounted centre.
I beseech you let us plead together without prejudiced 
opinion. Now mind, I say there is but two Spirits, good and 
bad; that I do but say, for I know beyond what is said, but it 
cannot be with convenience born nor delivered, for it is a 
reading maxim, but I say as you say, there is but good and 
bad, light and darkness, heaven and hell, is not this your own 
method? you cannot deny, then I say Christ came not to call 
light or righteousness, but sinners, devils to repentance; 
these are your own words, now as I said before, to teach the 
Spirit that could not be deceived, it was vain folly that he 
that was all wisdom would not do, for the Spirit could not be 
deceived, that is the living life of man operative: But he 
came to preach to the disobedient Spirits in prison.
Now what are these? this is the disobedient Spirit in man, 
that is the Devil in man: now at Christ's own preaching this 
Devil is always cast forth, but not by man's naming Christ's 
words, or the name preaching. For I tell you, that ye are all, 
even ye priests, as far from preaching as light is from 
darkness, for ye name a shadow for a substance; for if man 
could once preach, he then is Christ, then he casteth forth at 
his voice, but it is a spiritual voice from the true centre. 
Now it may be ye would know of me what I account Christ to be? 
I answer, that the Christ that I know, he is one with the 
Father, and his declaring himself in his declaratives is the 
living life of God operative in the whole creation; that is to 
say the strength of God, in the whole created by God, this is 
Christ the Saviour, and for to account him any less, it is 
undignifying the Divine and sacred deity of God himself.
Hos se in re sagat allilujah in re affermater al in re sabat 
alui deneus in reamus, sabat halilujah al.
O the thing of things is the strength of God, in which he let 
down the created of himself; that is his Son, the light, and 
life, and strength and beauty of and in the whole work of God, 
that is the English of the fore-cited state.
O Beloved, that God would be pleased to open and unveil our 
hearts, nay spirits, that we might but see the beauty of his 
loveliness, then we shonld be drawn on of ourselves into God 
the Lord our beauty and strength, dignity and excellency.
O Amorum non Bellum. O then loveliness, not war would be our 
delight! Non oli el. It is not the light of God we act in, 
when we murder one another, but it is morse, death and 
darkness that we are in, that is the cause of such produced 
effects.
O that we truly all knew but ourselves, then we should not 
know war and oppression, and deceiving one another. Non oculos 
in re, we see not the thing that is light, that light is life, 
that life is God in its original centre.
O Olemus oramus hackkarim el hashsha bele retenent affluous in 
re. O we wil not see; because it is a bridle to our 
affections, & will curb our desires, and will at last be death 
to our actions, therefore we shut our eyes that we might not 
see, that is the English out of the fore-cited state. But a 
fire, a fire is coming in wrath, to enlighten the veiled 
darkness, in the Spirits of the sons of men, and a consumption 
shall consumed the lifted up, it is at hand, even at hand, 
even at the door. Do not deceive yourselves, brethren; do but 
look into the sons of clay, and see what a potter's work God 
is a bringing forth, breaking some, and making others fit for 
his service, O amanem salem hushsarim in re madad arkad al 
onesephari alma legaget el. The English is this, O the 
strength of the hand of God that will be manifest, for the 
reducement of the people unto obedience. Pelma hasanah al 
hegemoniah almorui in rasaiah halcu avado siah allorum sabat 
al. The English. The power of compulsion unresistable shall 
appear, and overturn all opposition, and take its own place of 
regency in its sphere, and act its own will and commands; 
which is but thus much, Christ his second coming in power.
Now I beseech you brethren let us look and see what Christ his 
second coming is: Now if you knew Christ, you might know his 
coming in a measure to yourselves, but he is not measure in 
himself; for he measures all, and is not nor cannot be 
measured nor comprehended of any, nor of all; yet Theos auran 
can declare himself, that is, the light of God can declare 
himself so far as he pleases to our capacities, that is just, 
because God is just, and no otherways. Now Christ's second 
coming is to restore, confirm and confound, and not to consume 
with fire the heavens and the earth, as we read it in many 
places of the translation; but what we read there in that 
state is a lie, falsely conceived against the true meaning of 
the Spirit, for in them books called Scripture, is the lie, as 
well as in other books.
Thus, I am in darkness, I read a truth, it is a lie unto me, 
because I am not one with that truth, though I read it to be 
made one with it; that is another lie, because I make and 
account a strength to be in that dead name, and do not look 
unto the strength that caused that produced declarative or 
name of himself, to give as it were a stand to our motional 
affections, but know that the divine and sacred teachings is 
the Spirit of God arising within you, that over-powers your 
disobedience, and doth bind up your disobedience, and doth 
cast it forth, and plant obedience in its room, which in true 
propriety of speech it is Christ in his own glory. Now one 
thing I desire to commit to your considerations; that is thus 
much, that text, that that is translated thus, Christ in us 
the hope of glory: Now if it be granted that Christ is in us, 
he is not hope, for he is glory, nay the Father's glory, and 
we do hope till Christ be come, then we seal our hope, for we 
in joy take notice of this, we are in ourselves delivered from 
that our accounted Devil, and Hell and Death. Now brethren the 
main mystery is yet hid in these two denotations; Christ in us 
the hope of glory. I say Christ in us is glory. Now comes the 
abstracts of these two into one; that is thus, when this 
effect is wrought by the Spirit, then are we not, Christ is 
all unto God only one, for we then are not our own, but we are 
Christ's, and Christ is God's, and so an union betwixt Christ 
and us, and an union betwixt God and Christ into one entire 
and alone Essence; then is the Kingdom delivered up unto God 
by Christ, and then God the Father is as he was, that is, all 
in all, and out of that all, all came forth, and into that 
all, shall all be through Christ (who is the strength of God) 
be reduced into God, and yet a visible creation of appearances 
in this world, so no end.
This is one glimps of the mystery of the divine Deity 
operative acting through itself in the illustration of itself, 
this is wisdom's work and the Spirit's teaching.
O sapua in re faciebat al donior lamed eluviah senebatoi reme 
amalum sabbat al oly mem sebe non dear al oli sede pelud alui 
a sareth hashsha obi. The English is this, O the wisdom of God 
in making and creating, and creating and making no end neither 
beginning, for what is detracted here, it is illustrated in 
another form, and that illustration eclipsed by a greater 
beauty; so in excellency there is no end, no beginning, but 
itself acting and operating in itself, through itself, and 
unto itself; this is the called Trinas personas in re, the 
three persons in the thing, but it is the thing, three 
persons, no persons but the thing, nothing but the three, no 
three but one, and that in union who is Jehovah Jere. O 
Emmanuel a hushsharim in sadoniel abrat trakxci el oli selhene 
ccai pelet al. The English. To what it will hold: O God with 
us, he is the strong builder of the creation, and the same 
strong destroyer of the creation, and the strong continuer and 
preserver of all things in appearances. O all things 
destroyed, all things decline, nothing destroyed, nothing 
declined; for God is, and is is the same always, no greater 
nor no less but himself alone.
O Brethren that you were but able to bear the influences, that 
is the infillings that are even at the very birth, it is 
loosened even from the fastenings in the womb, but yet you 
cannot receive, by reason of your weakness, which is the new 
birth that will free man from his supposed enemy. But I mnst 
pass it till time; yet that time is at hand that Satan shall 
be bound and shut up, that he shall deceive nor trouble the 
people no more, remember that word THE; People it is a word of 
limitation and distinction. Now Beloved as in the Scripture is 
many various maxims in their imports, and coherents in and 
with others being compounded, and the main is the true, 
understanding the Hebrew, radically, not literally, that is 
nothing not worth owning comparatively; for it is nothing to 
know the name, but to know the knowledge in the inside Spirit 
of them outside letters radiacles, or semblances, or 
ciphraties. Now this knowledge here inserted, I deny the 
translator or translators, that translated our Bible and New 
Testament, to have perfectly literally, then short of my 
explicatory intendant, for where the conjunct in any state was 
dubious, or stated: in a figitive maxim, as Zain, or Peres, or  
Heth in some states is fugitive, and other words of great 
importance though fugitive: the meaning of a fugitive; is 
words that wanders, and are not combinements in any state, but 
are weak, and as I may say in English frothy, or light, 
invalid, or unstable, and without solidity, this are some 
radices when they become numeral, as in man's framing to cause 
the product by them composed to give a distinct semblance or 
discription by their denotation, as in the Translation of 
Daniel, the accounted 10 chapter and the 13 verse. I pray turn 
to the place, and see what can be gathered to understand any 
thing by, and I shall show you how that error was corruptly 
stated: the words are but The Prince of the kingdom of Persia 
withstood me, and I remained there by the King of Persia. Now 
I entreat you mind, sayeth one saying, All Scripture was wrote 
for our learning. Now I demand what can be learned here more 
than mere nonsense? Now you rabbis must say it is mystery, for 
to uphold thar Babylonish whore, that is and is not, and yet 
is: Brethren let me speak to you, there is not neither in Old 
nor New Testament any thing, but it shall be opened even in 
this age, of which opening I am the morning-light, declaring 
God the power at hand. First I demand what it was that 
converted, and taught, and strengthened Daniel? you must say 
God. I say, how conveyed? you must say, and I know it was by 
the Spirit, that is accounted the holy Ghost, thar is and was 
Daniel's teacher and instructor, and is also, the teacher of 
all that is taught God; now the text is rendred in its import, 
thus. Hessi perese nelle avallet medad. That word medad the 
import is not understood in the translation, but it is 
rendered false according to true method, Alui hushsharim aval 
selos add me seret negose, that is the true text in that 
state, but it draws your three verses into one, that is thus 
much. O Daniel Beloved of God, fear not for I am with thee, 
and the King of Persia shall not prevail against thee, but 
Michael shall deliver thee, and thou shalt reign; in that word 
reign is the abstract body of the fourteenrh verse which is 
what shall come to pass in the last days; For he that reigns 
according to the import of the insert sees all, for he sees 
with God's eye. Now what is meant by the Kingdom or Prince of 
Persia that opposed Daniel? was it a temporal Prince? the 
insert speaks as it were intended, but it was not a temporal 
prince; no, it was that Spirit of darkness that opposed 
Daniel, in that he could not see clearly what he did desire to 
see; and Michael is the strength of God in teaching and 
instructing, who always prevaileth, for it is God's Spirit 
predominance. I entreat you mind, so instructed they shall 
reign in knowing and knowledge divine; that is, when God is 
their instructor: but to state the word, Madad is dubious in 
the import, for the signification is various; for it is a 
country, a place, a kingdom, a cave, a separation, an acting, 
and to this effect the word Madad, so the translators would 
make their own fancy, when they could not understand the 
import of the word Madad, as it is too much and too often all 
along in the Bible and the New Testament done. Selos in re 
affirmatar homo or sabat aluah havi sene ocas addi senatar 
allu sele mem. The English is this. It is not what vain man 
stateth or nameth, for his breath is in his nostrils or is 
vanity, he pointeth at something, and himself is nothing but a 
fleeting shadow of air, earth, fire and water, the abstract of 
these, this is man reduced, man unto his first principle, the 
Elements secondary are his essence he was abstracted, derived, 
or drawn forth from, this is your accounted man and woman, but 
the soul or life of this is God, and they are properly God's 
sole, for the creation is God's sole or foot-stool as you term 
it; mistake me not, that word doth stand dubiously to you, 
that is, God is the soul or life of the whole creation in 
Christ, and so God is man's soul and life, but you would have 
it thus, man's soul is of and from God. Brethren, it matters 
not what name we set or give, for the thing is truth; that is 
to say, the image of God in man: but this dark place is light 
to some, and it is not like Paul's Epistles, in some of them 
there is something hard to be understood, which sayeth the 
translation the unlearned and the unstable wrest, as they do 
the other Scriptures unto their own destruction.
I beseech you mind, I cannot let that place pass, for it is no 
less then blasphemy. Well may the natural Jews my brethren 
disown the Testament through their darkness, when such places 
is enforced by authority for divine Scripture, it is a 
blasphemous lie of man's invention: thus the citations is in 
the 2 of Pet. 3. and the 16 verse, these words, As one that in 
all his Epistles speaks of these things; amongst the which, 
some things are hard to be understood, which they that are 
unlearned and unstable wrest, (or pervert) as they do the 
other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. Now mind the 
quere I lay down, the first is this, to try the truth in this 
main maxim; of asperse: First, I desire of you here present, 
whether you do believe that the truth be obtained by Learning, 
the name of the Scripture; can your reading the Scriptures, 
teach the gift that in that denoted insert is mentioned? if 
you can, then I say you can command the Lord, which I deny, 
and you will not affirm; for all you can learn, is but a bare 
name, until the Spirit named be come, then it is scriptum est, 
that is, it is inwritten in the spirit of that man or woman, 
this way I received my teaching, but it is knowledge; this 
teaching cannot be destroyed, for it is truth in power, and 
not learned; for learning is the lie, it is the name of a 
thing, and it is not the thing, but the sound of a substance, 
and it is nothing itself, but an abstract of air, composed by 
the actuation of the motional man for denotation sake, and is 
nothing at all, for the highest, it is but a voice or sound, 
from the true thing which is Christ in the root. The second 
quere is this, The unlearned cannot pervert the Scriptures;" 
for unread, unlearned; I hold your own Maxime, then the 
unlearned are free from destruction of, or by perverting the 
Scriptures: I say, it is the learned (calsed Rabbis) thar 
pervert the Scripture, for the unlearned do not, nor cannot 
pervert the Scriptures, but it is the great learned ones, for 
it is their Trade for to pervert the Scriptures; but I cannot 
grant them that word they have stated upon the unlearned, that 
is destruction. Now Brethren, you understand the import of the 
word destruction, now let me tell you, that the Decree of 
Election stands you in small stead, though you account of it 
so high; if God should cut you off, and destroy you, for 
naming a few dead names of words, and spellings of letters 
together, can destroy you, or be your destruction.
Surely the priests make a small God in this place, that a few 
names wrong pronounced should cut us off or destroy us. I 
beseech you mind, what a mighty mercy of greatness and 
freeness is in God, that will cut off and destroy the 
unlearned, for wresting or pervesting the Scripture, when in 
truth they cannot, but to show you this place is charged upon 
the Clergy, the great learned ones; give them but ther own 
words, that they have stated upon the unlearned, which in 
truth is but mere nonsence, or the unlearned is free from 
perverting the Scriptures, but the great learned ones, it is 
their work; now grant them their own words, then they must be 
destroyed; but I shall not grant them that word destruction, 
only I will read the truth of the Spirit in that denotation or 
text, which they have falsly corrupted with many other 
Scriptures; the words are these, Hos in aparan alli bene an 
audet elko O Seli rem Sebat al delcoh in re. The English is 
this in that text: The Scripture is a dark mystery, that man 
cannot reach without the Spiritual light, which learned man 
perverteth to his deceiving, this is the true text as the Lord 
lives, and the Spirit's meaning.
Now priests where are you with your destruction? if not 
deceived you need no mercy, for I say deceived is the 
foundation for mercy to illustrate her heavenly influences 
into that, thereby deceit may vanish and righteousness reign; 
for where sin did abound, there grace shall abound much more.' 
O the riches, and wisdom, and excellency in God, that hath 
concluded all under blindness and ignorance, that he may have 
mercy upon all, and our greatest deceivings is the foil to set 
off and illustrate the riches of God's free measure in the 
transcendentest, magnificentest excellentest manner, 
illustriously letting down his mercy to take away our 
imbecileness, our weakness, our wickedness, unto whose 
excellency the only one in unity, yet he all variety, to whom 
be praise for ever more, Amen. No Amen in unity, Amen is in 
variety.
Wrote by me THEAURAUJOHN TANI the Jew, High priest & Recorder 
to the thirteen Tribes of the Jews.

Thus far of this Book was transcribed at the Prison-house of 
Newgate.

Epistle 13.
Wrote at Eltham.
O Beloved, the beauty of excellency is in God alone, Esa. 5. 
7, surely the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of 
Israel, and the men of Judah are his pleasant plant; but the 
Lord looked for judgement, but behold oppression, and he 
looked for righteousness, but behold a mourning or crying.
Beloved, it is to be inquired into, what the meaning is of my 
falling upon this text of Scripture, which to me after I was 
guided unto, put me to a stand or maze; and what God will 
bring out of it, as this very word, I know not one tittle. 
Beloved, God's vineyeard are ye men and women accounted, by 
denotation in the written word, and ye are so indeed, and in 
truth ye are not so, so ye are and ye are not; that is, so 
many as walk in obedience, they are vine-branches, and their 
root is Christ Jesus their Saviour risen in them, by his own 
strength and power, by whose power they are made obedient unto 
himself, by having their corruptions changed and cast forth, 
and their whole all subdued by Christ's reigning in them, and 
ingrafting them into God the Father through the union of 
Spirit; so there the beginning hath taken his end unto 
himself, and then there is an oneness in entireness as at 
first, for in Christ or Massah, God let down the creation, 
which Christ or Massah, is the strength of God, and in that 
strength, that is Christ or Massah, God restores the all of 
the creation unto himself again; that word The All, hath more 
in it then any, or all you do understand in that state that it 
doth stand in: Now under the name of this qualification you 
are vine-branches indeed.
But now to show you in truth you are deceived, and are not 
vine-branches; it is thus, in truth you are not, if not in the 
truth you are, that is to say truly, if not in the root 
Christ, ye are indeed and in truth no vine-branches, but ye 
are briars and thorns, and hinderers in appearances of the 
true vine-branches, thus are ye hinderers of the true vine-
branches; and yet your hindrance of them is a furtherance unto 
them, thus you are hindrances to them, when you do not accept 
the truth declared by them and in them, for know, your own 
neglect is their hindrance; thus you hinder them, in not being 
one with them; for they that are not with us, are against us; 
but all this is short, yet once more, ye are hinderers of the 
true vine-branches; for in truth who hinders or opposes 
Christ, but the Devil? and that Devil are ye, and the vine-
branches are we that are in Christ. Deceive not yourselves, if 
ye are not of Christ, then ye are of the Devil, there is but 
two creations, and yet but one creation, and in that one all 
creations. But to speak in term to your understanding, there 
is but two, that is to say, God and the Devil; but because you 
are pleaders for the Devil, take him unto yourselves in your 
own term, and in that you will understand him best to your own 
capacity: now let me tell you, so long as you know a Devil, 
you neither have capacity nor understanding, though I cannot 
rob you of your Devil, yet let me tell you this, if you 
understood or had true capacity in truth, then there is no 
Devil, but God who is the light showing thee his beauty, and 
that is his glorious truth, and in that truth there is no 
Devil, and this is true understanding and capacity to know God 
to be thy God, then this Devil hath been a furtherer for thy 
good.
Now mind, how hath these thornes and briars, and Devil been 
good unto the vine-branches? thus, the thorns are the pricks 
from the Devil, which doth procure our unrest, till the Devil 
hath (as I may say) hunted us home to our God, who is our safe 
cenrre, in which this cheat and cheating Devil hath no centre, 
I term it a cheat, or deceit, or deceiving.
O that God would be pleased to open your eye, then you never 
see the Devil, but you see always a Devil while you have a 
double eye or two eyes, but when you see with the single eye, 
there is then no Devil to be seen with union his eye. 
Brethren, it is your being more than truly you are, that makes 
you see a Devil, for if you did but see yourself to be your 
own self, then there is no Devil, but God alone.
O I wish from my soul that you had but the true sight, then 
there would not be this judging one another, and censuring one 
the other, but instead of this envy which is the Devil; but 
you must have it in these words, this envy is from the Devil.
But now I will show you how envy, you and the Devil are all 
one, and in one Trine, which is the dark semblances figurative 
figure of Terra Evangelius in re, that is to say, the light 
Evangelical in the thing; but to let it down from the state to 
your capacity it is this; the Devil hath his Trine in figure, 
as Christ hath his figure in earthly appearances, but in their 
absolute & adverse contrarieties: as for Christ's figure, that 
is declared already in this epistle in the vine and the vine-
branches, as Christ being the vine's root, and the branches 
narurally branching forth from that true root, which in the 
Egyptic tongue the word that holds the  method enclosed in its 
womb is Glavo, in the true Hebrew, in Primus Maxi, the word is 
Okas, now the Greek word is Theos, the Latin word Deus, there 
was in the translation of this word, in the New Testament from 
the Greek tongue the reason, I know why the word Logas or 
Logos, for the variety of diphthongs, which is the foundation 
of the Greek tongue, their connexions being so knitted one in 
another in the pronounced sound, that the true understanding 
in many words is perverted, and the sence in its extent lies 
buried.
Now let me speak my man-sight and judgement, this is my own, 
yet there is somewhat more in it then my judgement is, that 
whereas you read, In the beginning was the word, which is in 
the import Logosh, but you say Logos. Now I give you my reason 
why I sound H, as Logosh; it is because I dignify him in the 
Hebraic Resh, whose import in that compound word doth import 
or denote the binding strength, or strength word, for strong 
word will not hold; but the word Koash is this, the strong 
binding root, that word Koash will bear the maxim in his full 
denotation. Now I say if true read, before the beginning the 
root was, you say in the beginning the word was: now know your 
maxim cannot bear it in the state of God, for God was before 
appearances came forth by or in his word, judge ye all of 
this, whether that the root was before the world was made, and 
before appearances did appear, root is the properest 
denotation. Paul sayeth we are his off-spring, that is, we are 
branchings forth from that root, that was before the 
beginning, as your text is read; which translation is false in 
that state, and though I am unlearned and unread in what I 
declare, and none more ignorant, that hath any learning, set 
me own my own, and that is this, I am a liar, God is true,' 
though it be somewhat strange, yet it is true, Brethren it 
reaches every one of you.
I pray you take this to back my words withal, Paul sayeth Let 
God be true, and every man a liar, or all men are liars.
And now I come to show you the Devil, Envy and Man, and that 
last word liars will hold all. Thus, man was the image of God, 
I beseech you mind, in true propriety of speech God can have 
no image; thus I prove it, the whole altogether cannot figure 
out the image of God, but thus they do, denote unto us the 
wondrous greatness and power and sacred Majesty of God, for 
know God is to be considered in the works of his royal 
creation, and not in himself, for God is incomprehensable: I 
tell you it is as easy for a gnat to swallow both the sea and 
the land, as for man to comprehend what the eternal Majesty of 
God is.
But know I must state the word image, because that you may 
understand my term. Thus, God made man in own his image or 
likeness, this is in the high light in man, that is the soul 
in man, now the soul in man I say cannot detract its derivacy, 
but the spirit of man is motional and hath no centre, whereby 
the strength of its quick composure, that is composed of or 
from, it is in coherency in operation with the abstract it was 
abstracted from, for know the spirit of man is the abstract 
out of the quintessence of the four elements with its 
recedings from the celestial bodies in their influences, now I 
would not have any of you to mistake my denotation or meaning.
Now I will state the state in Hebrew Greek and Latin and in 
English, that if the query be queried it may be reduced, for 
the reducement of the query queried, the Hebrew denotation is 
in these words Oli-Al, that is to say, the light of God set in 
man, that is the Spirit from God, yet enclosed in flesh a 
derivative, it doth take this descent in nomination, that is 
(mind) Oli el vau, that is, the light in man is wholly set in 
God, which is the soul in man, yet Spirit from God, but soul 
will hold both from God's denotation as well as Spirit, for 
the Spirit from God is the soul in man, and the soul in man is 
set wholly in God, for in him we live and move, and have our 
being; that is the union, his tie unto himself.
Now in the Greek, the true word in the originalest denotation, 
it is Oukessi Avalle, that doth denote thus much, the 
clearness in man is the Spirit. The Latin denotation is, Ego 
sum vita mentis; that is, I am the life of the mind, or the 
mind's life, which is but thus much by denotation, the soul is 
Primus maxzi; that is to say, the first strength in man that 
is the soul, now upon the return to God spirit doth if it can 
be defined, doth in the proper place as it were take the 
precedency in the return: but mind, I ever state the soul in 
man to be Primus maxzi, that is the first strength in man, the 
denotation lies very mysterious, that is it that causes the 
exactness in my state laid down; now the first in man is the 
soul, that is the breath of God, which is the being life in 
man, that is the soul in man.
Now I come to the Spirit in man, that is truly man's all, now 
that is Secundus vita in homo, that is the second life in man, 
or the second living in man.
Now know I am coming to bring the Envy Devil and Man, all to 
make one Trine in figure, and thus I begin.
First, The soul although it be in man, and be id est primus 
Maxzi, that is, the first strength in man, yet it is not of 
man, neither hath man any benefit in that soul, until that 
secundus vita, till the second life be brought into obedience 
unto the Primus maxzi, that is the first strength, Oli el vau; 
that is thus much, the Spirit of Man, that is Secundus vita in 
orbis, that is the second life in this little world, be 
brought into obedience into Primus maxzi, that is the first 
strength in this little world man. Now this is wrought by the 
Spirit of God infusive into the Oli el vau, that is God 
infusing his Spirit, which is word, which is Gospel, which is 
light, which is life, into the soul in man, by that light 
which is God's grace in the soul, the beauty of that 
excellency in the soul, it doth illustrate into the Secundus 
vita in orbis, that is the second life in man, which is the 
spirit in man, and by that beauty, the spirit in man is made 
obedient, which obedience is Christ in us, so by this light or 
spirit from God, we are reconciled in ourselves; that is, the 
soul, and spirit, and body, for the body is acted by the 
spirit in man, and not by the Soul in that body till the light 
in the soul hath overcome the darkness in the Spirit, and a 
marriage be made betwixt the soul and the Spirit and the Body: 
now then in this marriage with us, with Christ, with God, we 
are one enlightened Trine in ourselves, one with Christ, one 
with God, and all but one; then we see him as he is, which 
sight makes us one with the Father, though a derivative, yet 
in essence, and we shall be one in regency, Brethren here I 
have shown you the beginning work, the way work, and the end 
work.
O oli el vau, amor in re sabat al halilujah in mem. The 
English of the Hebrew state is this. O the light of love set 
in the soul in man by God, the word Re doth import God in this 
state, it doth cause the ejaculations of angels to return to 
God, for his free gift of rest into the soul; this is the 
light Trine figurative figuratively the semblance, in sanctum 
sanctorum, where there is only union denoted unto us, that is 
in truth, God's love or mercy praising himself, thus God in 
mercy made a creation, and God gave mercy to restore his 
creation, this restored being restored doth sing Halilujah in 
viva vose in Evangelious in Re. The English is this, The mercy 
or the saved do sing Hallelujah, in the living voice of Angels 
in the thing: so you see God his mercy in creating, his mercy 
in receiving his created, that very mercy doth praise God, so 
in short God's mercy doth praise himself; take one place of 
Scripture, I do not bid you beleive me not it, but stand upon 
your own centre; the words are these, Thy works praise thee O 
God, and we will sing unto thy Majesty. Now I did bid you not 
believe me nor it; How? because I would not deceive you, nor 
have you deceived, and John the Baptist my brother spoke the 
same words in the import, when he said I baptize you but with 
water, but there is one that will baptise you with fire and 
the holy Ghost. John knew he was but a sound or a voice, and 
knew that a voice or sound hath no centre, but is a composure 
abstracted of air, which is but a lie or nothing, that is all 
that man can teach; but the reason that I bid you not believe 
me, nor the place cited, it is because I would not deceive 
your manhood, for the manhood will gather together a stock of 
names and words of queries and answers and notions, which is 
all but a lie till the Spirit of the Lord be come, and cast 
forth that dark deceit, and Christ erect his own glorious 
light. So I would entreat you be carefull, that ye accept not 
a sound for the substance. Now I know that God's light shall 
unveil all these things unto you, that the true truth in the 
thing may be illustrated, for Christ's coming is like fuller'-
soap or the refiner's fire, this I know and have felt, and 
from the true knowledge in me I speak, though it be in me and 
in you a truth in the heart or soul, yet that you and I both, 
and all people speak, it is but lie in the mouth, for in the 
heart is wrote Digitus Dei, that is, the finger-writing by God 
himself, you speak what is done, and from that true root in 
the soul, yet know your voice is but a sound from the thing, 
and is not the thing, and a sound is a lie and not a 
substance, for 'tis but a name of and from the thing, and not 
the thing, I instance thus, a sign or picture of a man, is not 
a man; therefore in the true propriety of true speech, it is 
no more nor no less then man's lie.
Now to come to the Devil, he hath a Trine figurative, the 
celestial Trine temporal; as thus, the Devil, envy, and man, 
make up one temporal Trine; thus the Spirit in man, nay man's 
spirit, is a Devil, and the strange birth that is brought 
forth of Devil-man or Man-Devil it is envy.
Now that word Orga, it is a Chaldee word, but it is the 
properest word to hold in truth the coherency, but thus, this 
word Orga is envy, and this envy is the Devil-man, in man, 
from man, and by man, and against man, and this is envy in 
man, or the Devil-envy-man or man-devil.
Now to come to state the connexion, that exhales and draws the 
conjunction together in this Trine; it is thus, I beseech you 
mind, Non serte pele esse, this is a Latin state, though Pele 
be the ancient Orthodoxal word in the Greek tongue. Now the 
English is thus much, Not sure nor certain being; or thus, no 
certain being not sure; this is a strange state, but we must 
have stranger yet before we can find out this Apollyon, that 
hath inbondaged us unto his strange being, that is so strange 
that it hath no centre, and not to be found out. Now let me 
speak if all Languages can find him out, or all arts, or all 
sciences, or earth, air, fire, or water, I shall reach him if 
he can be found.
Non ocare in acaos in re, Here another state more harder then 
the other, let me tell you, The light in knowledge doth find 
out the Devil, or the true knowledge doth out the Devil; but 
to open the fore-cited state, it is thus the English, mind all 
you curious quick wits, while I define unto you this deceiving 
Devil, the English of the stated Greek maxim is this, Not the 
lightest in confusion in the thing.
Sed oculus in ve alli nen. But the eye in life sees no Devil 
or darkness, but it is a severation from light, that is a 
composure of dark and seeming light, and this is Hell or 
Devil, Quando in operati avaret nel medad al in re sem addi 
aal oli abbit sole toro orabit al beneam sabat. The English is 
this, When in work he varieth, then the eye sees the Cave of 
Hell, but the high thing sees no Devil but himself, for he and 
his sight sees no evil, or darkness or devil.
Solat arry absadet ve. The English is this. The safe strength 
evadeth the lie. I have gone thus far in this search, and 
cannot find a composed Devil; that is a substance, and that 
substance a place of residence.
Quoas amalum sarbat alu alaous in amarere semer allat vel nede 
mem in re sabat altra nebat. The English is, How or why doth 
light discover the lie? Why? it is the beauty of his own 
transcendency.

The darkness is a shade for light, 
Wherein it doth itself delight. 
Thus if truly understood, 
Then the Devil is viewed.
But to let the state down, thus, God in his Essence, before he 
came forth in created appearances, was all light, and God's 
veiling himself in earthly appearances, hath eclipsed, as it 
were to the height of our expression his glory in his 
Essential Essence, in his created derivative appearances; so 
that the light shined, in the darkness, and the darkness 
comprehendeth not the light, but the light illustrating, 
causes a banishment of darkness, then there is no Devil, not 
Death, but a daily Resurrection in glory into the pure and 
divine being, which is God in and with us a derivative, yet 
one in the all light Essency, which is the Teri-al. But to 
come to state this envy, Devil, and man all in one Trine; 
thus, man is the Devil, thus the Spirit in man is the Devil, 
and that by reason of the abstract it was abstracted from, it 
is quick and fugitive and lusteth to envy, nay, 'tis envy, and 
envy is the Devil. Semus in ar I-in-e, it is the alone lustful 
deceit in man, for know whatsoever centereth not in God is a 
Devil; for in the reducement there is, as the whole Church 
called in England, for know it is but a called Church, and 
call is but a lie and not the thing, they all hold only that 
in the reducement, that we must go either to Heaven or Hell, 
unto God or unto the Devil; and these two are as it were 
paymasters, as God the Father of mercy, and the Devil the 
Father of envy: Now you that are not in God, ye must be and 
are in the Devil, thus the Devil's Trine made and upheld, thus 
the Spirit of man is man's proper all, thus it is the life of 
man as he is natural man, until that spiritual light hath made 
it one by enlightening it, and so it obeying that light, there 
is an union made in one, and so all one in union with that 
glorious Essence it was descended from; for the darkness is 
unveiled, and light hath caused obedience, so that the day and 
night are both one, and night is gone in that clear day.
Now the Devil his Trine is thus, the Devil is the serpentine 
spirit in man, that opposeth the light of God, and while that 
spirit is uncast forth, man is wholly ruled by the lusts of 
the Devil, and his acts are in darkness in all deceiveableness 
in unrighteousness, for Satan and he is one. Mind Christ's 
words to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, then Peter was the 
Devil, acting in that dark Spirit or dark light: Now how can 
it be properly said to be a dark light? thus, the light is 
life, and the darkness is death; therefore where darkness 
resides in predominance, then a dark light, but the word runs 
thus, they shall be cast into utter darkness.
Quando avalet armi assem pele avaret axzi pele Ethrati leget 
alma amaset doly. The English is this, But the state is dark, 
for it is the denotation of Hell, and you hold it all of you 
to be dark; then mind, this is a dark state, for it is Greek; 
because the major language lies in the Greek tongue, and the 
other languages are but conjuncts to the Greek, and from the 
Greek tongue, this great deceivable Devil was elustrated, 
though what he is, and where he dwells, all men that have said 
they have been Christ's ambassadors, could never define to 
this day.
Now I Engsish the dark fore-cited state, (mind) When the 
contrary receives strength, the light is eclipsed, and the 
light increasing, darkness vanisheth away, and flyeth in his 
airy Kingdom, of which Kingdom, he the Devil is Lord 
predominate; for the light causes his combinement to his airy 
region.
Now to be priest-like as you call him, though the holiness in 
all men I honour, and holiness in man or men, that is the true 
priest, and not prating man; but holy acts from the true root, 
that is a demonstration that the true priest dwells there, 
mind these words, for ye shall all be Kings and priests unto 
God, but he that nameth Christ must depart from every evil 
way. Now you say man cannot think a good thought, then know he 
cannot turn from his evil way; it is granted, but to come 
close, where the evil way is not departed from, that man hath 
but prated, and never heard Christ preach, in them words are 
included both the called priests and people: for if the priest 
be not turned, he prateth, Christ never preacheth in him, and 
Christ never sent none, but he preached in him first, and by 
their voice they sounded forth to the people, all this is 
nothing yet, for the Devil may and doth speak as high in 
expressing words of godliness, as any in light can do; but 
when you come to search the root, it is but a sound and not a 
doing or reforming to that that was spoken, for Brethren until 
you are doers you are Devils and liars.
I will give you one more, It is not he that heareth my words, 
sayeth our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, but he that doth my 
will, that man or woman, or both, are my Disciples, but the 
same that the Spirit did denote to my brother John the 
Baptist, the same confer I unto your capacity to judge of, 
upon whom thou seest the Spirit descend and abide, that is he: 
So I say to you, whomsoever you see acting in love and 
charity, I had need speak this in plain English words, that 
you may all hear what I mean by the sound I deliver to you: it 
is this, When thou doest as thou wouldest be done unto; yet 
further, for illustration into thy duty that thou owest unto 
thy Brethren, feed thine enemy, clothe him, see none want. If 
one ask, if thou givest, make his condition thine own: Thus, 
if I were as he is, would I be content with the same I give 
unto him? Now brethren, I am come to sound you all in the 
Truth, in the true Gospel. Now apply my words unto myself, 
then you will say that I said a sound is a lie, and not the 
thing. Now I grant it, every sound is a lie. And now brethren 
look to it; for ye are all but sounds and liars, if ye are not 
doers; for the doer shall be justified in his deed.
Yet to come close, brethren; mind, I beseech you in the bowels 
of Christ Jesus our Lord and Saviour; leave off this lying in 
hearing, and in truth be doing: for ye dishonour the glorious 
Truth in the declarative of the true Gospel. Let me tell you, 
which to my grief I speak it, God is witness upon my soul that 
I lie not, That in many places where God and Christ was never 
named, they walk more near the true Gospel, which is doing, 
then ye do, that have all this preaching. But truly, if it 
were in power, the operation would be demonstrated in our holy 
walking before God, the glorious Majesty of heaven and earth.
Now I will speak in the English Tongue, the English actions 
that reign in predominance. O how are our holy named Zealots, 
how are they become more brutish in their lustful living, then 
the bestial beast! I am ashamed to name, but the meaning you 
know. O how doth oaths and drunkenness reign amongst us, for 
which the land shall mourn! But how doth deceit and fraud 
reign, even from the highest unto the lowest! O how do we cry 
up the Gospel, as though that were a cloak to cover over all 
our wickednesses! I beseech you hear me: ye are the very 
Mystery of Iniquity that my brother John saw: for it is but a 
name, and no true thing. And judge ye by your own doings, if 
God by his Spirit hath preached in you. I say, the Gospel and 
Christ you deny, and are bewitched with the highest witchcraft 
of Satan; and ye are the highest form of the devils scholars, 
that ever he taught: for his servants ye are, to whom ye obey. 
Lay Christ's rule home, and you see that it is doing that 
Christ commanded, and not saying. So now, until a turning unto 
obedience is come, ye are liars, deceivers, and the Devil's 
children.
Now I come to speak to the Devil and his regency, that is in 
the air; for he is said to be predominate in the air: Sub Luna 
non in Patreas a Salma onari reme Emishcio veniente amorarum 
in a Salma aphny audaret almat alliel in re sabuisti almat on 
or. This state is the highest that can be wrote or denoted, 
Sub Luna in re. For know, the Moon is knit in the thing, that 
thing in this state is Jehovah; but to open the Maxzi Sub 
Luna. Our fore-fathers were peaceful men, and in their peace, 
they saw no Devil, but we that are the weak children of the 
strong parents, we see a Devil: Now you think the state is 
easy, I tell you, the deepest judgement in the world by 
literal learning, cannot reach the meaning of the English; for 
there is all that can be spoken. But to this devil, and to 
show his regency, it is the air, from whence he and all things 
Sub Luna was abstracted. Now know, the Devil by his power is 
greater than man, for man is the Minor abstract, but if man 
and the Devil were but drawn to their full method, they are 
Signam Ve, that is, a sign of that same sign: I could wish 
that it were understood: but to come to the Devil's Trine in 
earthly appearances, it is this, the Devil-man, or Man-devil, 
but you will have it the Devil in man. Now how could the Devil 
deceive man with signs and lying wonders? thus, wonders and 
miracles are two distinct appearances, I prove it thus.
The miracle is the foundation that wonder doth rise upon, and 
the wonder is notional, the miracle is the substance. Now the 
miracle in man, is the Devil's wonder, thus God doth infuse 
grace into the soul, and then the Devil is cast forth, that is 
the Devil's wonder at being cast forth.
Now this wonderer is the deceit in man, which is indeed the 
devil in man. Now know, that the Devil's Trine hath the same 
expression in names, and quick, nay quicker than the 
expression from the true root.
But now to come to the true view of God and the Devil. God's 
Trine is acted in Christ, and by obedience we are made sons in 
God. Now the Devil his Trine is acted by the spirit of man, 
and that acteth evil continually; and the greatest Devil's 
scholars, they are the highest in Scripture, and by that they 
cover their own devilish ends.
One more: when they both cease speaking, and come to be 
declared by the Prophet in them, then the true root doth 
discover by his Prophet, that the teaching was true, which 
teaching is acted forth in the bowels of mercy and compassion, 
in distributive acts of mercy to the poor and afflicted. But 
when we look for the fruits that the man that hath not the 
Root Christ in him, although he hath sounded never so high and 
holily, yet I pray take Christ's own mark to know them by, 
that is this, By their fruits ye shall know them. And what 
fruits do the deceived bring forth? I give it a small name; 
but indeed, what fruits do liars, that is, notional men, bring 
forth? only dishonour: I beseech you mind, for it is the axe 
that is laid unto the root of all trees: for when ye have as 
it were reached the sphere or heaven with expression of words 
in curious eloquent oratory, and come down to your lives and 
conversations, why ye were angels in expression, and Devils in 
actions. Now let me tell you the truth, ye notional people, ye 
children of your father the Devil; he was a liar from the 
beginning. O that them words from the beginning were but truly 
understood; but it is not reached, but unto ye Devil's 
children, that is, deceive not yourselves, every one of you 
that are hearers and not doers, ye are the Devil's children: 
for know, ye are but a name, and ye are not the thing 
comprehended in that name: and so is your father the devil; 
for he is a name, and no true thing, but a lie, and so are ye, 
while ye are hearers and not doers: for the Devil your father 
would be like God, and ye would be like Christ's people, in 
hearing and speaking with the highest; but here comes the 
separating axe, that is thus: Christ's people are operative 
doers, and ye are only operative hearers; and your doing is 
contrary to that you have heard; so there you have set to your 
seals; for doing is the sealing to others what God the 
merciful creator and Lord of heaven and earth hath done in us. 
Therefore I entreat all in Christ's stead, never hear more, 
unless ye resolve to be doers of his will, whose voice you 
seemingly desire to hear: for in hearing, and not doing, ye 
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, which is even at 
the very door, ready to seize upon all disobedient hearers, 
and not doers of the things they have heard: for God shall 
render wrath in fury, like flames of fire, upon the 
disobedient hearers. Not he that heareth my Word, but he that 
doth my will, even that same man or woman is my disciple. Let 
me tell you, one doing is better than all the hearing that 
ever you heard in all your days.
Now this that I have spoken, it is the prophet that is sent, 
Non homo in prophecie, sed propishe in re sem mam. The English 
is this: Man is not the prophesying prophet, but the prophet 
is the prophecy; and yet both in one, that is to say, in 
truth. Man is not the prophet, but the light in man from God, 
that, even that is the true teaching prophet. Now know, that 
this prophet is never sent forth to one man at one time to 
reside in; but it is God's light at the time of God's 
pleasure, when the people are lost, to renew them, and 
connects them together by his prophet, that is his union 
spirit, in his appointed gathered all.
Now I will discover unto you the notes or signs that you may 
know the truth in the prophet, whether it be true or no that 
he declares: And I will come unto the highest instalments, 
thus: first, the Spirit of the Lord by communion goeth forth 
to gather the people: not by man's voice are the people 
gathered, but by God's power in his own Spirit: for man's 
voice is a lie, but the true strength gatherer is the spirit 
of the Lord. Now know, that I know God will gather a true 
figurative Church in England, and that gathering is the cause 
of all the trouble upon the spirit's of men at this day: and 
as the light doth increase, so doth molestation and trouble 
increase upon the natural man, for Antichrist must be before 
Christ in his creation: for out of a confused Chaos God's 
union shall be perfectly selected out. That is this work that 
is in the earth; it is Therakx alli, that is the high revolve 
of the revolution of the JEWS, and their calling, that is a 
turning from dark and dead names, and dead idols, though 
supposed God's, to serve and worship the true and living God, 
that made heaven and earth, and all things.
Now I come to denote the prophet, that is as it were the head 
unto the members. I beseech you mind, in that headship he is 
servant unto all. Mind this state: for it was Christ's own 
example, Who will be greatest among you, let him be servant 
unto all. That was Christ's own example: for he washed his 
disciples' feet. Now this humility hath cast out the Devil, 
which is pride and exaltation, and this lies written upon the 
spirit of that man in whom the Spirit is in the flue or 
fullness of it.
I have nothing but that I have received, neither do I 
understand what I have received: But it is itself, and I am 
yours to serve you in love, which is the Gospel in truth, and 
truth in love is Christ, and Christ is God's. So much for the 
first notation of Devitie Devinam, of the divine riches or 
spiritual gift, or the Spirit's teachings, or the spirit of 
prophecy.
The second note of the true Spirit dwelling in man, is this. 
The man must and is for the time taken wholly into the 
Spiritual work; that is this, his delight is so far drawn into 
that lovely beauty of excellency, that his love is wholly in 
that divine light, so that he hates all ends and by-respects, 
only advancing the glorious illustration of that beauteous 
excellency by voice of breath, and doth seal it with a holy, 
godly, liberal life, compassionate unto all. Thus much Paul 
said, Walk as we are an example unto you, Be ye followers of 
us as we are of Christ the Lord, for whose sake we have 
forsaken all, and do count all things but dung in comparison 
of Christ Jesus our Lord. Lex talionis in re. The right 
understanding is Christ in the thing, or the thing is Christ 
in the right understanding. But brethren, I would not have you 
ignorant of what hath been the reward of our Lord and Master, 
and of the Apostles his brethren and servants; and all they 
that will live up in the life of godliness, they must suffer 
persecution: for are we greater in this weak age, than Christ 
our Lord and Master was? Was not he counted a deceiver, a 
deluder, a drunkard, and a devil, and gluttonous? As it was 
then, so it is at this day: for then darkness did persecute 
light; even so it is at this day. O how are we censured for 
Ranters, for blasphemers, and of the Devil. Now for what cause 
is this that we suffer? it is first to make us perfect through 
sufferings, that we may be made partakers of his holiness; 
secondly, that it might fill up the measure of their 
wickedness, that destruction might come and take centre in 
this nation, in these words, Fill ye up the measure of your 
sins.
Now brethren let me speak unto you, not I, but Christ in me, I 
beseech you walk so that your walking in, and doing from that 
root Christ, your life may be demonstrated unto the sons of 
men, that the life of Christ lives in you you in it, and from 
that inliving life within ye, act outward acts of 
righteousness and holiness, without which no man shall the 
Lord; and although ye are condemned for blasphemy and 
blasphemers, yet I beseech you for Christ's sake, let your 
light of doing acts of mercy be great, that so the 
illustration of that beauteous truth may be by you so 
illustrated, that they may be ashamed, that have and do 
asperse and speak evil of you wrongfully; and know I act the 
life of the Gospel, which is doing, that you call blasphemy. 
So worship I the God of my forefathers in truth and 
righteousness; and let me tell you, that my blasphemy is 
better than your high cry of the name holiness. Brethren, I 
would not have any man to take the name for the thing; as to 
say that the Bible and New Testament are the holy Scriptures, 
and the Gospel, and the holy word of God, of which they are 
only the bare names, and not the thing, they say or name what 
was done, and what is to do, and that is all the stead they 
stand you in. But what is done in thee, O thou man and woman? 
them names and spelling, and much invention of man interwoven 
in the named Scripture. Now the word of God written upon the 
soul, that is the Scriptum est; that is, it is written in the 
Spirit, what is that that is written? it is this, holiness 
unto the Lord, written in thy soul by that finger of God, that 
is it that shall stand thee in stead, and not what is writ in 
another or by another, or what another shall write: for let me 
tell thee, O thou man and woman, where and when God writes 
that, then the false conception in man or woman ceases, which 
power is in the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, as he is a 
Saviour and not in them dead names called Gospel or Scripture, 
that doth only name a name of his saving us, but it is his 
substance without name that doth save us and deliver us.
So Beloved I would not have you deceived with the dead name, 
but the desire of my soul is, that you with my own 
engraftment, may be placed in the true thing, which is God the 
Lord.
Now Beloved I walking and thus acting, know that that you in 
me count blasphemy, is a glorious declarative of truth in 
righteousness, from that sngraftment which is Christ in the 
soul; it is greater than your calling the letter the word of 
God, and the holy Gospel of Christ.
Now let me tell you, that though you see and understand it 
not, Paul said, and testified what I have declared, and prove 
me in this point a blasphemer, and you must prove Paul a 
blasphemer. This I prove, I say that the name is not the 
thing, but a sound from the thing, a sound is not a substance; 
an so by consequence a lie, and nothing but an abstract of 
ayr. Paul sayeth that the letter is dead, and death killeth. 
What odds is there betwixt Paul's words and mine in this 
state? thus, Paul may name, or plant, and Apollo may water, 
but God giveth the blessing. Now if the letter be dead, know 
then all men it is a lie. I prove it thus: Things in death, or 
dead, are not lively: for of what is dead, there is but a 
name, and a name is but a lie; for the substance there is 
withdrawn into the thing, which is the life of all things; and 
the name is but the dead ashes of that appearance. Judge ye 
all people, is the name life? Is it life as thus, to 
illustrate: I say I will give such a thing unto such a one, 
that is but name, and it is good to the party, when it is 
done, that is received from the giver. So all names are a lie, 
till done be centred in that named name, that is, the thing 
spoken of, or promised, be wholly really performed unto the 
promised. So you see all names are nothings; and when the 
substance is come, the promised name is returned into the 
acted thing.
Now draw all into one Maxzim, it is thus: God is the thing of 
all things: and thing is as proper to denote the excellentest 
union, as any word in any or all languages. I tell you it is a 
higher import in the Ori Abba, than JEHOVAH. You cannot nor 
must not tell me, though you speak from your received opinion, 
what the highest denotation is in any one Language or Tongue; 
for I know all Tongues and Languages; and they are but one 
lighted life in the V E.
But brethren, know God is the Life, and all things are but 
names issued out from that one Life; do but reduce them dead 
names to the living thing, then they are not dead names as 
they were, but living things in the thing: that state lies 
dubious, and so it shall stand unrefined yet. Now Paul's words 
were the very same, for (sayeth he) The letter killeth, and 
the name is dead, but the word of God abideth for ever, 
turning all things, and planting, and transplanting all things 
according to its own pleasure. Now the word of God endureth 
for ever, because it is the life on whom all dependances 
dependeth; but death, that is, all names are but a lie, and 
nothing but vanity in appearances: So you see that a name is 
not the thing, neither is the written insert called the 
Scripture, the word of God: for God's writing is not upon 
paper, but in the heart and spirit of his chosen ones. So 
brethren, deceive yourselves no longer with that dead idol of 
your own making, for it is good in its place, if a seeing eye 
enlightened do view it, he values it at the true value: for 
brethren, our not being ourselves, makes us see double, and 
that double sight overthrows our true valuation, for that that 
is good in his own place, by our esteem of it, it doth thereby 
become a God unto us, for what man over-values, or over-
esteems, it is his idol, and by consequence his God. Let me 
speak; in the days of our vanity how many God's have we 
sacrificed unto? Now the shortest way to give a definition to 
the query, it is this, What have we not sacrificed unto? Do 
not mistake me; the sacrificing unto is this, it is obedience 
unto that that is not God: as thus: I esteem Gold, my love is 
drawn unto, nay into it; what will not I do, that that God 
will not reward me for? Because every God doth seemingly 
promise reward: for every God doth give himself, if adored, to 
the person adoring. Or thus, again; I worship Honour: how do I 
idolize that God, that will but procure me Honour! for Honour 
is the God I look to be rewarded with: Though man goes many 
ways unto his God, yet the end he counts his safe centre, and 
the centre is the end, and so a God. One more, thus: God the 
great Creator of heaven and earth, is he unto whom all 
obedience is due. Now he that doth give that due, that is only 
due unto God alone, unto any creature or creatures, it is to 
deny God his Creator his Royal pre-eminence. Now this 
sacrifice doth every man in his dark condition, as the Apostle 
sayeth, Such were we in times past, when we lived in the lusts 
of our own desire, fulfilling our envious minds in all 
lustfulness. But now mind; here is that that destroys all; but 
here comes the separating power of breaking asunder our 
connexion, that is God's word coming in power: But when the 
mercifulness of God our Saviour appeared, not through the 
righteousness that we had done; but mind, of his free mercy he 
saved us, by renewing into our souls the new birth; whereby 
they and we, and all that are enlightened, are renewed by the 
principle of obedience: this is, lust is cast forth, and 
obedience is planted and set upon the right object, that is, 
upon God; and then it acts righteousness, and righteously.
O Beloved, you high account of the name Gospel and Christians: 
it is the name that is the cause of your greater loss for the 
true Gospel of Jesus Christ is this done in our souls or 
spirits; we doing unto others, from that gift which is God's 
free mercy unto us: we declare the work of God done in us, 
unto the glory of God the Father, the free giver of that free 
gift: for brethren, the Apostles must be as bad as ye hold me, 
in this state, Be ye doers of his will, and not only hearers, 
only deceiving yourselves. All hearing is but a lie, that is, 
deceiving, until doing be come: for the doer shall be 
justified in his deed; and the hearer, which is but a sound, 
and a lie, shall be cast forth, and the doer is he, and only 
he, that shall be received into Christ the Lord: this, this is 
the true Gospel. Si Deus almoraram in re. The English is, Love 
is obeying the thing in all his commands.
Alui hessena amphi sele oraous-sebe-olat-al. The English is 
this: The height in love doth illustrate in the doer, to the 
example and invitation of others. 
O agomeon in a salms onary in reab oly odoneus. O the height 
of love in the creature, is in obedience acting the commands 
of the Creator & Savior. 
O alpha in cretura in re saguisse elma amaset in rem. The 
English is this: The beginning in the creature, is the light 
from the Creator, whereby he acts obedience unto the Lord his 
God sola alone.
Theauraujohn Tani the Jew.

Epistle 14.
Wrote at Eltham.
O Beloved brethren, that eternal word or root, it is the 
Gospel, it is not the named word, but it is the power Gospel 
in the soul, which is not Christ in name but word, God in 
power overturning the name and planting the thing, for the 
true Gospel hath not nor cannot bear any name that is ciphered 
out in letters, for it is the new creation within the soul; 
and a spiritual work in truth of term cannot be named, for a 
Spirit is spiritual; what is the meaning of spiritual? it is 
in import in the word, as if it should be said, thou Spirit 
art all, and to all there is not nor can be no proper name at 
all.
Brethren, my insert is beyond apostolical, for it is 
evangelical, and if you have the evangelical eye, then you see 
it mystery, the literal eye sees me not, I am life, if ye see 
me ye are one with me, nay we, and as many as do see are all 
but one in the union, for through Christ that is obedience, we 
are made one with the Father in the celestial centre.
But Beloved, now I come to cut your state that you are so fast 
stated in and upon, and I shall show your deceiveable state 
stated, and held, and maintained; and thus I begin, I will 
give your state the precedency, for it was a name, and that 
name was the written Bible and New Testament, their names are 
called, and were called so before you and I were born; that 
is, they were called the word of God, the glorious Gospel of 
Christ, the holy Scriptures. Non sabbah litteras sed sperituus 
devinus. The English is, The written letters are not holy, but 
the intendant Spirit it is holy, and holy cannot stand on 
paper and ink, but in the souls of men in that figure or 
image, being that man he is the fairest flower in God's field, 
within this terrestrial orb, and as wholly stands in the soul 
of man, which is but obedience from man unto God, so wholly 
stands the centre-bearer in the whole creation. Beloved, you 
that are taught in the Spirit, know what is spoken: for unto 
you is that teaching given, to understand the mysteries of the 
kingdom.
Now brethren know, that your composure of letters and names in 
the Bible and the New Testament, cannot give true knowledge in 
this mystery of the kingdom: for the mystery in the kingdom it 
is spiritual, and no name can define a spiritual thing; for 
this is the reason, the one is truth, the other is a lie; 
thus, the spirit it is truth, truth it hath a centre, nay it 
is the centre of all things, and all sounds or names are but 
compositions, semblances, and semblances are no substances, 
and no substance no centre, therefore nothing, a mere idea, a 
mere lie, a fancy, a shadow, a vanity.
Now you will say that I deny the Scriptures, now I join issue 
with you yourselves mine enemies, you shall be judge; first, 
it is true I do deny the Scriptures as you hold them forth, 
nor you understand not what you do hold forth, that is it I 
affirm: for the insert or Scripture in many places is true 
according to inserting or writing, but it is made a lie by 
your practising. This is the Scripture I affirm to be true 
Scripture.
First, I hold the Scripture to be true if truly wrote, you 
understand me not, I pass now, I tell you you understand not 
the Scripture, but you make the Scripture false, for the 
Scripture is trune, they admonish all to love one another, 
then wherefore doest thou see thy brother in need? and 
wherefore dost thou wrong thy neighbour to set up thyself? The 
reason is this, I pray you mind, thy self is thy Scripture, 
and thou hast denied the literal word of God, that thou 
callest the word of God and the Gospel, butthou deniest Christ 
the Lord, and his commands are cast behind thy back, and thou 
art both Scripture, Law, and Word, and Gospel, thy self, and 
so indeed thou art the high Antichrist; that is, Christ, the 
Law, the Word, the Gospel, the Scripture, all these thou art 
enemy unto, nay a destroyer of them all.
Brethren, out of love I entreat you, out of knowledge I do 
admonish you, be ye warned of this main condemnation that 
floweth forth upon you by your own knowledge and forwardness. 
I beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus our Lord and 
Saviour, remember the words of my brother Peter the apostle, 
they were these, in the days of our ignorance God winked at, 
but now that all should come to the knowledge of the truth.
Now Brethren I beseech you mind, what you curious and eloquent 
and quick witted ones have gotten by your affirming that the 
Scriptures, as the Bible and the New Testament, is the word of 
God, now you know that the word of God abideth for ever, and 
it is a word of power and discerning between the joints and 
the marrow, nay betwixt the soul and the spirit. I beseech you 
mind, it discerneth betwixt the apostolical doctrine and the 
evangelical declarative, whereof and from that root I affirm, 
that is the evangelical expression, it is beyond the 
apostolical insertation or writing, but to come to the word of 
God, I affirm it to be himself, for if it be true word, it is 
true God, for God and his word are not two but one entire only 
one: now know God's word is of that power, nay it is that 
power that over-turneth all things into itself.
Now mind I beseech you, the Scripture that you say is the word 
of God, you are a greater and stronger word than it, for it 
calls for obedience, you will not obey, therefore by 
consequence you are a greater God than the Scripture or the 
word of God, which ye call or count to be the word of God. 
Would you know the highest of what it is? I tell you it is the 
writing apostolical pointing to the life evangelical, of which 
things I am come forth to speak unto, that you might not be no 
longer deceived by the apostolical dead name, but to be drawn 
to the view in light into the evangelical living thing.
Now mind, upon this comes your condemnation that you know the 
Scriptures, and hold them in so high esteem in the name, as 
for to be the true word of God, and though ye say this, and 
dispute thus, and persecute them that say not as you say.
I entreat you take notice, you are the abominable beliers of 
your own word of God as you call it, for you say it is truth, 
then why act you not in that truth? Again you say you know it 
to be God's word, then know that if it were God's own word, 
and thou taught that knowledg by God, who is the giver of 
knowledge, thereby to know him to be the only true God, this 
knowledge turneth the receiver of it into obedience, and then 
he sees God as he is, for he seeth God with God's own eye; 
that is true sight without mixture: Now if God had taught 
thee, then it had been effectual to the turning thee into 
obedience, and know so taught so kept, for where God teaches 
he keeps, and obedience acts forth in distributives of mercy, 
love, pity and compassion, for God's teachings are always 
effectings, and from them effectings flow forth actings of 
mercy unto thy poor distressed brethren, which is a declared 
seal unto the people, that thou art taught by God himself, and 
sealed with God's seal, for know so long as you are but 
sayers, ye are devils and liars, and when you come to be 
doers, then ye begin to declare that God hath taught you the 
true Gospel, as for ye and your Gospel, and your word of God, 
so long as it lies in the tongue so long it is a lie, until 
the tongue in that body be turned into hands, and them hands 
be made doing distributively unto every one in necessity, then 
I say Id east non literas sed spiritus et divitie. The English 
is this, It is not letters or names but the spirit's riches, 
which is planted in the soul, and hath silenced the lying 
tongue, and hath caused an operation in the hands to be acted 
forth unto the members of the same body, whereof Christ is the 
head, if ye will be Christ's disciples ye are to sell all and 
follow him as he hath commanded, this is the word of God, and 
you know the text, then how are ye Christ's servants 
withstanding the commands of your master? but I take this for 
granted, this is a hard saying, and who can bear it?
I answer, he that commanded it, for if thou wert but out of 
thy devilish knowledge, then thou wast in Christ's strength, 
and his strength is thy strength if he be thy teacher, then no 
command is hard, because the strength that commanded in that 
same strength it is obeyed.
But now I will show you how you are all cheated and deceived 
that are not in that strength, it is thus, ye are learners of 
Christ, and ye are treasurers up of names, and verses, and 
texts, and disputes, and answers, all this is learning of 
Christ. Now I Theauraujohn say and declare this day, that 
Christ cannot be learned nor taught, for know that the height 
of learning is but getting the name. But I beseech you 
brethren, mind, it is God's free gift conferring the thing 
into the soul; that is it that makes an oneness betwixt thee 
and himself, thou hast learned the name, but he is the true 
thing, that will not nor cannot stoop to thy naming his name, 
for the name is a mere lie without the thing, which lie are 
thou until the thing named be come, which thing is God's free 
gift or Christ in the soul; alas what makes all this disunion 
or division amongst us, and variety of opinions as is amongst 
us at this day? I will show you the reason, it is because we 
gather unto us names, and them names are variously named, and 
so by this we ourselves gather ourselves into these 
opinionated names and gatherings together, but mind, we are 
not gathered by God himself, but ourselves gather ourselves 
into selected companies, and then judge others that are not as 
we are, when indeed we are all this while but a name which is 
but a lie, for know if we were gathered by the Spirit of God, 
then no division would be amongst us, but an entire oneness in 
the union Spirit, for whom and them that the Lord gathers they 
continue, for they are centered in the alone centre.
Now here is the difference betwixt our gathering ourselves 
into churches and companies and we being gathered by God's 
Spirit: it's gathering us thus, God gathers all out of us; 
that is, all our names, notions, oppositions and prejudices, & 
after them weeds are gathered, and bound up and cast forth, 
then he maketh the great Allah alba, that is, the high white 
plain in us and of us, and in that white plain he gathers 
together and plants in that plain, made plain by his own word, 
this to be expressed in words Hevi-altiel. The English is to 
say, Behold the great plain of the Lord's making.
Now this is the Lord's paper fitted for him to ensign himself 
in. Now this plain being thus made, now comes the ensignment, 
which in words is thus denoted in Hebrew, Oli el vau, which is 
in import as the words do stand relatives unto Hevi altiel. 
The English is this, The whole light in man is again set in 
God, this is the second Viva vita; that is, The spirit of man 
is made obedient to act God's will, and from this ensignment 
flows holiness unto the Lord.
Now thus gathered, thus they ever stand, and that that keeps 
them it is degitus dei in kor allah apparan hashsha. The 
English from this Hebraic state it is this, That that keeps 
them it is the finger of God wrote upon and in the clean and 
high table in the heart or soul of man, by the high strength 
of God in power overturning all false writings, and then 
engraving himself in his holy mount, for sayeth the Lord I 
dwell in the humble and meek spirit.
Now ye proud ones, consider who is it that dwells in you: for 
God dwells in the humble plain soul, in the dejected spirit. O 
Beloved, the mourning spirit is an angel's feast! O a poor 
pure heart is the Evangelical Throne! Therefore ye poor, ye 
weak, ye nothings in yourselves, why are ye cast down? it is 
because the Spirit of God doth rest upon ye, and in that glory 
that now you see yourselves nothing, then are ye the happiest 
happy, for your low nothingness in yourselves, it is Christ's 
riches in you that hath made you so, and ye are clothed with 
all, and that all is the riches of Christ, which is God's free 
mercy, that hath taken you into himself; so now you are not 
your own natural selves, but you are spiritually Christ's, and 
Christ is God's: O happy thrice happy are ye, when you are no 
longer your natural selves! then are ye the Lord's by his 
grace in us, then is the Temple builded in the spiritual 
Jerusalem, which word doth in the import denote thus much, The 
high peace is safe rest to the weary soul, that lies in the 
word Jerusalem.
Now one word to ye assembled companies of dissembling deceived 
people, truly I love you all every one; now why do ye jar and 
disjoint and fall asunder one from another? the reason is 
this, man's weakness was the cause of the conjunct or 
combinement into assemblies; now know you it is strength that 
doth gather the true gathered, and strength doth continue this 
gathered, and doth knit them gathered into an oneness with 
himself, this is God's gathering, for man's gathering is 
weakness; and know that as soon as light doth appear in 
strength into any one in your congregated companies, weakness 
cannot withstand strength, so then your gathering is 
ungathered by a higher strength; now because you being 
weakness, cannot comprehend that strength of light that is let 
down into the soul of that party or parties, you cry out they 
are deceived and deluded, when indeed yourselves are the 
people.
Now unto that party so drawn up, your name Gospel was unto 
that party Word, and Power, and Gospel and Life, in which word 
had you all been gathered at first, you could not have been 
separated, but ye were but bare name, which is but an idea of 
the thing, for know that the substance casts forth the shadow.
Alas! Brethren, God hath a Church (as you term it) of the Jews 
in England, nay the glory of all lands lies in its root, and 
it is going forth, for whose sake I am a messenger, a Jew, nay 
the Jew crying before the way, the way and light is coming 
forth like a full flowing sea.
Brethren, I beseech you hear me, and weigh it seriously; know 
that there is the greatest work to be done in England that 
ever the sons of men viewed.
First, Take this one hint in me, that am standing before you, 
I say that now is the time of temptation coming upon the 
world, such as hath not yet been. Now know before that the 
Lord came upon me in that great power, I was humbled fourteen 
weeks by fasting and praying divers days, seeking earnestly to 
God, but at length the power fell upon me, and I leave the 
effect to try the power, by whose power it was, then was I 
smote dumb, blind, and dead, before the eyes of hundreds, and 
then twenty-one days my sufferings was unspeakable through 
many temptations. I was deprived of my understanding a long 
time; now forty weeks I wrote in the languages, and understood 
not one word, God is my witness I lie not, I was made to make 
a distribution of much.
Now unto you I have read my epistles since my converse amongst 
you, and could not speak to dispute untill the last day. I 
have been smote twice dead, and forced upon the return of my 
spirit to declare woe and distruction unto this bloody City 
London.
Now I beseech you consider all these things, for they are but 
in figure what this land must suffer; yet I see no man turn 
from his evil ways. Nay brethren in all ages God never 
destroyed a nation, but the people had warning, and look into 
your own hearts, if ye have light judge ye; how can the 
hypocritical nation stand, the deceit of the World? But alas 
we cannot see until we feel! but know God is coming shortly in 
vengeance, to take high soul from under feet, bearing a proud 
heart, and he will make an evenness in our pride, for the 
proud shall be destroyed, and the humility of the humble shall 
be exalted, for affliction will make us know and own one 
another, when we are all naked, then there will be an evenness 
and an oneness, and this way God is coming and he comes in 
haste; therefore be ye humbled low, that the Lord may exalt 
you in his due time, for now is the hour of temptation coming 
upon all the world, the Lord will make a potter's work amongst 
the sons of men; because their stock is a doctrine of vanity, 
for Christ cannot be learned, Jeremiah the 10 and the 8 verse, 
and the 10 verse in that chapter, But the Lord is the God of 
truth, he is the living God, and an everlasting King, at his 
anger the earth shall tremble, and the nations cannot abide 
his wrath, take the 14 verse of the same chapter, the words 
are these, but it is an abortive birth unto the wise man, the 
words are these, Every man is a beast by his own knowledge. 
Then wise men they standing most upon their own knowledge, 
they are the greatest beasts. Qoarum in a salma manasaret elma 
a sadetpelko oni operat parma sadit veret. The English is 
this, The high knowledge in man's self, it is the high working 
Antichrist that hath all along and doth still deceive the 
people in the world or upon the earth; so Antichrist is not in 
Rome, but the word Roma will bear the denotation, for it holds 
height, but not the situation in Rome: for Rome so called, 
must give way unto her elder sister England, for she hath 
gotten the start of all the world, and know that now she is in 
her height, and suddenly shall be destroyed, and out of her 
fall righteousness shall rise unto the whose world, this I 
know by the Spirit of the Lord, and after the sharp scourge 
England shall be Primus maxzi in Evangelious in Re. The 
English is this, The first undeniable strength in the 
Evangelical thing of light.
O segat amabatar alvah hassary ackad el vau abret axci penan 
pathro horbas absit hegemonias alpha aparet. The English of 
this Hebrew state is, O the knowledge by the spirit that shall 
be engrafted in this Nation after that affliction hath opened 
the way for the plant to be let into to take root, and from 
that root light shall spring unto the whole earth. This hath 
been by the Spirit revealed unto many, that from the North the 
root shall grow, and so unto the holy Mount in Judea, and then 
the Temple's restoration in the transcendentest, 
magnificentest, excellentest glorious glorified glory. 
Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna, Alvat al. These things I know and 
have seen, Even I Theauraujohn Tani high priest, with that eye 
that is sight itself.
Now one word to the scorners of light, Go on, your days of 
account slumbers not, for know judgement is already begun at 
the house of God, and know that the sinners shall not 'scape 
unpunished, do but consider the high falling away in England, 
even the very highest stars are fallen, and Satan worketh 
swiftly, for his time is but short; and great refinings in a 
short bit of time, nay mite, nay half mite, nay minute of 
time, nay it is not to be defined in truth's rule, it is so 
short.
Non statis in ko saluat seabbris segat aluat hoi-sele mem. The 
time is so short that I cannot state it, for time is and it is 
time, and for a nothing that is, man is nothing, and for 
nothing to state a time in a centre it cannot be, for the 
centre is time, and time is the centre, here is wisdom to the 
wise, and understanding to the prudent, time is, time is not, 
not is time, and time is not, now times are two, and times are 
one, not two times but one, and that only one, In trinas in 
re, that is three in one thing.
O Beloved if ye perceive any thing in me that is light, know 
that it is this, That I know the land shall be destroyed; 
therefore I beseech you that fear the Lord humble yourselves, 
and walk low in love, for the time of vengeance hastens: O a 
fire is coming, I tremble to hear thereof, therefore walk 
humbly before God that in the evil day you may escape, as 
brands plucked out of the fire.
Brethren, what I say unto you, I practice in my own person, 
for abstinence and sorrow are my companions, crying to God for 
my people's gathering, and my complaint unto my God is this, O 
Lord thou hast made me naked before this people, and hast 
caused terrible things to be declared, when I was not myself, 
but know that mad men (so mad & fools) your own proverb is, 
oft speak truth. I have cryed in the streets, I have declared 
what I have received, yet who among you is departed from his 
evil ways? My heart panteth and my spirit faileth and is 
weary, because I see such small turnings unto God by 
obedience.
O Beloved, that you were not more stupid than the beasts in 
your understanding you might easily perceive, that if there be 
any God, as by many mens and womens living they declare that 
there is not (else) they would not, nor durst not do now as 
they do in this time of deceit.
O shall not the Lord throw down his wrath in his fury and 
anger upon this hypocritical, this all-tongue nation! But O 
people, deeds of mercy is not amongst ye! for the Lord hath 
looked from heaven, and behold nothing but oppression is found 
in her.
Now know O England, that thou art but a scourge to others to 
be scourged for scourging. O ye that fear the Lord, happy are 
ye, for when destruction comes upon the World, then even then 
is the time of your rejoicing, for the righteous shall rejoice 
when he seeth the vengeance coming.
Now we that fear the Lord are now dead, but in afflictions 
then we live; so Beloved unto you poor dejected ones am I 
sent, with the Olive-leaf of peace, even unto you, who are the 
precious ones in the sight of the Lord, though in low esteem 
in the world, nay necessity so overpowereth you, that many of 
you want bread. O this wanting bread in our nation doth 
declare we live but in the name Gospel, for refreshing the 
poor and relieving the needy this is the Gospel's true thing; 
for which my soul mourns in secret, to hear and see the name 
Gospel cryed so high, and doing which is the true Gospel's not 
owned amongst us. O what a dishonour is it to the Gospel, that 
amongst us care is not taken to supply the poor.
Now I will show you the reason, it is this; every man being a 
Gospel unto himself, that is the cause; I prove it thus, if 
thou did once own Christ's words to be Gospel, then thy self 
Gospel is cast forth, but thou ownest thy own Gospel, that is, 
thy own self-will to be the truest Gospel, and so Christ and 
his Gospel is cast forth, for thou sayest Christ shall not 
reign over thee, by thy actions in plain English words thou 
declared no less: therefore brethren I beseech you every one 
of you free yourselves from this high deceit, and set to your 
seals that it is true, for doing is a seal unto others what 
the Lord by his Spirit hath done in thee, try whether thy 
walking and actions be ruled by Christ's prescript or writing, 
which thou callest the word of God; now if thou actest 
contrary thou art word and Gospel, and God unto thy self for 
his ye are to whom ye obey; one thing I will state clear to 
you wise ones, the point is this, you say that the Bible and 
the New Testament, they are the word of God, I say you belie 
them in saying so, for know if God's word were of no more 
power and force in itself, then it is in the insert or 
testament, I say you are a greater word and a God than that 
is; I prove it thus, that that you say is God's word commands 
obedience unto something, you in actions act contrary, how can 
this be God's word that cannot overpower you?
I pray you mind. Now you are God's word, for the greatest 
strength that is God's word, and your strength commands that 
that is there commanded, and you act freely your own will; now 
let all judge wherher that you be not a greater word, than 
that you calls God's word, nay you make it a Lie, and become a 
God unto yourselves.
Let all people judge, now for you to acknowledge that writing 
to be God's word, and you are not reformed by that word; I 
tell you you make God a liar, thus, God sayeth that his word 
is life, and you say you know it to be so, why then knowledge 
in truth of that word it is life, unto all that it is 
commanded unto, but it is death to thee, because thou hast 
taken the bare notional name, and unto thee was the word never 
sent in power, which is the communicated thing.
Now let me speak unto you, here is the difference, Christ 
sayeth, I am the door the way and the life, Christ sayeth, I 
am the eternal word; now what is this unto any man, until 
Christ be become thus unto us? I tell you we are before he 
come and abide with us, we are unclean spirit's, witches, and 
sorcerers, deceivers, for we would climb over another way than 
Christ hath taught us, I am the door sayeth Christ, but your 
actions answer for you, you will go in another way, that is, 
by the power of your own strength.
This is every name and national gatherer in the whole world, 
which is cast forth at Christ's own appearing, and then all 
that you counted gain unto you, is become loss unto you, 
through the excellency that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
O that ye did but know what this Lord Jesus Christ is, or that 
you could bear my knowledge in the thing. El massah arkad axsi 
sephraim aspah salma oni pele labat arbattha koersirn semar 
axsi. The English to what it will bear, God the Saviour is 
only strong and omnipotent in every thing, and he alone is the 
restorer of himself in the whole creation in appearances, for 
this end were they created, that they may be preserved through 
destruction, nothing can be saved until it be destroyed, for 
destruction is absolute salvation by Christ.
Now hear a word O England, that is this, I know God is 
bringing about Zach. 10:3, My wrath was, but I know now it is 
kindled against the Shepherds, and he will visit the goats, 
but the Lord will visit the house of Judah, and will make them 
as his beautiful horse in the day of battle, the 4. verse 5 
and 6, and so on, for this work am I called and sent, for the 
proclaiming Israel's return, for the Lord will build her 
again, that he hath destroyed, and plant her in the 
magnificentest beauty of beauties, as is thus much, the Jews 
and Jerusalem shall be exalted beauty out of all beauties into 
one beauteousness, in royal magnificence and adorative glory.
Now ye Jews my Brethren, be ye doers of works of mercy, which 
doth declare the strength of the Gentile's Gospel, being 
planted in your living souls, and do not as the Gentiles do, 
that make a great sound of the name Gospel in the tongue, but 
in heart and life they deny the power, and they now crucifY 
Christ as the Jews did in times past; for the Gentiles name a 
name, and yet abhor the thing that is included in that name, 
but they are become a Law unto themselves, in that they have 
abhorred the Gospel, and departed from it in its power, 
Zachary the 12 Chapter, verse the second, and so forward, 
these insertations of the Prophets are my witness and the Jews 
strength, for to uphold their drooping spirits.
Beloved had you but eyes to see my sphere I move in, you might 
see the apostolical body for to be thick clay and ponderous to 
that evangelical lustre I recede from, the apostolical 
doctrine was light in the evangelical part of it, but then he 
that views it, he must have the evangelical eye, but know that 
the Jews' ceremonies were beauteous for a time, and then 
vanished the apostolical beauteous for its time, which time is 
ended, they were both beauteous in their times and new ended; 
but now comes the evangelical living, of which they both were 
but dark types, yet in them days splendorous; now know if God 
should cease from varieties, he must cease from being God, but 
he is various in his creation, and them various is the 
declarer of his entire union, there lies the Mystery.
Now ye that be talking and prating Gentiles, we that are 
ingrafted Jews; that is, God's strength hath subdued us unto 
himself, we are doers of deeds of mercy unto them that are in 
necessity, and not only literal hearers thereby deceiving 
ourselves, as ye literal notional Christians or Gentiles are, 
for not he that heareth my words, but he that doeth my will, 
even that very man or woman, it is Christ's disciple or 
disciples; therefore none come to hear me more, unless ye 
intend to make a true spelling, that is doing what you hear 
commanded, for ye are mockers of God by your so hearing and 
not doing, better had it been for you that you never had 
heard, than having heard a command commanded in them words you 
hold to be a truth, and yet you disobey this truth: now let me 
tell you your condemnation is just, and out of your own mouth 
against your own self it must and will pass, I have heard this 
word, it is truth, it commands righteousness, thou actest 
wickedness; here is thy judgement. Now brethren had God come 
unto you first in the power of his word, you had been 
enlightened within the soul, and that light is strength to 
obey, if by Christ it be taught, but you are so quick you will 
come in by the name Gospel, and your own bestial reason must 
be your own guide, and so you are guided in your own strength, 
from Christ unto the high Antichrist, now who is an 
Antichrist? even he that denies the Father and the Son, who 
denies the Father and the Son? even all that obey not the 
commands of Christ, which doth bring us unto God in union: so 
you may plainly see, and by that sight save a great deal of 
time that you spend in study, that your brains are and have 
been employed in about Antichrist, for if not Christ, then 
Antichrist. So now look no more for Antichrist abroad or at 
Rome. For thou O man in darkness art Antichrist, the Devil, 
the false prophet, the sorcerer, the witchcraft, the liar, 
this is every man in his dark state, and we thrust it off one 
unto another, and one country unto another nation, when indeed 
it is Antichrist his trade to keep our eyes without, lest we 
should see his deceit within, Antichrist is the whore that 
wipes her mouth, as it is said, saying with an amazonian face, 
I have done no wrong, when she hath acted what she can.
Beloved thus dark are we, being but the mystery of iniquity. 
Brethren Jeremiah the 8. and the 7. verse, these words, even 
the stork in the air knoweth her appointed times, and the 
birds their season, but my people knoweth not the judgements 
of the Lord, read the 8 verse and so unto the 12 verse, add to 
this Ezekiel the 5 chapter and the 5. verse, so unto the 12, 
this was a sentence against Jerusalem, but now I say and know, 
Tremble, tremble, tremble, O England, for thy decree it is 
sealed, and from the sealing the declaring is gone forth to 
warn the people that destruction is at the very door, 
therefore I beseech you lay it to heart, let every one cry 
unto God, though we are, neither shall be delivered, yet 
thereby we may be humbled, that when the judgment is come it 
may find us not proud but humble, There is an humbling in man 
as Ahab humbled himself, and went softly, it prevented 
judgment: but I fear that you are rocked in the strength of 
pride, and you and your pride will fall together, how many of 
you have made a covenant with death, and you will not be 
released that evil: it is a proud heart, that is the seal of 
deaths covenant, be watchful that a proud heart be not found 
in thee, then thon art fast tied in death's covenant.
Revelations the 6 and the 5 verse, And the seal being opened, 
I saw a black horse, and he that sat on him had balances in 
his hand.
Beloved I am carried thus from one text to another, but here I 
stand, for it is my centre place or place centre; that is, for 
to weigh the substance out of and from the seeming substances, 
for know my work is to weigh both the thing and the name, and 
to give honour unto the thing, and to curse the name, for it 
is one with the figure my brother Jesus caused, would you know 
who or what Jesus cursed? It was the flourishing fig tree, 
that was a show of a goodly good tree afar off, to dark eyes; 
but to come close to the fig tree, and you my brethren, then 
the fig tree are ye, and ye are the fig tree, for ye are full 
of beauteous leaves of expression, but come to the fruit ye 
are Devils in action. Now you count the expression strange, 
but it it is true, therefore to be owned by you, if you will 
do the Devil's work be not ashamed of your master's name: now 
here you will use my own method, and say that the name is not 
the thing, and that the master's name is not the servants 
thing.
Now comes the plain definition; thus, God is light, that light 
is love, now man in love he is in that light, and that light 
is Christ, and Christ is God; now is not this a clear apparent 
truth? Now as God is light, the Devil he is but darkness to 
that light; now in darkness is hatred, and hatred is the 
Devil, and hate being in man predominate he is Satan or 
Apollyon; but these words will not carry the intention of our 
English word devil, if we would but let that word stand in 
name, but we will have it thing, and so we are one with that 
Apollyon or Abaddon, which yon say is the English devil, but 
the intendant out-runs the name quite out, so brethren God and 
man make a declared truth, Devil and man make a declared lie: 
Now what is that Devil and man for? why it is to set forth the 
glory in created appearances, though the Devil was never 
created nor made, it is we that make him a creation, and judge 
ye how great creators we worms and dust are, things are 
greater in esteem than many times in truth they are.
But I pass now, let me tell you, the balance is come to weigh 
this nation, and Mene Tekel is found upon its basis, or in 
Hebrew Orbus kabus allah. The English is, Thou art not weight 
in the highest balance, or in the centre weight, thy people 
are a vain people trusting in the name, but the knowledge in 
the thing is not in them.
Bealah arki peal ardi neset doni. The English is this, Thou 
art high in name, but in me sayeth the Lord thou art not 
found, for then love was the connecting thy joints or members 
one to another; but thou art Quas in tiby allah pealah anvi 
peau ardi dele mem. The English is this, Thou art for thyself 
in every man, and self is exalted and Charity cast forth, or 
is made a vagrant amongst us, to our shame is this motto 
inserted upon us by the Spirit of God: this saying is strange 
to you, but it is true, and you will feel it true if you 
belong to light, as I have found; so shall many more to their 
sharp sorrow but their after joy.
O Beloved, I mourn for you, I strive with God for you, 
beseeching him to enlighten you in all spiritual knowledge and 
understanding; blessed be the Lord, I can say in a safe 
conscience as ever Paul could say, I have not coveted after no 
man's gold or silver, nor desired any thing of any man or of 
any of you, but only that life part that my soul thirsts after 
to see it gathered into union in the celestial centre.
O Beloved, my soul is ravished with the delightful delight, 
for when I am poor, then am I rich in him who is my riches, 
that is Christ the mercy and strength of God.
Brethren ye and to ye only I speak, that are passed the 
apostolical teaching, and are come into the evangelical 
living. Allah allah allah hoei selma amaseret ono peon alpha 
hag garim semam in re ex al olo on. The English of this Hebrew 
state is to what the English will bear.
O the light, the light, the light of peace is in the 
evangelical thing that is in God, when we have passed these 
beggerly rudiments apostolical which are dead names, pointing 
us to the evangelical living in God, for if Christ be come you 
are no longer in the dead name, but you are risen in the life 
of Christ into his body, that is evangelical. Mind the 
Apostles words, we are dead, and our life is hid with Christ 
in God.
Behold here is the greatest mystery in the world, men living 
speaking the height of the Gospel as you call it, and these 
men are dead, the same condition as every true new-born man 
and woman in; for our life is not in ourselves, nor in this 
body of dung, nor in things below, that is to say, these 
beggarly rudiments or elements motional, but our life is in 
God the evangelical caller and gatherer of his people into 
himself, and for this cause God did send forth his Spirit in 
men, to converse with that self-same Spirit in men, that their 
conversing by his power are turned to converting; unto this 
end God made some Apostles, some pastors, some ministers and 
teachers, some evangelists, and all was but the union of one 
Spirit in its efficacious varieties.
So now Brethren, the same work is God bringing about now in 
England, and all lands, and it lies included in these 
prophetic words of expression. I the Lord will gather her, I 
have cast off, and she shall re-(?) before me as in the days 
of old.
Brethren this is the gathering of the Church of the Jews, for 
whom I Theauraujohn and the rest of my brethren the Lord hath 
made fishers, for to gather the people into a figurative 
figure of the evangelical building; therefore the foundation 
of the Jews' Church evangelical is laid here even in this 
house, and the Lord my God add unto it daily thy increase of 
blessing: the place may remove, but the people cannot be 
shaken, for God the Lord he is the Evangelical centre, so this 
meeting hath been the gathering the Church of the Jews, and 
the Jews' Church is the true name. So you that are ashamed of 
the name of the Jews, see me nor hear me no more Sebat allah 
am R.
Theauraujohn Taniour high priest.

Epistle 15.
Wrote at Eltham.
Dearly Beloved Brethren, God is love, and know, that he that 
acts in love, doth act in God: Now I beseech you mind, how can 
it properly be said for man to act in God? Thus it is, (if 
radically understood) the Spirit of God in man, being 
predominate, that Spirit is in union with God in essence, 
though it be for a time a derivacy. Now the query would be 
resolved thus, God is love, how is God love? Thus God is love, 
His fullness is a filling every want and necessity in the 
whole Creation; that is, by distilling acts of compassionate 
refreshments to every distinct of his, or of himself.
Now let me speak, thus man is the Image of God in the earthly 
form, not of the earthly form; the distinction lies in these 
two words, IN and OF.
Now Beloved, to come close unto the matter of the main 
concernment, it is this, that if you are not in God, then you 
are in the Devil: Now know that there is but light and 
darkness in the whole Creation; now God he is the light, the 
death (or darkness) is the called Devil: Now what is God? I 
answer, God is light, which is love: now what is the Devil? he 
is death and darkness, which is deceit.
Now see the distincts in these two, light and darkness, God 
and the Devil: now if God or Christ be risen in us, to such a 
hight or perfect measure of manifestation of himself, that by 
his light, we are subjected to act only from that root, (which 
root is love distribute) then are we said to be properly in 
God, because the derivative essence reigns in flesh, as the 
regency essence reigns in the reigning all, then the figure in 
the earthly form, it is as true in truth, as the regency 
essence is in the reigning all; that is, the true pattern 
figurative figure in sanctum sanctorum, that is to say, the 
holy holiest; that word Est is the binding Maxzim in the 
reconciling any, or all Maxzims; but to love, which is God 
acting in mercy towards, nay into his Creation: thus the 
influences of his mercifulness filleth all things in Heaven 
and earth, but it is conveyed through many motional motions of 
earth, air, water, and fire, elements in the Konaxci part, or 
the binding part outwardly in the celestial predominacies in 
the fiery regions in the Helmetta, that is, in the burning 
light, in the inshutting conclave of Sol, in his Mida in re, 
that is, in the middle of the thing, that is the truest and 
perspicuousest demonstrative of God, figuratively of the whole 
all altogether created of God; that is to say thus much, The 
sun is the truest truth of figures, in all God's appearances 
in the whole created terrestrial, for the Sun is secundus vita 
vive in orbis, that is, the second living life in the created 
world; yet he is death to the living life, which is denoted 
Oli-al; them two Hebrew directors Oli Al, it is the height of 
expression that is letten down unto the Sons of men; nay, or 
the denomination unto Angels; for it is thus much in the 
import, that is to say, The light Al, or the Al light, from 
whence all things descend in strength; they are invalid, are 
weak, by reason of the combustible cumbersome shrine they are 
inveiled in, or shut in; which is weakness to the strength in 
the inside spirit, that is the life, for life cannot be 
touched with weakness, but weakness it is made sensible by 
that life, for the weakness of itself so called; though indeed 
and in truth if it were duly weighed, and radically 
understood, there is but one in all appearances, be what it 
will; for that that is not, nor hath not a centre, cannot be 
properly nor unproperly said to be anything.
Now let me speak, thus God, the Sun, and Man, they make one 
Trine, that Trine receding, is union in the Regency Essence, 
though two derivatives and both essencied one in another: as 
the life of man hath an essence in the sun, (I speak 
terrestrial) so the sun being a celestial body, it is 
essencied in God; for from him all these appearances came, and 
their recedings are from him, and their renewings are to him 
in strength.
Now to prove the terrestrial man for to be in Trine with the 
sun, and with God the Father of all things, it is thus.
God he is the all-creator of the all-things: The sun is the 
second light from God in strength, influentive into the 
terrestrial creation, through the celestial motional motions; 
which motions being moved with the union motion, they cause 
the produced product for to appear in the terrestrial world. 
Now the word terrestrial, is not yet fully understood, but the 
word doth import thus much, Terra, that is the earth or 
earthly, that is forma, a form or semblances; for though terra 
be the earth, yet it is the the appearances in all 
earthlinesses: so much for the word terra, sub intelligiter 
forma in Terras.
Now I come to the binding, or middle connection, that is 
Esterial; that is, the binding inclue of that word Est, that 
is to say, is.
Now know, that est is the binding of all maxzims, into one 
radical centre; so that here you see, that ter is bound in 
est, so that it is to say, the earth is.
Now if you truly understood what this est is, it is the all of 
all things; for God is, and that very is is God, who is all 
things in appearances, whereof the earth is one ponderous 
composure of IS: so much for Ter Est.
Now I come unto Terial, and terial that word doth import the 
earth tied to the Creator of all: thus God that produced the 
earth himself, he is the Mida or middle of connected things; 
that word Cied, it is the same with Is, if radically 
understood.
Now combine the word together, then in the property of true 
speech, the meaning of the word Terrestrial is this, the 
world, or the earth made by God, tied in that God, who is the 
middle of that earth, that is the centre; and that centre or 
middle, is God in every thing, and himself nothing, and yet he 
the all of earth and all things. One word more terrestrial, 
thus, God is the earth's life, for of him it had a being, and 
he is the restorer of it, and it is restored by the essence 
TIE, that it lies tied to in God; and by that tie or essence, 
by his influence it is restored and renewed daily.
Now Scholars, here is one glimpse of my knowledge, though I am 
unlearned:. But blessed be his name, that after my strong 
affliction, he hath poured a sea of knowledge into my soul, 
that is thus much, Oli El, the light of God in the soul of 
man; from which light, doth flow forth these expressions that 
you hear me declare.
O avallo seon honi sepharim ammi sele oli a saphet el doni or 
et al rege lexci am; the English to what it will bear in this 
state, for the English doth darken this, illustrious state or 
citation from this Hebrew maxzims: now I open it. O the 
highest knowing knowledge, is when the understanding in man is 
dead to the thing he declares; for then the thing is itself 
declaring itself from the Root, and as the Root is, so will 
the declaratives be.
Now brethren, judge you my declaratives, for they speak 
themselves in me, and I in them, and so both in union: I am 
dead to the word, the word is life to, me; I declare the sound 
to you, thus is the spirit operative in the sons of men; not, 
all men, but where the spirit will, and when it pleaseth: The 
wind bloweth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but thou 
knowest not whence it cometh, nor whither it goeth, so 
Beloved, is every one that is born of the spirit.
Hos in sela roma el al in re sebat oli odereous in se: O the 
wisdom of God it hid from man, in the secret thing which is 
the life of all things in appearances, that life is the spirit 
of God moving in his created frame or fabric. O Oli El Vau, O 
thou light, the declarer of thy self in all thy things made: 
Selos in re sapuit add amalam sab or on seben sait pele mem. 
The English is, the height of wisdom, is in knowing God in the 
things created or made, for he cannot be known as he is in 
himself.
Pele Ezecheus in se sephi el oli in re sabat al. O the 
greatness of things cannot demonstrate the heavenly light, but 
that light doth demonstrate itself as itself pleases, that is 
the english of the forecited state or citation in the tongues.
Now Beloved, I have shown you one glimps of God's goodness and 
God's greatness, in his distributive, distributive in 
distillation into and upon the creation, in appearances, by 
his illustrious influences in strength, conveyed from himself 
through the celestial attire, that is, the high moving motions 
in the sphere celestial, and so is conveyed by the Sun through 
the moon into every receptacle appearance in the terrestrial 
world, or form, or chaos, I prove it so: for what is not 
union, is a chaos; I speak it as relative to man, but it is 
union unto God; his varieties in themselves, is his delightful 
union in himself.
Now Beloved, I come to show you how man is essencied in God, 
and then how he is like God in the earthly figure; and if he 
be renewed to his figure, that is the life of Christ risen up 
in man in predominance, where man is wholly subjected to the 
will of God, that is, man to be wholly passive, and the spirit 
of God to be the sole and whole rule in the spirit of man; 
then the figure is as true in the derivative essence, as it is 
in the reigning all.
Now Beloved, I come to show you man, that is, man drawn up by 
the Spirit of God, into union with God; as sayeth one text, 
Whereby we have an union with the Father, through one spirit: 
that text varieth little from the original in its import, for 
it is thus; whereby our union is made one through Christ. O 
how I could joy if there were no more dismeeter in the whole 
conclave of the Old and New Testament: then had I not had this 
trouble that my manhood lies under; the zeal I have against 
the aspersion that by weak and vain man is laid upon God, only 
by the ignorance in man, and his false conception that man 
hath upon the sacred Majesty of God, that is, in not full 
understanding the denotation that God hath letten down, to put 
motional man to a stand or stop.
But now I come to denote how man is said to be like God, that 
is, the earthly patern of the Divine thing, in sanctum 
sanctorum: now man being made obedience, he acts in love, from 
that root obedience; which word in the Hebraic term, is Rokas, 
in the Greek tongue it is Kias, in the Latin word it is 
Cristus, but you would have it Chartas, but the word is 
neither Cristus nor Caritas, but the true nominative case is 
Cristos: in the true Latin the import is binding, that is the 
full import of the word Rokas, which is the essence from 
whence all these are derived from: for the Hebrew is Rimus 
maxzi, that is, the first great strength, that is the 
significant of Rokas. Now know, that obedience is the all 
required of man, and obedience is the all gift from man to 
God, that is the Rokas or binding strength of man to God, by 
God's own gift, that is thus much in import: In one text I 
(sayeth God) will give them an obedient heart, and they shall 
fear me.
Now this obedience is God's free gift into man, that is to 
say, in truth of words, it is Christ in the soul: now in man 
is this obedience set, which is Christ, or the Spirit, or the 
holy Ghost, or the new birth, or the angel of God in man.
Now know that at the descent of the spirit into the soul of 
man, it causes in the soul an erection of the heavenly figure, 
then doth the pattern temporal act in true truth in the 
pattern, as it is in the centre: though it be but a 
derivative, yet it is in sanctification holding coherent with 
the essence it was derived from.
Now I may truely speak if truly understood, it is thus much, 
God in man and man in God, that is by the derivative essence 
essencied in flesh, and yet not flesh, but the subjecter of 
flesh to itself, and so both unto God; so the marriage is 
completed in the union of one Spirit being thus, God in 
himself and in man by his Spirit, this is the true pattern of 
the divine and sacred Trinity operative in the earthly form, 
which is the figurative pattern of the Trine celestial, yet 
all in one, which in property of is speech is Jehovah or Al, 
for Al if duly considered in this new dispensation, but it is 
but the old truth reduced to his originalest centre in the 
true declarative, which by reason of man's false conception of 
God, and his declarative; so that the truth in the literal 
expression is buried, and one of God's declaratives mixed with 
man's invention, by man's conceiving it to be so, and he not 
knowing the true import of the various maxzims in their 
combinements in themselves and with others in their 
addititional coherencies and adjuncts.
Now in this state if truly understood, the learned rabbis may 
perceive that by my pointing at these Maxzims, being I am 
unlearned in what I declare, it might be a satisfactory 
satisfaction for them either to affirm against me, or else to 
acknowledge it to be true what I say, lest I do conclude that 
their silence doth give consent, through their ignorance in 
the citation I declare.
Now I have drawn up man, and stated him in his called centre 
or earthly form, to what can be required or can be attained 
to, in which man may in property of speech be said to be like 
God, by the Spirit of God predominating in man to man's 
subjectancy in the whole to the Spirit, thus that man beareth 
this motto from God his own writing, be thou like me in my 
humane creation, this is the new creation that God makes, or 
the called new birth in every one that is brought forth unto 
God.
Now I come to the declaratives, that this new birth, if truly 
born and brought forth unto God, OF you think would have been 
the true word, as to have said to be born of God, that very OF 
makes all the state false; for in a true state there must not 
be a false letter, so in a true sentence there must not be a 
false word; and know that in the translation in the major OF 
is read in the divine and sacred expressing or writing.
Now mind, I wist not, neither can I give it the name 
Scripture, if ir were but for that one word OF, and that word 
but named once in the whole book: for mind, we have and do 
read OF an Affirmative, and it is in our language or speech a 
Negative.
Now I come not to dwell in the name or shadow, but to look 
into the centre: I mind not what is said, but the true truth 
is, in truth the thing is: and now blessed be the Lord my God, 
he doth increase my understanding.
Now mind, I come to show, not what is written, but what in 
your hearts you hold a zeal for, the same, I ever did since 
God gave me light, and it is this, the Scriptures and the 
Gospel; for the defence of them (throngh the strength of my 
God) I would lay down my life for them: Now I will show you 
that in term, that I may say, that I and you at this day are 
so zealous for, that is the Scriptures so called: now the God 
that you ignorantly worship, him show I unto you; and I 
beseech you take special notice, even you that are but 
notional; and you likewise my brethren that are zealous, but 
not according to knowledge, as through God's goodness I shall 
make appear.
Non est nome sanktus in re sabat akzi a malet oli in rem medad 
alphi sele arbat al. The English from this Hebrew state, and 
yet both Latin, Greek, and Arabic, and Chaldee, all these 
tongues, to make a trne harmonious assent in consent: But lest 
you learned rabbis should contend with me that am unlearned, 
only English I have, and that no man worse; but I will give 
you one hint of knowledge and learning denoted unto me by the 
Spirit, and what spirit, let the decsaratives of itself speak, 
and the obedience and actions of my life speak for me, and so 
all judge; Look you be clean within, and then you judge 
righteous judgement.
But now scholars know, that the major includes the minor; so 
the major in that state is Hebrew, wrote in Kof, that is the 
second strength in writing. Now let me tell you scholars, I 
will but state three Hebrew words, and I will make their 
majority carry the state of five lines of Latin stated, but 
they will not carry so much in no tongue; for know, the nearer 
you come to the centre, which is the Hebrew, the more you 
discard the weak connexions' dependencies: For know, that the 
Arabic and Chaldee and Syriac and the Muscovite, in their 
original centre are as it were in the edge or verge of the 
Hebrew.
Now you will say, that the majority of them languages is 
Hebrew; it is granted, but write you in any one of them 
languages, it is not Hebrew: So though the Hebrew her regency 
be over the languages, yet her predominance may be eclipsed by 
another tongue, when she is but an adjunct in the state or 
sitation; for know, that in all tongues and languages there is 
an union consent and assent, in a composed composure in their 
coherents; and the truth Howes from the head to the foot, and 
ascends from the foot to the head, as the rivers from the sea 
to the sea, their centred centre: But this knowledge in truth 
of knowledge, by man is not to be understood, and none but the 
Spirit of God, whose conveyances is in and through all 
tongues, into one language, that is the scriptum est.
Now brethren, your long patience is your expectation of what 
is Scripture; I beseech you mind, I cannot come when I would 
to open the state or citation out of the tongues, though my 
desire is as great as yours can be; ye though I am weary, I 
cannot leave writing the mystery that lies in the Hebrew state 
last cited; when I thought to have opened it, when I named the 
English, I could never come at it till now: non est name 
sanktus in re. Now I beseech you mind the English of the fore-
cited state, The name is not the holy thing; now I read 
negatively, The holy thing denies any name in truth of thing; 
but is, and is, in truth hath no name: Now mind, since the 
world was, there was not a greater denotation by the spirit of 
the truth in God than this.
Now there is another citation in the same Hebrew state, which 
is this, The true Scripture 'tis the divine life of God in the 
soul, and it is written by, and with Digitus Dei, the spirit 
finger, or finger spirit by God. O that destroying of, it 
wounds and destroys sense; for according to our translation, 
digitus Dei, the finger of God, that word of undoes the state.
Now I shall show you how your zeal is evacuated, and how you 
come misled concerning that you call the Bible and new 
Testament, calling them the Scriptures, or the word of God; 
the Word was made flesh, and in that flesh there is a table 
and a book, that even that God doth write upon, that is 
holiness to himself. But to come to speak to you brethren, 
even ye blind persecuting zealots, truly I love you all, and 
pity all, for ye cannot do right, till light be come. 
Brethren, I demand of you from whence zeal proceeds, if it be 
true zeal in light, it proceeds from that scriptum est, that 
is from that inward and inmost veil unveiled, though you know 
it not. Now know but this, that nothing without can give life 
to your zeal within, but it lives in itself; and from that 
small appearance within to the notional man, he, as he is, 
sees outwardly, and he catches at the glimmerings within, and 
through that false conception, he states all without upon 
man's writing, or the Signam manum, or sign of a man's hand, 
of man's spellings, so man not drawn into obedience to the 
spirit of God within, he builds upon outward words, and names 
in books without.
Now I beseech you mind, did any of you receive remission of 
sins by man's preaching? you, and I myself did think so, thus, 
such a man is a man of God, and he is able to turn any man; 
now how was that? because God's power within thee did begin to 
unfetter thee, for it was God's spirit did begin inwardly to 
illustrate, and thy resurrection and walking was from that 
light within, and thou accounted that it was done by man, or 
hearing or reading; here thou wast a greater idolater than 
before: now here thou sacrificest to man, and in this act thou 
makest and accountest him thy God converter: or the Bible or 
Testament were thy idols, when indeed and in truth it was only 
the alone descent of God's mercy, conveyed by his spiritual 
light arising in thy soul, that caused thy awaking from the 
corruptible estate of death and darkness. Now mind, I desire 
to know of you my brethren, whether the knowledge doth lie 
outwardly in objects declared, or in the inmost or inward 
understanding in the spiritus, that is, in the spirit, in that 
word Theta; in that import it is a Greek word, and it doth 
denote God his Spirit, that is Theta; spirit; and you read it 
the spirit, not understanding the import of the word; Now if 
that be granted, that cannot be denied, if duly considered 
that the understanding lives, and lies within the inmost 
spirit, why doth not man act always right and in truth of 
zeal? I answer, though it be God's Spirit in the heart, and 
the heart be sanctified, yet a body of corruption doth remain; 
for know, that the inward righteousness cannot be demonstrated 
outwardly, for it is another creation in man, and not of man, 
nor by man, but by God himself; and this creation that is 
spiritual, cannot be demonstrated temporal.
Now here grows the mistake, for the outward motional man, that 
is, man's spirit that is quick and motional, and so swift, 
that it is a subject of deceit, and subject to deceit, only by 
the airy composure it was abstracted from, this is man's 
spirit natural.
Now to show the maxzim, it is this: The spirit in the flue or 
full motion moveth in man, this is God's spirit in man, and it 
doth (through the operative power) enlighten the dark spirit 
in man, that is, man's natural spirit; but till that the 
spirit of God hath wholly subjected the natural spirit of man 
unto its own light, there is a greater declarative of false 
light than before; for when we were dead to life in the spirit 
of darkness, then we were one with the world, but being making 
alive in, or by the spirit of God, there is a great strong 
work declared, both of truth, and the lie, by a strong motion 
acting in strength, that is, when the strong man sin is 
standing for the conquest, and the opposition never ceases, 
till the spirit of God hath gotten the prevalencie. Now in 
this conquest by the spirit of God, this natural spirit 
speaketh great names of things, till that the spirit of God 
come like a scythe and cuts down the natural spirit even by 
the roots, and causes an erection of righteousness, then where 
sin did abound, there grace shall abound much more, unto the 
praise or glory of God, which is denoted in this Hebrew word 
Gohest, the ancient Greek word is Siah, the Latin word is 
Cristus, but I say Cristos: the Hebrew word doth denominate 
thus much, a root, a strength unresistable, a forme, a tower, 
and a cave, and a circle. The Greek word Siah, doth import to 
know or overcome, or to remain, or sent; the Latin word 
Cristos doth import an anointing, a knowing, and it will bear 
no more. Now know that Massah is a Saviour, and a Deliverer, 
now all these is but the Gospel in the intendant.
Now let me speak to you, all that can be spoken of the Gospel, 
that glorious word, and that magnificent transcendentest 
Gospel, which word and Gospel are two words, but one entire 
beauty of excellency: that is not your called word of God, 
neither Bible, nor the new Testament, nor that you call Gospel 
and the word of God; but every life appearance is God's word, 
and not dead letters or names set together, now that you are 
zealous for: I myself have been as great a zealot for them 
dead names, called the written word of God.
Now I will show you that, which in truth none in majoritie can 
deny, that is this; God's word is truth, and endureth for 
ever, you cannot deny this: The Word was made flesh, that text 
is false, for the word in truth, is in that text the word 
dwelt in flesh; now mind, the soul of man enlightened by God's 
spirit is the Gospel, the word, and the truth, and the living 
life of God in man; for then God is said to dwell with men, 
that is, when God rules by his Spirit in the soul, that is the 
Gospel, and the holy word of God in the soul, and not the dead 
letters and names that we by reading do so idolize; and I do 
affirm, that by man it is made the great idol in Europe by 
this false conception; for man thinks that he renews from that 
outward word, and knows not that it is the gift of God 
illuminating within. One word more to conclude this point: Do 
you think that motion in the soul arises from without, or from 
the life principle within? judge ye, whether your 
understanding be not within yourselves every one of you, the 
truth of that true knowledge is the gift of God into thy soul, 
and this is thy idolatry, that thou sacrificest the gift given 
to be learned in & from the dead name of man's false composure 
of names together, so thou makest the living God, and his 
richest and greatest gift to be conferred to thee through 
that, and from, and by that dead name, written word, or name 
Gospel. Now word and Gospel it is the living life of God in 
you by the Spirit of himself, that is the Gospel, judge ye all 
whether it be so or not; for as I have declared, 'tis not the 
name that can confer the thing, but the thing itself doth 
confer itself without the name, and then man speaketh the name 
from the thing done; that is in short thus much, God hath 
given the Gospel, or the Spirit, or the word, or life into the 
soul of man, then it is Scriptum est, it is then inwritten 
digitus Dei with the finger of God, O! that of undoes all, but 
I intend it another thing than is there stated.
Now know, that the word of God cannot be written by none but 
himself, here again you are all deceived, that thinks that it 
can be wrote by man; for know, that the word of God abideth 
for ever, it is the living life of God in the soul, and that 
is wrote by, and with the finger by God himself; for the 
naming the words that flows from the ingraftment, that is, the 
light of God in the soul. Now write this upon paper, it is but 
a lie, compare it with the truth in the heart, for that 
Scriptum est in cor, that is, the writing in the heart by the 
finger of God, it remains for ever: Wherefore doth it remain 
for ever? Enim est digitus Dei, for it is written by the 
finger of God; and that writing is, and is is that wriring, 
and cannot be defaced, and that writing causes the soul to 
move from death to life, & at last raises the soul into the 
celestial centre.
O amalam orbeus in re fasisti nebat alli El. The English is, O 
the evil in the eye of the soul, by the writing of God upon 
that soul is cast forth. Now I entreat you mind all people, 
this is all the contest betwixt me and the enemies of light, 
that is this; I say (by the grace given me) that the name is 
not the thing: now you say that the name is the thing, by 
consequence, but you understand not what you say. You say that 
the Bible and the New Testament is the word of God, which I 
deny; and I affirm it is but the name of that word, and falsly 
spelled and set together, and man's invention added in many 
places for ends of concernment.
Now I say, the word of God can no man write, but God himself, 
and to ascribe that to the writing, that belongs to God 
himself, you thereby rob God of his glory, and are grievous 
idolaters. Now let me speak, I say there is such a justness in 
God, and such a justness in his declarative written, that if 
one word, or letter, or tittle in the whole books be not true 
in word, and in truth, in time, and truth in place, it ought 
to be rejected and refused: for know, there is no perfection 
but in God, and the spellings or denotation of God must be 
perfect to a mite, nay to itself, otherwise we make God a liar 
and an imperfect thing, which far be it from us to think so.
Now to come to close and state a query, and it is to the great 
learned ones in all tongues and languages, if they dare affirm 
that the translation of the Bible and the New Testament is 
truth in all its coherencies and dependencies, and in adjuncts 
and conjuncts, and in affinacy and definacy, and in 
reluctancy, to a little, to a mite, to itself, let them be put 
to their Oaths in this, and when they have done, it is not the 
word of God, but the writing by man, which is but Signam 
manum, the sign of the hand, naming the outward sound from the 
inward significant.
Now I Theauraujohn say, and affirm, that the writing in 
English cannot hold the truth in translation from the Hebrew, 
by reason of the weakness in it, and the excsuding certain 
letters, I know of y, and f, and q, and w, and other dubious 
consonants in consequence that are wholy destructive to the 
true truth in the signifcation; therefore blessed be the Lord 
our God that hath sent his light to reduce you from your 
idolizing the shadow or name, and by his resurrection in you, 
showerh you the truth and the true thing, which is Christ the 
Lord, the beauty of excellency, which is Massah, or al, or 
Jehovah. Salem add to Israel arbat.

Wrote by me Theauraujohn Taniour the Jew, 
Allah al sabbah Skribah-jael. 
High-priest.

Epistle 16.
Wrote at Eltham.
O Beloved, the word is life, and life is light, and light is 
God, the glorious Creator of the whole all together. Now 
brethren, my God will furnish me with radical expressions, 
whereby to let down the true meaning in the intendant, and at 
this time, and in this Epistle is divers matters in name let 
down, the first is this; Primus maxzi, that is the Oli al in 
man, that is, God's image in man, that is the soul in man, and 
that soul tied with the essence Ti into God, or in God, both 
the expressions will hold; so as the soul is the light of God 
set in man, so is the light of man wholly set in God.
Now to illustrate thus the Ti of God in the soul of man, it is 
an oneness, though a derivative with himself in essency, and 
shall be at the unmodelling of every figure, it shall be taken 
into regency; I shall through the light conveyed unto me, 
unveil this great contested for amongst us concerning the 
soul, Id est de faciendam a Deo vors vita alvi pele athrat. 
The English of the first state, (speaking of the soul) it is 
to say, the making of God; now mind, there is the first state. 
The second is this, the strong life is God's making himself, 
mind, I am the life of the world, or I am the strong life in 
the world, mind, this is God's omnipotency.
But to come to define these words, that is two words, and you 
hold them to be one word in the weight of the import: The word 
in Hebrew in the Orthodox, it is Veau, or Vea, signifying 
God's making from himself, and yet tied in himself; thus Ve is 
in all states a severation, but Ve being barred in by Alif,  
(Scholars this citation is for you, though it be from an 
unlearned man) thus Alif includes the separating Ve or Vau; 
for in the separating connexion, Alif doth bind the connexied 
into his majority; thus Ve it severs, Alif is the first 
declarative of God's strength. And know, the first is the 
tying strength, that produces all things in appearances, and 
the strength in them appearances is truth, and by truth God 
doth keep the Creations tied in himself, for in him we live, 
move, and have our beings, this is a true written sentence, 
but not God's word.
Now I come to show you that great mystery that few or none of 
you understand, that is, these two distinct words, whereby you 
are wrapped in ignorance, that is this; sayeth the insert in 
the Bible, God made man in his own image or likeness. The both 
comparisons I deny, in their affirmative state, and it is 
said, God created them both male and female. Now brethren, 
what odds do you judge there is in these two words? nay I may 
say them one word; they are two distincts in God himself, and 
we in our weak English make a connexion, nay an oneness and an 
entireness of these two words, God made man in his own image, 
or God Created man in his own image.
Now I beseech you brethren mind, God made, the proper word in 
the ancientest copy, the word is Akkivene, that doth import, 
God's making strength, and strength is making. Now to 
understand this making in God first, and in man next, being 
the product by Akkivene, that is man was produced by God's 
strength: First to query in God, it is vanity so to do, but 
take this short state, God is, and that is strength.
But to come to the conjunct of this strength, whereof man is 
one, nay, the gloriousest figure in God's earthly field, made 
in the image of God. Now do all people in the world know that 
man was not made? For know, that that you account the body and 
the soul, are the body; and man he is denoted by the Spirit, 
that is, the strength of God in man, that is the man, and the 
Scriptures hold forth the same, for there is a natural man, 
and there is a Spiritual man: now you understand it to be a 
man in grace or favour with God, a man that is sealed by the 
Spirit of God, as it is said: but let me tell you, that Oli al 
doth inhabit in every man and woman, and they inhabir not it, 
untis the natural is subjected to the spiritual, and then it 
is properly said, and if in property of speech understood, 
that man is subject to man, and so both to God in the union 
Spirit: for mind, the man Christ Jesus, the Creator and 
bringer forth of all things by his own power.
Now that you account man, it is but the name, Oli al is the 
man, that is, God's light is the man in your little world, for 
be you not so ignorant, I tell you, that in every one of you 
is many creations, and when the word runs in the singular, it 
doth hold forth for the most part the man, that is, the soul 
in man. Now as God in himself is the soul's life absolutely 
free, so is the soul, that is God's man, or God's strength, 
that is the body's life, absolutely free, and that is no 
creation but the spirit, and the body of man that is created, 
but the soul is made, but the body and spirit they are 
created.
Now here is the highest flight that ever was viewed, and it is 
this, I pray you do not judge the things you understand not: O 
apparatau salma arii el selma onosiel oro or moaus salma 
abbadet pele, that Greek compound pele is to bring the words 
in truth of writing into our horizon, the English of that 
Hebraic state is this, O the appearances in peace is into the 
in-man, which the out-man cannot understand, because he is an 
earthly creation. Now brethren, this you cannot deny, for your 
own written insert sayeth the same, that The natural man 
perceives not the things of God. Alas, this you refer to 
others, and count them natural men that have not so great a 
measure of knowledge as you have: Alas, still you are, and 
mnst bear this natural man, and the spiritual man in degrees, 
yet in all, and shall be in all, until the unmodelling every 
created appearance or figure. Now I hope this cannot be 
blasphemy, for I acknowledge God the Father, the strength of 
God the Son, and the product the holy Ghost. And for man, I 
acknowledge the soul, the spirit, and the body, and a 
resurrection of this all, and of these all every one: you 
understand not which, if any of you do but declare it in 
writing, and I shall make it appear that you do not understand 
the resurrection.
Now judge not, lest you be judged, now you say, I judge you: 
no, it is not I, but it is one greater than I whom ye know 
not, even he judges you, I judge you not, for I understand not 
what I write, therefore I judge no man: but know, betwixt 
God's making and his Creating, it is no more but light and 
darkness, for God's making is God's light, God's creating is 
the enclosing that light made, into created appearances, so 
the light is God's making, the creating is composing or 
connecting darknesses to create a veil to enshrine the made 
light into.
Now 'tis thus, the soul in man is made in God, and the spirit 
and the body is the shrine in which the soul is set, that is 
(as you term it) the image of God in man, or oli al, that is, 
the light of God in man.
Toas alni sepe pene el vadi annexit salui bele peterma al sam 
abrit pel. The English of this Greek state is this, The 
accounted man is but a sheep-house for the light, or soul, or 
spirit of God to reside itself in, till the unknitting the 
figure or sheep-house, and its reducement to its centre, then 
the light or spirit essency, it is taken into the essence 
regency, and so one again as it was at the first in one: and 
in this whole scope, lies in these words, Man dies, and the 
spirit returns to God that gave it, and at this point I being 
silent, while the strength of my manhood is destroyed: but 
know, that I shall begin to dispute, then know, that the dead 
begins to arise, for you have known and seen my weakness all 
along since I have been conversant amongst you, but now know, 
I shall reach you all, for my instructor is God the Lord.
Quas habit elpha areme mali-penan ory koas in a sab baalma 
magit pele terte esse vakare. The English is this, Because it 
hath not been given me to dispute, therefore I have outwardly 
suffered, only to confound my pride in my manhood: for know, 
if the tincture of pride, or self, be not clean purged forth, 
it will grow to the dishonour of the giver of his greatest 
gift, that is, man's spirit will appropriate unto itself; but 
afflictions is the salve that cures this sore, for which 
blessed be the Lord I have a fulness in them, yet my comfort 
is this, I see through them. Quoas solo arena ally beneam in 
re mendah alui sele mem hose. The English is this, afflictions 
alone doth confound the outward man, but by and through them 
afflictions, pride is consumed, and perfection is obtained as 
gift, not upon desert; these afflictions here are our royal 
robes, in the evangelical being.
Non hos amalam adma othratia luah sele mem. The English: Not 
our evil sufferings can destroy us, but they refine us fit for 
the Lord's service, for the Lord chastens every son he 
receiveth.
So let me speak or sound to you, ye poor dejected ones, that 
are cast down under your burdens, I say, not I, but the Lord 
in me sayeth, rejoice, in that you are made partakers of 
Christ's sufferings, for I tell you, it is the earnest of your 
future inheritance, for if we suffer with him, we shall also 
reign with him, so it is your weakness that heaps more sorrow 
upon yourselves, when indeed you have the greatest cause to 
rejoice; but you want eyes to see; for the which end, 
afflictions are the eye-salve for to enlighten your darkness, 
and for that end that you may see, are afflictions sent.
Now I state the Secundus vita vive in homo, that is, the 
second life living in man, that is, the spirit in man, that 
is, man's natural spirit, which is abstracted created, that 
that is abstracted is created, but made is one with the Maker, 
but not in an abstract his making; for God's making it is all 
light, and his creating is in the weaknesses for to enshrine 
the light into, for mind, light was, and it was not made nor 
created, that light is God himself, and that light illustrated 
darknesses, and then behold a creation, that word creation as 
it stands, is from God, and all creations are but his one 
creation.
Now I come to the Secundus vita vive in homo, sed non est vita 
Evangelies in re. The English of that Latin state, but it is 
not the life of Angels in the thing. Tuos ashy bele a ven pele 
nenos in mexhrati absit pele avertet pele necat. The English 
of this ancient Greek state is this, think it not strange that 
I cite it ancient Greek; mind, there is Grekus Arabic, there 
is Grekus Muscovitus, there is Grekus orcadus Orientalis sub 
luna in 54 degrees Saturne transcendant, that Tropic is 
undiscovered to this side world, the four Greek tongues is in 
the East Armenia.
Now I open the state fore-cited, and the reason I shall 
demonstrate of the four Greek tongues, the English is this, 
Though there be a being, it is not the Evangelical being, till 
the living spirit which the Evangelical Maker hath made it one 
with itself, then the spirit man is obedient to the light 
conveyed into the soul, so an oneness thereby conjunct in 
light, and so an union with the Father.
Now to render the reason, though I am unlearned, nor have any 
understanding in what I declare, but I commit my declarative 
to your judicious judgements to judge of. The first Greek is 
true, because the Derivasie was derived from the Hebrew, in 
full strength, coherent with its essential essence, and is as 
true, though a derivasie, as the essence it was derived from. 
Secundus derivationem in re, id est non recte quia abstraksi 
allah. The English is, The second derivasie is weak in the 
thing, because the abstract was but from a derivasie.
Tertia et quator, The third and fourth are the same, and false 
to the first: for know, that the difference betwixt the first 
and the fourth, is as light and darkness, in the weight of 
their import. I give you one instance in England: How long 
hath it had denomination in and by that name? Now what was 
wrote for English 13 hundred year ago? and what for nine 
hundred year ago? and what was wrote six hundred year ago for 
English? and what was wrote three hundred year ago, and what 
two hundred year ago?
Now by this rule, which is not the rule I intend, I will show 
you what English; the majority of the tongue includes the 
Minor: Now in England hath the Caldee tongue been the proper 
tongue, the Arabic, the Syriac. Now you think it strange, but 
'tis true, and this we have now, it is a borrowed abstract out 
of many tongues, though that you count it English; but how 
many Latinisied words, and Hebrew words is in English? So if 
the language be denoted from the kingdom, so many you may find 
in one kingdom; but by the people's captivating, is the 
language distracted or violated; for the Greek is the hardest 
tongue in the world, to be truly desined, by reason of the 
conjunct diphthongs: but take this as a hint to your 
consideration, look on our old English, and compare it with 
this that now is, and judge ye the difference.
But now brethren, to come to the matter of more concernment, 
and it is this, Christ seen of Angels, believed on, received 
up to glory; this is Christ our head, our elder Brother, our 
Son, our Saviour; and he that hath created us for this purpose 
is God, that hath also given us the earnest of his Spirit, 
through the which earnest we are bold to go out of the body; 
why are we bold to go out of the body? Because we are out of 
ourselves, and in obedience, which is light or Christ in the 
soul, and in that strength there is no danger: Christ is our 
Conqueror, Lust is subdued, the paradise is prepared, we are 
invited, and the bridegroom is coming to take his poor bride, 
in her self poor, but rich in him, and her earnest is her 
conductor to her heavenly centre; then men is man, and man is 
Christ, and Christ is God the Father.
Now I come to explicate them words, and search their centre 
thus, Christ seen of angels, men cannot see Christ, that is, 
weakness cannot view strength, if it could, then the creation 
could view God: now God sayeth, No man can see my face and 
live; but the angels see Christ, now what is an angel must be 
enquired into: now if you know not an angel, you never saw 
Christ, for Christ is seen with no other eye but the angel's 
eye, Adet pele ethrai avel sele saphat allphe sele mem. The 
English is, Christ the Lord is seen with no eye but his own 
eye, which eye is the host in heaven. Now how can men see 
Christ? not until he leave the number men, and come to be man, 
that is Christ in union, then in Christ's own strength he sees 
Christ, as to say, man sees Christ with Christ's own eye or 
sight. Now what is Christ's eye? Why it is God's gift, what is 
God's gift? it is obedience, what is obedience? it is light, 
what is light? it is love, what is love? why it is God, and he 
that dwells in love, dwells in God. Beloved brethren, deceive 
not yourselves, for without love you see not, nor never shall 
see God; for it is God's only gift letten down to draw us to 
himself, I will draw them in cords of love unto me, sayeth the 
Lord our God.

This was transcribed in the Prison at the Kings-Bench. 
Theauraujohn High-priest.

Epistle 17.
Wrote at Eltham.
Beloved brethren, God is love, and he that acteth in love, 
acteth in God, for then the spirit hath taken that man or 
woman into itself; and so an oneness in love betwixt man and 
the spirit, and by the Spirit we are made one with the Father 
in love; for here is a decipheration of love, why love it is 
evangelical sementing or knitting heaven and earthly together 
into one composed union. Why love is but one, love is all, and 
love ties all, and unties all, and then ties all into itself: 
love, there is in it no beginning, no end, no middle, no part, 
yet 'tis all parts, and but one middle, which middle is the 
centre in the whole creation, which is God the Lord.
O Beloved, did you but know how lovely ye are being in love! 
Beloved, love showeth the deformity in all that is not in 
love, but 'tis not seen but by love's own eye. O what an 
oneness is there in yourself, being in love! what a oneness in 
multiplicities being in love! O beloved brethren, love is the 
knot that ties all the brethren members into amity, and amity 
is the way to unity, and unity makes variety, yet 'tis all in 
love; so that varieties in love makes one unity in the 
celestial centre.
Brethren, the harm I wish you is, O that ye were out of 
yourselves, and in love planted, then ye were in Christ, and 
Christ is one with the Father. O Beloved, I am sick of love, 
that paineth me, the fulness of my desire is, to distribute 
love amongst ye, that thereby the members might be gathered, 
and then the body composed of love, O the lovely body! when 
the members are all made of love.
Truly my brethren, this beauteous beautified body, are every 
one of ye, if Christ be in you, and yet you all but one body, 
whereof Christ is the Head in the heavenly Jerusalem, or the 
celestial centre; the first Epistle of John, Chap. 4 v. 16, 
these words, We have known and believed the love that God hath 
in us. God is love, and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in 
God, and God in him. Herein is love perfect, that we should 
have boldness in the day of judgement.
Brethren, to be out of fear, is to be in love, and what is it 
that makes man's life burdensome unto himself? is it not fear? 
I pray mind, fear God, that's love God, and then no fear, for 
that love casteth out fear, and erecteth his stately throne 
upon the ruinated fear, then peace in earth as there is in 
heaven. Aven arry sele orcas abrit sele melloe non. The 
English is, the fearful man walketh in death all his days, so 
man's life (as we account it) is man's fearful death dying 
daily; this is in every man where love is not planted in the 
soul.
O Beloved, being that love is such an high securing strength, 
O how ought we to press after it as after the precious pearl 
that the merchant in the Gospel sold all to purchase: truly 
every one of you must be that merchant, or else love cannot be 
obtained, for it lies in this, Forsake all and follow me.
Brethren, in the writings of the prophets and apostles are 
divers names, for one intended thing (as in this place the 
pearl, the forsaking all, the bringing all, the bring nothing) 
all this is but thus much, that a man must be unmanned; that 
is, vanity must be cast forth, and our desirable mind slain, 
before we can be joined into Christ in union.
Brethren, be not ashamed of the greatest glory which is love, 
it was my brother John's motto, Beloved, love ye one another, 
not in tongue, but in deed and in truth. For know, love is the 
stability of truth, love makes us to obey all in love, love is 
the due from man to God, and from man to his neighbour: 
brethren, here is my brother John's recorded motto, We know 
that we are passed from death to life, because we love the 
brethren. Hos in Christos affirmata alvah penan asaddi elma 
appadet nesit pego alarama samait pelma. The English of this 
Arabic state brethren, To love one another 'tis God-like, but 
to hate one another is Abaddon, or Appollyon, or Devil-like.
Brethren, if you were not wilfully blind, you might see what 
condition your salvation stands in, for this prescript is a 
true looking-glass, whereby you may see a witness to your 
soul, that you are passed from death to life, or still your 
rest is in death. Beloved, to be in love, is to be one with 
Christ, and so one with God. Beloved, love is the key that 
unlocks the door into the heavenly Jerusalem, or the Celestial 
Centre.
O amorum in arbinariam in a salma legaget alma amaset 
haggarim. The English of this ancient Hebraic state is this, O 
the love is the strong arch that builded the foundation is 
erected, whose top reaches the Paradiacal essence, it is as to 
say, love the strong arch, that beareth all into the celestial 
dwelling, the state from the tongue would let it down no lower 
than the first sitation, for the Hebrew will not bend to our 
capacity, as our English will.
Beloved, I have shown you, every one of you that are in love, 
I have shown you, even that is, yonr centre is in the Paradise 
of God; this is their inheritance that is passed from death to 
life, because they love the brethren, or the love of God 
dwells in them, that is their beautified beauty. Now I come to 
the major part of this world, whose acts are not in love, but 
in darkness as envy, for the one doth set off the other, and 
the beauty of the one is the clearliest viewed by his 
contrary.
Non orbis in vita sed mors inveliciei penan armet el. The 
English, The world is not in light which is love, but is in 
darkness unto death. Sed viva vite in amor aluat hosai 
penecentalis sebatar arbaret pedero ox on in re festat. The 
English is, but the living life of love is God, and when he 
comes, that that was unto death, is turned into life, by the 
power of the most high Creator. Then darkness which was unto 
death, the same is made life, through the strength of Christ 
our Lord, who is the strength of God.
Now Brethren, as love rises to heaven, so hatred carrieth down 
to night or darkness, or hell. Brethren, I pray wrest not my 
words to you own hurt; let them stand, though you understand 
them not, I do, and the places name.
Now do not you out of my name coin to yourself a disturbing 
thing Abaddon or Apollyon, in penan acy logos nexce el pele 
neat arby, The English is this, that the deceiver, or Satan 
doth dwell in night or dark men, whereby he doth enslave them 
to his own vassalage; that is, Satan doth make men act his 
will, nay Satan doth act himself then: for man is Satan, if by 
him acted. Now Christ cast forth this devil at his appearing, 
but not at Christ being named by weak devil man: for when man 
is once come to be true Christ, then he casteth out the devil, 
bnt not before: so till we be Christ, we are but airy names, 
nay one with the Devil; for Christ sayeth to Peter, Get thee 
behind me Satan. Quando Petrus in elma amer sit pele negoas in 
rem. The English is this; when Peter out of pity or man-love 
bid Christ forbear to go thither, and by that means escape, 
one would have thought that this had been no hurt, but out of 
a careful pity of love to Christ: but know you, Christ doth 
not dwell in man's foolish pity, but in obeying the command 
commanded of the Father, so that Peter's love, was but Peter's 
dark veil to save Christ's outside, and that was but dung, and 
was not Christ, Christ was the inward free spirit in Christ 
that acteth obediently, as, mind I beseech you, what a willing 
Saviour Christ's outward body was, had not the power (Christ 
within) been the obedience Christ, you had had a poor Saviour: 
for these words I cite, and I leave them to your judgement, 
Father let this Cup pass from me. The spirit is willing, but 
the flesh is weak. What a great Saviour was Christ's flesh? so 
great a Saviour is your Bible and new Testament gotten by your 
learning, when you stand in need of them, you shall find them 
like Christ's flesh: for let me tell you, they are Christ's 
figurative flesh and no more, that is, they are dark pointings 
to the inside spirit, that is the evangelical living; of which 
thing, I and my brethren in our produced product shall make 
manifest: for behold, a revolution is begun, in which I 
Theauraujohn am the first in the first Trine, desending in 
viva voce in Evangelio jus in re Sabbah, that is, in the 
living evangelical voice or expressing the light in the thing.
O sapuit ille add oramus orgoas sad ma appalet ardi denean an 
tripoas in eligelious insem. The English is this, O the wisdom 
that he will pour forth into the sons of men filling them with 
light in his divine and sacred goodness.
But now I come to dark natural men; that is, men not in love 
but in envy, that is men-devils, as is proved in Peter; as 
thus, a deceiver is a devil, a liar; and all dark works are 
devil's works: But now know that thou O man or woman that art 
not in love, art in wrath and under the curse: how is that? 
thou art a doer of the works of darkness, and death is their 
centre.
Now to thee the law sayeth do thus, and in not doing thus thou 
art condemned by the law; now to them that are risen with 
Christ they act in love, and what the law commands 'tis to 
them under its command, but love is the new Jerusalem that is 
above, which is the mother of us all, this was part of Paul's 
doctrine allegorical allusive alluding thing in show to things 
in substance which was in the centre, Romans the 3 Chapter and 
the 20 verse. By the works of the law is no man justified, 
what then are we justified by? the faith in Jesus Christ in 
believing, which is but love, I pray take the 30 verse of the 
same chapter, for it is one God that shall justify 
circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision through faith; how 
is this? 'tis thus, the seed of Abraham are believers, and 
from believing act of obedience as circumcised according to 
command, the uncircumcised Gentile only through faith 
believing in Jesus the mercy of God, so both interests is knit 
in one, what was the salvation of our forefathers? It was they 
did believe a Messiah should come and obedient to the law that 
was salvation, we believe he is come, obedience from that root 
is salvation, the Jews look for a deliverer to come, their 
obedience to the commands is to them life, for we must not 
think that the beloved people though cast off temporally, are 
cast off eternally.
Brethren look to your selves and judge not others, Romans the 
9 and 25 verse, Brethren I would not have you ignorant of this 
secret, that partly obstinacy is come to Israel until the 
fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and this is my message to 
the whole world, that God is coming to make good his promise, 
that is this, the deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob, and so all Israel shall be 
saved.
O Brethren here lies the mystery of mysteries in them words, 
that is, God will make all Israel, that is, light in God's 
strength, and that shall be saved; Beloved, then there is in 
Israel in that peremphaical expression, there is neither Jew 
nor Gentile, but love, and love is Christ, and Christ in God, 
here the winding mystery, none but the evangelical eye can 
view it, and he that sees not is in darkness, and darkness is 
in death.
O Beloved that ye were but a true seeing people, then ye would 
be doing, for want of sight is the want of duty, and duty is 
declared by doing, and having this evangelical sight, we may 
perceive our root we sprang from, unto which root now I come 
for sight to view it, and then knowledge from that root to 
declare it.
And now I begin with my babe knowledge, John the 38 chapter 
and the 7 verse, When the Stars in their morning praised me 
together, and all the children of God rejoiced, this text is 
false translated, for the text in the true words are these. 
Hevi alsiel reme mem asadit errone aksi pele agas sab oh in 
rem alvat. The English is, In my morning the essence creative 
did obey in cheerfulness or in rejoicing.
Brethren before I come to my dialect, which is Cabbalistical, 
I shall denote unto you the improper denotations in the text 
being rendered according to our capacity in the English 
tongue, and I will maintain the text falsly translated, and 
prove his coherency in disjunct from the intendant.
Now mind, there was no stars then, though that word stars be 
put in, for Stars were fixed in the firmament, and were made 
in the third day's work, though they be stated in the fourth 
day's work in Genesis, and I am able to give a clear 
demonstration to wise men not wedded to their own conceit, 
that will be satisfactory for the same, but the stars denote 
light and in light is God praised, and not in darkness; I have 
given the text this help, the word morning will hold, for God 
is the morning of, and to all things; but to find the children 
of God before there was a creation, this is hard.
Now I desire to know what it is that makes the children of 
God? Is it not flesh and spirit, for if not flesh, sons in 
light, and then we are what we were before we were created, 
before the essence did descend into flesh: so know that the 
morning whereunto this text doth point, there was then neither 
stars nor children, then they could not praise, but their 
essence creative as I cited did rejoice in God, they did what 
we being in love do at our returne out of this inveilment of 
flesh, that is, sing praise in the celestial centre when we 
have finished our course, we shall have our crown in the 
heavenly kingdom where is joy without sorrow, mirth without 
mourning, all sorrow gone, all joy and rejoicing evermore 
increasing in us continually singing praises unto God the Lord 
who is holy righteous, and just, and good, that hath redeemed 
us unto himself by his own power through Jesus Christ our 
Lord.
Quas ammalet seon albi arri madad alvah he lie hosea al biah 
ablu henon arkad emi pent al. The English of this low derivacy 
yet Hebrew, because the majority of this state is wrote in 
Hebrew, the tenth derivacy; thus often hath the Hebrew lost in 
his definition, the English is this, What or when the high 
light was in itself alone? then there was no stars nor 
children, but in the essence creative all did rejoice together 
in me or in my being. Brethren ye differ, and are astounded 
when I speak two or three words of Latin then Hebrew or Greek: 
Know that the spirit composeth all tongues into one truth, but 
not as you do compose: and stand you still on your own basis, 
till by miracle God hath confirmed his truth in me, and then 
let yours fall, till then hold: the councel is safe, judge ye, 
is it not?
Now brethren, you make one word bear one signification most an 
end, I make one word take forty according to his combinements 
in the state: I can make to thou, I can make it stand for 
dark, or light, or hell, or heaven, or sea, or land, or angel, 
or sun, or Devil: So your wisdom in your learned method is 
lost, for that end I come forth to confound your lying 
learning, your exorcism, your blasphemy; and I shall put an 
end to it, and save your brains from that studied lie, which 
travail to some hath been so great, that thereby they have 
confounded themselves.
Pos o alogoos in a salma perny a sadit pelma madiana a saby 
al. O the height in learning is but the witchcraft of the 
mind, that doth deceive the simple man in the same body, this 
is a state from that Arabic tongue. I pray scholars see what 
an honour the spirit doth put upon your great study and pains, 
what spirit I leave you to judge: you will say it is an evil 
spirit to you, it is to your lying learning, but it is true 
light to you, if you had but eyes to see.
Brethren, the amors or love of death, is to the lovely in 
himself, for death is life being in God. Now the love of 
learning is that beauteous whore that bewitches the natural 
ingenious spirit in man unto death: for her lovely sight is 
but death two ways, First it is death because it is but name, 
Secondly it is death when the substance doth come; for then 
thy gain that thou counted life, is become unto thee death, as 
Paul sayeth, That that I accounted gain, was loss unto me, for 
the excellent knowledge in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Beloved brethren. I come not in the eloquentness of man's even 
weaved connexions, that is, with man's curious composers, for 
the apostles and prophets they took not a verse to study a 
sermon, but wrote the texts that you study from: Now what they 
wrote was true, what you study is a lie; the smooth composure 
in their writing, is not found a composure composed as yours 
is; theirs was life to them, yours being studied is death to 
you: for know, it is but name, and not the substance thing, 
which is Christ the Lord.
Now Beloved, I come to the main doctrine of all that is in the 
New Testament, that is, Accki Cristus in sabat re el vau 
salvat on in se, The English is this, Christ is the strong 
Saviour to the trusting soul in knowledge, for without 
knowledge, Christ no Saviour; and that knowledge must be 
Christ in the soul: it is his own teaching that brings us to 
life in himself.
But now I come to show you Christ the Saviour, whom multitudes 
of knowing people as they think, they know him not; Id est non 
corpus sed alvah a Deo in spiritus, It is not the body that is 
Christ, but 'tis the high spirit in the body: now the mystery 
doth begin, I entreat you mind, for I must treat allegorically 
as well as literally: Non sanguise selma a maxi pele ethrati 
sele meos in saba almat rogel perene aks elle nene sabat, not 
the composure of the Elements is the body of Christ: but mind 
the word spirit that commandeth them abstracted elements into 
a composure.
O Beloved, I could wish that I had the highest learned men in 
the world to speak to, for you cannot fathom my reach, though 
literal; I beseech you mind me exactly, and distinctly, that 
you asperse not me, neither wrong the Scripture nor 
yourselves, the point is this.
First I demand, do you believe that that body of Jesus that 
died at Jerusalem was our Saviour, for the Scripture sayeth 
that he offered up willingly an acceptable sacrifice unto God 
for us? This is a true Scripture, for it is God himself, he is 
our alone free Saviour. Now Beloved, this Scripture is, and 
hath been owned many hundred years together, but if it hath 
been viewed with veiled eyes, the truth cannot be reached; for 
you know that the Scripture speaks of Christ's second coming, 
which is the Sun in light, to unveil all the mystery both in 
the Law and the Gospel, which is his preaching within our 
souls, teaching us the evangelical truths, that is a true 
sight in all things, both allegorically, mysteriously, and 
literally.
Now I come to the called Scriptures that are literally 
expressed, they are Christ's body shadowy, pointing us unto a 
higher resurrection, as Paul sayeth, Let us go on to a further 
height, not laying again the beggarly rudiments of the first 
principles.
Now Brethren, for Christ's body that suffered, that is not 
your Saviour, nor Christ's body, mind me, for Christ's body is 
obedience in the whole new man, for what Christ did, he did it 
figuratively, and yet true Christ is your true Saviour: now 
that must be sought, Christ sayeth, I will destroy this Temple 
in three days. The words that I speak, is spirit and life. All 
these are mystery: let me tell you, that there is not one word 
that came from Christ and his Apostles, but were all mystery, 
if the insert had been truly translated, whereof to make up 
the Romish Church a body, they have bodied Christ in a body 
that the Spirit never intended. In alagma senaim maxsi sadaos 
in re perflex sele nos oramus sabat al. The English is this, 
The Church of Rome hath built their Church upon that body 
which is not Christ's body, but upon man's dung, and not 
Christ's, for true Christ hath not, nor cannot have any true 
corporal body, for he is a spirit, and a spirit is free from 
flesh, and embodies himself where he pleases, but it is in the 
soul, that is not of the body, but is the Divine riches of 
Christ, and Christ's riches are spiritual in the souls of men, 
there is one glimpse of Christ's body.
Now know that that body of flesh that suffered at Jerusalem 
was not Christ's body, but in that body was spiritual 
obedience, that was the Son of God, and that Son in the 
obedient spirit in that body, that was Christ your Saviour, 
which Saviour is in you, offering up you unto God, which is 
but thus much, obedience in love unto God: for do you know, 
and all people, that God doth give into the soul light, that 
light is Christ, which in the soul is obedience: so that God 
is God in regency, Christ in the soul, in every man that is in 
light, that lighr is obedience; hereby man is made obedient, 
and so one with the Father through the Spirit, and that light 
in the soul is perfect Christ.
Now as ever the light in the soul is Christ in flesh, God in 
spirit, do not mistake me, for God is the Creator, Christ is 
the strength of God, the holy Ghost and Christ are both one in 
the earthly creation: for God is the Creator, Christ is the 
strength of that created, the holy Ghost is the valley in 
which the two persons as you say act, but I say one union in 
all that hath been spoken, and no persons: for know, that a 
spiritual essence cannot be person in true truth, but if you 
say persons, and I say God, here is no difference between us; 
for say you what you can say, I know beyond what you and the 
creation can say, for mind, saying is nothing, and knowsedge 
is all things.
Wrote by me Theauraujohn Taniour 
Allah High-priest, allah all.

Epistle 18.
Wrote at Eltham. 
June 28. 1651.
O Beloved, God is love! O Beloved, so great is my desire that 
love should be engrafted in every one of you, that my soul 
panteth after my God for you, even that he would fill your 
souls with love, which love in truth is God himself planted in 
you. Brethren, let me tell you, that then Christ reigns in his 
kingdom, that is in your spirits, ye being in love: for know, 
that Christ hath an earthly kingdom, but the Spirit in that 
earthly Kingdom that is his throne; I will come and dwell 
within the humble and meek spirit sayeth the Lord.
Alvah havilah el asui arab salu in rem madad ai in sele mem. 
The English, O the height of Christ's Throne is situate in the 
low spirits of humble men in the earthly form, that is the 
English of that Hebrew state: brethren, I am coming down to 
the Hebrew that is now used, which is the tenth derivacy of, 
and from the first Hebrew that was wrote hieroglyphically, 
Moses wrote it radically, that was in roots; for know, that in 
the Hebrew three radices or letters as you count, will denote 
any word in the creation, without any more adjuncts.
Now Beloved, God is love, and love is light, and light is the 
true guide to God himself: thus God is love, he set down his 
loveliness in created appearances, he giving light into the 
soul of man, it is guided by that light into the centre it 
came out from, which is God himself. Now brethren, the truest 
name that Christ can be ciphered out unto the sons of men, is 
this, in Hebrew Sabbah oli, the English is, the whole holy 
light, that is true Christ.
Now I will show you the word that Christ is denoted from, and 
what the word in import will bear, and give you the reasons to 
conduce the proof of what I have laid down. Christ in the 
Greek is Cristos, which if truly understood, doth denote unto 
us Light, the Hebrew doth hold more full in strength of 
illustration, for nothing can hold with its original, that is 
no strength to the original strength: for know, that from the 
original, that that is, it is but derived from the original, 
in which lies the glory of that derived. The first proof to 
this is, that God is the original, we and the whole creation 
is but derived from God, who is the all of our continuing 
good, and the glory is still in himself, and our glory in him; 
he is our original; there is the first original, and his 
reason rendered.
The second reason of glory in the original is this, That the 
derivacy hath its dependancy on the original it was derived 
from: as Adam, the first figure, our glory in creation lies in 
Adam, as we are a derivation from that figure, that is the 
outside figure. But now I come to the inward spirit, that is 
light, or Christ in the soul, which is but the same; now to 
prove true light to be true Christ thus, Sabah oh apethrat al 
in re sabie pelma amaret al. The English of this Arabic state 
the whole holy light, is in English Christ; the whole holy 
light, is Christ that turneth in the whole moving motion in 
the whole creation, this is light.
Now by this light is denoted Christ's other faculty, that word 
doth not bear the state clear, but Oukssi, to denote the 
second conjunct in the declaring Christ in his second faculty 
or oukssi. Brethren, you must bear with the word, though you 
understand not, for I must write every conjunct in truth of 
word, in truth of time, in truth of place; for my stating one 
Hebrew word or state, doth bind the whole English afore-cited 
into truth of word, time, and place.
But now I come to Christ's second faculty or oukssi, and I 
shall cite the first state to prove the second, and give you 
Scripture in affirmation; but God must make my named names 
words to you, by writing them upon your souls, and that 
writing of his upon you, maketh you and his word one, you and 
I one by same word, and that word drawn into himself, we are 
all one with him as were at first, this is the Gospel in power 
of the Spirit, that must work this effect and when this is so 
written, then man's self ends is departed, Christ's throne 
erected, man's will is wholly subdued to act in love, then, 
and not before tak this Commandment his root, that is, I love 
my neighbour as myself; for then you that were neighbours are 
one in love, and love is Christ is the soul, and Christ is 
God.
Now do not think that I say the soul is Christ, but Christ in 
the soul is light, that light is Christ, that light in its 
Original centre is very God; if Christ be not in you, then ye 
are dead: now you read reprobates, which word doth vilifie the 
intendant as thus, dead to day, alive in Christ to morrow, 
which the word reprobate cuts off and excludes in our 
intention for ever.
But now I come to prove that light is strength, and strength 
is light, and suddenly thus. Arab axsi salma avaran anni 
pethrai radax ab lu sonary. The English is, The light in 
strength, is God in his creation, and the strength in light, 
is God in appearances. Or thus, God is light, that light is 
strength, God is strength, that strength is light, that light 
in strength descended into appearances; the strength sight and 
life in them appearances, is Christ, which is the light and 
the life of God; which in appearances is Primus maxci, that 
is, the first undeniable; but in creation, Secundus persona, I 
give you that, but it is Secundus vita in creationem in re, 
add id ex in re. Now I break your Latin connexions and 
conjuncts; the reason is, man's inventions cannot spell nor 
conjoin God's truth: for know, God's truth doth confound man's 
invention, and know, that God's truth in no age was revealed, 
but to confound man's invention, and when men's invention had 
wrought a full Babel, though they account it wisdom, strength, 
and beauty; yet then, even then, when men are concluding, 
their labours are finished, and they will enjoy themselves in 
beholding their work; just then, and not before, comes the 
stone unhewed, and breaks asunder; for God never appeared but 
to confound man's invention, that the wise might be caught in 
their own craftiness.
England, this is thy motto, that is involved in this motto, 
thy rendings to mine is even at the door, yet I will read you 
the intent of that you will count contradiction: brethren, let 
us walk honestly in things, though we differ in names, for in 
doing we are justified, and in saying and not in doing are we 
condemned: for know, saying gives us notice what we ought to 
do, and saying makes us guilty of not having done.
But the English to that Latin, that is Primus maxci, that is, 
the first undeniable in creation, he was the first-born, and 
to the Church of the first-born: now know, life is the first 
birth, and Christ sayeth, I am the life of the world; now this 
is a binding state.
Now you say Christ is Secundus persona, the second person in 
creation, I say, in that state he is not only Secundus 
persona, as you count, but as you in this point I count not; 
for I say, Sola Deus inter, vara alvah hapsi bene am in re. 
The English is, Christ was God alone in creation, in the high 
moving motion; that high moving motion, is God in union in 
creating, so then una, not duo.
Now I come to Secundus vita in creationem in re add id ex in 
re. The English is, Christ is the second living life in 
creation, that is, the second thing in that of the thing, and 
to the thing, the life in the thing, that is the life of the 
creation, which lies in these words, I am the life of the 
world: there is more in them Latin words cited, than ever was 
demonstrated if truly understood: now this state I lay down 
(and do not determine) thus, whether that the second living 
life in the whole creation, can properly in truth of word be 
called person or not? God is Wisdom to the wise, and counsel 
to the foolish ones, the simple he will teach in his way, and 
the arrogancy of the proud he will contemn.
Now brethren, I would not have you ignorant of what was the 
glory of the Gospel in the truth of it, I tell you, that the 
true Gospel is not only talkative as man's creation doth give 
it a being, but the true Gospel is active in goodness; now 
this acting goodness must be inquired into, and found out what 
it is, and every one be an example unto others acting therein. 
Brethren, it is round, the definition is strange, truly my 
brethren, I say as Peter and John said going into the Temple, 
Such as I have I give unto you. But I shall open unto you all 
the unfoldings are opened unto me, the Gospel of Christ is 
round, the acting goodness is and must be round; now I shall 
draw the emblem, The world is round, the Gospel is round, the 
soul of man is round; now all these are in every man and woman 
under heaven, the soul, Gospel, and the world.
But the true meaning must be understood, First, the soul is 
round, else the, world and its creation could not hold its 
figure in competency with it in its adherency. The Gospel is 
round; and that holds in competency with the soul, but it 
being last takes the first state and subdues all; for mind, 
first a world , then man, then the Gospel, and then comes 
goodness, righteousness; from what? from neither world, nor 
man, but from the Gospels: now my brethren, this is a strange 
metaphorical expression, but 'tis a true assertion.
Now here comes the true decipheration, and from this 
decipheration comes the clear definition. Now comes the clear 
view, that brethren you may apprehend every one of your 
standings, whether you are upon the Gospel built or upon man's 
foundation; that is, man's defending his actions by the name 
Gospel, and speaking of the spiritual intentions of the 
Gospel.
Now mind, before the Gospel comes to any, know that there is a 
world, and man in this world acting a oneness, or an 
agreeableness in one; thus man sees something in the world 
that hath a seeming beauty, unto which his understanding is 
subdued, upon this subdument there is an oneness in love, 
betwixt the worldly things and man; the world loves her own, 
that is Christ's words.
Now upon these two (yet one) comes the Gospel, and that doth 
illustrate into the soul a far greater beauty of loveliness. 
Now here begins man's trouble being wedded to the worldly 
appearances, the present enjoyment holds fast, the beams of 
the Gospel begin to heat both these as man and the world: now 
the Gospel being God's strength, never loses its end; My word 
shall effect the end whereunto it is sent sayeth the Lord.
Now Beloved, here is the contest begun betwixt the world-man, 
and man-world, both being one, by reason that the world hath 
conquered the understanding of man, and so man hath yielded up 
his all unto the world; for know, the world cannot yield up 
unto man, because of its majority, but man yields himself to 
the world, by reason of his minority and smallness of 
competency comparatively; now upon these two, yet one; and 
again two, and yet again all made one by the Gospel: so then 
the Trine is erected in terra, in earth, when the Gospel is 
planted, then comes this motto in truth, Thy will be done in 
earth as it is heaven; nay, then the will of God is done in 
earth as it is in heaven, which is world-man, man-world made 
obedient to the Gospel.
But to open their circumferences 'tis thus, The world round, 
the soul of man round, the Gospel round, thus I prove man, 
word, and world all round, and all in Trines, the greatest 
mystery that ever was wrote, therefore mind.
First know that God created the round world, whose consistance 
is of earth, the influentives of the celestial bodies, and the 
life operation in the sun, sub Deus, under God, this is the 
first Trine or the basis for man; now man in his Trine is 
this, soul, spirit, and body. Now I come to show how these 
Trines in their tinctures hold together.
First the earth, that is Major orbis, the great world, now God 
said, as the text is rendered, God made man of the dust of the 
earth, so there is a oneness in the earth and in the body of 
man: now here comes the deceit, Every thing loves his own, so 
man must by that rule love the earth he was made on, for in 
every oneness is an entireness loving itself; for man and 
woman (being in truth so) love one another, by reason of the 
true oneness in them, if they be truly one, which in truth of 
description ought to be; so much for the body of man, and the 
pondrous or massy body of the earth.
Now I come to the influences of the celestial bodies, and 
know, that they are placed in man's connexions, which is 
millions, as in the earrh; for these celestial bodies hold 
more the truth of figure, then the earthly bodyes can: for 
know, the more nearer the spheres you come, the more spiritual 
you must be; for let me tell you, the descent from them 
spiritual bodies, are the livening living in this gross 
terrestials; so know, there is a prefect oneness in the 
celestial influences, thus the influences causes all products 
in earthly appearances, as the spirit of man.
Now mind, I state the soul the first in man, the last in God, 
proved thus, God made man, and breathed in him the breath of 
life, and he became a living soul. I beseech you mind, Man 
dies, and the spirit (or soul) returns to God that gave it.
I pray you mind, first man was made, and then life was 
breathed, which life was the whole all that erected the fabric 
of man; the fall of this fabric, or man dying, the spirit 
returns to God that gave it: Now mind, here is the error, 
know, God withdrawing, is man's deceasing; for mind, the text 
runs as though man did die, and then God did receive, that 
text gives glory to man, and lessens the glory and strength of 
God: for God's withdrawing in that appearance, is the cause of 
deceasing: so let God have his pre-eminence, as Paul sayeth, 
Let God be true and every man a liar, so brethren, the truth 
lies not in names, but in things, not as they are said to be 
and reported to be, but as they are in the substance, and 
substance hath its centre. Now brethren, the soul is one with 
the Gospel, nay if you can say properly a true soul, I will 
swear that is true word and Gospel, for 'tis the living life 
of God in you, bringing your natural man to act in obedience, 
into spiritual righteousness declared in life and 
conversation, by distributing acts of mercy and relief to thy 
own members, that is of Christ's body. Now what is Christ's 
body temporal? I affirm it is the whole creation, and in that 
all men and women: Christ sayeth Love thine enemy, love him 
that persecutes thee.
Now brethren, I shall unveil one deceivable cheat amongst us, 
that count it a dishonour if that you do not name them people 
of the Gospel, and holy spiritual Christians, now mind, 
members of Christ's body spiritual, to them thou canst do that 
body no good: now David said, My righteousness extends not to 
thee, but to the Saints: and My delight is in them that excel 
in virtue.
Brethren, doth virtue and righteousness dwell in speaking 
names? no, I say all is lies if not declared in thing, that is 
doing, for the doer shall be justified, and the sayer 
condemned: alas brethren, if you be spiritual and act not 
mercifulness, that is (I must speak plain) not to relieve the 
poor oppressed, thou hast gotten Satan's highest shrine of 
shift to deceive thy self and Christ's members.
David said, I will not offer unto the Lord a sacrifice that 
shall stand me in nothing: to which our Nation I speak, of the 
majority of it, I will learn apace, and that I may be full and 
fluent in tongue to dispute names, 'tis the only wayk to be 
great, 'tis the land's livery, and I will have a cloak of that 
colour, then if I have but that name, I am rich; and a called 
spiritual man holds his religion at the cheapest Rate.
O say such people, he pray'd most devoutly, and he is a most 
heavenly man: when that man that hath prayed so long, and so 
high spoken, except he according to what he hath spoken, I 
will in words tell you what I mean, that feed the hungry, 
clothe the naked, oppress none, set free them bounden, if this 
be not, all your religion is a lie, a vanity, a cheat, 
deceived and deceiving; never prayed in your life, for 'tis 
not coming before God with a head full of names, but with an 
humble heart full of good things, actions in goodness and 
mercy to men, doth declare that God hath written the Gospel in 
the heart and soul of that man or woman.
O ovallo ovallo, ovallo on sephi agarim meteros in re. O 
England, O England, O England, thy conterfeiting feasts, God 
will discover thy skirts suddenly, for he is coming for to 
search for the blood thou hast shed for thy own ends.
O England, thy self-ends is the good you great endeavourers 
endeavour after, have you not all along cryed up a good name? 
but you have acted the evil thing; the time of recompence is 
at the very door: this I know, that the appointment of thy 
scourge is entered into the celestial influences, and as the 
Lord lives, the product shall be produced; Therefore tremble O 
England, and woe unto thee O France, thy judgement is 
appointed, and the time hastens.
Beloved, days of mourning and sorrow is at hand, for the earth 
is ripe, ready to be reaped, the time detracting is only for 
the people's gathering, this I know, the storm is coming will 
cause you to own one another.
Brethren, you are too high to receive instruction, but God by 
afflictions will bring you down.
Brethren, I cannot confine my Method, Sene arab ablah al in 
sem arkad al. The English is, The strong strength is searching 
for wickedness, to displace it, and plant righteousness; then 
when we have been plunged and purged from iniquity, then we 
shall rejoice in valuing our deliverance at the full value, or 
full worth; Thus far is the English of that Hebrew state read 
both affirmatively and negatively.
Now Beloved, the Gospel or word hath conquered the world-man, 
or man-world, when man acts round roundly righteousness: know, 
a round thing hath the smallest centre; for the very abbat or 
bottom touches the centre, and all the whole circumference 
stands to be viewed: now thou being centered upon the Gospel, 
though thou standest open to be viewed of the world, thy 
centre is Christ, which is not seen, neither can the world 
see, because his centre is spiritual, and all look with carnal 
eyes, and that sight cannot discover a spiritual thing or 
being.
Eusei selma a maset petra agma marci alvat horai senan arkad 
pallu erni senean avarat pal hoi nereat allu mikak appi sola 
vereat annu maad poke. The major is Greek in this citation, 
and doth denote unto us thus much, The centre of all things is 
not seen, which am I sayeth the Lord, and move not, and am the 
cause of all motion; though not seen: for the centered centre 
moveth not; its stability is the cause of all moving motions.
So the cause of als motion is from within, or not seen, so 
that without is the inveilment of the motion that moveth all 
things, so that that appeareth is not, and that that is not 
seen, even that is; which lies in these words, No man can see 
me and live, as Moses desired to behold the face of God, the 
answer was this, No man can see me and live, but thou shalt 
see my back-parts; but the word acose which signifies the out-
sidings of God in terra, for know, no man like Moses in Theos 
ologi, that was, in knowing God's declaratives of God in his 
appearances, Solomon was wise, but short of Moses, for Moses 
was God's eye as I may say, Solomon was but God's ear I may 
comparatively say.
Now the out-sidings of God, for to hold in truth of words, it 
must be to decipher God's out-sidings, it must be cited 
pluralities of multiplicities, and multiplicities of 
pluralities; these words must all be understood, and then you 
have light in the drift in my intendant.
Now the back-parts as the text holds it forth, but I say 'tis 
improper, but the word is acose, that is, the out-sidings of 
God, but you will have it the back-parts of God.
Now what was this? It was the creations genuine, and germine, 
and the knowing the influences in their consanguinity and 
generatori abstracts in their combinements and recedings, 
which is only known in the truth in knowledge, in the 
cabbalisterial inspirative knowledge; for by outward studies, 
great things in the secrets of nature are known, by reason 
that in man is the seeds of all compounds in earth, air, fire, 
and water, celestial, terrestial, that is man's compounds; and 
in all these hath man a natural faculty, only the predominate 
of these man is wholly sway'd by; for know, if that there were 
not in man a oneness in every of these, man could not 
apprehend any thing in these, but 'tis oneness with them, 
gives him view into them; but their multiplicity confounds man 
in his true genuine understanding them perfectly.
Now this is Adam in the garden amongst the trees, that is, man 
viewing darkly God's creation; these trees are in man, unknown 
to man, one with man, and not yet understood by man; but that 
spirit that touched Daniel, and caused strength in him to 
understand that, even that is he that discovers this hidden 
Mystery, which is this God in his regencie, God in his 
derivacie, and God in his definacy; there is again a glimpse 
of three, and all these in one union be.
Selose in re apparet O el soni arpha sal oli em medad allu 
sonan ai pele am. The English both affirmatively and 
negatively, yet both they again affirmatively; thus the 
heavenly light is loyal in the regency, loyal in the derivacy, 
loyal in the definacy, that is the regency going forth in 
derivacies, and taking up again its definacies defined, so 
here is once more three, and all again in union be.
Again, the derivacy appears, the definacy defined returns, the 
regency receives, and here is three, and they in union be.
Again, the defined definacy returns into regency: now you 
perceive but two, there is no more; for man dying, that is the 
definacydefined, the spirit returneth to regency, which is God 
the Lord: Brethren, this God hath let down, that the world may 
know that the unlearned mad man, God hath taught knowledge, as 
shortly will appear.
Qoas amalet el sadit phe al in rem madad alui seve am aphphy 
selos in re affirmater on. The English of this Hebrew citation 
is this, What evil hath Christ done unto you, that you should 
contemn his commands in England, ye priests and people, you 
will find the Lamb whom you have slain, turn a lion in life, 
and rend the nation in pieces, for God's glory Christ will not 
have given to another, and thus you have done, holding forth 
Christ high in great names of religion, by which means the 
nation is drawn into perjury, you inventers of this deceit, 
have offered up Christ and his Gospels a sacrifice to your own 
lusts, for Christ is in the majority of the nation, only a 
bait to catch the simple, for to satiate the desire of men in 
authority, so Christ is cried up to effect another end; so you 
have made your great glory Christ to become of no value, by 
reason you have engaged so deep in his name, and made nothing 
good you engaged his name unto: a day, a day, a day of 
vengeance is coming for covenant-breakers, then God himself 
will judge.
Now brethren ye great ones be not angry if a mad man tell you 
the truth, truth is truth, let it proceed from love or envy, I 
speak to mens actions.
Now you shall know how and whether I have spoken truth unto 
you, examine your lives and conversations, and if you have not 
acted as I have spoken, then you are in the truth, but if you 
have done it, envy not me for telling you the truth, but give 
thanks to God for discovering his light unto you, that thereby 
you may be reformed.
O how beautiful is the feet of the messenger that bringeth the 
glad tidings of peace: mind, depart from thy covetousness, and 
false ends, and oppression, then there is beauty in thee, 
there light is welcome, but before, 'tis like the 
executioner's axe to hew down thee and thy self-ended 
covetousness, thereby to make thee one with itself in light, 
but light is enmity to darkness, until it hath destroyed the 
darkness, and centered itself in darkness stead or foundation, 
then truth reigns, and then the new Jerusalem is come down out 
of Heaven, the marriage is made, which marriage, I beseech 
thee O Lord hasten, for thy chosen oppressed sakes, who at 
this day are very low, arise in thy power, and rend the 
nations that thy chosen Israel may be free.
The end of this. Spherative ackklah al.
Wrote by me
Theauraujohn Taniour High-priest to the Jews.

FINIS.


Diggers

Light Shining In Buckinghamshire:
Gerrard Winstanley

Source: https://www.marxists.org/history/england/english-
revolution/light-shining.htm and
http://oll.libertyfund.org/pages/leveller-tracts-5#5.21

Title Page

Light Shining
IN
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE,
OR
A Discovery of the main ground;
Original Cause of all the Slavery in the World,
but chiefly in ENGLAND:
presented by way of a Declaration of many
of the well-affected in that County, to all their
 poor oppressed Country-men of
ENGLAND
And also to the Consideration of the
present Army under the Conduct of the
Lord FAIRFAX.
-------------------------------------------------------
Arise O God, judge thou the Earth
-------------------------------------------------------
Printed in the year 1648

Light Shining In Buckinghamshire


JEHOVAH ELLOHIM Created Man after his own likeness and image, which
image is his Son Jesus, Heb. I. verse 2. who is the image of the
Invisible God: now Man being made after God's image or likeness, and
created by the word of God, which word was made Flesh and dwelt
amongst us; which word was life, and that life the light of men, I.
Joh. 2. this light I take to be that pure spirit in man which we
call Reason, which discusseth things right and reflecteth, which we
call conscience; from all which there issued out that golden rule or
law, which we call equity: the sum me of which is, saith Jesus,
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do to them, this is
the Law and the Prophets; and James calls it the royal Law, and to
live from this principle is called a good conscience: and the
creature Man was privileged with being Lord over other inferior
creatures, but not over his own kind; for all men being alike
privileged by birth, so all men were to enjoy the creatures alike
without propriety one more than the other, all men by the grant of
God are alike free, and every man individual, that is to say, no man
was to Lord or command over his own kind: neither to enclose the
creatures to his own use, to the impoverishing of his neighbours,
see the Charter, I. Gen. from 26. vers. to the end of the Chapt. and
see the renewing of the Charter to Noah and his Sons, Gen. 9. from
the I. vers. to the 18.

But man following his own sensuality became a devourer of the
creatures, and an encloser, not content that another should enjoy
the same privilege as himself, but encloseth all from his Brother;
so that all the Land, Trees, Beasts; Fish, Fowl, &c. are enclosed
into a few mercenary hands; and all the rest deprived and made their
slaves, so that if they cut a Tree for fire they are to be punished,
or hunt a fowl it is imprisonment, because it is gentlemen's game,
as they say; neither must they keep Cattle, or set up a House, all
ground being enclosed, without hiring leave for the one, or buying
room for the other, of the chief encloser, called the Lord of the
Manor, or some other wretch as cruel as he, and all must be summoned
to a Court Leet, there to acknowledge Fealty and Service, and that
with Oaths if required (at leastwise if Jurymen) to their Tyrant
called Lord of the Manor; and if a Tenant admitted, if Copy-holder,
he must take an Oath to become a true Tenant, rather Slave, as afore
said; now all this Slavery of the one and Tyranny of the other was
at first by murder and cruelty one against the other; and that they
might strengthen themselves in their villainy against God's
ordinances and their Brothers freedoms and rights: They had always a
Commander in chief, which was the most blindest and desperatest
wretch, and he was their chief and head, as Nimrod, and he became
their King; so that I dare make plainly appear by Scripture and
Reason, that Kings were not of God's institution at first, but it
arose from the Heathens, viz. those that lived after their own
beastly lusts: and when Israel would have a King, their only ground
was to be like other Nations; and God told Samuel saying, they have
not cast off or rejected thee but me, that I should not reign over
them. Read the whole, Chapter of the I of Samuel &c. where observe
the Slavery that the people are in that have a King, and amongst the
whole Catalogue observe the Tenth of Stocks, &c. and see the 12.
Chapter from the 16. verse forward, what judgements God sent in
their Harvest for asking a King, and afterwards observe what misery
befell, for they were in continual Wars abroad, and at last divided
into divisions and had two Kings: Then what woeful civil Wars and
murdering one another for the Kingdom: I refer you to the whole book
of Kings to judge; doe but read that of their first King Abimelech's
cruelty which was Gideon's bastard; Judges 8. and 21. read the 9. of
Judges, &c. there he kills his brother with a company of light
fellows; and as Kings are the root of Tyranny, so likewise they were
the first that brought in wars, see Gen. 14. for their greatness
must be upheld by murder and cruelty, as aforesaid, in so much that
in Revel. 13. mention is made of an ugly beast with seven heads and
ten horns, which horns did persecute the Saints: now in Revel. 17.
horns are there declared to be Kings, so that Kings are of the
Beast, which is a power that makes all subject to it, but only the
Saints, &c. Revel. 13. and 7. And saith the Scripture, the Beast
hath its power from the Dragon, Revel. 13. and 4. and the Dragon in
Revel. 20. and 2 is the Devil and Satan, so that it is plain, that
Kings are of the Beast, and the Beast is of the Devil; and it is as
plain, they that worship the King worship the Beast, and they that
worship the Beast worship the Devil, Revel. 13: and 4. verse. Now
let us a little behold our English Powers, all that which is called
Magistracy is from the Kings Patent, and his is from the Devil; for
the King's Predecessors, The outlandish bastard William came to be
King by Conquest and murder, now murderers are, saith Jesus, the
Devil's children, for saith he, the Devil was a murderer from the
beginning and he abode not in the Truth: now Kings are utterly
against the truth, and persecutors of the Saints; for saith Jesus,
they shall bring you before Kings, so that Kings are enemies unto
the Kingdom of Christ.

Secondly, Behold now from licence or grant comes all our enclosures
and tradings, as privilege to buy and sell, and to enjoy, occupy and
possess lands; it is from taking the Beasts mark: now observe the
rich possessors, encroachers, enclosers, see your holdings, your
Patents, and Charters, and Licence is from the King, and all tenures
and holdings of lands is from your King, yea all Writings,
Indentures, Bands, Leases, &c. is in the name and authority of him;
nay your money is not lawful, if it be not the Kings coin, and his
picture and superscription on it.

So that observe, the King is made by you your God on earth, as God
is the God of heaven, saith your Lawyers: therefore all Laws, Writs,
Summons, Warrants, Patents, &c, must be in his name; nay, the
Parliament will settle nothing without him, yea all Honours must be
from him. Now then mark if this be not all from the Dragon: and the
Priests to verify this, saith in their thing called Prayer, he is
supreme head of their Church, Ecclesiastical as Civil, next under
thee and thy Christ, so that he is their third person of their
Trinity, and so their God, Defender of their faith. Now here is the
blasphemy in Rev. 13. vers. 5. And in the Scotish Covenant, one
Article of their Religion is concerning his sacred Majesty, &c. and
Kings are the only chief upholders of Babylon: see how they weep at
her downfall, Rev. 18. when buying and selling ceaseth, &c.

Now friends, what have we to do with any of these unfruitful works
of darkness? Let us take Peter's advice, I Pet. 4. 3. The time past
of our life may suffice that we have wrought the will of the
Gentiles, when we walked in lascivious lusts, exces of wine,
revellings, banqueting, and abominable idolatry. And let us not
receive the Beast's mark, lest that the doom in Rev. 14. 9, 10.
befall none of us: but let us oppose the Beastly powers, and follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.

Now here is the chief ground why wicked men stand so for a King; it
is to uphold all their confused cruelties and incests as aforesaid:
and herein upholding him, they uphold that power that set him up,
(by our Saviour's rule) and by justifying him, they justify that
power that set him a work in all his tyranny; and they and the
Parliament in treating with him, treat with him that authorised him;
and in receiving him, receiveth him that set him on work, that is to
say the Devil. Then see how we are cheated.

Now the enlightened Saints are commanded to abandon the unfruitful
works of darkness. But all this power aforesaid is, 
1. of darkness; therefore to be resisted.
2. Christ hath called the Saints to light; therefore they are to
walk as children of light.
3. The Saints are to have no fellowship with Belial: but the power
aforesaid is of Belial, therefore have no fellowship with it.
4. The said power is to be resisted: and see the promise, for saith
James, Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. And this we have
experience of, that whensoever the Kings power was manfully
resisted, he fled from the resisters.

And therefore those called the Levellers, their principles to free
all alike out of slavery, are most just and honest in reference to
the matter of freedom: for it is the end of the redemption by Jesus,
to restore all things.

And to do this, the removal of the Kingly power will be a main
forwardness: and indeed the Kingly power is the being of Tyranny;
for if no King, no Lord, no Patent, &c. 2. If the execution of Laws
were not in his name, as all Assurances, Writs, Commissions,
Patents, Warrants, &c. then he should down if he would, for any use
or need they had of him.
1. Therefore rich men cry for a King, because the poor should not
claim his right that is his by God's gift. 
2. The horseleech Lawyer cries for a King, because else the supreme
power will come into the people's Representatives lawfully elected,
and so all Trials would be done in the country, in every Town &c. by
the same Neighbourhood, and so the Law would no more be bought nor
sold, and then farewell caterpillar-Lawyer.
3. The things, Lord, Barons, &c. cry for a King, else their
tyranical House of Peers falls down, and all their rotten honour,
and all Patents and Corporations, their power being derived from
him, if he go down, all their tyranny falls too. The like of Lords
of Manors, Gentlemen, &c. besides the Priests of all men must cry
for a King; for by his power and oppressing Courts, all his Judges,
Justices, &c. and himself too is their sworn creature, and they are
the Priests' pack-horses that carry the whore of Babylon's ware
about, and they want but bells about their neck they may be the
better heard, &c. Now if the King go down, what will become of the
Priests ware think you? and Tithes goes down.

The like of all base Conventions of men of what kinde so ever. But
now the honest man that would have liberty, cryes down all interests
whatsoever, and to this end he desires common right and equity,
which consists of these particulars following.
1. A just portion for each man to live, that so none need to beg or
steal for want, but everyone may live comfortably. 
2. A just Rule for each man to go by, which Rule is to be found in
Scripture.
3. All men alike under the said Rule, which Rule is, To do to
another as another should do to him: So that eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, hand for hand, &c. and if anyone stole, to restore double,
&c. 
4. The government to be by Judges, called Elders, men fearing God
and hating covetousness; Those to be chosen by the people, and to
end all controversies in every Town and Hamlet, without any other or
further trouble or charge.

And in the Scriptures, the Israelites Common-wealth is an excellent
pattern, if led up to that in Gen. I. and Gen. 9. mentioned in the
beginning.

Now in Israel, if a man were poor, then a public maintenance and
stock was to be provided to raise him again: So would all Bishops'
lands, Forrest lands, and Crown-lands do in our Land, which the
Apostate Parliament men give one to another, and to maintain the
needless thing called a King. And every seven years the whole Land
was for the poor, the fatherless, widows and strangers, and at every
crop a portion allowed them.

Mark this, poor people, what the Levellers would do for you. Oh why
are you so mad as to cry up a King? It is he and his Court and
Patentee men, as Majors, Aldermen, and such creatures, that like
Cormorants devour what you should enjoy, and set up Whipping-posts
and Correcting-houses to enslave you. Tis rich men that oppress you,
saith James.

Now in this right Common-wealth, he that had least had no want:
therefore the Scripture call them a Family, and household of Israel.
And in the 2. of the Acts, amongst those that received the Gospel,
they were gathered into a family and had all things common; yet so,
that each one was to labour and eat his own bread. And this is
equity, as aforesaid: for it is not lawful nor fit for some to work,
and the other to play; for it is God's command, that all work, let
all eat: and if all work alike, is it not fit for all to eat alike,
have alike, and enjoy alike privileges and freedoms? And he that did
not like this, is not fit to live in a Common-wealth. See Gen. 9.
And therefore weep and howl, ye Rich men, by what vain name or title
soever: God will visit you for all your oppressions; You live on
other men's labours, and give them their bran to eat, extorting
extreme rents and taxes on your fellow-creatures. But now what will
you do? for the People will no longer be enslaved by you, for the
knowledge of the Lord shall enlighten them, &c.

And now (according to my knowledge,) I shall discover your pedeigree
from your King to your Gentleman, and it is thus: William the
Bastard son of Robert Duke of Normandy, with a mighty Army of his
fellow-tyrants and Thieves and Robbers, enters Sussex, kills the
inhabitants the Britons and their King, that were in an Army to
withstand his cruelty and defend their rights, robs and destroys all
places and persons at his pleasure, settleth Garrisons of Normans to
enslave the Britons, takes all Land and causeth them to hold it by
Copyhold, to pay fines and harets at his pleasure, &c. It is too
tedious to relate all Polls, Tolls, Taxes &c. that he made our
Forefathers pay. Let the Reader view the Chronicle.

But amongst all unnatural, unreasonable, tyrannical and cruel Laws
he made, as that of Curfer, of Felony, That the child must suffer
for the Father, &c. And all his tyrannical Laws he caused to be in
an Outlandish tongue. So that here I take this power to be that
little horn in Dan., 7. 24. because I never heard or read of the
like cruelty that any Tyrant did the like, for to cause his cruel
Laws to be in an unknown tongue. Now the poor people knew not when
they offended or no. 2. For the execution of those Laws, the people
to come to what place he will appoint, at 4 Terms and times in a
year.
And 3. to buy their Laws at the Lawyers unconscionable rate, for he
set up and devised the Lawyers. Now as I shall make it appear that
this is the horn, so the Caterpillars' Lawyers will prove the eyes:
which Lawyers are as profitable as maggots in meat, and Caterpillars
in Cabbages, and Wolves amongst Lambs, &c.

And amongst those, see their Preferment (as it's called) to suck the
People; as Attorney, Counsellor, Barrister, Sergeant, and
accordingly Fees to rob, and they take Oaths; and out of this
rubbish stuff are all our Creatures called Judges, and they likewise
all to be sworn. And then places of preferment (so called) to
tyrannize and to be the head Tyrants, Sycophants, Wolves, Lions,
Leopards, &c. as Duchy General, Attorney-General, Lord-lubber
Keeper, Lord Privy-Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord Barons of the
Exchequer, and I know not what great Catchpoles besides these; all
to be sworn to their dread Sovereign Tyrant Beast, &c. And so being
right whelps brought up to rend, devour, rob, spoil, tyrannise &c.
over the poor people; then their dread Tyrant, as he hath received
power and dignity from the Dragon or Devil as aforesaid, doth
shatter, breath out, and all-to-bedaggle them with it, with hairy-
skinned Robes, resembling the subtle nasty Fox with his dirty tail.
And because the Lord Keeper, Privy Seal, and Treasurer's long tails
should not daggle in the dirt, they must have another Sycophant
slave apiece to carry up for them with their hats off doing homage
to their breech. Oh height of all baseness! What, will they creep in
one another's arses for honour? Why, oh, his Majesty's breath of
Honour it may be blows out There, and therefore he holds up his gown
that it might blow him that holds it up, and makes him be called
Sir. Likewise those men thus honoured must have a gew-gaw silver
Mace carried before them, With a Cross a top on it, to shew they
have their Title from the Defender of the Popish Faith; the Lord
Keeper having a fools-bauble like a Purse carried before him: now
all these Lawyers, Liars and twelve Judges: Besides with their
accoutred Caps; and Serjeants with their womanish Coifs and
Petticoats on their Shoulders, with their Barristers, Attorneys, &c.
Howbeit, they rob and devour the people, striving who shall most
play the knave and cozen; so that he may climb up into high places
of profit: for all those upholding their Kings Prerogative, their
Tyranny is unquestionable, that is the reason that they maintain the
King can do no wrong; that he is a God on earth, as God is God in
Heaven, and that he is the life of the Law; all Writs, Warrants,
Commissions, &c. His name gives the being to them: that he is the
fountain of our honour and magistracy: yea and that he is supreme
head Ecclesiastical and Civil; also that he is to be accountable to
none but God, and all this the better to hide their tyranny; for
they being all from him, and all their Commissions; if you question
them, then you must question him from whom their power was derived:
but they say, he is not to be accountable, &c. so that by this means
they uphold all their Tyranny; and there is no way, but to take down
the Kingly Power and then theirs will down too, & not before: Now
these Lawyers are the Eyes of the Beast, for the twelve Judges sit
in the tyrannical House of Peers, another sort of the Kingly
creatures to advise them in all tyranny, and how to keep the Norman
yoke about the people's necks.

The next thing to show is from whence came all our Nobility and
Gentry, even from that outlandish Norman Bastard, who first being
his Servants and under-Tyrants; secondly, their rise was by cruel
murder and theft by the Conquest; thirdly, their rise was the
Country's ruin, and the putting them down will be the restitution of
our rights again; these are called Dukes, Earls, Barons, Marquesses,
Lords, &c. And from this Bastard is all our royal blood, therefore
to be utterly disesteemed: O then behold, O England thy vanity in
Idolizing the King and his Children!

Thy Priests have gulled, bewitched, cheated, and betrayed thee into
these tyrants hands with their sorceries only for their own filthy
lucre and bellies' sake, because they have the greatest part of the
spoil for their preaching up the King to be the Supreme head,
Defender of the Faith, God's anointed; and that if thou dost resist
his power thou resisteth the ordinances of God: now all this is but
as bridles in thy jaws, and blinds over thy eyes, that thou must be
ruled by the Church, and they are thy enemies, and thou must believe
them; and keep thy self a good Subject to thy Prince, the condition
is good: and by all these and a thousand tricks more they do but
mould thee to slavery this five hundred years and more, and by this
means the King and his Creatures ride thee in thy Estates and
Persons and Labours.

And the Priests over thy Conscience and soul, and keep thee in all
ignorance and malice; and for so doing thy Priests are thy Princes
and bear rule, and for their so bewitching thee they come by their
Impropriations and fat Benefits: and it is for those fat Benefits
that makes them turn changelings, either to King or Parliament,
which will best furnish their kitchen. Therefore shake off those
locusts and be no more deluded by them, but hearken to the voice of
God in the Scriptures and his Saints, and pay no more Tithes to
those Priests, nay cast off those abominable deceivers.

All Charters, Patents, and Corporations was devised only to uphold
the Kings Tyranny, Greatness, and Interest; and because the people
did rise in many parts for their Privileges and Right; and he being
in straights and knowing not how to uphold his tyranny, devised a
way to set the people one against another, by making some Free, some
Foreigners, &c. and so deviseth these Patents and Charters in all
populous Cities and Towns throughout the Realm to uphold his
Interest.

Now as for these bewitching Charters, see how they run in J. I: Out
of our Princely grace, bounty, mere motioned princely favour, Do
give and grant to this our City or Town, &c. To be a body Corporate,
to consist of a Major, Bailiffs and Burgesses, &c.

Why? Mark, the better to serve us and our successors (this is the
end of their grant) then all Towns and Customs whatsoever is due to
us and our successors? We bequeath to the same body Corporate (and
every business must be sworn, to be the Kings creatures) then out of
that pack, they have power to choose twelve Aldermen for a Common-
council, and they all be sworn again: Then out of this stuff, all
the Burgesses to choose a thing called a Mayor, and she all to be
sworn to the Kings: then she shall be a Just-ass of Peace and Coram,
and have a silver artichoke or toy called a Mace, carried before
her; and she and her twelve Aldermen following after in their Cunny-
skin Gowns, as so many fools in a Mid-summer Ale: and those petty-
tyrants shall domineer over the Inhabitants by virtue of their
Patent, and enclose all, letting and setting of the Poor's lands to,
and moneys, stocks of moneys to their own use: and claim a Privilege
from their Charters and Patents that they scorn to be accountable to
others, but to their Prerogative Masters; so that you see all
tyranny shelters itself under the King's wings: is it not time then
to throw down the King, and bring his Person to his answer: these
Patents and Charters is the main wheel and prop that upholds the
Kings tyranny; for by this means the Prerogative people, strives to
uphold the King and Lords interests, to get favours of them, to hold
up their own knavery and deceit; and doth choose such Burgesses for
the Parliament, as will be for the King, as Caterpillar Lawyers,
Coliers or lords of the Manor, Impropriators, or such like; and it
is from those Patent Towns that the House of Commons if fil'd with
so many kingified Prerogative self-interest, proud and cheating
Varlets as now it is: and until those Corporations be thrown down,
we can expect never any hope of freedom by a Parliament: see how
London's Common-Council stir up their Hackneys with Petitions and
Mutinies, for a Treaty with our Conquered enemy, &c

Therefore let Burgesses henceforth be no more so chosen, but from
all the well-affected in general.

The next thing is to shew you, as I conceive, how we came by a
Parliament, 2. what is a Parliament, 3. what good may be expected by
a Parliament as it now stands?

Our fore-fathers the Britons, being altogether in slavery, did rise
in many parts, and would not endure the slavery aforesaid; then the
tyrant and his brood, not able to overcome, grants a Parliament as
followeth; the People to parley, treat, or declare their mind: to
this end, to choose men to treat, as followeth,
1. The Freeholders in every County to choose two, which should be
called Knights for the County; and his Patentee Towns, each to
choose two more, which should be called Burgesses, and those should
sit for the Country, and be called a House of Commons; and have a
firmitive voice, to affirm what they would have done, and the major
part to carry it.
2. Provided, that he would have a House of Peers to sit for him from
his Prerogative without Election, by his Patent, and those to have
an Negative voice to thwart the Commons if they please, and if they
assented to the Commons, then it should be an Ordinance; if they did
not, then all the Commons did should be null; and if the Commons and
Lords, or the most part, did assent, then the King to have a
Negative voice; and no Laws to be made or repealed without his
consent; and if he consented to it, then it should be an Act, and no
otherwise.
3. Before any sitting to Vote, they are to take these Oaths as
followeth, 1. That he is their lawful King: 2. They will not alter
the Government as it now stands: 3. And they will not deprive his
Successor: and in King Henry the eight time, when they came to be
Priest ridden, that he is Head of the Church, Ecclesiastical and
Civil, Supreme head &c. Defender of the Faith, and such blasphemies:
and these oaths, as it is manifest, they have ever since taken.

Now observe our Worthy Parliament; first the King is too hard for
the People to cheat them: for first, the greater number of the
Commons are chosen by his Patentee Burgesses Major & Aldermen: and
the County, but two in a County and those the Freeholders, which had
their freedom of the Normans, and all the people else shut by from
choosing, and if 
2. The King hath a House of Patentee Lords to balance them with
their Negative voice
3. The King hath a Negative voice, and that is the third State to
Balance them himself.
4. In the House of Commons itself, the King hath the biggest part,
even near two to one for most, all the Burgesses be for him, and the
major part carrying it by voice. Now what is this but a mere cheat,
and observe all the Chronicles from Bastard William to Charles and
upwards, and since, and it will appear that Kings got more by
treaties, then ever their Sword could have done, and kept it longer,
because now their tyranny was settled by a Law, and the People sworn
to those Laws; they thinking they have gained freedom when indeed
they have given away their freedom by their Parliaments, as
aforesaid: and now we see, had not God moved this Army to prevent
this Treaty, this Parliament had utterly cheated and betrayed us
into our implacable enemies' hands again; and had settled the whole
Norman power again over us, notwithstanding all this light to the
contrary, Treasure spent, Bloodshed, &c. Besides the many Oaths the
Commons took to free us; so that Charles had like to be set up into
his tyrannical Power again; but now blessed be God, the Net is
broke, and we are escaped. And for all our tyranny the Priests are
our enchanters, and those that preached it up for their own bellies'
sakes.

Now King, Lords, Commons, three States, as it hath been called, the
little Home (as I conceive) in Daniel the seventh; for it altereth
from all other tyrannical Powers in the world whatever: secondly,
the King is head of their Church, as aforesaid: thirdly, they alter
one tyrannical way, and set up another: and can make up a thing
called Religion by one Parliament, and throw it down the next
Parliament and set up another; so here is changing times &c. and
trampling under feet. And the base Priests, the Ecclesiastical
State, preacheth all those Powers and Constitutions to be Jure
divino. O wretches, wretches, the black guard of Satan, what will
become of them.
FINIS.



A Mite Cast into the Common Treasury:
Robert Coster.

Source: Digger Tracts, 1649-50, published by John the Red Nose,
Seattle?, 1996 
(Copy provided by Mikke Sennekke and Richard Schneider)

Title Page

A
MITE
CAST INTO THE
Common Treasury
OR,
Queries propounded (for all men to
consider of) by him who desireth
to advance the work of public
Community.

==============================================================
ROBERT COSTER
==============================================================

1. Whether all men (by the grant of God) are not alike free, and all
to enjoy the earth with the fullness thereof alike, (Genesis 1. from
the 26. verse, to the end of the chapter, and the 9. chap. from the
1. to the 18. verse,) until they sell their birth-right and
Inheritance, for a proud idle life: the 2. of the Thessalonians, and
the 3. chapter, from the 6. to the 13. verse?

2. Whether the Scriptures in many places, do not complain of man's
Lording over his own kind, (as in Isaiah 3. 15. Luke 22.24.25. and
26. verses. Matt. 23. chap. from the first to the 13. verse,)
calling such men for their nature and cruelty, Lions, Wolves, Foxes,
Dogs, (Isaiah 56.10.11. Ezek. 22.27. The men call some of them,
Lords of Manors, ministers, and lawyers?)

3. Whether particular propriety, was not brought into the room of
public community, by murder and theft; and accordingly have been
upheld and maintained? In which acts of cruelty, whether those
devouring creatures before mentioned, have not been chief, and
whether such naked shameless doings do not lie lurking under fig-
leaf clothing, such as Sabbath, fasting, and thanksgiving days,
doctrines, forms, and worships?

4. Whether the Lords of Manors, do not hold their right and title to
the commons, merely from the King's will, (which will proving a
burden to the Nation, caused the King to lose his head) and whether
the strongest point in their Law for the keeping up their title, be
not, Take him jailor?

5. Whether the common people of England may not seize upon the land,
[which] is called after their own name, to wit, the commons, for to
dress and improve it for their best advantage; for these Reasons
following, without paying fines, quit-rents, heriots, or swearing
fealty, (or any other cursed and diabolical payments whatsoever) to
any tyrant soever?

First, Because the great Creator of all things, ordained that the
earth, with [the fulln]ess thereof should be a common treasury of
livelihood for all, and that none should lord over his own kind; but
that all should love as brethren, and so glorify the Creator in the
work of his hands.

Secondly, Because the common people of England, have (these six or
seven hundred years) been shut out from having any benefit of the
earth, except that they have bought by their slavish payments. And
all this by & through the means of that illegitimate Lord and Master
propriety, which was ushered into the creation, by those two grand
disturbers of our peace, murder and theft; and therefore now it is
high time for them (the common people) to lay hold upon the waste
land, that so they may receive some benefit freely, and may no
longer live in a starving condition: and this cannot with reason be
denied by the gentry and clergy, if they consider what cruelty they
have acted towards fellow-creatures these many years, who have a
privilege to the earth equal with themselves.

Thirdly, Because there is no Statute-Law in the Nation that doth
hinder the common people from seizing upon their own land, (but only
the mercenary wills of men,) and therefore where there is no Law,
there is no transgression.

Fourthly, Because oppression and cruelty doth bear so much sway in
the Nation, that poor men will be necessitated to make a breach of
the Lawes of the Nation, if they are not suffered to labour the
Earth for their maintenance.

Whether it would prove an inlet to Liberty and Freedom, if poor men
which want employment, and others which work for little wages, would
go to digging and manuring the commons, and most places of the
earth; considering effects this would produce?

As 1. If men would do as aforesaid, rather than to go with cap in
hand, bended knee, to gentlemen farmers, begging and entreating to
work with them for 8d. or 10d. a day, which doth give them an
occasion to tyrannize over poor people, (which are their fellow-
creatures,) if poor men would not go in such a slavish posture, but
do so as aforesaid then rich farmers would be weary of renting so
much land of the Lords of Manors.

2. If the Lords of Manors, and other Gentlemen who covet after so
much Land, could not let it out by parcels, but must be constrained
to keep it in their own hands, then would they want those great bags
of money, (which do maintain pride, idleness, and fullness of bread,
which are carried into them by their tenants, who go in as slavish a
posture as may be; namely, with cap in hand, and bended knee,
crouching and creeping from corner to corner, while his lord (rather
their tyrant) walks up and down the room with his proud looks, and
with great swelling words, questions him about his holding.

3. If the Lords of Manors, and other gentlemen, had not those great
bags of money brought into them. Then down would fall the Lordliness
of their spirits, and then poor men might speak to them; then there
might be an acknowledging of one another to be fellow-creatures.

For, what is the reason that great gentlemen covet after so much
land, is it not because farmers and others creep to them in a
slavish manner, proffering them great sums of money for such and
such parcels of it, which doth give them an occasion to tyrannize
over their fellow creatures which they call their inferiors.

Secondly. And what is the reason that farmers and others are so
greedy to rent land of the Lords of Manors: Is it not because they
expect great gains, and because poor men are so foolish and slavish
as to creep to them for employment, although they will not give them
wages enough to maintain them and their families comfortably: All
which do give them an occasion to tyrannize over their fellow-
creatures, which they call their Inferiors.

All which considered, if poor men which want employment and others
which work for little wages, would go to dress and improve the
common and waste Lands, whether it would not bring down the prices
of land, which doth principally cause all manner of things to be
dear?

Whether a livelihood be not the right and propriety of every man;
Look in the first Query.

Whether this be not intruded into by those which do impoverish their
fellow-creatures by their buying and selling, and by their enclosing
and appropriating the earth, with the fruits thereof unto themselves
(purposely to uphold their lordly spirits) as most men do; and so
(in plain English) rob and steal from their fellow creatures, their
proper right and Inheritance?

Whether those Scriptures which say, Love thy neighbour as thyself;
and do unto all men as you would they should do unto you: and he
that hath this world's goods, and seeth his brother in want, and yet
shutteth up the bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love
of God in him? Matt. 7.12, John the first chapt. the 3. verse the
17.

And many such Scriptures; Whether they are not least spoken of, and
less practised among men now a days, although in them is contained
the whole Law and Prophets?

The Nation is in such a state as this,
	to honour rich men because they are rich.
And poor men, because poor most do them hate,
	O, but this is a very cursed State.
But those which act from love which is sincere,
Will honour truth where ever it doth appear.
And no repecting of persons will be with such,
	but tyranny they will abhor in poor or rich.
And in this state is he whose name is here,
	your very loving friend, Robert Costeer.



The Brotherly Request of those that Are Called Diggers - 
A Letter to Colonel Fairfax

Source: Digger Tracts, 1649-50, published by John the Red Nose,
Seattle?, 1996 
(Copy provided by Mikke Sennekke and Richard Schneider)

To his Excellency the Lord Fairfax and the Council of War the
brotherly request of those that are called Diggers showeth

That whereas we have begun to dig upon the Commons for a livelihood,
and have declared to your Excellency and the whole world our
reasons, which are four. First, from the righteous law of Creation
that gives the earth freely to one as well as to another without
respect of persons. Secondly, by virtue of yours and our victory
over the King, whereby the enslaved people of England have recovered
themselves from under the Norman Conquest; though we doe not as yet
enjoy the benefit of our victories, nor cannot so long as the use of
the common land is held from the younger brethren by the Lords of
Manors, that as yet sit in the Norman chair, and uphold that tyranny
as if the kingly power were in force still; and a third reason that
moved us to dig was the persuasion of our hearts that the Parliament
and Army would make good their bargain with us; for you promised
that if we would adventure person and purse to recover England from
under that Norman oppression you would make us a free people, and
you have obtained the victory by your own and our assistance, and
there is nothing wanting from you to us but maiming good your
bargain to us, for by the law of reason and contract we have bought
our freedom of the Parliament and Army, who have the power of the
sword in your hands, by our blood, taxes, and free quarter. And we
are persuaded of your faithfulness to us for two reasons. First,
your promises, which as you are Gospel professors we expect you will
make good, and so give us our freedom, which we have dearly paid
for, and you have received our moneys the fruits of our labours.
Secondly, your Covenant to God, unto whom first we kept fasting
days, and prayed him to help and deliver this oppressed Nation, and
then after any victory over our oppressor Charles you appointed days
of thanks-giving unto God. Now in the third place, God expects from
you and the Parliament to perform your Covenant in deed and work as
well as in words, and let the oppressed go free unto whom you
promised freedom; and though you have fought for it, yet we have
paid for it, and so have purchased that same freedom with you, that
is that we may live in the earth without poverty; for (fourthly) we
dig upon the Common to make the earth a common treasury, because our
necessity for food and raiment require it.

Now Sirs, divers repulses we have had from some of the Lords of
Manors and their servants, with whom we are patient and loving, not
doubting but at last they will grant liberty quietly to live by
them; and though your tenderness have moved us to bee requesting
your protection against them, yet we have forborne, and rather
waited upon God with patience till he quell their unruly spirits,
and of prosecuting Sauls to make them righteous Pauls; and in regard
likewise the soldiers did not molest us, for that you told us when
some of us were before you, that you had given command to your
soldiers not to meddle with us, but resolved to leave us to the
Gentlemen of the Country and to the law of the Land to deal with us;
which we were satisfied with, and for this half year past your
soldiers have not meddled with us.

But now Sirs, this last week upon the 28th of November, there came a
party of soldiers commanded by a cornet, and some of them of your
own Regiment, and by their threatening words forced 3 labouring men
to help them to pull down our 2 houses, and carried away the wood in
a cart to a Gentleman's house who hath been a Cavalier all our time
of wars, and cast 2 or 3 old people out who lived in those houses to
lie in an open field this cold weather, (an action more becoming the
Turks to deal with Christians then for one Christian to deal with
another); but if you inquire into the business you will find that
the Gentlemen that set the soldiers on are enemies to you, for some
of the chief had hands in the Kentish rising against the Parliament,
and we know, an[d] you will find it true if you trust them so far,
that [they] love you but from the teeth outward.

Therefore our request to you is this, that you would call your
soldiers to accompt for attempting to abuse us without your
commission, that the Country may know that you had no hand in such
an unrighteous and cruel act. Likewise we desire that you would
continue your former kindness and promise to give commission to your
soldiers not to meddle with us without your order, and we shall be
very thankful to you and remain

Yours and England['s] true born sons and friends.
JOHN HEYMAN
AN: WRENN
HEN: BARTON
JON COULTON
ROBERT COSLER
JOHN PALMER
JACOB HEARD
in the behalfe of others called the Diggers.



A Declaration of the Grounds and Reasons
(Wellinborrow)

Source: Digger Tracts, 1649-50, published by John the Red Nose,
Seattle?, 1996 
(Copy provided by Mikke Sennekke and Richard Schneider)

A declaration of the grounds and reasons why we the poor inhabitants
of the town of Wellinborrow, in the County of Northampton, have
begun and give consent to dig up, manure and sow corn upon the
common, and waste ground, called Bareshanke belonging to the
inhabitants of Wellinborrow, by those that have subscribed, and
hundreds more that give consent.

WE find in the Word of God, that God made the Earth for the use and
comfort of all Mankind, and set him in to till and dress it, and
said, That in the sweat of his brows he should eat his bread; and
also we find, that God never gave it to any sort of people, that
they should have it all to themselves, and shut out all the rest,
but he saith, The Earth hath he given to the children of men, which
is every man.

2. We find, that no creature that ever God made was ever deprived of
the benefit of the Earth, but Mankind; and that it is nothing but
covetousness, pride, and hardness of heart, that hath caused man so
far to degenerate.

3. We find in the Scriptures, that the Prophets and Apostles have
left it upon Record, That in the last days the oppressor and proud
man shall cease, and God will restore the waste places of the Earth
to the use and comfort of Man, and that none shall hurt nor destroy
in all his holy Mountain.

4. We have great encouragement from these two righteous Acts, which
the Parliament of England have set forth, the one against Kingly
Power, the other to make England a free common-wealth.

5. We are necessitated from our present necessity to do this, and we
hope that our actions will justify us in the gate when all men shall
know the truth of our necessity: We are in Wellinborrow in one
parish 1169 persons that receive alms, as the officers have made it
appear at the quarter sessions last: we have made our case known to
the justices, the justices have given order that the town should
raise a stock to set us on work, and that the hundred should be
enjoined to assist them; but as yet we see nothing is done, nor any
man that goeth about it; we have spent all we have, our trading is
decayed, our wives and children cry for bread, our lives are a
burden to us, divers of us having 5.6.7.8.9. in Family, and we
cannot get bread for one of them by our labour; rich men's hearts
are hardened, they will not give us if we beg at their doors; if we 
steal, the Law will end our lives, divers of the poor are starved to
death already, and it were better for us that are living to die by
the sword then by famine: and now we consider that the earth is our
mother, and that God hath given it to the children of men, and that
the common and waste grounds belong to the poor, and that we have a
right to the common ground both from the law of the land, reason and
scriptures; and therefore we have begun to bestow our righteous
labour upon it, and we shall trust the Spirit for a blessing upon
our labour, resolving not to dig up any man's property, until they
freely give us it; and truly we find great comfort already, through
the goodness of our God, that some of those rich men amongst us,
that have had the greatest profit upon the Common, have freely given
us their share in it, as one Mr John Freeman, as Nottingham and John
Clendon, and divers others; and the country farmers have proffered
divers of them to give us seed to sow it, and so we find that God is
persuading Japeth to dwell in the tents of Shem: and truly those
that we fund most against us are such as have been constant enemies
to the Parliament's cause from first to last.

Now at last our desire is, That some that approve of this work of
righteousness, would but spread this our declaration before the
great Council of the Land, that so they may be pleased to give us
more encouragement to go on, that so they may be found amongst the
small number of those that considers the poor and needy, that so the
Lord may deliver them in the time of their troubles, and then they
will not be found amongst those that Solomon speaks of, which
withhold the corn (or the land) from the poor, which the people
shall curse, but blessing shall be upon the heads of those rulers
that sell corn, and that will let the poor labour upon the earth to
get them corn, and our lines shall bless them, so shall good men
stand by them, and evil men shall be afraid of them, and they shall
be counted the repairers of our breaches, and the restorers of our
paths to dwell in. And thus we have declared the truth of our
necessity; and whosoever will come in to us to labour with us, shall
have part with us, and we with them, and we shall all of us
endeavour to walk righteously and peaceably in the Land of our
Nativity.

Richard Smith. John Avery. Thomas Fardin. Richard Pendred.
James Pitman. Roger Tuis. Joseph Hichcock. John Pye. Edward
Turner.
=================================================================
LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1650.



A Declaration of the Grounds and Reasons
(Iver)

Source: Digger Tracts, 1649-50, published by John the Red Nose,
Seattle?, 1996 
(Copy provided by Mikke Sennekke and Richard Schneider)

A Declaration of the grounds and Reasons, why we the poor
Inhabitants of the Parish of Iver in Buckinghamshire, have begun to
dig and manure the common and waste Land belonging to the aforesaid
Inhabitants, and there are many more that gives consent.

The word of God hath witnessed unto us, that the Lord created the
earth with all that is therein for whole mankind, equal to one as to
another, and for everyone to live free upon to get an ample
livelihood therein, and therefore those who have by an unrighteous
power made merchandize of the earth, giving all to some, and none to
others, declares themselves tyrannical and usurping Lords over God's
heritage, and we affirm that they have no righteous power to sell or
give away the earth, unless they could make the earth likewise,
which none can do but God the eternal Spirit.

2. We are very sensible that although Mankind was by the will of his
Maker, constituted in all his branches, a supreme Lord over all
creatures of other kinds, yet we see that no creature is so much
deprived of a being and subsistence as mankind is; and though those
who are become Lords and Masters over their fellow creatures, do
challenge a larger circuit of earth to be given of God, more
particularly to them then to others; we say that this is false,
unless they mean their God covetousness, the God of this world, who
hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, and this God is
an unequal and impartial divider, and therefore he must be
destroyed.

We know that Cain is still alive in all the great Landlords, and
such like earthmongers who are continually crucifying their poor
brethren by oppression, cheating and robbery: therefore you Lords of
Manors especially, the Lord hath set Cain's mark upon you, because
he will surely find you out, if you do not repent and give over, lie
down therefore and submit (and why not) that your iniquities may be
no more in remembrance, and that the cry of your cruelty may be
heard no more in the Land.

3. Then thirdly, there is a promise in Scripture (which God hath
made) to free us from that bondage wherein you have involved us, and
that pride and oppression shall be heard of no more in the Land, and
that the Lord will restore the whole creation into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, which is no other liberty then that
which Christ himself by his spirit hath invested us withal, and that
is equality, community and fellowship with our own kind; for the
first shall be last, and the last shall be first, and he that
sitteth, as he that serveth.

4. We are urged to go forth and act in this righteous work, because
of our present necessity, and want of the comfort which belongs to
our creation, that the earth being enclosed into the hands of a few,
whereby time, custom and usurping laws have made particular
interests for some, and not for all: so that these great taskmasters
will allow us none of the earth whilst we are alive, but only when
we are dead, they will afford us just as much as will make the
length of our graves, because they cannot then keep it from us, and
that then we should be equal with them; but why may we not whilst we
are alive with them, have as much of the earth as themselves? yes
truly, remove but covetousness, and kill that cursed power, and then
those men would not keep all to themselves, but would willingly
suffer their fellow creatures to enjoy the birthright of their
creation; for whiles the great ones like rats and mice draw all the
treasures and fruits of the earth into their nests and holes after
them, resolving rather to spoil these good things, then to suffer
the common sort to have part with: and therefore they have now got a
custom to diet the Markets, and make a dearth in time of plenty, and
though the lord be pleased to give joyful and fruitful seasons, yet
we see that this helpeth us nothing: we must be starved
nevertheless, and why? because the rich will have it so, no other
reason can be rendered: Therefore you of the poorer sort, understand
this, that nothing but the manuring of the common land, will reduce
you into a comfortable condition; and likewise we declare, that
though we keep our selves close to our hard labours, breaking our
due and necessary rest which should refresh us, whereby our lives
are become a burden to us, and yet our careful and diligent labour,
will afford us no other than a distracted, languishing and miserable
life, for how can it be otherwise? seeing we cannot enjoy the
benefit of our labours ourselves but for the maintenance of idle
persons, slow bellies who reign and ride over the common people in
every Parish, as Gods and Kings: And therefore if this be that
freedom which we have for these nine years striven for: then we pray
you to exchange this freedom for our old bondage, and to set us down
in that kennel where you did first lift us out.

5. And further we declare before God and the whole world, that the
inhumane cruelty of our taskmasters is, and hath ever been the just
cause of all our miseries, and of the whole nation into this sad
condition, and that we see no hope, comfort, or redress to be had
from any that are in authority in our parish, who say they will do
nothing but what they are forc'd to do: therefore from their own
words we may gather, that their full intent is to make us absolute
slaves and vassals to their wills.

6. We have great encouragement from this present Parliament, by
making of those two excellent laws, the one to cast out Kingly
Power, and the other to make us all a free people, which we
understand, is to break the neck of the Norman power which was
brought in upon us by the Norman Bastard, continued and increased
ever since within this nation, by every King who was his successor.

7. This act of ours endeavouring to make the waste land fruitful, is
an act full of honour, righteousness, justice and peace, and
consequently agreeing the Law of God and the Law of reason; for the
Scripture saith, The meek shall inherit the earth: this work
therefore of ours is not to be carried on by force of Arms, it is a
thing which we much abhor, but in love only and meekness, and this
power only shall at last conquer, and bring in the Kings and Princes
of the earth: therefore all you that are prepared to act freedom and
love, come forth and break your swords into ploughshares, and levy
war no more.

8. There is a principle of reason that teacheth every man to do as
he would be done by, that is to live in love, and be at peace with
all men, and to do as we would be done by, is to allow the same
liberty to others, that we ourselves are willing to enjoy, which is
food and raiment, freely without being a slave to any of our fellow
creatures: We desire all those that are free to act with us in this
work, that they would come forth and set their hands to remove this
bondage which we have lain under this 600. years: And further we
desire, that those who cannot come forth as yet in person, that they
would lend us their assistance and encouragement to supply our
necessities whilst our labours lies buried in the earth until the
fruit comes up; our condition being but poor at the beginning, that
so this righteous work may not fall off and perish, to give the
adversary cause to perceive that we are again brought back into
bondage.

10.(sic) And lastly, we do not intend to proceed upon this work in
any other power, but that which is before expressed, which is the
Lords own way, even peace and love, steadfastly resolving not to
meddle with any man's property, but what is known to be common land,
and these are the essential grounds and reasons of us the poor
inhabitants of Iver in Buckinghamshire, whose names are hereunder
written.

And we much desire the fishing trade may presently be set up, for
then we might have more fish for one shilling, then now we have for
4s. which would be great comfort to us the poor, and no hurt to you
therefore; and likewise that Potters List might be paid, which so
long from them have been stayed.

And that engrossers and buyers of corn might be looked to, that we
might have it at some reasonabler rate. And that there may be
commissioners granted, to call the churchwardens and overseers of
the poor for the country as well as for the city to an account.*[see
note below] We hear that they have begun manuring the Commons in
Kent, at Wellingborough, and Bosworth old in Northamptonshire & in
Gloucestershire, & in Nottinghamshire, and they intend to sow roots
till July, & then follow for winter corn, and then to build for the
poorest in the parishes, and if the rich will not let them alone,
the poor will leave them their children to keep, as they have done
in Surrey.

And we pray release all prisoners for debt, that cannot pay their
debt, and let the prisons be for work-houses for the poor to make
things for the fishing trade, what will poor men's bones do you
good?

Some QUERIES.


1. Whether there be any Statute or Law against breaking up, or
manuring of the Common which was left out for us ever since the
Conquest, only for the poor by all old records, and now we intend to
make use of our own, and if the rich will not let us provide for our
wives and children truly, then they must, for we will not be such
slaves as we have been formerly. 2. Whether there be any Statute or
Law extant, or can be produced or shown to us by any Lord of Manor,
to take honest poor men from their true and righteous labour, and
put them into a Norman stronghold, and there to lie as long as
corrupt Law, and unjust Justices will please. 3. Whether the
Parliament, Council of State, High Court of Justice, and Council of
War, will uphold such Norman laws, seeing that the successor's head
is cut of, we hope you will not maintain the same still, if you
will, we fear you may want poor men's help when you stand in need of
them. 4. Whether those words in your Acts against Kingly Power, and
all that hold claiming under the King, do not take away all Lords of
Manors, and tithing priest power too likewise, seeing they came in
all by the Norman Conqueror, and those words in the other Act, that
you made England a free Commonwealth, doth not mean all the poor as
well as you rich, and if it mean but only the rich, then let the
rich fight all the battles that are to be fought, for we will have
some assurance of our true freedom, and what you mean by your words,
and how we shall have our pay and our debentures; for we cannot live
for or by fair words any longer, and they not performed neither.

5. Whether it be not felony in or by any man to set fire on his
house and burn it down, the Law saith it is; and if so, what will it
be in any man to get some 30. or 40. or more together, and go and
set fire on 6 or 7 very poor men's houses that had set them up in
some waste places, and these people before mentioned, came and
burned them down, and some of their goods too: now no question, and
if the first be felony, this is in a higher nature, more felonies
than the first: we desire it may be taken notice of by all rational'
men in this whole free Common-wealth of England for ever hereafter,
that no such felony be committed again by any man whatsoever.

We write this, because we have 9. especial friends that were at work
in their own ground as they conceived, and were taken from their
righteous labour, and carried from Wellingborough to Northampton
Goal, and at sessions last, being the 16. & 17. of April last; they
could prove nothing against them, and yet would not set them free by
proclamation according to law; but we hope our honest army will not
pass by there, till they have freed them: the General's own cornet
Spinege was on the bench, and saw that they could prove nothing
against them, we hope he will help release them.

Henry Norman. Edw: Dun. Rob: Dun. Tho. Taylor. Wil. Saunders. Henry
Slave. Tho. Beedle, younger. Rich. Moseley. John Currant.

London, Printed for T. Brewster, and G. Moule, at the three Bibles
in Pauls Church-yard near the West end of Pauls, the 1 of May, 1650.

*[note:] Thy are at work at Barnet, and at Enfield, and there they
are resolved if they will not let them plant and build, they will
leave them in Barnet 7. Children, and at Enfield nine Children.

They were better leave them then starve them, and themselves too;
and they are at work at Dunstable, in Buckinghamshire also, and we
hear they are going to build in many Countries, and are resolved to
pay no more rent, things are so dear they cannot.



Levellers



London's Liberty in Chains Discovered:
John Lilburne

Source: http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/hart-tracts-on-liberty-by-
the-levellers-and-their-critics-vol-3-1646#lf1542-03_head_046

Title Page
London's Liberty In Chains
discovered.
AND
Published by
Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn
prisoner in the Tower of London,
 Octob. 1646.
=======================================================
Jer. 22. 15. 16. 17.
Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in Cedar? Did not thy
Father eat and drinke, and do judgement and justice, and then it was
well with him?
He judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with
him: Was not this to know me, saith the Lord?
But thine eyes and thine heart are not, but for thy covetousness,
and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression and violence to
do it.
Therefore thus saith the Lord concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah
King of Judah, they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah Lord, or ah
his glory.
==================================================================

It is to be observed, that the illegal election of great ministers
and officers for the administration and execution of justice, and
where the people have been and are deprived of this their just right
and liberty; there have ever all actions and practises of injustice
and oppressions abounded: freedom and liberty being the only jewels
in esteem, with the commonalty, as a thing most previous unto them,
and meriting that men should expose themselves to all danger, for
the preservation and defence thereof against all tyranny and
oppression of what nature and condition soever.

For prevention therefore of these mischiefs and miseries, (which
through evil government of magistrates by their injustice and other
the oppressive practices) do usually fall upon kingdoms and cities.
And for that all lawful powers reside in the people, for whose good,
welfare, and happiness, all government and just policies were
ordained: and forasmuch as that government which is violent and
forced, (not respecting the good of the common people, but only the
will of the commander) may be properly called tyranny: (the people
having in all well-ordered and constituted commonwealths, reserved
to themselves the right and free election of the greatest ministers
and officers of state.) Now although the tyranny whereby a city or
state oppresseth her people, may for the present seem to be more
moderate then that of one man; yet in manythings it is more
intolerable: and it will clearly appear, that the miseries wherewith
a tyrant loadeth his people, cannot be so heavy as the burthens
imposed by a cruel city.

Therefore all free cities, lest their government should become a
tyranny, and their governors, through ambition and misgovernment,
take liberty to oppress and enslave the people to their lusts and
wills; have in their first constitutions provided, that all their
officers and magistrates should be elective by votes and approbation
of the free people of each city; and no longer to continue than a
year, (as the annual consuls in Rome.) By which moderation of
government, the people have still preserved their ancient liberty,
enjoyed peace, honour, and accord: and have thereby avoided those
calamities incident to people subjected to the laws and arbitrary
dominion of their insulting lords and magistrates (or masters;) of
all which this honourable city, and metropolis of this kingdom, upon
the first erecting of this island into a monarchy, or kingdom, by
that valiant, wise, and victorious prince, Alfred, who first freed
the land from under the Danish yoke and slavery, under which it had
a long time groaned did with the approbation of their King, and
states, then assembled in parliament, for their well-being, and more
peaceable good government, agree, and by a perpetual law, ordain,
that all their governors, and magistrates, should be annual and
elective, by the free votes of the freemen of the city, then, and
yet, called by the names of barons, and burgesses of London, as
appears by their general charters of confirmation of their
liberties, by several princes (before and since the conquest)
although in process of times, their titles, and names of their
offices, be changed yet the power and right of election still
remains, and ought to continue in the body of commonalty, and not in
any particular or select persons of any company, or brotherhood
whatsoever. And for illustration, and more clear manifestation
hereof, I need none other evidence, or proof, than the charter of
King John, granted to the citizens before the incorporation of any
company: the first company that was incorporate, about the year of
our lord, 1327. Being more than an hundred years after the date and
grant of the aforesaid charter; which hath been since by sundry
kings and parliaments confirmed. Their charter I have here set down
at large; which, compared with the protestation, will make good your
right, and justify your claim to vote in electing the Mayor of this
city.
The Charter.
IOhannes Dei gratia Rex Angliæ, Dom. Hiberniæ, Dux Norman.
Aquitaniæ, & Comes, Anjou. Archiepisc. Episcop. Abbatis, Com. Baron.
Justic, Vic. Prapositis, & omnibus Ballivis fidelib. suis. Salutem,
Sciatis nos concessisse, & præsenti Charta nostra confirmasse
Baronibus nostris de London, quod eligant sibi Majorem de seipsis
singulis annis, qui nobis sit fidelis, discretus & idoneus ad
regimen Civitatis: ita quod cum electus fuerit; nobis, vel Justic.
nostro, si præsentes non fuerimus, præsentetur, & nobis Juret
fidelitatem: & quod liceat eis ipsum in fine Anni amovere, & alium
substituere si voluerunt vel eundem retinere. Ita tamen quod nobis
ostendatur idem vel Justic. nostr. si præsentes non fuerimus.
Concessimus etiam eisdem Baronibus nostris, & hac Charta nostra
confirmavimus quod habeant bene & in pace quiete & integre omnes
libertates suas quibus hactenus usi sunt, tam in Civitate quam extra
tam in terris quam aquis, & omnibus aliis locis. Salva nobis
Chamblengeria nostra. Quare volumes & firmiter præoipimus quod
prædicti Barones nostri Civitatis nostræ London eligant sibi Majorem
singulis Annis de scipsis predicto modo: & quod omnes prædictas
Libertates, &c. bene &c. in pace beant sicut prædict. &c. Testibus
&c. Anno regit decimo sexton.

JOHN by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of
Normandy, Aquitaine, and Earl of Anjou, to his arch-bishops,
bishops, abbots, earls, barons, justices, sheriffs, stewards, and
all his bayliffs, and faithful subjects greeting; know ye, that we
have granted, and by this present charter, have confirmed to our
barons of London, that they may choose to themselves every year a
Mayor of themselves, who is faithful to us, being discreet and fit
for government of the city. So that when he shall be chosen, he be
presented to us, or to our justice, if we be not present, and swear
to us fidelity, and that it may be lawful for them at the end of the
year, to remove him, and appoint another, or retain him, if they
please; yet so, as the same be showed to us, or to our justice, if
we be not present. Moreover, We have granted to our said barons, and
by this our charter have confirmed, that they may well, and in peace
quietly and fully have and enjoy all the liberties which hitherto
they have used, as well in the city as without: in the land as in
the waters, and in all other places, saving to us our chamberage;
wherefore we will and firmly command, that our said barons of our
city of London, may yearly elect a Mayor of themselves, after the
aforesaid manner, and have and enjoy, well and in peace, wholly and
fully, all their said liberties, with all things appertaining to the
same aforesaid; witness, &c. In the 16. Year of our reign.

Wherein is fit to be observed. 1: that all the free-men of London be
all and every of them barons, being so intitled and ordained by the
King's grant or charter. 2. That every of them hath his free vote in
the election of their Mayor. 3. That they have liberty to choose any
baron or burgess from amongst themselves, without restriction or
reference to any particular person or persons, or to any other
fraternities of aldermen, commmon-council men, or any other
particular gown or livery-men only; so as he be faithful, discreet,
and such as they judge fit to govern. 4. That no Mayor may continue
in office above one year, without a new election. 5. That aldermen
were likewise eligible by the commonalty, and but to continue for
the year, patent 22. Edw. 2. No. 2. Cook 2. Part institutions, fol.
253. 6. Sheriffs are only eligible by the barons or burgesses of the
city, as appeareth by the charter of Henry the 3. Made in the 11.
Year of his reign, confirmed after by Henry the 5. Charta de 2. Hen.
5. Part. 2. No. 11. But of late years the aldermen and common-
council of this city, by their power and policy, have invaded your
rights and just privileges, and contrary to the fundamental law of
the land, & the ancient customs of the city, most injuriously have
betrayed the trust reposed in them: spoiled you of your liberties:
taken upon them (of themselves, with some selected companies)
without the free vote, the rest of the barons or free, burgesses
(the commonalty) of this city, the sole power & government of the
city, changing and altering your laws and customs at their pleasure,
and choosing of majors and sheriffs, such, and whom they pleased,
hindering and prohibiting all others (who ever had the like equal
right and interest with them) to have their votes in the choice and
election of the Mayor and sheriffs. Whence have ensued many
calamities and miseries, even to the endangering of the utter
overthrow and desolation of this most famous and honourable city of
Europe, being wholly disfranchised of those liberties, and
immunities, which even the meanest borough or corporation in England
now enjoyeth.

Hence, by their craft and policy, have so many monopolies and
patents under pretext of public good, been brought in, and set up to
the ruining of thousands, and great decay of trade & traffic, 
bringing in and countenancing of arbitrary laws, and unlimited power
and government, and whereby tyranny, injustice, and oppression, have
without control been exercised and practised by these your late
governors and rulers, as well as by those your former governors and
magistrates, not by the commonalty.

Were not the land-money, ship-money (and many other illegal taxes
and impositions) with rigour and force exacted of you citizens by
these your illegal governors? Were not many of you free barons of
this city (for refusing to pay those exactions, and to part with
your estates by such illegal tyrannous courses) imprisoned by these
your governors (thus illegally forced upon you without your own free
election?) Were not the cruel edicts, and bloody tyrannous decree of
the star-chamber, high commission, and council-table, with all
readiness in a compulsive torrent executed? Nay, to reckon up in
particular, the several cruelties, exactions, oppressions,
insolences, violences, and the illegal practices and proceedings of
these your magistrates, and their subordinate ministers; would
require a particular tractate, which I rather desire might be buried
in oblivion, by a timely restoration of you to your ancient and just
freedoms in electing your own officers. But if still you be denied
justice, and may not enjoy your due and accustomed privileges; I
shall be occasioned to remonstrate at large, and in particular, set
forth your several heavy burthens, harsh dealings, great grievances,
and several encroachments upon your franchises: how, and by whom
your rights and liberties have been invaded: and how you are
enslaved, that were and are (or at least of right ought to be) free
burgesses and barons, but now captivated to the laws, covetous
lusts, and the arbitrary unlimited power and dominion of your
illegally imperious lording magistrates.

Therefore, for the present, I will insist only upon the manner of
the election of your now new Lord Mayor: the narrative whereof will
fully discover, how much the barons of this city suffer, and that by
their long forbearance, or rather neglect, to own and claim their
just privileges and immunities (if they stoutly stand not up) and
resolve to be no longer robbed and spoiled of their birth-right and
inheritance; they are, and will be then in danger to be reduced into
a condition worse than ever any of your progenitors, were, under the
bastard Norman bondage. For indeed, you citizens are but free-men in
name, as in truth this your giving up yourselves to the power and
government of men, without your free and public choice and
approbation, demonstrates: and therefore (truly) you can be
accompted none other than mere slaves to your thus elected
governors, as the rest of the whole nation is become, unto lawyers,
attorneys, clerks, solicitors, and cruel jailors, and such
instruments of contentions, by whom the peace and flourishing state
of this kingdom is quite devoured, and the people wholly enslaved to 
their wills; for truth hereof, I appeal to all the inhabitants of
every county throughout this kingdom, whose estates, purses, and
persons, have for these many score of years groaned under the
inhuman burden thereof; all which, is farther demonstrated unto us
all, the inhabitants of this land, by the (still continued)
frequent, unjust, and illegal commitments of your fellow-citizens,
and all the free commoners of England to the several murdering-
houses (styled prisons) in this kingdom, abounding in cruelty,
murder, and oppression: being most wickedly and powerfully
countenanced and supported by their potent adherents.

I have shewed you, how by right, the meanest baron of this city of
London (by their charter) hath as good right to have his vote in the
election of the new Mayor, and other the subordinate officers, as
the Lord Mayor, or any aldermen (for the time being) with their
golden chains. Notwithstanding this undoubted right be acknowledged;
yet is it denied to the people upon bare surmises, and vain
pretences of danger, by tumults and disorder, if the same should be
yielded unto, which in truth is, but a poor allegation, and
frivolous excuse: the vanity and weakness whereof, must needs be
apparent to any who is impartial, and not carried aside with desire
of rule, through ambition, and blinded with affection, or beastly
besotted, and against nature and reason, loving bondage more than
liberty. For what mischief (I pray you) do we find, or have we ever
heard of in any town, city, or corporation, (where the citizens
have, and enjoy this freedom) of any disorder or tumults that have
grown thence?

Were not the sheriffs (till now of late) ever chosen by the
freeholders in full country? & yet we find not that choosing to have
been complained of but rather (only) by prerogative power taken away
to defrauding the people of their free choice due & of right
belonging unto them, by the great charter of the kingdom. And how
are the commons and burgesses now assembled in that high court of
parliament, elected? Whether by the sheriff, and some few selected
grandees of each county, or by the majority of voices of all & every
the free-holders that will appear, & give their votes upon the day
assigned by proclamation, if our great senators come in place, and
be chosen by the general and free voice of all, and not of a few
(like some) which hath been the right manner of election from the
first establishment of this kingdom, and so hath continued to this
day, being conceived to be the best form of government, and so hath
been found to be by approved experience? For, did Rome ever so
flourish, as when, not anything was done but by the senate and
people there? But of this, expect a larger discourse.

I pray you, whence have we fetched this new wisdom? Surely, not from
above, but beneath; it being none other than satanical pride in thus
despising their fellows, and free commoners. For these can be of no
other spirit, but such as affect tyranny, injustice, and oppression:
and being thus, is it not then a lawless dominion, and so, not of
god, but of the devil?

But let us now say somewhat of the election of the Mayor upon the
29. Of September, 1646. The day assigned for electing the Mayor of
London; at which time Mr Wansie, a citizen and baron of London, came
to the Guild-hall, London, the place appointed for electing the Lord
Mayor for the year ensuing, (the door of the hall being kept shut)
the Marshal of London, who was with divers others, standing with
staves, to keep the door: but Mr. Wansie, with divers other citizens
of London, desired that they might have liberty to go into the hall;
telling them, that they came with intent to pass their free votes in
electing the new Lord Mayor. But could not by any means obtain
liberty to enter the hall, (although by them earnestly desired) but
were kept out forcibly with halberds, bills, and staves, upon a
special command of the now Lord Mayor, Thomas Adams: whereupon the
said citizens having framed a protest, (which they intended to
deliver in the open court) the said Mr. Wansie having the said
protest in his hand, and reading it to the rest of the citizens
there present; the said Marshal thereupon with force, and much
violence, laid hold on him (with the said protest in his hand) and
dragged him into the Guild-hall, and kept him there as a prisoner
for the space of an hour, until the Lord Mayor and aldermen came
from the sermon: and then he was brought before the Lord Mayor, and
court of aldermen; who there examined him strictly about the said
protest; demanding where he had it, and who delivered it to him. And
then they all threatened him very violently, that they would send
him to Newgate. But he answered, that he knew not the framer of it,
nor him that delivered the said protest unto him: and then also
affirming, that he and the rest of the citizens, intended to have
subscribed it, and then to have delivered it unto his lordship, and
the rest of the court. But the said protestation was detained from
him. And he thereupon dismissed for the present, with engagement by
promise, that he would attend his lordship the day following. But
for more assurance, his lordship sent an officer for him (as for a
delinquent.) Upon whose appearing before the Lord Mayor, the said
Marshal made a great complaint against the said Mr. Wansie, for
saying that he would question him the said Marshal for abusing him,
as aforesaid, being very earnest with his lordship to have him
committed. But the Lord Mayor and some of the aldermen for that
time, dismissed and let him go.

Thus you may see how imperious this Marshal is (being none other
than a mere vassal or servant unto the citizens of London) shewing
and expressing his disaffection to all honest and good men, in the
highest nature.

After the thus election of the Lord Mayor, the livery men departing,
and the court not risen, the hall door then being opened; the Lord
Mayor, Thomas Adams, gave command to the constables and halberd-men
then standing at the door, that they should take care that no cloak-
men should come in; fearing, as it is conceived, lest the citizens
should come in, and protest against that unjust and undue election
of the new Lord Mayor.

This brief relation, thus made unto you, may be a sufficient
discovery of the intentions and sinister ends of your great masters,
to continue you still under an enforced slavery and subjection, who
esteeming you no other than as abjects, & as unworthy to have
anything to do in the choice of your own officers, withholding from
you your charter of liberties, and franchises, the more to blind
you, and keep you in ignorance, that they may the better carry on
their designs against you, for the continuance of your thraldom and
to hold your necks under their yoke.

The very relation of the bad usage of Mr. Wansie, with the manner of
the election of the Mayor, compared with your claim of right, and
protestation against the same; is sufficient to shew & plainly set
forth the illegality thereof, to which you cannot submit, without
betraying your own liberty. Your protestation being in my hand, I
held it my duty no longer to conceal it: but for your common good to
publish the same; hoping, that as you have freely fought for your
liberties, sworn to maintain your liberties, and largely contributed
to the state to enable them to protect you in your liberties: so you
will not sit still, and pass by this injury and indignity of those
that would and do make themselves lords and masters over you, by
violence and wrong: but constantly adhere to your protestation,
continue the claim of your right, and with courage and resolution,
maintain and preserve your just and undeniable liberties and
privileges, which are thus unjustly extorted, and kept from you by
fraud and force, lest it be said in after ages; these were the men,
these were the fathers that durst not, would not, own their
liberties and rights: these were the men, who when a free parliament
were sitting subjected them, and their posterity to voluntary
slavery. If you neglect this opportunity, and advantage offered you,
for the regaining of your liberties, and recovery of your birth-
right (the law;) the loss will be irrepayable, irrecoverable,
bringing with it certain ruin, & unavoidable vassalage upon you, and
your whole city; yea, though I am not a citizen, yet no stranger,
nor foreigner, but a freeman of England, who hath freely hazarded
all, for the recovery of the common liberty, and my country's
freedom; and it is no small grief unto me; yea, it lies more heavy
upon me, then all other my troubles undergone, to see our national
and fundamental laws, rights, and privileges, thus trodden under
foot, even by those, by whose endeavours we expected a restauration
of the same. Oh! The unexpressable misery, and besotted condition
possessing this nation, that we should be so regardless of ourselves
and posterity, as thus in and by cowardly silence, to betray
ourselves, and to beget children, to live and remain (by our means)
bond-men, and bond-women, yea, slaves.

Look but upon your industrious neighbour-nation, the Netherlands,
how for a long time, under fair and colourable pretences, (as
conformity, and religion,) they were spoiled of their lives,
liberties and estates. But at the length, they discovered the
cunning and crafty dealings and devices of the bishops, and their
clergy, whom the Spaniard promoted, and used as his instruments, by
whom he intended to bring those countries under the power of his
sovereignty, and cruel will. These your neighbours were constrained
to knit themselves together by bond and oath, to stand up for their
common liberties, and countries safety, leaning every man (in
matters of religion) according to that common principle, religio sua
denda non cogenda, religion may be persuaded, not forced & the good
success they have had therein, and tranquillity and security they
thereby enjoy; may be great encouragement to us, not to despair of
the recovery of our native, and just freedoms, and by the like means
to put an end to these our troubles, & unnatural oppressions, if we
will but tread in the same steps, each one labouring in his place to
preserve the common liberties and laws of the kingdom, which makes
us indeed true free-men, without seeking, or endeavouring to lord it
thus (as now we do) one over another's faith; your brethren,
together with you, and all the commons of England , have an equal
interest, and property in the law, being all of us free-born
Englishmen.

Therefore look about you, and be no longer deluded to be by a meet
shadow of greatness and flattery, fooled into slavery; but according
to your protestation, endeavour to preserve, or rather recover your
lost liberties, which under conformity, and other specious pretences
and glosses, you have been long deprived of: till when, expect not
any justice or right to be done unto you: for, it is impossible, for
those that have reduced you to this slavery, to degenerate so far
from themselves, as to maintain or give you any assistance or
countenance, in standing for liberty, until they lay down their
offices and functions, which they all this time have unjustly
usurped, and intruded themselves into. I will forbear to insist
further upon this matter for the present, being ready and willing,
if any should presume to question the citizens just rights, in the
election of their Mayor; upon the peril of my head, and forfeiture
of my life (if I be called thereunto, and may have a just and equal
hearing) to prove and maintain, that it is the just and due right
and liberty, for any free citizen and baron to give his vote in the
election of the Mayor, and sheriffs, and other the public officers:
the same being grounded upon the law of god and nations, and
agreeable, as well with the fundamental laws of this kingdom, and
customs of this city, as by the Charter and Acts of Parliament (yet
unrepealed,) is confirmed.

But one thing I cannot pass by (which may cause some scruples) which
is this:

By the words (barons of London) mentioned in King john his charter,
whether, all, or but some special citizens of note, are to be
understood; to be the electors of the Mayor and sheriffs of London;

That all and every citizen is there meant and implied; the very
words of the charter itself clearly manifest: for, the liberties
there granted by the charter, are to them all as barons, and not
otherwise, not to any other particular persons of any society: yet
the same may be farther cleared, thus; in that before the conquest;
all free-holders of this kingdom, (as well as in Scotland are yet to
this day) were called barons; and therefore saith Lamb. Fol 128 and
136, court-baron is so called because amongst the laws of King
Edward the Confessor, it is said thus, barones vero qui suam habent
curium de suis hominibus &c. barons are those who have their court
for their tenants or men. And this jurisdiction hath every free-
holder, according to Mirrour c. 1. Sect. 3. chescun, free tenant use
jurisdiction ordinary: every free-holder hath this ordinary
jurisdiction; and the name baron in the eye of the law hath relation
to free-holders, saith Sir Edward Cook 1. Part, institut. Fol. 58.
And in very ancient charters and records, saith he, the barons of
London, and the barons of the cinque-ports, do signify, the free-men
of London, and the free-men of the cinque-ports, Cook ibid. All
which, I desire may be taken into due consideration: which, as I
writ the protestation, so this I have published for the good of this
famous city, and for the benefit of all the barons thereof; and if
you will own this your right, and not suffer yourselves to be
brought into voluntary servitude; I shall be encouraged to make a
farther discovery of the privileges and just rights, now unjustly
detained, and holden from you.



Tyranipocrit discovered
(Anonymous)

Source: Edited by Andrew Hopton, Aporia Press, London, 1990.

Title Page
TYRANIPOCRIT
Discovered with his wiles, wherewith 
he vanquisheth
—————————————————————
Written and printed, to animate better Artists
to pursue that MONSTER
—————————————————————
(Illustration)
ROTTERDAM
—————————————————————
Printed in the year of our Lord, 1649.
The Epistle Dedicatory.
O poor unregarded Truth, I do dedicate this my poor despairing
labour unto thee, because thou canst judge aright both of it and me:
thou knowest that thou hast many enemies, and I have not many
friends, because verax parit odium;["The truth produces hatred"] yet
because thou knowest thyself, therefore I know no better Patron to
offer up my labour unto, than thou art: if I have erred in anything,
thou knowest it was not of malice: O poor Truth, I know that thou
art silenced in the most part of all the world, yet I know that one
day thou shalt have liberty to speak, and then thou wilt approve
thyself; and in the mean time if the world will not permit thee to
speak for me, yet I know thou wilt not be against me, because for
thy sake I undertake to show myself a fool in print; thou knowest my
poor art, and my willing heart, and my desire to discover
Tyranipocrit, for he with partiality ruleth and spoileth all the
world, for some do teach us a partial God and an artificial
religion, so that it seemeth that some persons are privileged to
sin, and yet partiality will have such things to be sin in other
men, and thou knowest that in this Treatise, God through me, hath
borne witness to the truth of his revealed will, concerning many
errors and great abuses which are maintained against the Truth, and
thou knowest, that contrary to the rule of Christ, rich and proud
tyrants do rule the Christian world, and because all men desire to
rule, and none but rich tyrants do rule, therefore most men do
labour to make themselves rich, that so they may be chosen to be
rulers, and so, homo homidi diabolis, one man is another's devil,
and thou knowest that God gave the office of a King in his wrath,
and that Kings and Priests are Jewish ceremonies, and thou knowest
that Christ ruled as a servant, and took the burden of the people
upon him; but our Rulers do rule like Lords, and cast their burden
upon the poor people, and thou knowest that to rule as dictators,
and not directors by their own examples, that is contrary to the
rule of Christ, and repugnant to reason; for the world subjecteth
reason to tyranny, and thou knowest that the glory of the world and
the devil, are one: and thou knowest that God commanded all men to
labour in tilling the earth, but now they that do till the earth,
are made slaves to them that are too proud to do it, and thou
knowest that to simulare sancti,("to pretend to holiness") is a
double sin, but the world knoweth, qui nescit simulare, nescit
vivere:("Who does not know how to pretend, does not know how to
live") and thou knowest that God through me hath borne witness to
the truth of his revealed will, concerning the reproving of
hypocritical Tyrants, & thou knowest what a blasphemous doctrine is
now taught by some, concerning God's predestination to salvation,
and thou knowest that Preachers and Teachers ought not to take wages
of the Rulers of this world, and thou knowest that to prefer
anything before love, is heresy, if it be not blasphemy: and thou
knowest that to teach evil men to do good, is a preposterous
doctrine, and because it hardeneth men in their sins, therefore it
is an impious doctrine, which maketh men apt to commit any impiety
whatsoever: and thou knowest that it is better to keep a Sabbath
every day, then one day in the week, and thou knowest that humane
arts, and strange languages are more esteemed in these days, than
sincerity, truth, and reason.

And thou knowest likewise that supreme Rulers should have good
consciences, but it seemeth they have not so much as bad
consciences, for if they had any consciences, the world could not be
so bad as it is: and thou knowest that it is against all reason,
that young children should command old men, and thou knowest that
all men's children should have alike education and means to live on,
and thou knowest that nothing is more ridiculous to the Christian
world, than it is to be a Christian according to the rule of Christ:
and thou knowest that if any one shall scoff at the ill ordering of
this my Poor labour, if he would open the eyes of his consideration,
he might see that it is so well ordered, as the worldlings do order
the world, which is the subject of my labour.

O impartial simple Truth, I have many things to complain of, some of
them are written in this book, but more I should have written if I
had been able, and thou knowest the cause is God's, the labour mine,
and therefore let the acceptation be thine, God the glory, and
mankind the profit. Amen.
The Preface.
Wonder not though Asses preach, but rather wonder that stones do not
speak to reprove the impieties of our age, for if Balaams ass had
reason to reprove the foolishness of his master, what would that ass
do, if he did see our Atheistical, hypocritical, partial, impious
Christian world, which doth not alone curse God's people, but it
doth curse God himself, in walking contrary to the revealed will of
God in Christ, for he that delighteth to practise sins of knowledge,
contrary to the motions of the Holy Ghost, in his heart and
conscience, he curseth God in his heart, whatsoever he saith in his
mouth. The reason why I undertook this unwelcome matter to the
world, was because I did desire thereby to honour God in profiting
mankind. My intent is not so much to reprove sin, as to discover
hypocrisy, and the seeming sanctity of the hypocritical world. I aim
at those double sins which are esteemed for virtues, not so much the
sins of the black, but those of the white devil, which are
sanctified impieties. I would speak a word to such as are dead in
their sins, and have made themselves impious coffins of iniquity, to
bury themselves in. O it is the hypocrite, which doth not alone
deceive men, but if he had no conscience, as he hath not much, he
would go very near to deceive God himself: O he worketh both by
wiles and force, that nothing sub luna ("under the moon") can escape
his tyranny: Now I having seriously considered ab initio,("from the
beginning") the preposterous practises of worldly minded men,
concerning the ruling of themselves and others; I finding after due
consideration according to that I have read, heard, and seen, that
we which call ourselves Christians, do seem to exceed all Nations in
all manner of impieties, and it hath much troubled, perplexed, and
amazed me to behold so contrary and so strange a consequent, that we
which have the best means to be good, should notwithstanding be the
worst of all: Now as I conceive that the reason of so unreasonable a
consequent is, because we do not esteem of our Law-giver, nor of his
laws, as other Nations do of their Laws and Lawyers, for the Jews
had Moses and his laws in high esteem, so had the Egyptians
Promethus, the Grecians Lycurgus, and the Romanes Numa Pompilius,
those Nations honoured both their laws and Lawyers, but we vile
wretches have taken Christ to be our Law-giver; now if we do comply
with his Law, according to his rule and command, let his History be
the judge, and our consciences the witnesses.

But O what Christian, and especially our supreme Christian, that
will not be ashamed to have his life and manners to be compared with
Christs, for now instead of ruling ourselves by the rule of Christ,
we have gotten to rule us, and we are ruled by wilful, sinful, and
partial prerogating respect of persons, tyrants, artificial thieves,
hypocrites, &c. and all those are ruled by the devil, and all this
were little, if the devil did appear in his own colours, black as he
is, but the hypocrite hath made him a great white Surplice, so wide
as a Bishops Cassock, embroidered with Atheistry, laced with
partiality, and lined with hypocrisy, &c. Now the devil being thus
bravely set forth, he telleth the world, that he is God, Christ, and
all in all: and this is the white devil, and whosoever he be that
hath not his mark in his hand, or on his forehead, he may neither
buy nor sell: I know that partiality hath laid this beastly mark
wholly on the Pope of Rome, but God help us, the world is too full
of such beasts, and they are that abomination that maketh
desolation, those are the Idols that will stand in God's Temple:
this is the white devil, and although the world doth know that this
composed Monster is a devil of his own making, yet according to his
diabolical nature, he taketh him for his God, because he, through
the free-will of evil men, hath gotten such great power in the
world, for the world adoreth tyranny and hypocrisy, and in them two
are included all sins, and yet so Cunningly doth the world know how
to carry this kind of Idolatry, that he will not, and others must
not say that he is an hypocrite. Now this white devil through God's
permission, and the help of his friends, commandeth and ruleth all
the world, and as the devil by all impious persons, is taken for
Christ, so on the contrary, they do take Christ for the devil. In
the Church he condemneth all other men for heretics, but he himself
is the only Phoenix, the infallible, what shall I call him?
hypocrite. In the Commonwealth he presseth and oppresseth all
mankind at his pleasure, his love and charity, if he have any, it is
all in his mouth: he is wise, and knoweth how to rule all mankind
for his own profit, but himself profitth none but the devil.

Now I having seriously considered not alone his nature, but also his
effects, and I have partly proved what impious fruits he produceth
in the Commonwealth, and how he striveth to empty Heaven, and fill
Hell, have I not reason to exclaim against that impious white devil,
and to do my best to discover his odious will. I know that he that
should upbraid or reproach any poor weeping and repenting sinner,
which through God's permission and his own infirmity, hath
accidentally fallen into any or many sins, yea for a man to despise
any repenting sinner, or to cast his sins in his teeth, such an
unmerciful) wight in so doing, would be found to be a hater of God,
a crucifier of Christ, and an enemy to mankind, a friend to the
devil, and a destroyer of his own soul; but on the contrary, he that
doth see premeditated sins of knowledge and will, yea proud,
malicious, tyrannical, uncharitable, hypocritical impious sins,
committed with a high hand, to God's dishonour, and our Christian
profession, glorious sins, which have their dinners served in with
trumpets, and ride in a most proud manner in costly Coaches, drawn
by six or eight horses, as if they triumphed over the poverty and
misery of their poor neighbours: sins that fight against the
patience, nature, and long-suffering of God: sins that will and must
be esteemed for virtues: sins of Rulers and Commanders and Teachers,
which should be examples to others. He that doth see such sins
committed, with a continual perseveration to the dishonour of God,
and the prejudice of mankind, and shall pass it over in silence, and
not do his best one way or other to help remedy it, such a one will
be found in the day of examination, to be a partial, careless,
uncharitable wretch, and he may justly be blamed with Cain, when he
said unto God: Am I my brother's keeper? for if Moses' Law condemned
him that did not help the burdened ass, how much more shall the Law
of Christ condemn him that taketh no care for the soul of his
neighbour, which he seeth so over-burdened with that heavy and
intolerable sin of pride, that when he should go to Church to humble
himself, he will be drawn to Church in a costly Coach, there to show
his intolerable pride. Now to unburden myself and my poor
neighbours, through the grace of God, I will do my best to remove
that intolerable burden of proud, wilful, and delightful sins.

A task too hard for me, but there is nothing too hard for God, nor
anything that can overcome the Truth, for whose sake I undertake
this world-hated, and world-hating labour. Now if any formal
hypocrite will tell me, that I am not called to be a Teacher, I say
that every man is called to maintain the truth, and therefore if any
man speak the truth in God's cause, that alone is a sufficient
calling for him. Now I beseech God, for Christ his sake, that he
will do this work through me, so that it may redound to his honour
and glory, and the profit of mankind. Now let this suffice for the
Preface: The Argument shall be the book itself. I have concealed my
name, because the Readers shall consider what is written, and not
who wrote it, because partiality, if the Author were known, might
make the work hateful.

In this Treatise I do intend to allege many things, for which I will
not quote my Authors: let others do that for me, for I will leave
the margin free. Fare well:
A friend to the truth, and an enemy to Tyranipocrit.
TYRANIPOCRIT,
Discovered with his wiles, wherewith he vanquisheth.
e that will seek God without, and not within himself, may well say
with Simonides: The more he seeketh, the less he findeth what God
is, for what God is in himself without us, that knowledge cannot
help us; but the knowledge of God within ourselves, and in his other
creatures, that is all in all to us: but I intend to treat of
practise, more than of knowledge, because Christ pronounced more
woes against malicious, than he did against ignorant sinners, and
amongst others he said: Woe be unto him that knoweth his master's
will, and doth it not, but what shall become of him, that knoweth
the will of God in Christ, and hateth it; and what are all proud,
tyrannical, hypocritical, impious Christians, but haters of God in
Christ, for so long as they are so, and do so: they do grieve the
Spirit of God in their hearts and consciences, and that is a great
sin, if it be not impiety: then being it is so, woe be unto you, all
you tyrannical, hypocritical Christians, you proud Christian
Princes, and hypocritical Prelates, and all you superfluous, rich,
uncharitable Christians, O you profane Princes and dissembling
Prelates, you will have the name of Christ, the more shame you ought
to have of your wilful and exemplary sins, which you maintain
contrary to the rule of Christ. O thou white devil, I would fain
unease thee, and discover thy vile practises, that all men may see
and know that thou art an ugly, odious devil, I mean thou that wilt
win honour by thy impious practises, thou that hast God in thy
mouth, but wilt not cast the devil out of thy heart, thou that
commandest and teachest others to do that good which thou praisest
in thy mouth, and hatest in thy heart: thou that bindest heavy
burdens, and layest them on other men's shoulders, but wilt not
touch them thyself with one of thy fingers: O it is thou that
stealest with a high hand, and yet with an impudent face, thou wilt
outface the Law.

As for the sins of the black devil, they are better known to the
world, which is ready to take notice of them: The Senate of Tyrants,
and the Synod of Hypocrites, are ready to correct and punish him,
according to the laws of the place where he resideth, and in so
doing, they do not amiss; but who shall correct and punish the white
devil, who shall tell him that he is running down the hill to Hell?
his own conscience if he had one, that might help him, but that is
gone long since, and if he should sell his hypocrisy to buy him a
conscience, that would spoil the white devil of all his glory. But
tell me thou preposterous impious world, if thou canst, who hath
taught thee to punish the transgressors of the second Table of God's
Commandments more than the first? who hath taught thee to hang poor
artless thieves, and to maintain tyrants, and rich artificial,
proud, hypocritical, partial thieves, in their impious practises,
and yet both are contrary to God's commandment? who hath taught thee
to pay God with an external show of holiness, when he will have
internal holiness, and to show him the figure of the law, without
the substance and meaning of the law, and to maintain a loveless
law, when the whole law is love? If thou knowest not who hath taught
thee those, and many more such like impieties, hearken, and I will
tell thee: certainly it is the devil, in thy atheistical,
tyrannical, hypocritical, proud, impious heart, for conscience thou
hast none, and above all thy other impieties, which are many, none
doth bewray thy atheistical impious heart so much, as thy hanging of
poor, and maintaining of rich thieves doth: but consider the
perverse dealing of that world, which through the instigation of the
devil, all impious persons do maintain; but first consider, and God
grant that we may truly know, what relation God hath to man, and man
to God in Jesus Christ, which is God's son: Here if I would be
curious, I should seek to define the infinite God, which is nowhere
included nor excluded, but containeth all, and is all in all, &c.
But although so as God is in himself, so is he only known to
himself, yet in all his creatures there is some appearance of the
tract of his foot-steps; but passing by the rest of his creatures,
let us consider man in his first creation, I do not mean to pull him
in pieces, to see the frame and constitution of his natural soul and
body, but I would fain know and show how, through God's free grace,
Religion is wrought in man: It is recorded by Moses, that when God
had made man's brutish parts, he did not leave him so, but he 
breathed in his face, or in his soul, a quickening spirit, which
caused man to be man: what that spirit was, and is, I know not, but
if any man can tell me what God is, then I will tell him what that
Heavenly gift of God was, and is, which God gave unto man in his
first creation, but whatsoever it was and is, it was, and is free,
because it was not subjected, and it could not be subjected, because
it was not created, and because it was not subjected, therefore it
must be free, and because it was free, therefore God placed religion
in that free uncreated part of man: for when God made all things of
nothing, he subjected all that he made, under that strong,
irrevocable, unchangeable law of necessity, and not alone the
creature, but their operations, and he predestined and subjected all
our thoughts, words and works, and all accidents which we call
chance, are all necessitated of all creatures visible and invisible,
will they, nill they, they must all yield obedience, and do all that
which God hath imposed on them, and therefore we must consider, that
religion on our part is passive, and therefore it must be free, for
that which God gave unto man, was a spark of his own essence, and it
doth participate of God's nature, and because it is one with God,
and free as God, therefore God placed Religion in it; and we must
consider, that in, or with that uncreated spark, God gave unto man a
free power, which we call will, and his office is willingly to
dispose of the whole man, for God without man, had disposed of all
things, but he would not dispose of man, without man, and therefore
God so framed man that he is capable of divine wisdom, not by
compulsion, but by reason; not by force, but free-will, and
therefore salvation to persons of discretion, is conditional,
because compulsion is contrary to God's nature, for religion must be
a joining of two free-wills in one, ergo man must be free to will
both good and evil, and that is man's part concerning religion: man 
must desire to be good, or God cannot make him good, because it is
contrary to God's nature to force a man to be good. Now let us
consider how the devil doth strive to erect his kingdom of sin and
impiety, in the same place where God will have his kingdom of grace,
namely, in the free will of man, for the devil knoweth that God will
have nothing of man, if he have not his will and desire, which are
one, and it is the devil's nature to sin against the nature of God,
and therefore he striveth with all his power to contradict the will
of God in man. Here I should say something concerning that sin
against the Holy Ghost, which Christ said should never be forgiven.
Two ways we may so sin against God, that we cannot be forgiven, not
that God wanteth mercy, or is not willing to pardon all sins, but
because some men will not accept God's free grace, when they have,
and do sin. All such sins as cannot be pardoned, are such sins as
are never rightly and truly repented, and such sins are not alone
committed against God's laws, but against God's nature. The first is
when a man with a ripe knowledge, and a free deliberal
consideration, doth freely choose, and maliciously strive to sin
against the nature and humility of God in Christ, not accidentally
nor causually, without a man, but through hateful malice, proceeding
from an impious hatred against the humility and love of God in
Christ: no infidel, ignorant, or distressed man, can through
ignorance or fear, commit this sin; for this entrance into this sin
must be maliciously committed against the humble love of God, which
sent Christ to save us, or to tell us, that through the love of God
we might be saved if we would. The second unpardonable sin is, that
a man loveth his sins so much, that he will not leave them to be
saved from them, but he will continue in, or with them contrary to
the motions of the Holy Ghost, in his heart and conscience: Now he
that so sinneth, and so continueth in sinning without repentance, he
cutteth and keepeth asunder God and his free image, which is in man.
In the first entrance into so sinning, it is rare to find any man so
impious, but in the second place, where men make their sin
unpardonable, because they will not forsake them, of such the world
is full: whether Judas sinned that first sin I know not, but it is
said of Julian the apostate, that he sinned them both: first he
sinned through wilful malice, and then he continued in his malicious
wilful sin so long as he could, which was so long as he lived: and
we ought to consider that an evil heart or desire which are one,
although it break not out into actions, is a damnable sin, yea it is
the only damming sin; for so long as our desires are evil, and we
rest with our evil desires, we are impious wretches, and all that we
do is sin, and all our prayers are sin; for God judgeth man
according to the intention of his heart, and therefore we must first
cleanse our hearts, and then wash our hands in innocency, for if we
do good with evil hearts, the devil and hypocrisy will have such
power over us, that we shall fall asleep in our sins, and through
the deceitfulness of sin, we may come to that pass, that we may call
good evil, and evil good, which is the highest degree of impiety.

Now we have seen the conditional obligation, let us consider ab
initio, how men have complied with the conditional obligation, and
first of Adam and his fall: Adam did not fall from God's determinate
counsel, neither from God's mercy proclaimed unto him, and all men
else in Jesus Christ: Adam fell from the peace of God in his heart
and conscience: Adam's fall was accidental to him, but God had
unavoidably predestined it before Adam was made: Adam's fall hurteth
no man's everlasting salvation, for how can that hurt my salvation,
which did not hurt nor hinder Adam's own salvation? but consider the
circumstances of Adam's fall, for it seemeth that he began to be
curious to know the foundation of his happiness, and to know whether
he were a God or a man, but howsoever it was, through the help of
the devil, he made a woful venter for such needless knowledge, for
he then, and we now, do find by woeful experience, that without
God's continual assistance, that we are poor miserable Hell-hounds:
Adam fell from the peace of his conscience, through disobeying of
God's revealed will, yet he did God's secret will, which he and all
creatures must do, but when Adam considered his sin, he did not
delight in it, but he was sorry because he had disobeyed God's
antecedent will, and if we do follow him in repenting, as we do in
sinning, then neither ours nor Adam's sins, can have any power to
hurt us concerning our eternal salvation. O then let us not burden
Adam nor God with our sins, for there is no sin whatsoever it be,
but if we will, God will turn it to the best for us. Adam's fall,
through the mercy of God, was the glory of the power of God revealed
to us in Christ, and God will glorify his mercy in pardoning all
sins, if the sinner will repent. But let Adam rest, and let us
consider how his successors have dealt with God concerning the
conditional obligation, and first of Cain, because he was the first
man that was generated, and the first that hated God in man, ergo he
is the lieutenant, and the devil, the captain of all uncharitable
persons, and all preposterous sacrificers.

For if Adam were a semi-pelagian, Cain was a whole one; for it is
said of Pelagius, that he did affirm that man had such a free power,
that he could both will, and act without, or against God, and it
seemeth that Cain had such a conceit of himself, for he, contrary to
God's nature, would needs be offering to God some of those things
which God made for Cain, but as it seemeth, he thought that God was
poor, and therefore he out of his rich proud heart, would give God
something, but God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and
truth; but Cain would not do that, and therefore God did reject
Cain's hateful sacrifice, and yet he did as many of our rich and
proud tyrannical hypocrites will do, for they will, and do give unto
God some things, which he regardeth so much as he did Cain's
offering, for they will build God Churches, Chapels, Cloisters,
Bells, Paintings, Organs, Music, &c. All these and more such
preposterous offerings, with Cain, do we offer unto God, that which
the poor should have, which is our temporal goods, that with Cain we
give some part of it to God, but our willing minds which God would
have, them we will give to the world, and so by consequence to the
devil, if we do not return to God again, but we will not give God
our hearts which he would have, because we will not give our poor
neighbours our goods which they should have. But consider the issue
of Cain's offering, for when he saw that God would not accept his
hateful sacrifice, Cain waxed wrath, but with whom was Cain angry?
surely he was angry with God, but he could not kill God as he would,
and therefore he went and killed his brother Abel, which he could,
and yet notwithstanding Cain's bad success, with his odious
offering, yet his kind of sacrificing hath been used by Cain's heirs
from time to time, and it hath passed by the name of false fire. The
sons of Aaron and old Eli had a smack of it, but the Pharisaical
Priests in the days of Christ, could act the hypocrite's part better
than Cain himself, and God grant that ours do not exceed them all,
for the more knowledge the greater sin in one and the same thing:
now if we consider Cain's intention as we may judge by his actions,
he sought to cross God's intention concerning the whole Creation,
for God made all things to show the bounty of his riches, and the
richness of his bounty, but Cain would be rich without God, by this
we may take notice what sacrifice we must give unto God, not the
creature, but that uncreated gift, which is the free-will of man,
for that only man hath power to dispose of, and that willing power 
God hath freely and universally given unto every man, without any
respect of persons whatsoever, yea all men shall one day know,
though now they will not, and then they shall all acknowledge and
confess, that God is just, and that he doth give unto all mankind
universally, none excepted, grace to be saved if they will, for if
this be denied, then it must needs be affirmed that God hath, or
doth make some men to damn them; but in those days the devil hath
produced a doctrine of a strange nature, by a people which are
predestined to blaspheme God, and hate men: God deliver us from such
doctors and doctrine: unmerciful men which will maintain, that God
hath predestined one man to salvation more than another, if this
doctrine did not strive against the nature of God, although it be a
pestilent doctrine, yet it might be borne withal, but it is so
impious a doctrine, that it striveth against the nature of God, and
what greater impiety can there be imagined? and those that maintain
this doctrine, are, as they say, some of those which are predestined
for heaven: & if you ask them how they know, that they are some of
those which are so predestined, their answer is ready: forsooth they
do believe it is so, such men have a good conceit of themselves, or
else they would think that other men were so good as they: and they
have Scripture to prove their partial predestination: It is written,
say they, That before the children had done good or evil, God said,
Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated. O wonderful malice of the
devil, in the hearts of uncharitable men, to judge so hardly of God!
that Scripture was written, if the Holy ghost did ever write it, to
show the wonderful wisdom and prescience of God, and unmerciful men
do pervert it, to make God a partial Tyrant. O you partial merciless
men, consider a little better of the nature and power of God, for
God is love without hate, and all times are in his power, for God
hath no preter nor future, sed nunc ("but now") is God's time,
neither before nor after, but now, God doth all things: and why then
do we say of God, that he did love or hate before, and not after the
children had done good or evil, if men will ascribe hatred to God?
yet that were a more charitable exposition, and better agreeing with
the nature of God, and to say that God is a hater of unborn
children, is a most impious saying: but, say they, it is writ as we
say. True, but it was not written that thou shouldest construe it to
make God a tyrant, for the nature of God is more than all writings,
and God's nature is love, which is contrary to hatred: O but some
say, the Reformed Churches do maintain this doctrine, but I say,
either thou dost not understand them, or they do not understand the
truth concerning this matter, for let it be granted that God hath
made any man, and that he hath not given him a possibility to be
saved if he will, let any man seriously consider what absurd
consequences must needs follow such blasphemous conclusions, and the
consent of Churches and multitudes of people, are no sure rule to
find out the truth.

The Council of Trent hath taught us that lesson: there wanted not
learned men, neither did they want time: eighteen year they
consulted how they might deceive the Holy Ghost, but in the end they
deceived themselves, and so many more as were willing to be deceived
by them; for in divine matters, this is the surest rule: Quo
doctior, eo perversior,("the more learned, the more perverse") when
men will employ their learning to contradict the Holy Ghost. Here I
could find work enough to show how sophistical divines have spoiled
the sincerity of Religion; but I will hasten to the principal
matter, which is, to give notice unto the world, of three great
abuses amongst us that are called Christians, and those vices or
abuses have gotten most of their evil power, because generally they
are taken and esteemed for virtues.

The first is, that Preachers are paid by worldly Potentates. The
second is, that Preachers in their doctrine do prefer faith before
love. The third is the worst of all, because they teach evil men to
do good, which is impossible. Of these three evils I intend to write
what I think. O thou that only canst do all in all, do this work
through me, so that it may redound to thy honour and glory, and the
benefit of mankind, God Father, Son and Holy Ghost, so be it, Amen.

Solomon said, that God made man upright, but he had found out many
inventions, and of all his inventions, none is more prejudicial to
mankind, than the invention of new ruling officers, for through the
evil custom that is maintained concerning supreme ruling
Magistrates, all mankind are out of order: for nature would have the
oldest, and reason would have the wisest man to command and rule
others, but our Machiavellians say, that neither the oldest nor the
wisest, but the son of such a man, if his mother doth not deceive
them, he shall rule and command, whether he be old or young, wise or
foolish, that's all one; but because we may not err, let us take
notice of the descent of the office of a King, because through him
tyranny is supported. The office of a King is compounded of those
four evils, viz. The instigation of the devil: the wickedness of the
priests: the rashness of the people, and the wrath of God, so the
office of a King is a quintessence of them four evils: I add to them
what they have added to the King's office through partial
prerogatives, and then we may judge what a brave thing the office of
a King is. What that royal prerogative is that Kings have usurped, I
know not, but to do justice, and to strive to maintain truth: no man
needeth any special prerogative, because every man is bound to do
that, but it seemeth that this prerogative is to command over the
Law, and to overthrow justice, if it do stand in competion with
their impious prerogatives; but consider ab initio, the effects of
this cursed prerogative, and then we may the better judge of his
nature. By this evil prerogative, King Romulus may kill his brother
for leaping over his wall. By this prerogative Alexander the Great
may kill Clitus, and put many worthy men to death against all right
and reason. By this prerogative the Turkish Emperors, when they do
come to their optimate power, may murder all their brothers. By this
prerogative, king Saul may kill three hundred Priests, which were
innocents concerning that matter, for which they were slain. By this
prerogative, king David may make Uriah's wife a whore, and murder
him, and then take her to be his wife; but see how Christian Kings
have, and do behave themselves with this prerogative.

By this prerogative, Don Rodrigo king of Spain, may ravish the
daughter of Don Julian, which was the cause that Spain was conquered
by the Arabian Moors. By this prerogative, Richard the second, king
of England, may cause men to subscribe to blanks, that so he may
abuse them at his pleasure: by this prerogative, Richard the third,
may murder friend and foes, to get and keep a kingdom against law,
justice, truth, and reason: by this prerogative, king Henry the
eighth, when he is weary of his wives, he may put them from him, or
cut off their heads, and say they are whores: and when he had made a
deformed reformation, and had taken some of the Pope's power to
himself, then he that would not acknowledge and swear, that the King
was the head of the Church, he must lose his own head. By this
prerogative, King James may take away one man's wife, and give her
unto another: by this prerogative, King Charles may rent out, or
sell his subjects to base Projectors, and vile Patentees, and break
up Parliaments, and so tread the laws and the Commonwealth under his
feet. By this prerogative, King Artaxarxus may marry with his own
daughter, and if he have a scruple in his conscience concerning that
matter, his vile Counsellors can soon remove that, by telling him,
that the Persian Kings had a prerogative, so large as the devil and
partiality could make him, for by that they said, that he might do
what he would, and concerning their hereditary tyranny, when a young
foolish child shall rule and command old wise men, what patience can
endure it? Lysander told the Spartans, that they were not wise to
look out of what house their Kings should be born, but they should
rather consider what virtues he had to make him fit to command.
Rehaboam hath left us an example concerning this matter, how he
plagued the people through his obstinate folly, for when a young
fool doth command old wise men, there all disorder is complete, for
there quiet men are troubled by seditious persons, the humble
subject to the proud, the just obedient to the tyrant, the ignorant
teaching the wise, the coward ruling the hardy, the cruel commanding
the merciful, &c. and above all, there the most and greatest thieves
do hang the innocent on the gallows. O what treasons, murderings,
poisonings, prisonings, banishings, and such like cruelties, that
are used betwixt the old and the new tyrants, concerning the
getting, keeping, and executing of the royal tyrannical office. What
wars and blood-shedding there hath been, and is now, concerning this
thing, histories both divine and moral, are full of testimonies. Now
let us consider how tyrants and hypocrites came acquainted one with
the other, and how they wooed and contracted themselves, & in
process of time, how the devil did marry them together; for in them 
two are included all sins, for hypocrisy is the chiefest sin against
God, and tyranny is the greatest sin against man.

Now if we rightly consider, we shall find that tyrants, although
they want grace, yet they have a kind of impious reason, which 
through the instigation of the devil, they do employ for his, and
their profit, and therefore when supreme tyrants with their wicked
wit, did consider that plain down-right tyranny could not subsist
alone, because it is odious to nature, and therefore tyrants, to
prevent the destruction of their tyrannies, they sought to cloak it
with a simulated sanctity; and although they knew that to be a
double impiety, yet they consulted how they might attain their evil
desire, for they knew if they should commit so much gross tyranny as
they did intend, without an hypocritical mantle, that then the
Silvian satires would snap at them, and the dogs would bark at so
much open profanation. And it seemeth when the Senate of Tyrants had
seriously considered the tottering state of their tyrannical
kingdom, they found that the best way to secure and maintain
tyranny, was to match him with hypocrisy, but whether they should
force her, or seek to win her by faire means, that took up some time
in consulting, but when they considered that hypocrisy was the
devil's daughter, and how he is their great friend, then they
thought it no wisdom to make war against the devil, nor to force his
daughter, which would, if she were forced, do them more hurt than
good, and that they knew by experience, for tyranny had persecuted
the Church a long time, in which hypocrisy was shrouded: and in
persecuting of the Church, the tyrants knew that they had gotten
more shame than honour, and therefore they concluded unanimously, to
supplicate the devil for his daughter, and then the whole Senate
gave order that a request should speedily be written, and then they
subscribed it, and so sent it to the devil, I know not the
circumstances of the petition, but the sum of all was: That the
devil would be pleased to bestow his daughter Hypocrisy, on his
great friend Tyranny.

I need not tell you how glad the devil was, to be entreated to do
that which he so much desired to have done: So when he had
considered the great profit that he should reap, by joining of those
two capital sins in one, then he freely gave them his consent, but
he told Tyranny that he could not force his daughter to marry him
against her will; but he comforted him for the present, in promising
him his best assistance for the accomplishing of his desire, and he
told him that his daughter Hypocrisy was proud and covetous, and
therefore he should woo her with gold and preferment, and for
natural inclinations he knew that they were both alike, because they
were both his children, and he esteemed them both alike, and
therefore he would not rest till he had brought them to Church, and
there he would join them hand in hand, when they had joined
themselves heart in heart, & therefore he wished Tyranny to spare no
cost nor labour to win his dearly beloved Hypocrisy. Now when
Tyranny had his instructions, he went with them to woo his mistress;
but when he saw that she held her residence in the Church, he was
somewhat troubled, but necessity hath no law, and if it had a
thousand laws, tyranny would break them all, but when he thought
what good instructions the devil had given him, he grew bold and
went like a Machiavellian, and did choose out a company of poor
priests, such as he thought would do their best to maintain tyranny
through hypocrisy, and of them poor priests, he made rich Prelates,
for when Tyranny had made show of his gold and preferment, and
Hypocrisy had accepted his proffered courtesy, then the work is more
than half done: little wooing sufficeth where both parties are
willing; for when Tyranny hath given his faith, and Hypocrisy her
truth, then Tyranny rideth to Church and Hypocrisy rideth to Court,
and then Iniquity doth rejoice to have the pre-eminence, for then
the Tyrant with the sword, and the Hypocrite with the word, will
silence truth in the land, or banish her out of the land, which is
the less evil of the two, then Amasiah the Arch-priest will tell the
Prophet Amos, that he must not speak the truth here, becuse of the
Kings Court; for when Princes and Prelates do join their power to
maintain tyranny and oppression, then who can live in peace? and now
the world is full of such tyrants and hypocrites, that like Herod
and Pilate, do agree to persecute the truth.

Now consider how Tyrants and hypocrites do demean themselves
concerning the oppressing of the truth, for which the devil brought
them together: now when the Tyrant hath taught the Hypocrite to be a 
tyrant, then the hypocrite will teach him to be as himself is, and
so they knowing each other's mind, they do keep a formal and
external seeming sanctity, and they do extoll each other in their
double deceitfulness, and yet they would make men believe that they
are the Lords anointed ones, and yet they will not be Jews, though
they know that Kings and Priests are Jewish ceremonies, but they do
tell of a mystical anointing of the Holy Ghost, which they have, or
should have; but because men do judge of them according to their
practises, and finding them to be contrary to the rule of Christ,
therefore men think, and would say if they durst, that they are a
company of hypocritical tyrants, for the Prelate saith, although he
be a liar in so saying, that the King is the light of our eyes, and
the breath of our nostrils: and the King saith, that the Prelate is
a holy man; and he might have said, that they two were ordained to
disorder the Commonwealth, but the hypocrite had taught him better,
and the more to blind the world, the Tyrant taketh the Hypocrite for
his ghostly father, and he maketh him one of his Privy-Councillors:
this is all well, but if the Prelate should chance to speak of a
right Reformation, and should rightly reprove the Tyrant, or the
tyranny, O then they will take from him the Holy Ghost, for if it be
not so, how dare they silence him, before they have taken the Holy
Ghost from him? what, do they silence the Holy Ghost in him? and if
he had the Holy Ghost when he pleased the Tyrant, doth he loose it
in displeasing him? and if he had not the gift of the Holy Ghost,
why was he permitted to preach and teach, more than others? But all
such tyrants may well say, that they have not so much as heard, if 
there be an Holy Ghost or not: This is such an atheistical practise,
that men should be ashamed to think of it, how much more to do it:
and for examples to show how tyrants in times past, have dealt with
them which have sought for a right reformation in Church or
Commonwealth, read the histories of John Huss, Jerome of Prague,
Anacharsus, Euripidus, the two royal Grecian Kings, Agis and
Cleomenes, and the two noble Romans, Tiberius, and Caius Gracchus,
those and many more by their examples, have taught us, how tyrants
do love justice and right reformation. If Herod hear of a king that
shall rule the people in truth and righteousness, all the young
innocent children in Bethlehem must be slain, because he supposed
that Christ was one of them, so much did he hate a right
reformation. If John Baptist do tell that other Herod of a
reformation, then the dancer must have his head. If Pope Adrian
pretend a reformation, although it be to stop Luther's mouth, yet
the whole Conclave of Cardinals will withstand him. What do I speak
of men, when if Christ himself will have a right reformation
according to the will of God, they will say, that he hath a devil,
and they will betray him, sell and buy him, whip and scourge him,
and mile him to the Cross, and feed him with gall and vineger, and
then they will deride and mock him, and tempt him to show them
miracles, for they will bid him, if he be the Son of God, to come
off from the Cross, and then they will believe him.

Now let us consider to what end all laws, lawyers, offices and
officers, were made and ordained, and given unto men, and we shall
find that they were given to repair the decayed estate of mankind,
which was caused by Adam's fall: for although that the mercy and
love of God in Christ, took away the everlasting curse, if there
were any caused by Adam's fall, yet the temporal misery that was
caused by Adam's fall, is not taken away, till man by death be taken
out of this life. Now when any laws, lawyers, offices, or officers
become prejudicial to the Commonwealth, then they must be taken
away, because then they are perverted from their right end, for
which they were ordained; but of this more shall be said hereafter.
Now let us consider how the rich artificial thieves do rob the poor,
and that under a feignned show of justice, and a seeming holiness,
and when they have done it, most impiously they say and affirm, that
God's providence hath made them rich, and those which they have
robbed, poor: for they say that God's providence maketh rich and
poor, for so the sophistical hypocritical devil hath taught them.
Now to free God's providence from our wickedness, let us consider
how God maketh rich and poor, for indeed God doth all things; but
God doth not will all things alike in man: God through his
permissive will and power, crucified Christ, but that was no excuse
for them, which through hatred to his doctrine, crucified him. God's
permissive will, is no rule for us; for the devil and all impious
persons must do that, and so, and in that manner God doth all
things, but we are to do God's revealed will, and we must understand
of God's making rich and poor, as when Christ said, Offences should
come, but woe be unto them by whom they came: now doubt but there
hath been, be, and shall be rich and poor, but therefore we must not
through our covetousness and partiality, make and maintain them, and
delight to have one too rich, and another too poor: God hath
forbidden in us those things whereby we make men too rich and too
poor, ergo the fault is ours: and to make it appear, consider this
one practise, and by that one we may judge of all other of that
nature. Suppose a King should entertain soldiers, as the manner is
to defend himself, or offend others, and he should, as they use to
do, give unto one of those soldiers ten shillings a day, and unto
another five pence a day, shall we say that God's providence hath
made one of those soldiers too rich, and the other too poor? I trow
no: it was his partiality that gave unto one of them too much, and
the other too little. And what is said concerning those soldiers,
may be said concerning all other practises where partiality ruleth,
and giveth unto one man too much, and unto another too little. As
for some to have so many hundred pounds a year for doing of nothing,
or for executing of some needless office, or to oversee and command
others, &c. and a poor labouring man must work for three or four
pence a day, and we uncharitable partial wretches, can behold all
this and be silent, and we pass it over as a matter not worthy of
our considerations; but consider if a man may have, and hold more
than a necessary or a competent portion of worldly goods, and in so
doing not offend God, nor hinder himself in his way to Heaven, which
is his Christian profession.

This is worthy of our consideration, because it is generally
maintained by many worldly wise men, that riches, if men do not set
their hearts on them, cannot hinder godliness; but let us examine
this matter, by the example of Christ, because we are Christians,
and let us consider what worship we owe unto God, and then we shall
find that those rich godly men are much deceived, for God should
have the whole heart, and therefore he that will give some part of
his heart to God, and some to riches, he would make Christ a liar,
which said, We cannot serve God and Mammon, but above all consider
that the life and manners of Christ, are the right rule for all men
to order their lives by, and if superfluous riches had been pleasing
unto God, then Christ would have laboured to have been rich, and he
would have taught us by his example, that to be rich in worldly
goods, was the most acceptable thing, that God would have men to
labour for: now the example of Christ, is the perfect rule, for he
was sent from God to men, to be a director of them by his example,
to walk uprightly with God in their hearts and consciences; but he
was poor in worldly wealth, because that is best pleasing unto God,
but in those days the devil hath many advocates, which do cry out
contrary to Christ. Abraham, David, Solomon and many of the
Patriarchs were rich: True, but they were not rich Christians, and I
hope that we will not turn Jews: but sophistical divines, and
hypocritical tyrants, and rich uncharitable persons, through the
instigation of the devil, in those days have found out a doctrine
which Christ never taught, nor never will teach, and that it is to
be rich and pious, which is impossible, no doubt if Christ had
preached such a world-pleasing doctrine, and pressed it to the
purpose, the Jews would not have used him so cruelly as they did;
but he taught the contrary, and therefore they hated him, and said,
that he was not Caesar's friend, because they were his enemies.

For this hypocritical doctrine to be rich and godly, is meat and
drink alone for the world, and therefore he that hath not this
doctrine, let him not presume to mount the Pulpit, nor to preach to
Kings, Princes, and other superfluous rich, and uncharitable
persons, for without this doctrine, he shall be esteemed in those
days, by such men, as an old Almanac, and he shall have so good
entertainment of them, as Christ had by the Gargasites: for if they
do not use him worser, yet they will entreat him to depart out of
their countries, because he is not for their profit. But suppose
that riches do not wholly separate a man from God, yet superfluous
riches maketh his way to Heaven the more difficult and harder: for
Christ said, It was hard for a rich man to enter into Heaven, but he
never said, it was hard for a poor man to enter into Heaven, and
therefore extraordinary riches are stumbling-blocks, which should be
removed out of the way. But consider, if rich men do not set their
hearts on their riches, for therein consisteth the art of hypocrisy:
for to carry fire in a man's bosom, and not to burn himself, to
touch pitch and not to be defiled therewith, and to have superfluous
riches, and not to set a man's heart on them, is all on difficulty,
if it be not an impossibility: but do not rich men set their hearts
on their goods, when they have made a combination, that if any poor
artless thieves do steal the goods from them, which they have stolen
from the poor before, that the poor thieves shall hang by their
necks till they be dead: What, will they hang men for that which
they do not care for, for a trifle which they do not regard? I hope
they will not say so for shame, that Christians will hang their
Christian brethren for nothing. O preposterous dissembling white
devil, thou art like unto none, but the devil thy father, or wilful
sin his mother. O hypocrite, hang thy poor neighbour freely, if he
do steal thy idols from thee, yet say, and confess the truth, which
is that thou lovest, thy stolen goods more, than thou lovest God in
Christ, or Christ in thy poor brother, which is all one? and in so
doing, although thou do continue an uncharitable wretch, yet thou
shalt quit thyself from hypocrisy, which is no small sin. But to
conclude this point, too much pelf is a dispersing of the mind, and
a dividing of the affections, and so it is a separating of the heart
from God; for God should have the whole desire of the heart, for a
divided heart is not upright with God.

I would fain be quit of this tyrannical, hypocritical, impious white
devil, but he is so full of deceit, and he hath so many evasions,
and so much sophistry to maintain his impious practises, that I do
not know how to deal with him, for neither the law of nature, nor
grace, nor God's commandments, nor the rule of Christ, nor God
within nor without him, nor Heaven, nor hell, nor love to good, nor
hate to evil, nor anything else that can move impious persons to
yield to reason: for God through nature hath formed all men alike,
and generally he hath given alike bodies and limbs unto every one,
and yet partiality, contrary to God and nature, doth cross God's
intent concerning the maintenance of the creature, which nature,
according to the will of God, hath impartially produced in the
world, and yet in despite of God, nature and reason, which are
contrary to partiality, the impious world will make some men too
rich, and others too poor, and yet the worldlings cannot show any
reason why they do so abuse both God and nature, and yet they will
continue in their unnatural, unreasonable, impious partiality,
against the knowledge of their own consciences; for there is no man,
if he would enter into a serious consideration with God in his heart
and conscience, but he must needs know, that to give unto every man
with discretion so near as may be, an equal share of earthly goods,
is consonant to the law of God and nature, and agreeable to the rule
of Christ. And for the truth of this, I appeal to the consciences of
all charitable and reasonable men, and let God, the impartial Judge
of all the world, judge this cause, and decide this matter, and to
enforce the truth for what I say, concerning this matter, consider
how God commanded the children of Israel to divide their land, and
how he was offended with them which did dispossess their neighbours,
and in the primitive Church, the Christians had their goods in
common, and we should take notice of Lycurgus with the
Lacedemonians, and of the Gramanthians, and the Masegates, and other
people which have had an equality, or a common and equal share of
worldly goods, so near as they could, and so they have lived and
laboured together in peace and concord, as brethren should do. Now I
believe that in those days, most men will grant that a reformation
is needful, but the question is, who, or what shall be reformed:
Tyrants and Hypocrites, and all impious persons, would have a
reformation: in the Church the hypocrite would have a conformity in
ceremonies, and in the Senate-house, the tyrants will have the rich
artificial thieves, to reform or deform the poor artless thieves. O
such a reformation would please both tyrants and hypocrites, and all
impious persons, such a reformation would content tyrannical
Princes, and hypocritical Prelates. A reformation that will subject
reason to tyranny, that all the world will embrace, but a
reformation that would subject tyranny to reason, that is so odious
to the world, as a repenting sinner is to the devil. A reformation
that will establish tyranny and slavery, and make the rich richer,
and the poor poorer, that is the reformation that the devil would
have, but a reformation sine partiality, that would give unto every
man alike means to live on, and that would cause all able persons to
labour according to God's commandment, and agreeable to reason, and
that would maintain and cherish all old, weak, and impotent persons,
so well the poor as the rich, &c.

Such a reformation the seeming sanctified world hateth, and he that
should propound such a reformation in our impious Christian world,
he should be esteemed of, as the Jews esteemed of Christ, and they
said, that he had a devil: and the world is now so impious, as it
was then: as for example, now at this present time are assembled at
Munster, the Agents of most of our supreme Christian Rulers, and
what to do? or to what end? not to destroy tyranny, but to order it
for the profit of some persons in this world, and for the damnation
of all mankind in the world to come, for they will maintain the
causes of evil, and yet they will seem to take away the evil
effects, for they do not intend to root out tyranny, but to divide
it, and to part the slaves, that every tyrant may abuse his slaves
at his own pleasure, therein they are very circumspect, not for the
universal freedom and profit of all mankind, but for the private
profit of some: and how hypocritical tyrants shall share the world
between them: They do not seek to make the rich poorer, that so the
poor might be made richer. They do not care to cause an equality of
goods and lands, that so young, strong and able persons might
labour, and old, weak, and impotent persons might rest: they take no
care to educate all men's children alike, and to give them alike
means to live on, that in so doing they might break the gall of
murmuration, that so all mankind might live in concord, and labour
for their livings one so well as another, according as God, nature,
and reason would have them: they do not labour to subject tyranny to
reason, but they would subject reason to tyranny, and so do our
Senators at London, and all the world over; but I shall have
occasion to say more of this matter hereafter, and here will I end
the first part of my triple intelligence. God the glory, and mankind
the profit, Amen.

It is said, ubi fide, ibid amor, ("where there is faithfulness,
there is love") let that be as it is; this is certain, where God is,
there is love, & Amor vincit omnia, ("Love conquers all") and he
hath all that hath God, for he is in all, and over all, and will
turn all to the best for them that do love him, and keep his loving
commandment. I intend to write a little concerning faith and love,
because I have observed the evil constructions, that presumptuous
sinners do seem to make of that doctrine, which in the point of
justification, doth prefer faith before love: I would not dispraise
faith, but I would praise love, and prefer love above, and before
all, because God is love, for when we have done all that we can to
find God in his attributes, which are infinite, yet we must reduce
God to one, for he is one simple uncompounded substance, and then
what shall we call him, Mercy, Justice, Power, &c. All those are in
God, but God is one: the Apostle said, that God is love, and when
Christ would express the wonderful incomprehensible nature of God,
he said, Behold, so God loved the world, that through love, he gave
his only begotten Son to save the world, if the world would be saved
by him. As I take it in all the Bible, there is but one place that
seemeth to approve of that doctrine, which teacheth justification by
faith alone, and it seemeth at that time the Apostle did not so much
desire to advance faith, as he did to condemn them which would save
their selves by their good works, for neither faith nor good works,
can save any man: no man can be saved, if the love of God be not
spread abroad in his heart, and that alone is sufficient to
salvation, and if faith alone can accomplish salvation, the devil
can say that Christ is the Son of God, a greater faith than some men
have; but whether faith alone can justify, I will not curiously
dispute, for God never commanded man to search for any such needless
knowledge.

But consider the effects and operations of faith and love: for the
mere knowledge of virtues cannot please God, nor profit men. It is
the practical more than the theorical part of virtues, that we are
to labour to attain, and therefore let us consider the operations of
faith and love, and compare them together, and then we shall see how
much love doth exceed faith; for love respecteth both God and man,
but faith doth not so respect his brother, and therefore faith is
not so perfect as love is. Faith will love and honour God, if hope
tell him that God will save him, and bring him to Heaven, but Love
will love God although despair tell him, that God will cast him into
Hell. True love knoweth neither Heaven nor Hell; but faith is all
for Heaven. Faith is a mercenary, but love is a voluntary soldier,
that knoweth no why nor wherefore, but saith with Christ, Behold,
here I am, ready to do thy will, O God. But consider the operations
of faith and love concerning our neighbours, for man may profit man,
but no man can profit God, and therefore if we will do good, we must
do it to mankind, and not to God without man. Now for faith, that
cannot help our neighbours, for what can it help me that another man
hath faith? Faith no doubt is a comfortable thing for him that hath
it, but another's faith cannot help me; but if I be poor, and want
food and raiment, if my rich neighbour do love me, although he do
not believe as I do, yet love will cause him to help me; but if he
have faith to remove mountains, and goods to build Churches, yet if
he do not love me, he would not help me, except he played the
hypocrite, and then in helping of me, he would hurt himself, but
charity, although it be poor and cannot help, yet she is willing to
help, and love and charity are all one. I know that a man may have a
false love, as he may have a false faith; but a man may better prove
his love, than he can his faith, for love is an inherent quality,
which God gave to man in his first creation, but faith is a second
gift of God, and the accomplishing of it is in God alone, for God
can save a man although he want faith to believe it: love is
natural, and when it is fixed aright, then it is divine, which is,
when we give unto God our good wills, and our neighbours our good
works. Through love all things were created, and through love all
mankind are redeemed, and through love all things are, and shall be
preserved, and God is love, and when a man goeth to God with a
loving heart, then Promise, Law, Prophets, Gospel, Christ, and all
Doctors, have done all that, for which they were ordained, for in
all such willing hearts, God is all in all, for all things are from
God, through God, and to God, and God is love. But the devil and all
impious men, hate love, because love is contrary to their nature,
and therefore they would overthrow love, by preferring of faith
before her: if they had opposed hate without hypocrisy against love,
that could not have wronged love so much, but the devil striveth to
set those two principal virtues at odds, thereby to despite God the
more, because God is the author and giver of them both.

But some say, that this justifying by faith alone, is Pauls
doctrine, but if Paul were now alive, he would find out another
doctrine for presumptuous sinners, which should teach them to work
out their salvation with fear and trembling, and for them that
stand, to take heed least they fall; for that which is accidental to
one man, is incidental to every man: For let occasion be offered,
and God withhold his preventing grace, or if God prepare the
temptation, and then leave a man to himself, tell me then, O thou
proud earth-worm, what would become of all thy supposed strength?
But it may be, that thou art the eldest son, and hast always been at
home with thy father, having not disobeyed him at any time, and
therefore thou presumest that God is bound to keep thee from
falling, and it may be he will; but consider how thou repinest at
thy younger brother, whose fall was predestined, to be for the
glorious mercy of God in Jesus Christ, and yet thou wouldst not
rejoice with his father, because he had received him safe and sound.
But tell me how this lost son could be so welcome to God, when he
had sinned so boldly. O this, or that son, so lost, and so found,
was all predestined sinners, and all such as God had prepared the
temptations for them, through which they fell, and all repenting
sinners, and all such as are accidentally overtaken by sin, and all
such as hate themselves, because they have been made the instruments
of sin and Satan, &c. but all those which continually do delight to
walk in their wilful sins of knowledge, and are so willing as the
devil is, to be made his instruments to sin, all such are none of
that lost, and found son.

This world is a warfare for some, and a plague for others: God is
most wonderful with them that love him, for some of them he causeth
to fall accidentally, and that so heinously, that they through
desperation, are ready to fly in the face of God, for in that sad
condition, God permitteth the devil to open a man's conscience, and
he, to affright such a poor despairing worm, bringeth along with him
the quint-essence of Hell, I mean despair: God deliver us from such
phisicians, for when a man hath not the feeling of the favour of God
in his apprehension, then desperation ceaseth on the conscience, and
when the devil, despair, and a man's own conscience, are all against
one poor worm, let any one judge, if he can, the miserable state,
and poor condition of that man, when all those three at one time
shall make war within him, presenting to his consideration Heaven
lost, Hell won, the endless length of eternity, and above all, the
separation from God, and that for ever, as our doctors do affirm,
and stoutly maintain. Now if any one can tell of a greater Hell, let
him speak, for I know none: now being it is so, let no man presume
of his own strength, nor any special predestination, for they are
both alike, deceitful: And therefore consider this all you proud
tyrants, which have your dinners served in with trumpets, and will
have men kneel to you, and will be drawn in costly coaches, with six
or eight horses, as though you triumphed over the poor people, which
you have robbed of their necessary maintenance, to maintain
yourselves in pride and gluttony, &c. but consider from these
sayings of Christ, how a man may be deceived in his faith.

Christ told the Jews, That many should come from the East and West,
and should sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven, with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, and the children of the Bride-chamber should be cast out.
Now in whose esteem were those out-cast children? not in God's
esteem, for then they had not been cast out; but they were children
in their own esteem, and therefore they were cast out. And he said,
Many will say unto me on that day, Lord, have not we prophesied, and
cast out devils in thy Name? behold much faith to little purpose:
yea, a faith to remove mountains cannot profit a man, but to augment
his misery. But consider who are the greatest believers: are they
not our Princes and Prelates, that do make war and kill the poor
innocent people? The Emperor, if all were stated as the devil would
have it, he should be the head of the tyrannical Christian world,
and the Pope of Rome, he should be the head of the hypocritical
Christian world, but now the Catholic, and the most Christian Kings,
and the Defender of the Faith, and many more which are like them,
will share with those two hypocritical tyrants. Behold, those have
faith enough, but they have not much love, except the fruits of love
be tyranny, pride, hypocrisy, partiality, voluptuousness, &c. for in
maintaining and practising of such like impieties, they and their
richest subjects, do employ most of all their wealth and power, not
to build up, but to pull down the Commonwealth: and for our
merchants, they travel by Sea and Land, to make Christian
proselytes, chiefly our Indian merchants; but consider their
practises, and the profit that we have by their double dealing,
first in robbing of the poor Indians of that which God and nature
hath given them, and then in bringing of it home to us, that we
thereby may the better set forth and show the pride of our hearts,
in decking of our proud carcases, and feeding of our greedy guts
with superfluous, unnecessary curiosities, and although their
dealing concerning the Indians goods, be bad, yet they deal worser
with their persons; for they either kill them, which is bad, or make
them their slaves, which is worse: I know not what to say concerning
such impious proceedings, with them poor innocent people; but
concerning such merchants and their merchandise, I would that those
which are permitted to speak, and to preach some part of the truth,
would say what they know concerning this matter, which is, That when
Rome and Greece were well ordered, although they were Heathens, yet
they would not have permitted so many needless curiosities, to be
brought into their countries, to have spoiled their people and
Commonwealth withal. Now such things as the poor Indians do not know
how to employ for the devil's profit, our merchants bring them home
to us, and we proud gluttons employ them for his greatest glory, for
we clothe ourselves with their silk and gold, to show that we are
glad that the devil will use us to maintain his proud kingdom
withal, and some will have their meat painted, so well as their
clothes laced, with gold and silver, that so they may please the
devil within and without, and it may be that such persons have a
golden faith, because they eat gold, and wear gold: And it seemeth
that all rich uncharitable persons, which have, and hold an
extraordinary portion of worldly goods, more than their poor
neighbours have, that they expostulate with the poor according to
that which followeth. Come on, you poor villains, what will you do,
for you see that we rich hypocritical tyrants, have gotten by fraud
and force, the most part of the goods of this world into our impious
power, and we have made a law, as we call it, that if any poor
persons do steal any of our goods, which we have taken from them,
that they shall hang by their necks till they be dead: but now you
poor miserable wretches, if you will serve the devil and us, then we
will employ you in his, and our service, but we will not use you in
any virtuous actions, for they are contrary to our natures, but as
the devil doth use us, so we will use, and abuse you: some of you
shall serve by sea, and some by land, but most of you shall serve to
maintain pride and tyranny: some of you shall rob the poor Indians
for us, and some shall bring us new fashions out of France, and some
shall flatter us, and kneel unto us, and blow trumpets when we eat
and drink, and some shall vex and trouble honest men, because they
will not be our slaves, and serve the devil freely as we do, and
some of you shall kill our neighbour Tyrant's slaves, for if we
suppose that he hath done us any injury, then we will send some of
our slaves to kill some of their slaves, and then one innocent shall
kill another, for that is sport alike for the devil and us, and some
of the vilest of you, shall do that for us, that God hath commanded
us to do ourselves, which is, to till our land; but although God had
no more wit than to command us to do such base and vile labour, yet
we are wiser than to do that which he commanded us: no, our poor
slaves shall do that for us, and we will proudly command them to do
it, and we will pay them poorly for doing of it, and when they have
done it, we will esteem of them, almost so much as we do of our
hounds and horses, and yet we will be faithful Christians, and we
will rule all Christendom, not according to the rule of Christ, but
according to our partial, tyrannical, hypocritical, impious rule,
which we have invented, and which we do intend to maintain so long
as we can.

But Tyrants may say, that it is Crimen laese ("Lèse-majesté") to
speak of such matters, and therefore I will be silent. And now
concerning faith and love, I say and affirm, considering the
presumptuous sinners of this age, and the evil constructions that
uncharitable persons make concerning justification by faith alone,
that it is better to preach and teach that doctrine, which is best
to keep presumptuous sinners from sinning through security, than it
is to preach and teach an uncertain doctrine, of an absolute
predestination in God of man, without man, which is contrary to
God's nature, for God cannot be partial, neither can God do the
works of a tyrant, as that doctrine would have him to do, and above
all, it may cause men to neglect the walking with God in their
hearts and consciences, which is the sum of all pious Religion; but
those doctors may, and I think they will say, that they do not mean,
that men should be saved, or think to be saved by faith without
charity.

To which I answer: If a man's intention be good, God will, and doth
accept his good will; but if a man have taught a truth, if it be not
the most necessary truth for his auditors, when he shall come to
know it, he must then change his theme, and preach and teach that
part of the truth, which is most needful for his auditors. Now the
cause being so, let all doctors seriously consider without
partiality, or respect of persons, what doctrine in those days is
most needful to be taught, wherein so many presumptuous sins are not
alone committed, but maintained; but if men should let
predestination alone, and seriously preach to such persons that
doctrine of repentance, and of working out of their salvation in
fear and trembling, that might chance to take off the proud spirits
of some of our gallant persons, which have their dinners served in
with trumpets, &c. Now if such doctrine were well preached, and that
they were well put in mind, that God will cast down the proud, and
that he will give grace to the humble, it may be they would come to
a serious consideration of the way of God with man, and so turn unto
him, that he might heal them. There is now, and a long time hath
been, a great cavilling in the Christian world, concerning faith and
good works, and by which of them two a man may be saved; for we
mercenary Christians, God help us, desire salvation more than
sanctification, for we cry out with Paul's jailor, and Peter's
auditors, What shall we do to be saved? but we should rather say,
Lord, what is thy blessed will, that we may delight in it. But for
faith and good works, neither of them are ours, nor are they
absolutely necessary to salvation, for Christ said one is necessary,
and that is not faith nor good works, but that unum
necessarium,("the one necessary thing") is to participate of God's
nature. It may be that faith, or good works, or predestination, or
some other thing may bring a man to Heaven, but if the love of God
in Christ, be not shed abroad in his heart, he will be cast out as
the devil was.

I grant that we ought to labour to have a faith, to believe that God
is not partial, and that God in himself hath predestined all men
alike, concerning their everlasting salvation, and we may believe
that God will save no man with his sins, nor damn him without them,
and we may believe that pride, hypocrisy, tyranny &c. are wilful
sins, which God cannot pardon till we forsake them, and we may well
believe that God cannot save a white devil, except he become black,
because that is contrary to his nature, and we should have so much
faith as Elias and Nathan had, to tell our Princes, as they did
theirs, that our Princes trouble the Christians, more than the
Princes of the Jews, did their people: and that they kill many
Uriahs, and cause their wives to be whores, because they want means
to live on, and we may believe that such practises are contrary to
God and nature, to reason, and the rule of Christ; and yet all this
is done, because the devil and uncharitable, superfluous rich men
will have it so. And we should have so much faith, to know that all
men are liars, and therefore concerning our walking with God in our
hearts and consciences, we should wholly and alone depend and wait
on God, for the direction of his Holy Spirit within us, for if any
man can speak or preach well, that he that taught him, the same must
teach all men, for Christ sent his auditors to God in their
consciences, there to be taught of the only teacher, which is the
Holy Ghost: and we should have a faith to tell all superfluous, rich
persons, that they do serve the devil of free-will, and they cause
the poor to serve him by compulsion. Such a faith would please God,
because it would profit men, and therefore let no man presume to
speak of faith, if he have not so much faith, as to strive to do and
say such things, for those are the practical part of faith, which is
the sum of all; but to labour to have a theorical, mystical,
forbidden faith, to know what God is in himself, or what he doth in
himself without us, or his other creatures, such a faith is not
alone unprofitable, but sinful: but a faith to keep God's
commandments according to the rule of Christ, such a faith we ought
to have, and practise.

Now to attain to that Unum necessarium, that one which is only
needful to salvation. A man must go unto God with a willing mind,
and in his desire he must give himself wholly unto God, with a
resolution to walk with God, and in all things to be ruled by him,
then all is done, for then God hath his desire in that man, for to
that end God made the world, and all that is therein: now when man
giveth himself so unto God, then it is that unum necessarium
attained, and consider that God doth not at all times work that good
in man, which man desireth, for then we should have no strivings,
but God accepteth any man that desireth to be good, for the willing
is ours, but the working is God's, and therefore it is the
delighting in good or evil, that maketh a man good or evil in God's
esteem. And now to conclude the second part of this intelligence,
God grant all mankind such a faith, as may be pleasing unto himself,
and give us that love, which is himself. O God for Jesus Christ his
sake: God the glory, and mankind the profit, Amen.

Mundus vult decipi, the world will be deceived, as the Monk said
when he went into his Cloister, and therefore, said he, I came here.
Zelum Dei, & nomen Christi Antichristus habet: ("The Antichrist has
zeal for God, and the name of Christ") To be zealous for God, and to
have the name of Christ, that hath been, is, and will be, the manner
of the tyrannical, hypocritical Christian world. O simulated
sanctity, which art double iniquity, how impious art thou! thou art
the mother and nurse of all impiety, thou art the root of hypocrisy,
which is the destroyer of all virtues. O seeming sanctified
holiness, thou art too bad to be named: I have observed some of thy
wicked practises, concerning mankind on thy working-days, and now
through God's grace, I will enter into thy Sanctum Sanctorum,("Holy
of holies") to see how thou dealest with God on thy Sunday, I do not
say rest-day, for on that day thou doest the devil double service,
but first I would show how most of our doctors, both writers and
preachers, do abuse themselves and others, through partiality,
concerning tyrants and tyrannies, for they all do seem to hate
tyranny, and yet they flatter the Tyrants in their tyrannies,
wherein they deal preposterously, because they prefer the bodies of
tyrants before their souls, and the private, before the public
profit, for men should love the Tyrants, and hate their tyrannies,
and therefore our doctors should sharply reprove the Tyrants, and
not flatter them in their tyrannies, as they do, and they should
venture their lives, to draw tyrants from their tyrannies,
counselling and persuading them, will they, nill they, to leave 
their tyrannies, and to become honest men, not fearing nor caring
for their frowns nor favours; for through the converting of tyrants,
the whole Commonwealth should be bettered: and I would desire all
men seriously to consider, if a man may be silent at such sins of
other men, as are committed to the dishonour of God, and the
prejudice of the Commonwealth. I know what I should say concerning
this matter, and all reasonable men know, that to be silent, is a
consenting to a thing. O then consider how men do fail concerning
this matter: I know that the world doth choose some men, and permit
them to reprove some sins in some men, but if a man should pry into
the well-ordered impieties of Tyranipocrit, then he shall be
punished for want of a calling, and if they have called him, they
will tell him that it was not to reprove them, but to pray for them,
and to reprove other men, and the reprovers do know their minds,
although they were silent, and so they do silence truth, and conceal
iniquity in great persons, the one will not hear the truth, and
therefore the other will not speak it: And if another do, speak of
their partiality in that kind, they will punish him for interrupting
of them in their simulated sanctity. Thus it hath been, is, and will
be, the proceeding of the impious world. Usque ad finem,("until the
very end") and therefore if a man have no sins of his own to cast
out, then let him weep for, and fight against the sins of other men,
but the world is, and will be deceived in the estimation of things,
for those which practise tyranny in those days, they will be called
gracious Lords, and hypocrites will be called Holy Fathers. I am so
beset with hypocritical partiality, that I know not which way to
turn me, for I would have all visards taken away, so that all such
as do practise tyranny and hypocrisy, should be called Tyrants and
Hypocrites, as reason would that they should, but partiality saith
no, not so, for he saith, that Kings, Princes, Prelates, and other
impious persons, may do the works of Tyrants and Hypocrites, and yet
they must not be called hypocritical tyrants. Now if those be not
hypocritical tyrants, that have gotten so much pelf, that they are
grown so proud, that they will have their dinners served in with
trumpets, and ride in Coaches drawn by six or eight horses, as
though they triumphed over the poor which they have robbed, and will
have men to kneel unto them, and force men to go to war, and kill
one another: if those that oppress the poor as tyrants, live idle
like tyrants, build and fare like tyrants, and spend their goods and
time, like tyrants, doing all the works of tyrants and hypocrites,
and yet be gracious Lords and Holy Fathers, certainly then there is
neither truth nor falsehood, but all is fantasies, imaginations,
dreams, and illusions, &c. for if such will not, and therefore must
not be called Tyrants and Hypocrites, then there are no such things
on earth, and therefore we should not use the names of Tyrants and
Hypocrites any more; but one day we shall know how partiality and
hypocrisy have deceived us in this matter.

O cursed partiality, how many friends hast thou, that with thee, do
make war against poor unregarded, simple truth? and therefore all
you Preachers and Teachers, labour to do one impartial thing for
Truth's sake, make that which is sin in one man, to be sin in every
man, if it be done with alike will and knowledge: make pride,
tyranny, and such like evils to be sin, or no sin, if it be no sin,
then teach poor men to be rich and proud, but if it be sin, then
tell Kings, Princes, and Prelates, and such like persons, that
pride, tyranny, hypocrisy, &c. are sins in them, and that in them
such sins are more displeasing to God, than they are in meaner
persons. O plough no more with an ox and an ass, do not wear
garments of linsey-woolsey, be wholly for God, or nothing at all for
God. Set the sins of great ones before their eyes, because you know
that they are great sins, so well as you do set the sins of the poor
people, for God is no respecter of persons: and you know that
Potentes potenter punienter, Mighty men shall be mightily punished,
for the sins of Rulers, are double and intolerable sins: For wilt
thou steal, that commandest another that he shall not steal? Wilt
thou be idle, which commandest another to labour? Wilt thou be
proud, that teachest another to be humble? &c. But those rich
artificial thieves, which do not stand by the way side, and take
men's purses, nor creep into windows, but have gotten a more impious
artificial way of stealing, than the poor artless thieves have, such
think themselves secure, and because the law and the hang-man are
their slaves, that dare not hang them, therefore they make
themselves thieves by act of Parliament, and yet they will be called
gracious Lords, and such are no thieves, for all that they rob and
steal, is their own, by so good right as the Lion had to the whole
Hart, and if need be, they can produce sheep-skins, wherein it is
written, that such a country, city, town, or village, lands, houses,
goods, &c. are all theirs: but let such artificial thieves consider,
that one day all uncharitable writings shall be burnt, and it is to
be feared that such artificial thieves, shall then burn with all
their uncharitable writings, except their hearts here in this life
do so burn with love to their poor neighbours, that they do restore
again that which by fraud or force, they have taken from them, and
that is all the worldly goods that the rich Tyrants have, more than
their poor slaves, neighbours, and brethren have.

But now let us consider how we Christians do behave ourselves on our
Sunday, for that is the chiefest matter to be treated of, in this
last part of my Intelligence, and now I wish that our Christian
Rulers would seriously consider, what manner Sabbath God in Christ,
doth require of us: for if God had delighted in a ceremonial
Sabbath, he would have maintained the Jews' Sabbath: but if Christ
be the end of the Law, then he is the end of the ceremonial Sabbath,
for that was included in the Law; but God never delighted in
ceremonies, for they are not consonant to his nature, for that which
doth please God at any time, must please him at all times, and that
is not ceremonies, but a new creature. God, for causes best known to
himself, permitted ceremonies for a time, to the Jews: And the Law
was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, and
therefore Christ is the end of the Law, and of all ceremonies
contained in the Law, and as Christ said, God is a Spirit, and will
be worshipped in spirit and truth. Now being ceremonies are not
consonant to God's nature, and Christ taught us, that God is in us,
and shall we seek him in ceremonies which are without us? God is in
our hearts and consciences, where he will be found of us, if we will
there seek him according to his promise, and shall we seek him in
ceremonies contrary to the rule of Christ? I know not who changed
the Jews' Sabbath into our Sunday, some say it was one of the Popes,
which is like enough to be true; but if one Pope brought it in, many
Popes do maintain it: But consider our demeanour on the Sundays, but
first take notice how we do order our Church affairs, before we come
to our Church worship. First we ordain, or choose us Preachers and
Teachers, as we do other officers, only we are a little more
circumspect concerning their education, for commonly we choose
humane Artists, good Grammarians, curious Linguists, such as can
orderly speak Hebrew, Greek and Latin, such as have been brought up
in humane schools, and have no experience in that honest simple
life, of tilling the land, nor keeping of sheep, but some of them
are good sophisters, that can tell us that hot is cold, and cold
hot, that white is black, and black is white, &c. O Christian world!
how contrary art thou to Christ? for he thanked God, because he had
not revealed the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven to worldly wise
men. God destroyed the ancient language, because of that proud
Babylonian builder Nimrod, and yet we more impious than he, learn
strange languages to build Christ a Church withal, for in these 
days, he that cannot speak strange languages, shall not be thought
fit to preach, nor to teach Christians, and are not such curious
Artists and Linguists, worldly wise men? such as are not fit to
preach the gospel of Christ, because arts and languages are enemies
to humility, which is the sum of Divinity: for, Christianismus non
cadit sub regulus,("Christianity does not fall under the Law [of
Moses]") but our Christianity seemeth in these days to consist in
rules and forms, for take those from us, and then a Turk, or a Moor,
or any Barbarian, will be so good a Christian, and much better than
some of us.

Now consider that hypocrisy will be always seeming to do good, which
she hateth, but will never be good, because that is contrary to her
nature: now when we have gotten us Prelates, then the work is more
than half done, for tyranny, hypocrisy, superstition, and ignorance,
have builded us idolatrous churches to our hands. O Hypocrisy, how
impious art thou! six days thou hast served the world, the flesh,
and the devil, and yet thou art not satisfied with sinning, but on
the seventh day, thou wilt bring thy sins to Church, that there thou
mayest sanctify them, and make them complete impieties, for then
thou clothest thyself in a more prouder manner than at other times,
because then thou wilt do the devil more service, than on working-
days.

I have endeavoured to show, that all impious sins, are wilful sins,
and that pride, tyranny, hypocrisy, &c. are wilful sins. Now for a
man to seem to pray unto God, for pray he cannot, so long as he will
keep such sins, as he hath a power to leave, but will not, for such
a one to ride or go to Church, to mick God, is the greatest impiety
that can be imagined, for God hath given man a power, to desire to
be good, and if he cannot attain his desire to be good as he
desireth, then he hath a power to hate himself, because of the great
power of sin, that is within him, and if he cannot leave his proud
heart, yet he can leave his proud habiliments by which he showeth
his pride to the world, which are his proud cloths, proud coaches,
proud Ships, proud houses, proud Churches, proud pictures, proud
wife, children, and servants, &c. such things, men and women have
power to leave, and such things must be left, before we begin to
pray, or else instead of praying, we shall tempt God, for God will
not help, but when all helpers fail: for God hath given unto man a
free power to will, and till man hath used his willing power, in
leaving such sins as are in his power to leave, God will not help
him. God will deliver us from all those sins which we have done, but
not from those sins that we desire to do. God will pardon all our
sins which are past, if we do not desire to have them acted again,
because it is the office of God in Christ so to do: but there is no
power in God nor Christ, to save a man with his sins. And now being
that nothing is contrary to God's nature but wilful sinners, and
pride is wilful sin, what doth a proud person in the Church? hath he
not sins enough already, but he must church his pride, the more to
augment his impiety?

O consider this, all you that are young and strong, and yet you are
so loaden with pride, that when you will play the hypocrite with the
tyrant, then you will be drawn to Church in costly coaches, with
pampered horses, when if you would leave your pride, one ass would
carry you, if your own legs would not bear you, but pride is a heavy
sin, and therefore proud persons had need of many horses to draw
their pride and themselves together; but all proud persons have not
coaches, and yet they do their best to show their pride, for some
have the feet of their boats so long, and the tops so wide, and
therein so many emblems of pride, that it makes them to straddle, as
if they had the pox, yea some have so many tokens of pride hanging
on their stinking carcasses, that if they had any of God's grace in
them, they would be ashamed to see themselves: And what hath been
said of the proud man, may be said of all Tyrants and Hypocrites,
and all wilful sinners: O impious partiality, how contrary art thou
to God, and all goodness! young, strong, lusty, and able persons,
which are well able to go on their feet, must ride in coaches, and
old, lame, blind, and impotent persons, must crawl on the way, and
not have horses, nor asses, coaches, nor Sedans, to draw, carry,
help, or ease them. O see, and consider, if you be not stark blind,
if this partial dealing of the worldlings, be not contrary to the
Law of God and nature, and the rule of Christ.

Some of the Grecians had a temple, into which none but merciful
persons might enter: if there were such a custom concerning our
Churches, then Tyrants should not be admitted to come to Church,
much less to have the chiefest room in the church. O this partial
white devil, that in the Christian world ruleth and disposeth all
things contrary to reason, hath need of some better-mouthed dogs to
barke at him; But I have waited so long, that I am almost blind with
expecting, to see if any better barker would undertake this task,
but I saw that men loved to sleep in a whole skin, and it seemeth in
these days, that men do think it no sin, to be silent at other men's
presumptuous sins, and therefore men will not, or dare not tell
hypocritical tyrants, that they are impious white devils, then at
length I resolved to do my best concerning that matter. But to the
purpose, which is to drive our seeming holy persons from their
sanctuary; because simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas.("To
pretend holiness is doubly sinful.")

O consider that it is bad enough to be a black devil, and to stay at
home with our sins, and not to bring them to Church, and so to make
ourselves impious white devils. O for an evil man to sacrifice, or
seem to do any good, that is the greatest impiety that can be
imagined. When Cain will sacrifice, and yet murder Abel, and when
Solomon will honour his mother, and yet kill his brother: when Judas
will pretend for the poor, and yet sell his master: when Julian
buildeth churches, and yet hateth Christ: when Periander will make
good laws for the Corinthians, and yet he will observe no law
himself: when King Henry the eighth will reform Religion, and yet
his own manners were contrary to reason: when Alexander will be free
of his frankincense to the Gods, and yet kill men. O what shall I
say concerning Saul's obedience, Jezebel's fastings, Jehu's zeal,
&c. when he that buildeth like Crassus, and fareth like Lucullus,
and yet speaketh like Cato, then beware the goose, for the Fox
preacheth. I do not name all these to defame the dead, but to show
how odious hypocrisy is in God's esteem, and how much better it is
to be a black devil, than a white one, for God can wash a black
devil in the blood of Christ, and so cleanse him; but there is no
help for a white devil: and above all other impious wights, none can
be so vile as that inhumane monster, when tyranny and hypocrisy are
joined in one, which the devil doth on the Sunday: for then he
calleth tyranny and hypocrisy to church, and there in the presence
of God and the Congregation, it seemeth he saith unto them: Come on,
my two dear and best beloved children, Tyranny and Hypocrisy, I know
that on the week-days you have done me all the best service that you
could, and now because I have no better jewels to bestow on you,
than your own selves, therefore in recompense for all the good
service you have done, and shall do for me, I will give you each to
the other, and therefore cause Formality to proclaim the banns,
which shall bane all the world.

There is a contract of Matrimony betwixt Tyranny and Hypocrisy, and
the devil, who is the father of them both, hath given his consent:
now if any one can show any reason, why these two Imps of hell
should not be joined in one, let him speak, if it be not too late;
for when they are joined together, then truth and reason must be
silent. Now when this needless ceremony is past, and none doth
contradict the devil's desire, then he that preached to Eve in
Paraidise, and he that taught Cain to kill his brother, and Judas to
sell his Master, he supplieth the place of a priest, and as it
seemeth, he saith unto them as followeth:
"Thou Tyranny my son, and Hypocrisy my daughter, stand up and hear
your charge: Thou Tyranny shalt confess here before God and this
Congregation, that thou dost take unto thee to be thy wedded wife,
my daughter Hypocrisy, to live with her, and to love, comfort,
respect, and cherish her, and to maintain her against all sincerity,
truth, and reason. And thou Hypocrisy, promise Tyranny to do the
like for him: now take each other by the hand. Now the blessing of
him that taught Cain to sacrifice, and Judas to preach, &c. be with
you, and remain with you for ever."

And now thou TYRANIPOCRIT, for that henceforth shall be thy name,
for now I have joined you in one, therefore you shall have but one
name: now viva Tyranipocrit, live long and prosper, and he that will
not honour thee, let him not live on earth, and when he dieth, let
the infernal furies torture him. And now consider the great love
which I do bear unto you two, for I have many other children which
must live, but because all the world is yours, therefore all other
sins and sinners shall be yours, and to order them for your, and my
greatest profit: Partiality shall rule, place and displace all thy
whole train of sinful servants, and for thy Privy-councillors, thou
shalt have atheistry, pride, security, artificial thievery, hatred,
malice, disdain, uncharitableness, &c. and for my black children,
which are whores, and knaves, gluttons, drunkards, swearers,
Sabbath-breakers, artless thieves, and all poor profane persons,
they shall be all your slaves, and wait and attend on Tyranipocrit,
and his friends, and you may freely use, and abuse them at your
pleasures, for these, although they be my children, yet they are so
unruly, and out of order, that I know not almost how to trust them,
and many of those black ones, through God's grace, many times do
quite forsake me, and therefore I do not care so much for them, but
for you Tyranny and Hypocrisy, which I have now joined in one, you
and your privy-councillors which I have named before, you seldom, or
never fail me, and therefore Tyranipocrit hearken thou unto me, and
in all things be ruled by me, and then I will teach thee how thou
shalt commit and maintain any impiety whatsoever, and that with a
faire seemblant. First, thou must get an hypocritical Painter, and
cause him to paint Truth and Justice, and then cause seeming Zeal,
to hang up painted Truth and Justice in the Church and Senate-house,
and then cause Hypocrisy to write many fair sentences, taken out of
the Holy Scripture, and are fit to maintain tyranny through
hypocrisy, and then be sure that thou hang or banish Tom-Tell-Truth:
And I charge thee to be very circumspect in all things, for the
establishing of iniquity, and as occasion shall serve, thou mayest
convent tyrannical Senates, and hypocritical Synods, but remember
that I do charge thee on my blessing, that whatsoever thou
pretendest or reformest, that thou do not molest or trouble the
white devil, for then my whole kingdom would be in danger of
falling; but thou mayest reform many things for my profit, so thou
be sure, that nothing be the better for thy reforming, for it is a
bettering and not a reforming, that hurteth my kingdom, I do not
care what form tyranny be put into, neither what fashion hypocrisy
can set on tyranny, so I may have the substance, I do not care for
the show: and therefore cry out aloud for new forms, that in them
you may commit new impieties, and hypocrisy shall carry all things
so in the clouds, that through her juggling, the people shall say,
that good is evil, and evil good, which is the highest degree of
impiety.

And if at any time Tom-Tell-Truth should chance to open his mouth,
you must deal very circumspectly with him, and first turn him over
to hypocrisy, that she may deal with him, as Tyranny had dealt with
her before, which is, to convert him through gold and preferment;
but if he be obstinate, and will not hearken to her hypocritical
persuasions, then turn him over to Tyranny, and he shall call a
Council of War against him, and if he will not recant, then hatred
shall condemn him, envy shall judge him, and cruelty shall execute
him, and infamy shall proclaim his rebellion; because he would not
honour and obey Tyranipocrit. And I charge thee, that in all thy
impious practises, that thou make a show of piety and charity, in
giving something for God's sake, to honour the devil withal, for
when thou hast robbed a hundred or more, then cause ostentation thy
almoner, to feed some few poor people at thy gates, and that in a
proud detestable manner, not fit for men, much less for Christian
brethren, and when you have convented Parliaments, then make a great
show of zeal, for the welfare of all mankind, but give partiality
with hypocrisy leave to rule and dispose all things, and be sure
that in all your conclusions, you do subject reason to tyranny, and
not tyranny to reason, and if you cannot make it seem good by Logic,
Sophistry shall help you, for this is a general known maxim: Take
away the cause, and the effect will follow, but you shall strive to
take away the effects, and yet maintain their causes, for you shall
hang the poor artless thieves, and maintain the rich artificial
thieves, which cause the poor to be thieves: And labour to have a
uniformity in ceremonies, for concord in forms, and discord in
manners and conditions, that can never hurt the devil's kingdom, for
if you maintain rich tyrants, then they will make poor slaves, make
the rich richer, and then they will make the poor poorer, and then
what forms soever you have, the devil doth not care; for then the
rich with their too much, and the poor with their too little goods,
shall both serve sin and the devil: the rich of free-will, and the
poor by compulsion, make it so, that pride may abound in the rich,
and misery in the poor; for if you should make and maintain an
equality of goods and lands, as God and nature would have, as
justice and reason doth crave, then the gall of murmuration would be
broken, and then mankind might live in love and concord as brethren
should do, for then the devil's kingdom would fall, or consume away
to nothing, then tyranny and oppression would cease, and the Kingdom
of Christ would flourish, and then mankind might rightly sing the
133 Psalm: "O how happy a thing it is, and joyful for to see,
Brethren together fast to hold, The band of amity," &c. where now
like a company of impious apes, they maintain the causes of discord,
and yet they ride, or go to Church, and there sing and pray for
concord. O impious impiety! for they seem to pray unto God, that he
will force them to do that which they hate, for they tempt God, to
have him to do that for them, which he hath given them a power to do
themselves, but they will not, neither will they cease from tempting
God in that impious manner, for they know that they do hate that
which they seem to pray for; for they know, that if every man had an
equal portion of goods and lands, then every man might live as God
commanded all men, by the sweat of their own brows, and not as they
do now, by the sweat of other men's brows, for now every poor man
must be a slave to the rich, and if the rich man be the devil's
slave, what a miserable slave must the poor man be, that must be a
slave to him, that is a slave to the devil?

But it is not fit, that the devil should ruin his own kingdom, and
therefore I charge thee, Tyranipocrit, and all thy friends and
counsellors, which are many and evil, that if any man dare to prate
of an equality of goods and lands, amongst such false Christians as
inhabit Europa, let him die without mercy, because he is a disturber
of the tranquillity of Tyranipocrit, and therefore he is not for the
devil's profit, for the devil's kingdom is established through
iniquity, and yet it hath a show of equity, which is the mystery of
iniquity.

I cannot tell you all the impious sport, which they had at this
cursed wedding, all other feasts are nothing comparable in all
impieties, to this feast. That feast of Ahasuerus, of Balshazar, of
Lucullus, Crassus, Herod, and such like, the feast at Paris, where 
so many thousands of innocents were slain, was not so impious as
this feast. But when the halcyon days were ended, the devil would
not neglect his time, and then it seemeth that he in his diabolical
manners, told them that for the present, that he had done them, and
they had done him all the best service that they could do each
other, for which he gave himself, and them many thanks, and he said,
that the joining of Tyranny and Hypocrisy, did please him better
than anything that ever he did, for a greater impiety for the
destruction of mankind, was never plotted in hell: but yet to secure
their estates, he would return to hell, there to consult with his
infernal counsellors, and so he committed all the whole impious
crew, to their own wicked wills, for they are so bad, and as much
displeasing to God, as the devil can be, and he commended and
committed unto them all the deadly sins, and he charged them, upon
pain of his displeasure, not to repent. And he charged them to
maintain partiality, and in all things to be ruled by him, for he
would invent strange prerogatives for some persons to sin by
authority, &c. so when he had given them their charge, and blessed
them, he seemed to leave them for a season.

Now how there can be so much tyranny in the Commonwealth, when there
is so much sincerity in the Church, and both are ruled by one
spirit, how this can accord and stand together, that is a mystery
above my capacity, and it seemeth to be so strange a paradox, that
it is able to make a man mad, if he consider it seriously, as he
ought; for it is so impossible, that tyranny and sincere religion
should accord with each other, as it is to cause God and the devil
to be of one mind; but all is not gold that glistereth, nor all of
the church, that are in the church, for Hypocrisy can counterfeit
sincerity, and faith in the mouth, may be infidelity in the heart,
and when the devil seemeth to be an Angel of Light, then there is
much zeal, but no piety. Tell me why in those days Zacharias is not
slain between the Temple and the Altar: why is not John beheaded?
Steven stoned? Peter crucified? &c. Is this world better than that
world was, wherein those men suffered? No certainly: but our
Zachariasses are better daubers than that Zacharias was, for ours
can better reprove the black, than the white devil, and a black
devil is not so cruel as a white devil, neither hath he so much
power, if he were so cruel, and it seemeth that our Teachers had
rather have money and good words, than either stones, ropes, or
swords, and it seemeth although they speak so much of faith, yet
when it comes to be proved, concerning the right reproving of
Tyranipocrit, when they consider what power he hath gotten, which is
so great, that he that hath not his mark, must neither buy nor sell,
O then faith in them is at a low ebb: for then they stagger, and
cannot tell whether faith or its object, be a reality, or an
imagination, and if they have a wavering faith, yet they do not know
how to resolve. And although they have heard that God is a defender
of truth, yet considering how simple Tyrants in former times have
dealt with such as have maintained the truth against them, and their
tyrannies, how much more, think they, shall those be tormented, that
shall now oppose Tyranipocrit, he unto whom the devil hath given and
resigned his whole power and authority. O Tyranipocrit! he sweepeth
off the stars of Heaven with his hypocritical tail; for those which
tyranny cannot subdue, hypocrisy will seduce.

Now when I think of the inhuman cruelties, and vile impieties, which
have been committed in the Christian world, since the joining of
Tyranny and Hypocrisy, then I think that the devil did himself a
notable piece of service, when he joined them in one. When I think
how Vladislaus King of Hungary, through the Popes instigation, broke
his faith with the Turk, through which the King, the Cardinal, and
thirty thousand more, lost their lives. When I think how worse than
barbarians, the French-men dealt with the Waldenenses, and so did
the Spaniards with the Moors, and how the English hunted the poor
Irish: and how Duke d'Alva persecuted the Belgians: and how in the
Low-countries, Predestination got the vantage of Free-will: and how
Rochel was circumvented by the Reformadoes, and how in England the
Presbyterians do cast out the Bishops, their tyrannical brethren,
&c. When I consider those, and many more such cruel changes, and no
bettering, but all to establish tyranny in other forms and fashions,
then I think O white devil, O Tyranipocrit, how impious art thou: O
thou old serpent, thou dost change thy old hide, but thou wilt not
leave thy old tyrannical nature. And if tyrants must make us slaves,
what do we care what names they have, call them Kings, Bishops,
Senators, Soldiers, &c. Tyrants, if they will exercise tyrannical
power, it makes no matter what names they have, if the King call his
slave, a subject, and the slave call his tyrant a King, what are we
bettered by that? call yourselves and us, what you will, so you do
administer Justice indifferently, without any respect of persons,
because justice exalteth a Nation: and what can be more just, than
to give unto every man that which God, nature, and reason, hath
allotted him? O to give unto every one with discretion, so near as
may be, an equal portion of earthly goods, to maintain him in this
life, that is the greatest actual justice that man can do.

This is perfect charity, & Charitas non excidit, nec potest
quidem:("Charity does not pass away, nor can it") and therefore if
we will work by any other rule, we must err, and the more we do
strive to do justice, before this equal foundation be first laid,
the further we shall be from either doing or knowing what justice
is; for he that doth justice partially, is an enemy to justice. The
rule of God in Christ, is to love thy neighbour as thyself, ergo if
thou doest love to be rich, then thou must labour to have thy poor
neighbours so rich as thou wouldst be. I need not reiterate this
matter so often, if men would confess the truth, for all reasonable
men do know, that this is the right rule; but self-love, and an
evil, long-continued custom, pride, the devil, Tyranipocrit,
partiality, the world, and all impious persons, in this cause do
make war against God and nature, Christ and reason, against truth
and justice, against their own consciences, and the welfare of
mankind here and hereafter. O partiality and hypocrisy, how do you
deceive men through new formes, and respect of persons. When the new
tyrants which have driven out the old, are in all things so bad or
worse than the old tyrants were, only they have, or do pretend to
have a better faith, and a new form of tyranny, and in all their
other practises, they are worse than their predecessors, then it
seemeth that the devil is grown young again, or else he did cast out
himself, that so he might return again with more power, to commit
more strange impieties. And therefore all you which have cast out
any old Tyrants, consider seriously what you have yet to do, and so
near as you can, make and maintain an equality of all goods and
lands, for that is your duty, which if you will not perform, you are
worse than the old tyrants, because you did pretend a bettering,
which they did not.

And now to better some, and not all things which you are able, God
no doubt will esteem of your Reformation, as he did of Saul's and
Jehu's proceedings, and therefore remember, it is not new forms, but
a new condition that we do want, we have no need of tyranny in a new
fashion, but of a changing of manners and customs, which are evil
and prejudicial to the Commonwealth, into such as may be beneficial
to all mankind: for a bettering in some, and not in all things that
you can, that is a double sin, and therefore do all that you can, or
nothing at all, for God will not be mocked. It is because the rich
do rob the poor of their necessary maintenance, that pride and
gluttony doth so abound in the rich. Now in this cause, I take God,
who is the impartial Judge of all causes, to judge this cause,
concerning an equality of worldly goods for men to live on: and for
men's consciences, let God alone with them, for he alone knoweth how
to deal with them. And therefore all you Tyrants and Hypocrites, if
you will not labour and be willing to do the will of God, according
to the rule and example of Christ, but will continue in your
tyrannizing, O then, as you tender your own salvation, forsake
Christ in words, as you have done in works, and do not play the
Hypocrite any longer; but if you hate his nature, then cast off his
name, because simulata sanctitas, est duplex iniquitas.("To pretend
holiness, is doubly sinful").

 Now if this doctrine seem strange, it is because the impious world
hateth it, and maintaineth the contrary, which is a sure rule to
know that this is the right rule, and we must not follow a
multitude, to do evil; but if you will not approve of it, because it
is according to the revealed will of God in Christ, yet consider
that it is contrary to corrupt nature, and therefore approve of it,
and maintain it, for both those rules are sure rules to find out the
right rule; for God loveth the truth, and corrupt nature hateth the
truth. Now to love our neighbours as ourselves, the rule is always
in us, we need not ride, nor go to church, nor hear Preachers, nor
read books, to attain to this knowledge: Every man knoweth how much
he loveth himself, and what he most desireth, and if a man's desire
be good, then that is the rule by which he should build up his
neighbour; but if his desire be evil, then it is no rule for him nor
them, and therefore we must first be good, or no doing good can help
us, therefore will well, and all is well. And therefore when any
offices, or officers, are become prejudicial to the Commonwealth,
let them be willingly forsaken: yea, and Magistrates if need be,
must part with their lives and souls, if it were possible, for the
benefit of the people: and if in this cause you will not imitate
Christ, remember Moses, Paul, Lycurgus, Otho, Codros, and more
worthy men: some of them have lost their lives for the safety of the
people, and others have wished themselves to be separated from God,
for the salvation of the people.

It is not enough, that some Tyrants be removed, but all tyranny must
freely be forsaken, for it is alike evil, to do good with an evil
will, as it is to do evil with a good will. O consider this, all you
rich Tyrants, you that have robbed the poor, and yet you will not
hang yourselves, neither will ye permit the law, nor the hang-man to
hang you, and which is worst of all, you will not make satisfaction,
by restoring again unto the poor, their goods which you have
wrongfully taken from them.

And now for conclusion, consider that God made all the world for
man, to that end that man should give his desire unto God, for
before the creation of all things were in God, immutably without
change, operation, or alteration, as now they have, and so they were
all good, but not so good as God would have them, and therefore God
would let out himself in the creatures, because he would have a
free-willing sacrifice, and therefore he did set man free; for so as
he was in God uncreated, he could not give unto God that which God
had not then given unto him, which was his free-will. Before the
creation all things were in God, and when the creation shall be
consumed or refined, then all things must return again unto God; but
during the time of this natural dying life, it is not so, for so
long as a man liveth, or rather dieth in this world, he hath a free 
mutable power, to will both good and evil. I think no man can deny
this, but then comes in that great question, to wit, What Adam lost,
and what Christ found for us. What we lost in Adam, and found in
Christ, God knoweth; but this, through God's grace, I know, that
every man hath a willing desire, whether it was taken from him in
Adam, and given him again in Christ, God knoweth; but now man hath
it: I mean a desire, and although he cannot do good, yet he can love
good, if he will, and if he cannot shun evil, yet he can loathe it,
if he will, and so as a man desireth, so God accepteth, and so he
disposeth of man, not as he hath done, but as he desireth to have
done, and to do if he could, for the works are God's, but the
willing is man's, because God gave it him: And God doth not always
work that good in us which we desire, for then we should have no
strivings against the evil, as we have, but God always accepteth the
good will and desire of any man. Now those which do maintain an
absolute predestination in God of man, without man's consent, would
have men in this life to be so in God, as they were before the
creation, which is the greatest absurdity that ever was maintained:
but of this matter I have treated before.
And now for a farewell, I would desire all noble Princes and
Prelates, and all superfluous rich persons, to consider the vileness
of wilful and examplary sins, and from henceforth, if the devil must
be served with pride, tyranny, hypocrisy, &c. yet hereafter let him
serve himself, or let the poor cursed people which know not the Law,
serve him, and let them have their dinners served in with trumpets,
as you have, and let them ride in coaches drawn by six or eight
horses, and let them force men to go to war and kill one another,
and let them pardon murderers, and hang poor, and maintain rich
thieves, and let them have their servants and slaves to kneel unto
them, and let them live idle, or let their actions be worse than
idleness. O let the poor people do such things another while, and do
you be poor, and behold such manners in them, as they have a long
time beheld in you, and then it may be that you will loathe them in
the poor, and be ashamed of them in yourselves. O let the poor
people do such things, if they must be done; but for Kings and
Queens, Lords and Ladies, gentle-men and gentle-women, Holy Fathers,
gracious Bishops, learned Divines, such as command and teach others,
for such to be slaves to sin and the devil, to help him to maintain
his proud impious kingdom, that is the greatest shame in the world.
O consider that you are Christian rulers, and therefore your lives
and manners should best accord with the life and manners of Christ.
O search diligently all the whole History of Christ, and see if you
can find that he had such things done unto him, as you will have
done to you, or if he did cause such things to be done to others, as
you cause to be done to others: See if he had his dinners served in
with trumpets, or if he had his Cup-bearer to kneel unto him, or if
he had so many vain titles of honour, or so many proud blazons of
arms, or if he had his coach drawn by six or eight horses, or if he
had so many thousands a year to spend, more than his poor
neighbours, and so in all other things concerning his and your
deportment. O if you could find a History that would conform Christ
to you, for you will not be conformable unto him, except you change
your manners, surely such a book in these days, would be more
esteemed then the Old or the New Testament; But if you cannot find
such a History, then leave your pride, and follow Christ in
humility, if you will be Christian Rulers; but if you will not leave
your pride, and all your wilful sins beside, then resign your ruling
power, which you have usurped over Christians, to others, whose
lives and manners do better accord with the life and manners of
Christ, than yours do.

Now for the truth concerning this matter, let any man confute me, if
he can, if not, then let all reasonable men labour to effect, that
which God and all good men do affect: and for equality of riches, I
suppose that evil-minded men will say, that it is impossible that
every man should have, and hold alike portion of earthly goods. To
which I answer as I have done before: That if the Rulers of this
world, cannot make all the poor rich, yet they can the richest
poorer, for their sin is not so much, in that some men are too poor,
as it is in that some are too rich. The Magistrates duty is, equally
to divide and share such goods, as God hath given them a power to
dispose of, and when they have done that, then they have done their
duty. O impious world, thou art not so much to be blamed, because
there are abuses, but because thou maintainest them. Do thou take
away the superfluous riches from the rich, and divide them amongst
the poor: first limit the goods of the rich at ten, twenty, thirty,
forty, or a hundred pounds a year, and then share their overplus
amongst them that have lesser means, then thou hast left the other,
and then see if the poor have more goods then the rich: now if one
have so much as another, then it is done, if not, then make a new
division again and again, so long till thou hast made them all alike
rich, and yet that is not enough, but once in a year, or oftener,
thou must examine every man's estate, to see if they have not made
their goods uneven, and if they have, then thou must make it even
again.

This is not so hard to be done, and this is plain English, and very
good reason, and this would easily be done, if all men did love
their poor neighbours as themselves, and if all our Judges, Lawyers,
Projectors, Proctors, Plotters, and all such like creatures, and if
all Magistrates in every town, would employ themselves and all their
power, to make and maintain this law, and once in a year to make all
even, as they do now to make it uneven.

O how many old and new Courts of Injustice are there in England, and
all to deceive truth, with a feigned show of justice, and who but
the devil, hath profit by our Court-holders? They call them Courts
of Justice; but God knoweth if there be one just court in all the
land, for till that just foundation be laid, all rules and
ordinances whatsoever they be, are nothing else but tyrannical
injunctions, for the rich thieves do make a combination, and it a
Law, to hang a poor man if he do steal, when they have wrongfully
taken from him all his maintenance; yea, those impious thieves which
do rob the poor, do make laws, as they call them, to hang the poor
people, when they themselves do deserve double hanging.

But now I would speak to them, which I fear will not much regard it,
I mean our Divine Philosophers, and would desire them to consider
seriously what they have to do: for, as I have said before, it is
not enough for them to preach and teach truth, but they must preach
and teach the most necessary truth, and they must reprove all
persons according to their sins, without any partiality, so well the
King, as the beggar, and Tyranipocrit, as the poorest slave, and if
he do not, but willingly permit partiality through fear or favour to
sway his affections, as they use to do, and so to be silent at the
sins of great men, and yet condemn the poor for smaller offences,
then all the truths which they have taught, will be reckoned unto
them for lies, like Souls obedience, and Jehu's zeal, for they did
some of that which God commanded them. For Saul he killed the poor
Amalekites, but he would not kill their proud King, and Jehu he
murdered Ahab's sons, and burnt Baal's priests, &c. for so much was
for his own profit, but Jeroboam's calves and Tyranipocrit, Jehu
taketh no care to root them out. O you Divine Philosophers, you do
know what I should say concerning this matter, and you know how to
comment upon the histories of these men: & then apply them to
yourselves, and therefore strive to do all your duty, which is to
reprove impartially, and to discover the white devil, which is
Tyranipocrit freely, and then no doubt, but you shall have of the
world so good entertainment, as Zacharias the son of Barachias had,
and he was slain between the temple and the altar.

And for our Potentates, I do assure them, and if they have any
consciences, they do know it better already then I can tell it them,
that the best service that they can do, is to give unto every man
with discretion, an equal portion of temporal goods, and when that
is done, then they may go to Church and sacrifice, if they will, but
not before: this is the right rule, and this is the fulfilling of
the law of love, which is the law of God in Christ: this is perfect
charity, & charitas non excidit, nec potest quidem, ("Charity does
not pass away, nor can it") charity cannot err, for when it is in
distress, then it looseth its self in God: & consider this, all you
proud, hypocritical, uncharitable persons, which do carry your
impious sins to Church, to sacrifice with them there: & remember
that, Cor vel solum orat, & vita innoxia plusquam os,("Either the
heart alone prays, and life is virtuous as well as the mouth") the
object of charity should be our neighbours misery: & then, what doth
an uncharitable, superfluous, rich person in the Church, before he
have parted his goods with the poor: O hypocritical impiety, thou
detainest the means which God hath ordained to help the poor in this
life, and yet thou ridest to church, and prayest, or rather temptest
God to help the poor miraculously, for thou hast, and wilt hold the
means wherewith they should be holpen, and although they do know
that simulated sanctity, is a double iniquity, yet they do stick to
that other saying, which is, qui nescit simulare, nescit vivere; he
that doth not know how to dissemble, doth not know to live: &
Christian world, how contrary art thou to Christ! nothing can be
more ridiculous to the world, then the rule of Christ. Who will give
his coat after his cloak, and turn one cheek to be smitten, after
the other? Who will sell all to follow Christ? &c. but if we may
have wealth and honour to be Christians, if we may rule for gain,
and teach for hire, and have our lusts for laws, and play the tyrant
six days, and the hypocrites on the Sunday, &c. such a Christianity
pleaseth the world: we will be Christians of our own making, and we
will have Christ in forms and fashions, in health, wealth and
liberty, at times, and in places, &c. & consider wherefore at this
present time, the world is so out of order, is it for want of Laws
or Lawyers? No certainly: for the world had never more Politicians,
and worldly wise men, then it hath now; but because they will not do
that which God in their hearts and consciences, tells them is right:
therefore they with their too much wit, and too little wisdome,
spoil all the world, and all this is, because superfluous arts are
more esteemed, than needful labour, and because a painted truth, or
a fair lie, is more regarded then simple truth, and because in these
days men have too much faith, and too little love, and because the
white devil pleaseth the impious world, much better than the black,
and because all impious persons do hate God in Christ, and yet they
will not forsake his name, although they hate his nature, for they
will have Christ, not as a Lord to rule them, but as a slave, so
they will rule him, which is the greatest injury that man can offer
unto God, for to keep Christ in a man's mouth, and to hate him in
his heart, and to do all things contrary to his nature: what greater
impiety can there be imagined? and yet so or worse, doth
Tyranipocrit deal with Christ, and therefore all you which have most
power on earth, strive with all your might, to cast out
Tyranipocrit, with his Viceroy, Partiality, or never expect that God
will bless your proceedings. God is an all-sufficient helper, but he
will not be mocked, neither will he help, where there is no need of
his help: First we must do all that we can in every respect, to help
ourselves and all mankind, with that power which God hath given unto
us already, and when in all things we have done all that we can,
then we may freely go unto God for more power. We cannot call again
yesterday, nor measure eternity, nor undo that which is done, such
things are for God, and not for us; but to give our goods to the
poor so long, till they are so rich as we are, that is for us, and
that God doth require of us. And now I will review and consider what
I have treated of in this Treatise, and so conclude.

The chiefest matter, and the principal points of the same, are
those: That no predestined sins, can hurt man concerning his eternal
salvation, except man will, and that all our thoughts, words, and
works are predestined, and that in God's esteem there is no sin, but
an evil will, and the desire of an evil heart, that would, if he
could, do something contrary to the nature and revealed will of God
in Christ, and that God's predestination is no forcing power, but a
prescience and a disposing of man, so, and according as he hath in
this life delighted in good or evil, and so as he hath, or doth
desire to be used as an instrument for God, or the devil; for it is
contrary to the nature of God, to force the desire of man, neither
doth God give more grace unto one man to be saved, then he doth to
all, and every man, for if he should, then God must be a partial
respecter of men, which were blasphemy to affirm. And concerning our
passive Religion, I have not erred in that, because for that I have
not propounded any rule: for, Christianismus non cadit sub regulus;
("Christianity does not fall under the Law [of Moses]") and
therefore let every man leave all his wilful sins, and then let him
go to God in the power of Christ, which is in every man's heart and
conscience, and there he will, if they will, through his Holy
Spirit, teach them which way he will have them to follow him, and
what he and we in us, will have him to do for us, and with us.

And concerning our actual Religion, I have showed wherein that
consisteth, which is, To give an equal portion of worldly goods unto
every man, and now I say again, as I have said before, that before
any good can be done in church, or Commonwealth, that Partiality
must with an unanimous consent, be put to death, and he must be
buried in an oblivious grave, and we must borrow Pope Paul's great
stone, and lay that upon his vile carcass, so that he may never rise
again, to do any more mischief in the Commonwealth.

And for my Intelligence, I have partly showed the great damage, that
mankind do sustain by their mercenary dealing, concerning divine
matters: and concerning faith and love, I have done the like, and I
have partly showed what an impious sin it is, for an evil man to do,
or seem to do good: and for the Sabbath, because we are Christians,
I would have six days more added unto it, that so it might be a
complete Sabbath.
Those are the principal heads of this subject, and now I say, that I
think that it is bad, for a Preacher to take wages of those, which
he in the Name of God ought to reprove. It is worser to prefer
anything before love; but it is worst of all, to teach evil men to
do good. And now if any one will quarrel this doctrine, I am a poor
Artist, and a poorer Sophister, yet when all false glosses shall be
out of date, and no language shall be understood, but that of the
heart, when Partiality shall have no power, and respect of persons
shall not know the King from the beggar: when gold and glory shall
not be regarded, and when men shall have nothing but their
consciences, to cloth them withal: when we shall all appear naked,
before the Judgement-seat of God in Christ, then this poor
contradicting, and contradicted labour of mine, shall answer for
itself.

And now for a farewell, according to that knowledge which God hath
given unto me, concerning his way with mankind in Jesus Christ: I
say, that sin is no longer sin, than it is delighted in, and to
delight in anything but God, that is sin. He that loveth God without
man, he hateth God in man: and he that loveth God, and not man, he
hateth them both. The prayer of the mouth, is good: of works,
better: of the heart, best of all. It is bad for a poor man to sin,
worse for a rich, but worst of all for a Ruler. He that sinneth
through fear, doth ill: through favour, worse: through malice, worst
of all. He that seeketh places to worship in, and times to pray at,
is a local-worshipper, and a time-server. He that teacheth a partial
God, and an artificial Religion, erreth in both alike. He that
saith, that the mercy of God endureth for ever, and yet that it may
fail a man in this life, if he seeketh it, maintaineth an absurd
paradox. He that maintaineth that God hath predestined young
children to damnation, is an uncharitable person. They that will not
teach the most necessary truth themselves, nor permit others that
would, are worse than that dog, that would not permit the horse to
eat the hay. He that goeth to church to learn the will of God, doth
well, but he that is, what he may be if he will, he hath chosen the
better part. He that teacheth an absolute predestination in God of
man, without man, he cannot honour God, nor comfort man. He that
teacheth a partial God, loveth partiality, and that is his god. He
that doth not endeavour to discover hypocrisy, he seemeth to be an
hypocrite himself. He that commandeth and teacheth another to be
good, and yet himself will be evil, he is that impious Tyranipocrit.
He that will hate me for any truth that God hath herein revealed
through me, if he would truly forsake the world, the flesh, and the
devil, and his ego sum,("I am") then it may be he would be of
another mind.
Now I take God to witness, that I have not written anything, through
hate to any person; for I do not hate Tyrants, but their tyrannies,
and now I say with Cicero: Non nobis solum natisumus, ortisque
nostri partem patria vendicat, partem parentes, partem amici.( "Not
for us alone are we born; our country, our parents, our friends,
have a share in us") But to pass by parents, country, and friends, I
will conclude with them noble Grecians, which said: I will maintain
the truth against all men. So help me God.
Verax parit odium, Deo soli gloria.
("The truth produces hatred, glory is due only to God")
FINIS
The Mournful Cries of Many Thousand Poor Tradesmen
(Anonymous)

Source: http://oll.libertyfund.org/pages/leveller-tracts-9#9.21

The mournful Cries of many thousand Poor Tradesmen,
who are ready to famish through decay of Trade.
Or, the warning Tears of the Oppressed.
(22 Jan 1648)

OH that the cravings of our stomachs could be heard by the
Parliament and city! Oh that the tears of our poor famishing babes
were bottled! Oh that their tender mothers' cries for bread to feed
them were engraven in brass! Oh that our pined carcasses were open
to every pitiful eye! Oh that it were known, that we sell our beds
and clothes for bread! Oh our hearts faint, and we are ready to
swoon in the top of every Street.

O you Members of Parliament and rich men in the city, that are at
ease, and drink wine in bowls, and stretch your selves upon beds of
down, you that grind our faces and flay off our skins, will no man
amongst you regard, will no man behold our faces black with sorrow
and famine, is there none to pity. The sea-monster draws out the
breast and gives suck to their young ones, and are our rulers become
cruel like the ostrich in the wilderness, Lament. 4. 3.

OH ye Great men of ENGLAND, will not (think you) the righteous GOD
behold our affliction, doth not he take notice that you devour us as
if our flesh were bread? are not most of you either parliament-men,
committee-men, customers, excise-men, treasurers, governors of towns
and castles, or commanders in the army, officers in those dens of
robbery the courts of law? and are not your kinsmen and allies,
collectors of the King's revenue, or the Bishops' rents, or
sequestrators? what then are your ruffling silks and velvets, and
your glittering gold and silver laces, are they not the sweat of our
brows, and the wants of our backs and bellies?

It's your Taxes, customes, and excise, that compels the country to
raise the price of food, and to buy nothing from us but mere
absolute necessaries; and then you of the city that buy our work,
must have your tables furnished, and your cups overflow; and
therefore will give us little or nothing for our work, even what
you[Note 1] please, because you know we must sell for moneys to set
our families on work, or else we famish: Thus our flesh is that
whereupon you rich men live, and wherewith you deck and adorn your
selves. Ye great men, is it not your plenty and abundance which
begets you pride and riot? and do not your pride beget ambition, and
your ambition faction, and your faction these civil broils; what
else but your ambition and faction continue our distractions and
oppressions? Is not all the controversy whose Slaves the poor shall
be? Whether they shall be the King's vassals, or the Presbyterians,
or the Independent factions? and is not the contention nourished,
that you whose houses are full of the spoils of your country, might
be secure from accounts, while there is nothing but distraction, and
that by the tumultuousness of the people under prodigious
oppression, you might have fair pretences to keep up an army, and
garrisons, and that under pretence of necessity you may uphold your
arbitrary government by committees, &c.

Have you not upon such pretences brought an army into the bowels of
the city, and now exchange doth rise already beyond sea, and no
merchants beyond sea will trust their goods hither, and our own
merchants convey their [Note 2] estates from hence, so there is
likely to be no importing of goods, and then there will be no
exporting, and then our trade will be utterly lost, and our families
perish as it were in a moment.

O ye Parliament men hear our dying cry. Settle the common-wealth,
settle the common-wealth! Strive not who shall be greatest until you
be all confounded. You may if you will presently determine where the
supreme power resides, and settle the just common freedoms of the
nation, so that all parties may equally receive justice and enjoy
their right, and every one may be as much concerned as other to
defend those common freedoms; you may presently put down your
arbitrary committees and let us be governed by plain written laws in
our own tongue, and pay your ministers of justice out of a common
treasury, that every one may have justice freely and impartially.

You have in your hands the King's, Queen's, and Princes' revenue,
and Papists' lands, and bishops', and deans', and chapters' lands,
and sequestered lands, at least to the value of eighteen hundred
thousand pounds by the year. Which is at least five hundred Thousand
pounds a year more then will pay the Navy and all the Army, and the
forces which need to be kept up in England and Ireland; and out of
that the Kingdom's debts would be paid yearly; whereas now you run
further into debt daily, and pay one thousand pounds by the day at
least for use money; besides you may if you will proclaim liberty,
for all to come and discover to a committee of disengaged men,
chosen out of every county, one for a county to discover to them
what moneys and treasure, your own members and your sequestrators,
&c. have in their hands, and you may by that means find many
millions of money to pay the public debts. You may find 30000l. in
Mr. Richard Darley’s hand 25000l. in Mr. Thorpe's hands[Note3], a
member of yours who first proclaimed Sir John Hotham traitor. And
thus you may take off all taxes presently, and so secure peace, that
trading may revive and our pining, hungry, famishing families be
saved.

And O ye soldiers who refused to disband, because you would have
justice and freedom, who cried till the earth echoed justice,
justice; forget not that cry, but cry speedily for peace and
justice, louder than ever. There is a large petition of some pitiful
men that’s now abroad, which contains all our desires, and were that
granted in all things, we should have trading again, and should not
need to beg our bread, though those men have so much mercy as they
would have none to cry in the streets for bread.

Oh though you be soldiers, show bowels of mercy and pity to a hunger
starved people; go down to the Parliament, desire them to consume
and trifle away no more time, but offer your desires for us in that
large petition, and cry Justice, Justice; Save, save, save the
perishing people; O cry thus till your importunity make them hear
you.

O Parliament men, and soldiers! Necessity dissolves all laws and
government, and Hunger will break through stone walls, tender
mothers will sooner devour you, than the fruit of their own womb,
and hunger regards no swords nor cannons. It may be some great
oppressors intends tumults that they may escape in a crowd, but your
food may then be wanting as well as ours, and your arms will be hard
diet. O hark, hark at our doors how our children cry Bread, bread,
bread, and we now with bleeding hearts, cry, once more to you, pity,
pity, an oppressed enslaved people: carry our cries in the large
petition to the Parliament, and tell them if they be still deaf the
tears of the oppressed will wash away the foundations of their
houses. Amen, Amen so be it.
Notes

 [1] And since the late Lord Mayor Adams, you have put in execution
an illegal, wicked Decree of the Common Council; whereby you have
taken our goods from us, if we have gone to the Innes to sell them
to countrymen; and you have murdered some of our poor wives that
have gone to inns to find countrymen to buy them.

[2] The merchants have already kept back from the Tower, many
hundred thousand pounds, and no bullion is brought into The tower,
so that money will be more scarce daily.

[3] Mr. William Lenthall, Speaker of the House, to cover his
cozenage, gave two and twenty thousand pounds to his servant Mr.
Cole, to purchase Land in his own name, though for his use; which he
did, and then died suddenly, and the land fell to his son, and the
widow having married a lawyer, keeps the land for the child's use,
and saith he knows not that his predecessor received any money from
the Speaker, and now Master Speaker sueth in Chancery for the Land.
A hundred such discoveries might be made.



The Baiting of the Great Bull of Bashan:
Richard Overton
Source: http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/2601#lf1542-06_head_065

Title Page
THE BAITING OF THE
GREAT BULL OF BASHAN
Unfolded and Presented to the Affecters and approvers of the
PETITION of the 11 Sept. 1648.
Especially, to the Citizens of London usually meeting at the Whale-
bone in LOTHBURY behind the Royal Exchange,
Commonly (though unjustly) styled LEVELLERS.
By Richard Overton
Close-prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.
Psal. 22. 12. 13. Psal. 68. 28. 30. Many Bulls have compassed me:
strong Bulls of Bashan have beset me round. They opened their mouths
against me as a ravening and a roaring Lion. Strengthen O God that
which thou hast wrought for us. Rebuke the Company ot Spearmen, the
multitude of the Bulls, with the Calves of the people till every one
submit. Scatter thou the people that delight in war.

Imprinted at London, 1649.
Gentlemen,

BEING necessitated (by some over-sudden misdeemings from amongst
you) some few days since to assert and avow the continuance of my
integrity to those sure foundations of peace and freedom, offered to
the people of this Nation under the form or draught of an Agreement
of the People, May 1. 1649.

It hath happened with me, as with other adventurers into the public:
All palates are not pleased with that Sheet intitled Overton's
Defiance etc. yet falleth it out no other wise then I expected; it
seems many are weak and as many are offended, and chiefly with that
figurative passage of the Bull; especially at the word pox; but they
need not much, did they but also take into their thoughts, the
adulterous and wicked generation, on whom that metaphor is made
good, a people whose heart is waxed gross, and their ears dull of
hearing, having closed their eyes, least at any time they should
see, hear, understand and be converted.

To such a people Christ spake not but in Parables: why then to such
might not I use the Figure of the Bull of Bashan, or rather of the
bull-baiting, with all the circumstances Emphasis Gratia thereunto
appertaining? But there's uncivil language, such as becometh not the
Gospel of Christ. I answer (my Brethren) he or she (how pure or nice
soever to the eye) that is not guilty of real gross incivilities
both in word and deed, let him or her throw the first stone at that
seeming incivility, for at most you can make it but so in
appearance, and no like is the same. The figure is but the shell;
will you not crack the shell to take out the kernel? pass through
the Parable to the Moral thereof? Aye, but it jeers and that's not
the language of Canaan; and be it so: Is it not recorded that Elijah
mocked the Priests of Baal, and said, Cry aloud for he is god,
either he is talking or he is pursuing his Enemy, or he is in a
journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be waked.

Sure this was a jeer to some purpose: here Elijah bid them cry aloud
etc. and 'tis justified; then why now may I not cry ha-looe-ha-looe,
etc. and not be condemned? What if I had turned fiddler in that
paper, Christ himself useth the simile of a piper, saying, we have
piped unto you and ye have not danced (Mat. II. 17.) And truly I
think we (the four poor sea-green fiddlers in the Tower) may take up
the same saying, We have piped unto you ever since the first of May,
the most pleasant tune of the AGREEMENT of the PEOPLE, but ye have
not danced up so roundly as so sprightly a tune deserves. But you
will say (it may be) I am still in the language of Ashdod (as
perchance you may take it) or that this dialect is of consanguinity
with the other: Tis true; things (however in themselves) are to
others as they are taken. He that should take the Parable of Dives
and Lazarus in the bare letter (how known canonical soever in its
own genuine sense) he must explode it the Scriptures and at best
give it but a place in the Apocrypha, for the Letter or character
thereof (if that must be the sense) is contradictory to the body of
divinity, except you will say, to believe that the rich glutton and
the beggar left not their eyes, tongues, fingers, etc. in the grave
is Orthodox. And so of my metaphor of the bull, the use of the word
genitals, pox, etc. you may say is uncivil in the letter, but how
uncivil I pray in the moral? Know ye not that whosoever shall but
fasten on the genitors or parents of the peoples ruin, so, as to
pinch the grand imposters and deluders of the times, he burns his
fingers, is smit with the Morbus Gallicus of the enslaving sword;
For, what's he, that is precisely honest to the Commonwealth, that
can scape persecution? As it hath been of old and is still in things
spiritual, He that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution; so he now, that will but faithfully discharge his duty
to the public, shall be sure to be cast upon the fiery trial, that
dog's mouth (as after the metaphor) shall be sure to be burnt, and
tis well he scapes hanging as the time goes.

Now I pray, to how much incivility doth this amount? Is it so worthy
your second condemnings as it may not be indulged with a favourable
eye? Love envyeth not, it judgeth the best; I had thought with two
or three merry jigs to attempt an uproar in all the laughers in
England, but I see you are a company of dull souls, mirth with you
is like a shoulder of mutton to a sick horse, or worse, you straight
convert into melancholy, trample it under your feet, turn again, and
are (some of you) ready to rent me; He that had cast Pearls before
Swine could have expected no less.

Indeed, you looked (many of you) upon me as in a sound at my close
imprisonment; but truly, when I came abroad with that ignorant
sheet, it found you in a dead sleep, as men in a trance, portending,
as if the champions of the eleventh of September had been sparrow-
blasted with the business of Burford: and I essayed, to put you out
of your dumps, and mind you of the Agreement of the People as the
centre, or ne plus ultra of all our engagements; but it seems it
proved but as music to the house of mourning; yet however, it hath
so far gained its end; if by it you will not be provoked to your
duties equally with us, it hath awaked you into a little discourse
pro and con, though it be but to point at my weaker parts, and
that's better than nothing, if rightly applied, for ex nihilo nil
fit: by this you may take notice of your own infirmities in so wire-
drawing of mine: Certainly, it may provoke you to consider of what
spirits you are, not unlike such as strain at a gnat and swallow a
camel, that usually in any discourse pass over what concerneth
themselves, though of never so serious and weighty consideration in
point of their duties, and betake themselves wholly to spy out the
spots and infirmities thereof, and of the author, and fall foul
thereupon, and so sleight their duties, stifle and smother the thing
that is good: And now (my tender friends) I pray tell me what spirit
is this? 'tis a foul spirit, away with't for shame; go purge, go
purge; one pennyworth of the Agreement of the people, with a little
good resolution taken morning and evening, will work out this
corruption, cleanse and purify the blood, and put a period to this
distinction of parties, allay the feud and division of the people,
and state us in firm freedom, safety and peace; and then there will
be none of this catching and carping, this lying in wait to snap at
infirmities; and till the Agreement be settled, this is not to be
expected.

I have known, when things as unserious as my last sheet, dressed out
in the youthful attire of mirth, hath found a very large acceptance
not only with you, but even with this generation of men, that are
now the Enemies of the People; and I think if I have not forgot the
Arraignment of Persecution, and some other things of that nature,
that I myself have been one of those who have had the honour of such
acceptances: But O tempora! O Mores! how few are the same yesterday
and to-day? success changeth men's minds as the wind doth the
weathercock.

But (my friends) your gravity (which I am afraid hath too much of
Melancholy in it) cannot more move me to a more serious Dialect,
then my own affections incline me, I prize both in their places; as
I affect the one, I respect the other: for sure, modest mirth
tempered with due gravity makes the best composition, most natural
and harmonious: God in the temper of our natures as he hath made us
earth, so hath he enlivened that dull lump with the element of fire,
which is the forma formans, the giver and preserver of being and
motion, and the original of that habit of laughter: Therefore mirth
sure is of Divine instinct, and I think I may boldly say, more
natural than melancholy, and less savours of the curse. Nature in
its creation was pure and good, void of corruption, or anything
obnoxious or destructive: all misery and mischiefs came in with the
fall, as a curse upon the creature, as death, sorrow, tears, pains,
etc, in which number you may reckon melancholy, for 'tis both
unnatural and destructive to nature, and so fitly reputed a branch
of the Curse, and 'tis the root of the root of all wickedness,
covetousness; for where have you seen a melancholy man that's not
covetous? and a covetous man seldom proves a good Commonwealth's
man: yet this ill weed is gotten into so religious an esteem that
all our Religion is turned into Melancholy; that, he that cannot
whine, pipe, weep and hang down his head like a Bulrush and seem sad
unto men, is profane, light, hath not anything of God in him, is a
Reprobate, is condemned and censured of all, as neither fit for
Church nor Commonwealth; And thus comes it to pass; my mirth is
heightened to such a transgression, even to cast me under the
present anathema of the now godly party.

But my Brethren of the Sea green Order, take a little wine with your
water, and I'll take a little water with my wine, and it will temper
us to the best constitution. I wonder what meaneth your late
dullness of motion, appearing as men in a dream, or as if you were
another sort of people then the Authors, promoters, approvers and
presenters of the Petition of the 11 of Sept. that people use to be
the most active and vigorous People in England for public Freedom
and safety, they use to fear no colours, the more they were pressed
down the more they pressed forward, and the more they increased; few
months have passed that they have not in point of Common-Right
produced some eminent peace: but your heads have drooped of late,
nothing hath appeared, not one punctilio in supportation and
promotion of the Agreement; deep silence hath covered you; fie, fie;
be not cowed out of your abilities and principles by the present
rage of the wicked: compare but the strength of your principles and
the strength of an army, and tell me which is stronger: How many
persecuting powers have fallen before your principles as Dagon
before the Ark? and who hath been able to stand before them, even
from Episcopacy to this whited and Jezebel-like painted
Independency? Think you, that this unparalleled tyranny, under this
new name, more fierce and cruel then his fellows, trampling the
residue under its feet, that it shall scape the vengeance of Gods
wrath more than its Predecessors? no, no; God's motto is Semper
Idem. Be not therefore dismayed or daunted at the height and 
magnificence of this insolent faction, the new sons of perdition,
that are set up to deceive if it were possible the very Elect.

It is your own evil and weaknesses and of those that are professors
and pretenders to the same principles with you, that our cause is
thus under a cloud: would you all act together, all suffer together,
all be as one; and not thus (as some amongst you commonly use) hang
back in the adversity, and be seen in the van of prosperity (not
daring when the storm rageth, to peep into the tempest for fear of
being blown away) we should not be at this pass with our Cause.

Where there is anything of venture or hazard, while 'tis in the
embryo, who's not then busy and forward? but when 'tis put upon the
personal test for execution, O then one hath bought a piece of
ground, and must be excused; another a yoke of oxen, and he must go
see them; and a third hath married a wife and therefore must please
her.

Friends, be not offended, this is a crime deserves your repentance;
I condemn you not all, it is but some few; A little Leaven you know
leaveneth the whole Lump; therefore do ye beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees, it much retardeth your motions and blasteth their
fruits; the public is a loser thereby, and your cause receiveth
damage: let those whom this pincheth, be thereby provoked to
amendment, it is worthy their care: For know you not, that it is
many hands make light work? If the stress or weight of the work be
laid upon one, or some 3 or 4, it must needs go on slowly: Why, is
not he that's most backward as forward as the best? it is his cause
as much as it is any man's, and thereto in duty as much obliged as
any. We are no more concerned than yourselves, 'tis but upon the
point of common duty (which binds all) to our Country, that we
suffer, and we count it our joy, for that we know we suffer for
well-doing, and though we perish in the work, our reward shall go
with us, for our Redeemer liveth, and that is our stay. Therefore
why stand you still, and are not provoked to this good emulation; be
as active and vigilant, and you shall share in the rejoicing, and
'tis such (I must tell you my Friends) is worth your having; Dulce
est pro patria pati [it is sweet to suffer for one's country].

Fear not those hills and mountains that are in your way; it is but
your want of faith that they are not removed, and cast into the
bottom of the sea: While you lift up your heads, are vigorous and
active, your principles present you as Steeples above the rest of
the people; every man is a strong barricado in the way of the Enemy,
and your principles flourish and get ground but when you are
fearful, are flat or remiss, then they retire and fade; for they are
said to increase or diminish, as they get or lose ground in the
understanding or acceptance of others: And this ever take as a sure
Rule, That the most virtuous and saving principles in a person most
undaunted and faithful, the more they are suppressed, and the more 
he is persecuted, the more they prosper and spread; of so mighty an
efficacy are his sufferings and testimony; as, in the case of Paul
is witnessed. Now I would (saith he) ye should understand, Brethren,
that the things that happened unto me, have fallen out rather to the
furtherance of the Gospel; so that my bonds in Christ are manifest
in all the Palace, and in all other places, and many of the Brethren
the Lord waxed confident by my bonds, are much-more bold to speak
the Word without fear: And this is all the persecutor gaineth upon
the undaunted asserters of righteousness; his own sword is turned
into his own bowels: persecution, as the viper, devoureth its own
parent. Then faint ye not (my friends) rouse up your heads and be
valiant; lift up your agreement of the people again, and put it upon
the public stage for promotion and subscription, and doubt not: What
man that there is amongst you, that is fearful and faint-hearted,
let him depart your meetings, and return to his house: the more the
Enemy stormeth, the more resolute and vigorous be ye; give them
enough of persecution; the more they persecute, the more do ye
appear, that your bands may be famous; for with fetters, irons, and
prison walls you may shake them to pieces; 'tis their tyrannies,
cruelties and oppressions must be their fall, through which you must
beat your way for the agreement.

I highly honour the fidelity and valour of Mr. Christopher Chisman,
who notwithstanding his imprisonment, his abuses and sufferings,
hath not wrapped up his talent in a napkin, but like a good and
faithful servant hath improved his imprisonment to the public
advantage; see his book, entitled, The Lamb Contending with the
Lion, 'tis worthy your imitation. Let your light (as his) so shine
before men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify your
cause; fear no dangers; the high and mighty cedars are never able to
overtop your principles; what though ambition hath mounted to the
title of Lord Governor (forsooth) hath not your vigorous principles
slain both the Lyon and the Bear, and shall not this uncircumcised
Philistine be as one of them?

But (my friends) I am informed those painted sepulchres of
Independency desire your compliance and treaty with them: But touch
pitch, and you shall be defiled, have nothing to do with them; touch
not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish with the using;
Remember the fidelity of Uriah to David: The Ark, and Israel, and
Judah abide in tents, and my Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord
are encamped in the open fields, shall I then go into my house, to
eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? As thou livest and as thy
soul liveth, I will not do this thing. Your Agreement lieth half
dead in the streets, your friends and its assertors are in prison,
with sentinels at their doors, denied the access and visitation of
friends, have the catch-poles of the Council of State enter their
chambers when they are in bed, with musketeers at their heels,
search, rifle, catch and take away anything that any way they may
wrest unto their bloody ends against them, as formerly, and now, the
other day (July 4.) they have done, and all the land mourneth and
groaneth at the calamity and miseries upon it for want of the
settlement of a just constitution of Government; and shall you go
unto them (those pests and vipers of the Nation) to treat or comply?
As you live and as your soul liveth you must not do this thing.

While your agreement is trod under their feet, your friends under
their cruel captivity, etc. let him that treateth with them amongst
you, or with any of their creatures, or keepeth any correspondency
with them, be to you as a reprobate, let the mark of Cain be set
upon him, that every finger may point at him for a traitor, and a
Judas to the people that meeteth him.

If a wife or child be like to be destroyed by fire, water, or
thieves, he accounts himself base that dare not venture his own life
to save theirs: our cause is of a more transcendent value, and we
suffer for it; and can you see it destroyed in us, and we for it,
and not be as natural as in a private relation? the lives,
liberties, and freedoms of all is contained in it? If your
neighbours ox or his ass were in a ditch, it is a shame to pass by
and not to help; and behold, here's all in the ditch, then, why
venture you not your time, your labours, your moneys, etc. to redeem
out all, our cause, the nation, and us in it, and with it.

I confess no people in England have been more vigorous, more active
and diligent, and more adventurous for the Cause of the Nation, and
for our Liberties than most of you: we have been as precious to you
as the apple of your eye; you have spared no hazard, no toil or time
to get us at freedom, and I hope we shall never be so ungrateful as
not thankfully to remember that service of Love: To you we are
obliged in the deepest obligations of any others in England.

But now considering the extreme necessity of your still constant
unwearied prosecution, I have emboldened myself to press you forward
to the good work of the people, that at this time you may be as
vigilant and industrious as at any other, that public life and
spirit may still be preserved and increased in our cause, even in
these worst of times.

And if I have been a little too sharp in my advice, and
admonishment, impute it I pray you to the heat of my zeal and ardent
affections to the promotion of that Cause; for truly to me it is as
the life of my life; without it I'm nothing, with it I live, and
therein am
Yours and every man's as my own
RICHARD OVERTON
From my close imprisonment in the tower of London 
July the ninth, 1649.
FINIS.



Muggletonians

A Transcendent Spiritual Treatise: 
John Reeve & Lodowick Muggleton

Source:
http://muggletonian.org.uk/Early%20Muggletonian/A%20Transcendent%20S
piritual%20Treatise.htm

Title Page


A
TRANSCENDENT
SPIRITUAL TREATISE,
UPON
SEVERAL HEAVENLY DOCTRINES,
FROM
THE HOLY SPIRIT OF THE MAN JESUS, THE ONLY TRUE GOD
SENT UNTO ALL HIS ELECT,

AS

A TOKEN OF HIS ETERNAL LOVE UNTO THEM BY THE HAND OF HIS OWN
PROPHET, BEING HIS LAST MESSENGER, AND WITNESS, AND FORERUNNER
OF THE VISIBLE APPEARING OF THE DISTINCT PERSONAL GOD IN POWER
AND GREAT GLORY, IN THE CLOUDS OF HEAVEN, WITH HIS TEN THOUSANDS
OF PERSONAL SAINTS, TO SEPARATE BETWEEN THE ELECT WORLD, AND THE
REPROBATE WORLD, TO ALL ETERNITY;

=====================

JOHN REEVE & LODOWICK MUGGLETON,

The two last Witnesses and true Prophets

OF
THE MAN JESUS, THE ONLY LORD OF LIFE AND GLORY, SENT BY HIS HOLY
SPIRIT TO SEAL THE FOREHEADS OF THE ELECT, AND THE FOREHEADS
OF THE REPROBATE, WITH THE ETERNAL SEALS OF LIFE AND DEATH;
AND SUDDENLY AFTER WE HAVE DELIVERED THIS DREADFUL MESSAGE,
THIS GOD, THE MAN JESUS, WILL VISIBLY APPEAR TO BEAR WITNESS
WHETHER HE SENT US OR NOT.

Ye that are the Blessed shall patiently wait for the Truth of this
thing.

(1652)

AN EPISTLE

FROM THE Holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal Father,
written by the Lord's two last Witnesses and Prophets that ever
shall declare the mind of God, the Man Jesus, that was crucified
without the gates of Jerusalem; the Lord Jesus, by us, His poor
despised Messengers, hath sent this writing unto the Christian world
so called. Wherefore we declare, by virtue of our Commission given
unto us by voice of words from the Holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus,
from the throne of His glory, to make known His prerogative will and
pleasure, both to the elect world and reprobate world, a little
before His glorious coming to separate between the two worlds, that
whosoever despiseth this writing, whether he be a king or a beggar,
by calling it blasphemy, or heresy, or delusion, or a lie, or
speaking evil of it in any kind whatsoever; in so doing they have
committed that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost or Spirit
that sent us. Wherefore, in obedience to our Commission from the
Lord Jesus Christ, whom they have despised, and not us, we pronounce
them cursed, both soul and body, from the presence of the Lord
Jesus, elect Men, and Angels, to all eternity.

JOHN REEVE and LODOWICK MUGGLETON, the Lord's two last true
Witnesses and Prophets, spoken of in the Eleventh of
Revelation, a little before the coming of Him that sent us,
who is the Judge of both quick and dead.

CHAPTER I.

1. Of my Commission received by Voice of Words from the Spirit of
the Man Jesus in Glory.
FEBRUARY the 3rd, 4th, and 5th, 1651, three mornings together, much
about an hour, the Lord Jesus, the only wise God, whose glorious
Person is resident above or beyond the stars;
2. I declare from the Spirit of truth, that this Jesus, from the
throne of His glory, by voice of words, spake unto me John Reeve,
saying: I have given thee understanding of my mind in the
Scriptures, above all men in the world.
3. The next words the Lord spake unto me were these, saying: Look
into thine own body; there thou shalt see the kingdom of heaven, and
the kingdom of hell. The Lord spake unto me twice together. 
4. Again, the Lord spake unto me these words, saying: I have chosen
thee my last messenger for a great work, unto this bloody
unbelieving world; and I have given thee Lodowick Muggleton to. be
thy mouth.
5. At that very moment the Holy Spirit brought into my mind that
Scripture of Aaron given unto Moses.
6. Again, the Lord spake unto me these words, saying: I have put the
two-edged sword of my Spirit into thy mouth, that whoever I
pronounce blessed through thy mouth, is blessed to eternity; and
whoever I pronounce cursed through thy mouth, is cursed to eternity.
7. When I heard these words, my spirit desired the Lord, that I
might not be His dreadful messenger: for indeed I thought, upon the
delivering of so sad and unexpected a message unto men, I should
immediately have been torn in pieces.
8 Again, the Lord spake unto me these words, saying: If thou dost
not obey my voice, and go wherever I send thee, to deliver my
message, thy body shall be thy hell, and thy spirit shall be the
devil that shall torment thee to eternity.
9. Then for a moment I saw this hell within me, which caused me to
answer the Lord these words, saying: Lord, I will go wherever thou
sendest me; only be with me.
10. These were the Lord's words, spoken unto me the first morning,
and my answer unto my God; I being as perfectly awaked when He spoke
unto me, the Lord is my witness, as I was at the writing hereof.
11. Again the next morning the Lord spake unto me, saying, Go thou
unto Lodowick Muggleton, and with him go unto Thomas Turner, and he
shall bring you to one John Tane, and do thou deliver my message
when thou comest there; and if Lodowick Muggleton deny to go with
thee, then do thou from me pronounce him cursed to eternity.
12. These words the Lord spake unto me the second morning and no
more.
13. The third and last morning, the Lord spake unto me these words,
saying: Go thou unto Lodowick Muggleton, and take such a woman along
with thee; and then go thou unto one John Robins, a prisoner in New
Bridewell, and do thou deliver my message to him when thou comest
there.
14. These were the Lord's words the third and last morning, and all
the words in the commission of the Lord spoken unto me; only this
message of the Lord extends in general to the whole world, because
the elect Jews and Gentiles are mixed in marriages through all parts
of this earth, for whose sakes only we are sent:
15. But as for those natural unbelieving Jews, that deny that God is
come in flesh, those Jews shall never come to the faith of Jesus; we
are not sent unto these.
16. The Holy Spirit beareth witness in my spirit of the truth of
that which I shall write unto you, that the first words that the
Lord spake unto me, the words speaking came into my spirit and body,
with such an exceeding bright burning glory of God-like majesty,
that I did not well know whether I was a mortal man or an immortal
God;
17. So glorious are the words of the immortal God, that the tongues
of men or angels can never express it;
18. My body also was changed at that time for a season in a most
dreadful manner to behold, of which there be many that can bear
witness, at this time.
19. Again, for your information that are spiritual, the Lord opened
the understanding of my fellow witness, and made him obedient with
me in the messages of the Lord, as Aaron's understanding was opened,
to make him obedient with Moses in the messages of the Lord at that
time.
20. And the Lord hath given him as glorious testimonies by
revelation from his Holy Spirit, many a time, of the full assurance
of this commission to be from the Lord, as ever the Lord gave to
Aaron, to assure him that Moses's commission was from the Lord;
21. Only Moses's commission (he being the Lord's first commissioner
unto men) was manifested by natural signs, visibly upon the bodies
Of men and women;
22. And, on the contrary, we being the Lord's last commissioners,
our commission is manifested by spiritual signs upon the invisible
spirits of men and women, because our message is all spiritual,
concerning men and women's eternal weal or woe in the life to come.

CHAPTER II.

1. Of the last great deceiving Antichrist, and Man of Sin, that ever
shall be.
AGAIN, that you that are elected unto eternal glory may understand
something of this John Robins aforesaid;
2. I declare from the Holy Spirit, that this John Robins was that
last great Antichrist. or man of sin, or son of perdition, spoken of
by Paul the Apostle in the Thessalonians, who (as it is written )
opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God; so that 
he as God, sitteth in the temple of God, showing himself that he is
God;
3. This is he that was to appear in this last age, a little before
the personal visible coming of the Lord Jesus in the clouds with His
ten thousand of saints in power and great glory.
4. To separate between the persons of the true Christians, whose
weapons are spiritual faith, that work by love and patience, with
all other such-like heavenly virtues, from the persons of all lying
hypocrites, who call themselves Christians, but they are indeed far
worse than heathens, by killing their neighbours with the sword of
steel.
6. Therefore their damnation will be far greater than the heathens
in the day of the Lord's vengeance.
6. Again, it would be too tedious to write unto you, wherein this
John Robins did appear to be the man of sin as aforesaid;
7. So that the Pope is not the man of sin, as men blindly imagine,
for want of the spirit of the Scriptures; but, on the contrary, I
declare from the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, that all men that call
themselves Christians, and yet make use of the sword of steel, in
any case whatsoever, the Pope and those men are both Christians
alike;
8. Therefore to be an Antichrist or a man of sin, to oppose God, as
beforesaid, I declare from the Holy Spirit that is, when a man doth
exalt himself in the place or person of God, and doth set up a
worship seemingly far more pure than the simple plain worship of
God.
9. And to manage his design he doth show many great lying signs and
wonders, as this John Robins did, to the amazement of many deceived
by him.
10. It was a spiritual opposing of Jesus, which is the only God, by
showing of seeming spiritual lying signs and wonders, as this John
Robins did; yea he showed such signs as the popes could never show,
nor never shall show:
11. Wherefore, that you that are the elect may no longer remain in
the dark concerning the last great spiritual Antichrist, I declare
from the Lord Jesus, that this John Robins did attribute to himself
the titles of the only God:
12. First, he called himself Adam Melchisedek; again, he called
himself the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:
13. Also, he held forth a Trinity of persons; as, namely, Adam,
Abel, and Cain: again, he called himself the first Adam, saying,
after he had been five thousand six hundred and odd years in the
dust, he was risen from the dead, to deliver his people;
14. Then he said Abel was his son Jesus, the second person of his
Trinity; then he called Cain the Holy Ghost, and this was his third
person of his Trinity.
15. This Cain, that was the seed of the serpent, or son of the
devil, this was his Holy Ghost.
16. I could write very much of his Trinity concerning his wife Eve, 
so called by him; and of a Jesus he said should be born of her, of
his begetting; and of a disciple of his that he called Cain, to make
up his counterfeit Trinity, but that it would hinder things of more
value.
17. Again, he declared, that he knew all angels, their names and
their natures; also, he said, he had a power over all voices; also,
he said, that he knew what the spirits of men spake that were in the
dust; again, he said, that he was judge both of quick and dead:
18. Again, he said, that the Lord Jesus was a weak and imperfect
Saviour, and afraid of death; but he said, that he had no fear of
death in him at all; but this Cain hath proved himself an old liar,
since his great blasphemy against the Lord Jesus:
19. Again, this John Robins did declare, that he was to gather the
Jews in all nations, and to lead them into their own land, unto
Jerusalem; with many more such-like things declared by him.
20. As for his lying spiritual signs and wonders, they were these
and such-like: unto some that were deceived by him, he did present
the form of his person riding upon the wings of the wind, like unto
a flame of fire:
21. Also he did present unto some in their beds a great light like
unto a flame of fire over all the room, that they have been
compelled to hide their faces in their beds, fearing they should be
burned; but when they hid their faces in their bed, the light did
appear brighter than before:
22. Also he would present unto them half-moons and stars, and
sometimes thick darkness, darker than any natural darkness
whatsoever.
23. Also he did present his head only in the day time, without a
body, to a gentlewoman that I know, in her chamber; also presenting
unto her, to deceive her, the forms of strange beasts, as, namely,
dragons and such-like.
24. Again, I declare from the Lord, that this John Robins did
present the form of his face, looking me in the face in my bed the
most part of a night, insomuch that I cried in my spirit unto the
Lord, and the Lord, by his Spirit, revealed this great Antichrist
unto me, to my exceeding joy and his everlasting praise.
25. Much more might be spoken of his deceits in this kind; but now I
shall declare the manner of his being worshipped as a god by those
deceived by him.
26. They prayed unto him, and they fell flat on their faces, and
worshipped him, calling him their Lord and their God.
27. Also he gave commandment to some of them, that they should not
make mention of any other god, but him only:
28. Also he gave authority unto some of his disciples, both unto men
and women, to change their wives and their husbands, telling them
that they were not united to their own bone.
29. This cursed Cain changed his own wife first, for an example, and
called her name Eve, telling his disciples that she should bring
forth his Son Jesus, and it should be caught up into heaven: many of
his disciples following of his cursed example to their utter ruin in
this life, and that to come.
30. Also he commanded his disciples to abstain from meats and
drinks, promising them that they should in a short time be fed with
manna from heaven, until many a poor soul was almost starved under
his diet, yea, and some were absolutely starved to death, whose
bodies could not bear his diet;
31. For those that believed on him indeed, they brought in their
whole estates unto him, so that then he had full power over their
souls, and bodies, and estates, and he did plague their spirits and
bodies at his pleasure in a most dreadful manner, if they were not
obedient to his commands, of the which I myself was an eye-witness.
32. I could speak more of this prince of devils in this last age,
but I know I have written enough for a spiritual Christian to
discern something of this great deceiver in what I have written.
33. When his wickedness was at the full, the Lord Jesus sent me, as
beforesaid, unto this John Robins, to declare his wickedness unto
him, and immediately to pronounce him cursed in soul and body, from
the presence of the Lord Jesus, to all eternity; unto the which I,
with my fellow-witness, were made obedient.
34. Then about two months after this sentence of the Lord Jesus,
this John Robins wrote a recantation of all his seeming great
matters declared by him, and sent the writing to General Cromwell,
and so obtained his liberty;
35. And when he was out of prison, he gave all his disciples about
London the slip, and with what silver he had left, that he had
cheated from them, Cain-like, instead of building of cities, he went
into his own country and repurchased his land;
36. But it was rebought with the innocent blood of many poor
innocent souls, in the highest nature, that ever any man gained such
a sum of silver as he did.

CHAPTER III.

1. Of the Unlawfulness for a Spiritual Christian to war with a Sword
of Steel. 21. What was from Eternity.
AGAIN, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that all those
that bear the name of Christians and yet make use of the sword of
steel to slay men who are the image of God, they are utterly
ignorant of the true God, the Man Jesus, and enemies to His Gospel
that commands men to love their enemies;
2. Therefore their fleshly reasoning causeth them to forsake the 
gospel of suffering the cross of Christ, and they apply themselves
to the law of Moses, to prove it lawful to kill the gospel of Jesus,
instead of yielding obedience to it.
3. Unto you that are chosen to work righteousness, I declare, by
revelation from the Holy Spirit, that no spiritual Christian hath
anything to do to meddle with any Scripture from the law given by
the hand of Moses, to prove it lawful to war with the sword of
steel, because it was lawful for the nation of the Jews only, by
commission from the Lord, to war against all the heathen Gentiles
that rose up against the Jews, because they worshipped the God of
Israel, who was contrary to the heathen's idol gods;
4. And this war of the Jews was lawful until God the Father became
flesh, to reconcile both Jew and Gentile into that one faith in the
body of his flesh, and no longer.
5. Therefore, since God became flesh of our flesh, and bone of our
bone, sin only excepted, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that they
that are Christians indeed, they are not under the law of Moses,
that is, a sword of steel, but they are under grace, or the gospel
of Jesus, that is, the sword of the Holy Spirit.
6. That makes all true Christians to understand, that in this world
their portion is to suffer all kind of wrong from all men, and to
return mercy and forgiveness unto all men, yea, and to forgive those
that would kill them, because they know all vengeance is the Lord's,
and He will repay it; therefore they dare not rob God of His glory.
7. Again, when the Lord Jesus gave that new law of love unto all his
elect believers, where He saith, It was said of old, An eye for an
eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but I say unto you, Love your enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you.
8. These be those Christians indeed that may be called perfect, as
their heavenly Father was perfect; the Lord Jesus, who did all good,
and suffered all wrong, yea, and laid down His life for that whole
world of His elect, when they were all become His enemies.
9. Again, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that they that are new born
by the Holy Spirit, they are so far from killing or consenting to
the killing of any man, offensively or defensively, in their own
behalf or in the behalf of any other man, that they are afraid of
their own evil thoughts, and much more of evil words of deeds,
against God or men;
10. Because they know nothing but pure righteousness, pure love
without envy, and pure innocence, shall reign in eternal glory with
the only eternal Father, the Lord Jesus.
11. And on the contrary, they know all man-slayers, under what
pretence soever, and all covetous, idolaters, drunkards. swearers,
liars, sorcerers, whoremongers, and all those that vindicate
unrighteousness, through the love of silver, in opposing of that
pure law of love that commands all Christians not to do as they are
done unto, that is the hypocrite's unrighteousness on the contrary,
to do unto all men as you would they should do unto you, this is the
righteousness of pure faith, which is the righteousness of God,
which makes men to fulfil all righteousness.
12. For want of this, those unrighteous persons beforesaid must all
perish to eternity.
13. Again, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that all those that hate
to yield obedience to this pure peaceable law of love, proceeding
from the pure spirit of the Lord Jesus; I say in the great and
notable day of the Lord, by His decree, or by a word speaking from
His mouth, they shall every one of them rise out of the dust
together, not with the same bodies they died or fell asleep in,
because there was somewhat Of God in those bodies whilst they lived,
which perisheth with them in death;
14. But the bodies which they shall have shall be in form of their
former bodies, but they shall be fiery bodies of spiritual darkness,
yea, bodies of all unrighteousness, having all their wicked deeds of
their former bodies conveyed into these bodies as fuel to kindle the
fire of new sorrows in these bodies of hell and utter darkness, and
their spirits in their bodies shall be all fiery devils;
15. So their bodies shall be their kingdom of hell, and their proud
spirits, that had pleasure in unrighteousness, shall be the devils
that shall be barred in close prisoners within their bodies, from
all motioning or thinking of any former comforts, either spiritual
or natural, to give them any ease at all, because all time is past;
16. Then, as beforesaid, shall their spirits and bodies burn
together like a flame of fire, that is, all as dark as pitch, they
never stirring from the place of their resurrection, nor never
seeing one another's faces more, much less shall they see the face
of God, just men, or angels, to all eternity;
17. And the place of their eternal torment shall be upon this earth,
where they acted all their bloodshed and all other unrighteousness.
18. Then shall the sun, moon, and stars, and all other natural
lights in this lower creation or world, vanish or go out like the
snuff of a candle, giving no more light to eternity:
19. Then shall this fruitful, pleasant earth be like unto dry
burning sand, the seas and all rivers or springs of water being
dried up for evermore, as if they never had any being.
20. This whole creation being turned into a chaos of confusion,
without form, and void of all light or sap, either natural or
spiritual, to all eternity, as beforesaid.
21. Again, I declare by revelation from the Holy Spirit, what was
from eternity, before any creature was formed, that had any sensible
life, either in heaven above or in this earth beneath.
22. There were these two uncreated substances of earth and water,
with the uncreated spiritual Person of God the Creator, in whose
glorious presence these senseless substances of earth and water were
eternally resident, that the Creator might create or form by His
infinite wisdom, out of those dead substances, all variety of
sensible living creatures in His own time, for the setting forth of
His -visible glory to eternity.
23. Again, I declare by revelations from the Holy Spirit, that the
earth and the water were both dark substances, having no light or
sensible life at all in them; but the Person of the Creator was
infinitely full of all glorious light and sensible life to Himself,
both within and without. Thus it is clear there was death from
eternity, only it was not in a sensible form; as well as there was
sensible life, light, and glory, in form from eternity.
24. Again, eternal life, or God, was a substantial Form from
eternity; but eternal death, or darkness of earth and water, was
substance without form, void of all spirit or life; so that life or
spirit only is all substantial form, and death or darkness only is
all substance without form:
25. So that life and death from eternity are not bare words, as
blind hypocrites imagine, but the invisible Creator of all life or
spirits was a God of a glorious substance, a spiritual Body, in the
form or likeness of a man from all eternity.
26. Again, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that the glorious sensible
life or light, in the Person of the Creator, could not possibly be
known by men or angels, but by His creating or forming of some
creatures to live sensibly in death and darkness, shame and misery,
and by His creating other creatures, in opposition, sensibly to live
in life and light, joy and glory.
27. Again, the infinite glorious prerogative power of the Creator
could not possibly be known to any of His creatures to make a
distinction between the glory of eternal life and the misery of
eternal death, but by His forming of creatures of the same lump to
be vessels of honour and vessels of dishonour to eternity.
28. But, on the contrary, if the Creator, without distinction, had
formed His creatures to be all eternally glorious, like Himself,
then the glory of His prerogative power of infinite love or mercy,
and infinite justice or wrath, and all His infinite new wisdom,
increasing or flowing in His glorious Person as a fountain of living
waters, must in a manner have been shut prisoner in His own Person,
and the creatures must have been all as gods instead of creatures:
29. And so the Creator would have had no glory in His creation at
all of the prerogative power of His Godhead.
30. Wherefore I declare, by virtue of my commission from the only
wise God and everlasting Father, the Man Jesus in glory, that all
those that are made to yield obedience in love to the prerogative
power of God are His elect ones, appointed for blessedness to all
eternity.
31. But, on the contrary, all those that are offended at the
prerogative power of the Creator, and love to dispute against it, 
are all reprobates, and appointed to be cursed to all eternity.

CHAPTER IV.

1. Of the Creation beyond the Stars, or of the other Side of the
visible created Heavens.
AGAIN, for your information, I declare from the Holy Spirit, that
the creation, above or beyond the stars of the holy angels, who are
spiritual bodies, in their persons formed like men, and all other
creatures that God hath made in the heavens above, of that substance
of earth and water aforesaid, that was from all eternity in the
presence of His eternal spiritual Person;
2. I declare from the Lord Jesus, that God the Creator hath made
that creation in the heavens above as visible to be seen as this
creation is seen in this earth beneath.
3. Again, I declare from the Holy Spirit, that the glorious Person
of the only wise God and eternal Father, the Lord Jesus, is as
visibly seen of the creatures where His Person is resident, as man
is visibly seen of the creatures in this earth beneath, where his
person resides.
4. As for this creation in the heavens above, it is to set forth the
glory of His immortal Person that all the creatures in His presence,
visibly beholding the glorious Person of their Creator, both holy
angels and other creatures, according to their wisdom or
understanding, might give Him the glory of their eternal happiness
of this their creation.
5. And, on the contrary, if the Creator were not visibly seen by the
eyes of His creatures, then no creatures could possibly know Him, to
return any praise or glory unto Him at all, for the happiness of
their condition.
6. Therefore it is a cursed lying imagination for any man to think
that the glorious Person of God is not as visibly seen of His
creatures in the heavens above, as the person of man, who is the
image of God, is visibly seen of the creatures in this earth
beneath.
7. Again, you must not think after a fleshly manner, that the
creatures above the stars are male and female for natural
generation, as they are in this creation beneath the stars:
8. For a woman had never been made but for generation, that the
immortal God might have a woman's womb in this world, to clothe
Himself with flesh;
9. And that the reprobate angel, which is the devil, might have the 
womb of a woman to clothe himself with flesh also, to bring forth
God's glorious design, between the seed of the woman and the seed of
the serpent.
10. Wherefore I declare from the Holy Spirit, that the holy angels,
and all other creatures that are in the presence of God in the
creation beyond the stars, are all spiritual male creatures, never
increasing in their numbers, not being fleshly, desiring generation;
11. But their spirits or natures, instead of fleshly pleasures in
generation, are full of spiritual and heavenly joys, of a more
transcendent glorious content within themselves, and visible
glorious contents,
12. In their beholding of the glorious Face of God, and the faces of
one another, and the glory of that place they enjoy, the which
exceeding glory shineth forth through that heavenly kingdom, from
the bright burning glorious Person of God the Creator, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who alone hath all the glory of His creation in the
heavens above, wherein dwelleth nothing but righteousness in glory.
13. Again, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that no man can understand
or know anything of these things, that are invisible unto our
natural eyes, but by the spirit of revelation;
14. Therefore it is written, that "faith is the substance of things
hoped for, the evidence of things not seen." Again it is written:
"Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word
of God; so that things which are seen were not made of things which
do appear."
15. So that in the letter of the Scripture it is clear, to you that
see by the eye of faith, that God hath made or framed two worlds or
two creations, which is all one: for you know, to frame a thing, or
to make a thing, is all one.
16. Again, unto you it is clear there are spiritual visible things
in that world above or beyond the stars, as well as here are natural
visible things in this world beneath the stars;
17. Because you may understand, that this world, and the things that
are visible therein, were made or created out of that world which is
invisible to us who are in mortality, but visible to those who are
above in glory;
18. So that now you, that are appointed to enter with spiritual
bodies into that glorious creation or world beyond the stars, may
understand a little clearer of your inheritance in that kingdom made
without hands, or city eternal in the heavens,
19. Where you shall visibly see with your eyes the face of God, men,
angels, and all creatures, in that creation above the stars, as you
see the face of man and all other creatures in this creation beneath
the stars, with glorious new songs of spiritual and heavenly praises
unto a glorious God to all eternity.
20. This proves the truth of these Scriptures, where it is written,
"My kingdom is not of this world;" and of this saying, "Lord,
remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom;" and of that saying,
"In my Father's house, or kingdom, are many mansions;" and of that
saying, "For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory, for
ever;"
21. And of that saying, "The kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ;" this world was the heavens
above;
22. And of that saying, "Nevertheless, we look for a new heaven and
a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness;" and of that saying,
"He hath made us kings and priests unto God, and we shall reign with
Him upon the earth."
23. This is that glorious new heaven and new earth, in the presence
of God, above or beyond the stars.
24. But blind carnal hypocrites imagine that God's reigning with His
elect ones will be upon this bloody earth; because they have no
spiritual eyes, to see or know that new heaven or new earth above or
beyond the stars, where nothing but pure righteousness reigneth in
glory for everlasting, or world without end. Amen.

CHAPTER V.

1. Of the creating that reprobate Angel Serpent that beguiled Eve,
and became a Man.
AGAIN, concerning that serpent beforesaid, so called of the Lord for
his subtlety; I declare by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that God
created His spiritual Person more glorious than the persons of all
the holy angels that are in the presence of God in heaven;
2. Because this mighty angel, by the wisdom and secret counsel of
God, was to be as a God, to bring forth his seed or generation of
wise and prudent, subtle serpent men and women, to oppose the
Creator and His innocent seed or generation of simple, plain-hearted
men and women, that are of the Spirit of faith and pure love, with
all other heavenly virtues;
3. For the nature or Spirit of God is faith and love, and all other
divine virtues, infinitely living in his glorious Person; the which
faith is all power of righteous actings naturally flowing from His
pure Spirit, as from a pure over-flowing fountain of living waters;
4. But, on the contrary, the nature or spirit of this God-like
angel, and all the rest of the holy angels in their creation, were
pure reason, from whence naturally flows no good at all, but what
comes into them continually by revelation from that pure Spirit of
faith, in the Person of God their Creator;
5. And this is that spiritual manna that keeps the holy angels'
natures or spirits pure in the presence of God;
6. For it is the nature of that pure reason in the holy angels
continually to desire the knowledge of that Spirit of wisdom in the
Creator that made them, and the overflowings of that new wisdom in
the Spirit of the Creator, by the decree of God.
7. It is that spiritual food that keeps the holy angels pure in
their glory; or else not one of them could stand upright in the
presence of God, not one moment, but they would all become serpent-
devils, and fall down into this earth, as that great angel did
presently after the Lord withheld the revelation of His glorious
wisdom from him;
8. Then this angel, for want of His spiritual food of revelation,
that kept his spirit in obedience to his Creator, presently his
spirit began proudly to imagine and think high and lofty thoughts
concerning his own person, and great wisdom of spirit within him;
9. Wherefore secretly he was lifted up in his spirit to disdain the
persons and wisdom of all the holy angels, in comparison of the
glory both of his person and wisdom.
10. Pride being begun in him, Lucifer-like, he soared higher in his
pride, for he thought both his person and his wisdom to be as
glorious, if not more glorious, than the Person and wisdom of the
Creator; 
11. Wherefore, he being very proud of his own wisdom, he imagined
that, if he had been the Creator, he would by a word speaking have
created angels and all other creatures without earth or water, as
God made all things of;
12. For his proud spirit thought he could by a word speaking have
created all creatures of nothing at all; therefore he counted his
wisdom rather greater, and of a more higher nature, to have formed
all things for a greater glory to himself, if he had been the
Creator, than the Creator's wisdom in the things or creatures formed
by Him.
13. So, imagining his wisdom above the Creator's, he thought himself
more fit to reign over the holy angels, and all other creatures,
than the Creator.
14. He, being wise in his own conceit, became an absolute fool; for
out of nothing comes nothing, and out of nothing comes no form, or
nothing can be formed;
15. For to create or make a living form or creature out of senseless
matter or substance, of earth or water, by a word speaking, of what
nature or form the Creator pleaseth, whether contrary to His own
nature and form, or of His own nature and form, this is the power
and wisdom of my Creator, the Lord Jesus;
16. For He, by his infinite glorious wisdom, by a word speaking, did
create all living creatures in the two creations or worlds of
insensible earth and water, that was without His Person, from all
eternity in His presence with him.
17. Because His eternal glorious Person, you know, must have a place
of residence; therefore reason itself cannot deny the eternity of
earth and waters, and the Person of the Creator, let it imagine
never so much, nor never so long.
18. Again, as beforesaid, when the time of this proud and lofty
angel's glory was, by the decree of the Creator, expired in the
heavens above, to the exceeding joy of all the holy angels, unto
whom the Lord revealed his exceeding pride, the Lord then cast down
this angelical wise serpent into the earth;
19. Therefore it is written: "Woe be to the inhabiters of the earth,
for the devil is come down amongst you."
20. This angel that was cast into the earth is that devil
beforesaid; and his nature or spirit of pride and envy, and all
other wickedness, being changed, his name or titles are changed
according to the uncleanness of his nature.
21. And now, instead of the name of an angel of light, he is called
an "angel of darkness," as in Jude.
22. Yea, he is called a serpent, a dragon, a devil, Satan, or an
unclean spirit, or that wicked one, suitable to his cursed nature;
but the Lord changed not the form or person of this reprobate lost
angel at all, but his names or titles only, as beforesaid, according
to his nature.
23. Again, I declare by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that that
serpent spoken of in the Scripture, that tempted the virgin-wife
Eve, he was a spiritual body, in the form of his person like unto a
man;
24. Yea, I say from the Lord, that this angel-serpent was more
amiable or glorious in the form of his person, to the outward
appearance of Eve's eyes, than the person of the man Adam was.
25. Wherefore, by the prerogative power, and secret wisdom and
counsel of God, to bring forth His glorious design, it was the
outward comeliness of the serpent's person, and his seeming wise and
glorious God-like counsel, by the decree of God became a snare, to
deceive and I overcome the innocent virgin-wife Eve, as many poor
innocent virgins in these days are deceived and overcome by the
outward comeliness of men's persons, through their serpent counsels
and cursed temptations.
26. Wherefore it is written. "The woman was deceived, and not the
man."
27. Again, I declare by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that when
this angel-serpent, by his seeming wise God-like counsel, had
overcome innocent Eve, as beforesaid, the very person of this
spiritual serpent, reprobate angel, entered into the body or womb of
innocent Eve, and there he died, or was changed from his
spirituality;
28. And immediately he quickened, in her pure undefiled seed or
nature, all serpentine lust of all natural uncleanness; wherefore,
she being now naked from her former pure created virginity,
presently she is full of natural lust after her innocent husband,
that had no desire to a woman at all;
29. Therefore it is written, "And she gave also unto her husband
with her, and he did eat;"
30. Then were they both naked from that pure spiritual life of their
virgin creation of Godlike content within their own spirits; and in
the room thereof they are both full of all natural lusts whatsoever,
they being both defiled with the spirit of the serpent-angel of
unclean reason and wicked imagination;
31. And this was that cursed effect of their becoming as gods,
knowing both good and evil, until they were both born again, by the
Spirit of faith, to the full assurance of a more glorious
inheritance than that which was lost, through the eternal love of
God to His lost image.
32. Again, I declare from the Lord Jesus, that that Cain that was
the first-born of Eve, he was the very seed or spirit of that
reprobate serpent-angel in the body of Eve, and the first-born child
or son of the devil;
33. And so he became, and none but he alone, that Beelzebub, the
prince of devils, and the only father of all those angels of
darkness spoken of in the epistle of Jude, that are kept or reserved
in chains of darkness, of unbelief; unto the judgment of the great
day.
34. Therefore, where it is written of the warfare between Michael
and his angels, and the dragon and his angels, that Michael is the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus in His angelical believers, whose spiritual
weapons are faith, and love, and patience, and such-like, unto the
death, because they see a crown of life in yielding obedience to the
cross of Christ;
35. The dragon, that is, the spirit of cursed Cain in his
persecuting believers, whose carnal weapons are swords, and guns,
and all kind of murdering weapons whatsoever, flowing from
ignorance, cursed covetousness, and vainglorious envy, selling their
eternal birthright for a mess of pottage, because the Lord Jesus
hath no delight in their persons.
36. Again, it is written, "And the great dragon was cast out, that
old serpent, called the Devil and Satan, he was cast out into the
earth, and his angels were cast out with him."
37. That Cain beforesaid was that serpent-dragon angel; and his
angels are that fleshly seed of his, or offspring, or generation of
serpent-wise prudent men and women, that mind earthly things.
38. These are those serpent reprobate angels, that go upon the
bellies of their spirits, and lick up the dust of the earth all the
days of their lives; that is, their spirits lick up the gold and
silver, and put it into a bag, for their generations; and this is
the food of their souls, and suchlike, all their days.
39. This is that spirit of unclean reason and wicked imagination
that was in Cain, and now is in all his angels, who are the lords of
this world, whose spirits wholly thirst after things that perish;
40. And they are never in their proper centre, but when the thoughts
of their spirits are feeding upon riches, or honours, or friends, or
fleshly delights, or long life, and such-like.
41. This was the food of that serpent Cain that slew his brother
Abel, because he was more righteous than he; and this is the food,
and no other, of all those serpent angelical men and women, both
great and small, that are the very sons and daughters of cursed
Cain, hating all spiritual righteousness in all spiritual Abels as
he did;
42. Therefore, as beforesaid, cursed together with that serpent
reprobate devil, their father Cain, from the presence of the Lord,
just men, and angels, to all eternity.

CHAPTER VI.

1. The Eternal Creator clothed Himself with flesh, and so became a
pure Man.
AGAIN, for your information, in whose persons the Lord by his Holy
Spirit delights to dwell, I declare, by revelation from the Holy
Spirit of the Lord Jesus, a little of that wonderful unspeakable
mystery of God the Father clothing Himself or manifesting Himself in
flesh.
2. It is written: "She was found with child of the Holy Ghost."
3. Again, it is written: "For that which is conceived in her is of
the Holy Ghost; and the Word became flesh." And, "Behold, a Virgin
shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall
call his name Emanuel, Which being interpreted is, God with us."
4. Again, it is written: "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son
is given; and the government shall be on His shoulders, and His name
shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of His 
government and peace there shall be no end."
5. From these Scriptures it is very clear in the bare letter, unto
you that see God by the eye of faith, that that holy child Jesus,
that was born of the virgin-wife Mary, He is the only God, and alone
eternal Father, unto you that have faith in a personal God, or a God
of one distinct Person, and no more.
6. Unto you alone, for whom is prepared a crown of immortal glory, I
declare, by revelation from the Holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus, that
the Holy Ghost beforesaid was the glorious Person of that one only
wise God, and everlasting Father, and Creator of all things, that
entered into the Virgin's womb, and died, or changed His immortality
or spirituality, in the body or womb of the Virgin; 
7. And immediately quickened or conceived Himself of the very nature
or seed of the Virgin, a pure natural child or son, in whom, as it
is written, "The fullness of the Godhead lived bodily."
8. So that, as the serpent-angel beforesaid entered into the womb of
the virgin-wife Eve, and defiled her pure nature or seed throughout,
and died in her womb from his spirituality, and quickened in
mortality, and brought forth himself the firstborn child or son of
the devil, and so he became the father of an innumerable company of
serpent reprobate devils, of men and women;
9. So, in opposition of that reprobate angel, and prince of devils
beforesaid, the glorious Person of the eternal God entered into the
womb of the virgin-wife Mary, and died in her womb from His
immortality, and purified her nature or seed throughout, that was
unclean before, and quickened Himself in pure mortality, and brought
forth Himself the first-born Son of God, and the only eternal Father
of an innumerable company of elect sons and daughters, purchased by
His own precious blood.
9. Thus immortality died and quickened in mortality, and this pure
mortality died and quickened in immortality and glory again, in that
very same flesh or Person that died, and now reigneth in glory in
the highest heavens and the lowest hearts, God alone, blessed to all
eternity.
10. Thus eternity became time, and time is become eternity again;
for there is nothing but an eternal, immortal God, that is the
Creator of all life, that can by His own power live and die, and
live again.
11. But, on the contrary, no creature hath any power at all, neither
to live nor to die, but by the decree of the Creator alone, the Lord
Jesus Christ.
12. Thus, you that see by that single eye of faith may understand in
some measure the difference between the seed of the woman and the
seed of the serpent;
13. For ever since the angel-serpent, by his wise cursed counsel,
took possession of the garden of God, the bodies of our first
parents; I declare, from the Holy Spirit, that there is no devil at
all without the body of man or woman, but what dwells within the
bodies of men and women;
14. So that that devil, so frequently spoken of in the letter of the
Scripture, that tempts men and women to all unrighteousness, it is
man's spirit of unclean reason, and cursed imagination, that
insatiably lusteth after things that perish, until the Holy Spirit
of faith enters into the man, and purifies his unclean spirit, and
reveals unto his dark understanding spiritual and glorious durable
things;
15. And that makes a man trample this perishing world, and all its
vain-glory, under the feet of his spirit, as dung, as it is in
comparison of the glory that is to come, in that world above the
stars, that remains to all eternity.

CHAPTER VII.

1. The same Subject continued:
AGAIN, it is written: "A woman shall compass a man;" that woman was
the Virgin Mary, and that man was God the Father.
2. Again it is written: "A woman clothed with the sun, and the moon
under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars;" this
woman was the Virgin Mary beforesaid, and the sun that she was
clothed withal was the only-begotten Son of God, the Eternal Father,
in the Virgin's womb:
3. And the moon under her feet, that was the worship of the law of
Moses; for she, being clothed with the sun, was filled with the
revelation of the everlasting gospel of that Son within her, which
was of a more transcendent glory than that of the law;
4. And that crown of twelve stars upon her head, that was the twelve
Apostles, that sprang from her head, Jesus, to preach the
everlasting gospel of truth and peace unto His elect.
5. Thus that saying, that "every seed shall have his own body," is a
little more clear unto you that have faith in a personal God, than
it was before.
6. You may understand that God the Father was a spiritual Man , from
eternity, and that in time His righteous spiritual body brought
forth a righteous natural body: that the Father to show forth His
infinite love and humility, and to bring forth a new transcendent
glory to Himself, might become a son, yea, and a servant, unto His
creatures, in the very condition of a creature for a season,
7. That He might exalt His elect creatures into the same condition
of the Creator in His glory in the highest heavens to all eternity,
when the curtains of this lower heavens are drawn and vanished like
smoke, never more to be, time being past. 
8. Again, it is written: "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father;
and the Father liveth in me, and I live in Him, and I and the Father
are one;"
9. The only meaning or mind of the Lord Jesus in those words is
this:
10. His Spirit living within His body, that was the Father; and His
visible body, that was the Son, both God and Man in one Person, and
so but one Personal God, the Man Christ Jesus.
11. He, perfectly knowing Himself to be the only God, said unto the
Jews, "Except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood, you have no life
in you:
12. Again, He said, "Except ye believe that I am he, ye shall die in
your sins;"
13. His very mind in those words was this: except they did believe,
that that very Person of His, of flesh, blood, and bone, that spake
unto them, was the only God and eternal Father, and alone Saviour of
all that were to be saved; and that there was no salvation to
mankind, but thus spiritually eating of His flesh, and drinking of
His blood;
14. Except they did thus own His Person to be their Lord and only
Saviour, they must all die in their sins, and perish to all
eternity; because there is nothing, but the precious blood of a God
can possibly cleanse the spirit of man from the power of sin.
15. Therefore, if the very Godhead had not died, that is, if the
very soul of Christ, which is the eternal Father, had not died in
the body, or with the body, to quiet or satisfy the cry of the guilt
of sin in men's spirits, all men would have perished to eternity.
16. Because the spirit of unclean reason, the devil in man, whose
nature is all sin, did reign in the very bodies of the elect, as
their lord and king; and they were free from the power of
righteousness, until the precious blood of a God, by the Holy Spirit
of faith, was sprinkled in their consciences, that, by the pure life
of spiritual love to God and man, they might break the serpent's
head of sin, of reigning any longer in them.
17. But, on the contrary, they that have no faith given them in the
precious blood of God to cleanse their spirits from the power of
that devil, sin, in them, their sins will be their lord and king,
and they must perish together eternally as beforesaid.
18. Again, by this time it is very clear to you that have the faith
of Jesus, that the serpent-angel beforesaid was a spiritual body or
person in the form of a man, before he entered into the womb of Eve,
by that seed or son of his called Cain:
19. Thus every seed or spirit, by the decree of God, brings forth
his own body, according to its nature or kind.
20. God the Father, being a spiritual Man from all eternity, in time
begot and brought forth Himself a man-child in mortality, of all
pure righteousness;
21. Therefore He was called "the express image of the Father,"
because He was indeed the very Father; and that made Him say, "He
thought it no robbery to be equal with God;" and that was the cause
that made Him say, that "all power was given unto Him, both in
heaven and in earth," because He knew perfectly, that there was no
other God but Himself to possess all power.
22. And this made the prophet Isaiah attribute the chief titles, of
the "everlasting Father" unto the Son, that was to be made of a
woman, or of a virgin; because the prophet knew very well, that the
Father and the Son was but one inseparable Person in immortal glory
from all eternity; and so he knew they were to become in time one
inseparable Person of all purity in mortality.
23. And I with him know, from the same Spirit that revealed it to
the prophet long before God became flesh, that that pure mortality,
both spirit and body, that died together, They did both immediately
quicken together a new life in death or out of death.
24. And They inseparably, both Father and Son in one Person, did
ascend together into that immortal glory that They possessed
together from all eternity; and so They now enjoy it again, in one
transcendent glorious Person, both God and man, to all eternity. 
25. This proves the truth of these sayings: "Glorify me with the
same glory I had with Thee before the world was;" and of that
saying, "My glory I will not give to another;"
26. And of that saying: "Before Abraham was, I am;" according to
that saying of God to Moses, when He bade Moses tell Pharaoh that "I
AM sent him;"
27. And of that saying: "He thought it no robbery to be equal with
God;" and of that saying: "I am the living bread which came down
from heaven; if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever;"
28. And of that saying: "This is the bread which cometh down from
heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die;" and of that saying:
"For the bread of God is He which cometh down from heaven, and
giveth life unto the world;" and of that saying: "I am that bread of
life;"
29. Again; "Not that any man hath seen the Father, save He which is
of God, He hath seen the Father;" and of that saying: "What, and if
ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where He was before?"
30. And of that full saying, that proves Jesus to be the Father: "He
was in the world, and the world was made by Him, and the world knew
Him not;"
31. And of that saying: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God; the same was in the beginning
with God; all things were made by Him, and without Him was not
anything made that was made."
32. Whosoever is not stark blind, by this Scripture must needs
understand that there is no Creator nor Father but the Man Jesus
only, the Lord of life and glory.
33. And where it is said: "Through faith we understand that the
worlds were framed by the word of God, so that the things that are
(visible or) seen were not made of things that do appear;"
34. And of that saying: "I am Alpha and Omega, I am the First and
the Last; and behold, I create all things new;" and of that saying:
"I am He that was dead and am alive, and behold, I live for
evermore." This was the Man Jesus, that sat upon the throne of the 
Father.
35. With many other Scriptures too numerous to relate, that prove
clearly, to all that are appointed to eternal glory, that the Lord
Jesus Christ, that died without the gates of Jerusalem, is the only
God, and everlasting Father, and alone Creator of all things that
were made, both in heaven and earth.
36. Therefore I declare, from the Holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus that
sent us, that whosoever prays in his spirit or tongue unto any other
God or spirit but unto my God, the Man Jesus, that sent me, he prays
unto a devil of his own imagination, instead of a God;
37. For that Man Jesus, then to come, was David's only God and
Saviour; therefore he said, "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on
my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool."
38. And this Jesus was all the true prophets' God in the time of the
law; and this Jesus was the holy apostles' God, and all the
Christians' God, in the time of the apostles' commission, or
dispensation, or administration, that lasted about three hundred
years;
39. And this glorious Man Jesus is my God alone, and the God of all
spiritual Christians in this last age, until He comes in His glory.

CHAPTER VIII.

1. Of Elias the Prophet ascending bodily into Heaven, to represent
the Person of God the Father. 5. Moses represented the Person of God
the Son. 25. Of the creating of Man, and the nature of the Holy
Angels in their Creation. 47. Corruption in Death caused by Sin.
AGAIN, but some may say, if Jesus Christ be the only God and eternal
Father, who was that Father that He spake so much of when He was in
mortality, where He said "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me?" and, "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit," and such
like.
2. To this I answer, by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that Elias,
spoken of in the law, that was taken up bodily by a whirlwind into
heaven, where the likeness of a chariot and horses of fire appeared
to Elisha at his departure;
3. I say from the Lord, that the body or person of that Elias was
taken up and glorified in the heavens by the Creator for that very
purpose, that he might represent the Person of God the Father for
that time or season whilst God the Father went that journey in
flesh, as aforesaid.
4. Again it is written: "He shall give his angel's charge over
thee;" those angels were Moses and Elias, who being both glorified,
they did both represent the Person of the Father in the heavens
above the stars, as they did represent the Person of the Son and of
the Father when they were in earth beneath the stars.
5. When Moses was upon this earth, he represented the Person of God
the Son, that lamb Jesus that was then to come in flesh, in these
things:
6. First, Moses was called the meekest man upon the face of the
earth.
7. Again, he was a great type of Christ in this, in offering up
himself to be blotted out of the book of life for the salvation of
Israel, as the Lord Jesus became a curse for his elect Israel.
8. Likewise, Moses was a great sufferer at the hands of Israel with
much patience, as the Lord Jesus suffered with all patience at the
hands of his own people or nation.
9. Again, Moses was made an angel of the covenant of the law unto
all Israel, as the Lord Jesus was made or became an angel of the
covenant of grace, or the gospel, unto all the elect Israel;
10. So that whosoever despised the law of Moses was to die a natural
death without mercy, as a type of the eternal death of all those
that despise the grace or gospel of Jesus;
11. And in this he was a great type of the Lord Jesus, when he said,
"God will raise up a prophet unto you like unto me, Him shall you
hear."
12. Much more might be spoken of Moses representing the person of
God the Son, but I suppose it is sufficient for any moderate man.
13. Again, when Elias was in this world, he did represent the Person
of God the Father in these things:
14. First, in a God-like manner, by commanding fire to come down
from heaven to destroy his enemies.
15. And it was so again by his commanding, like unto a God, all the
priests of Baal, that were the national false priests, to be put to
death, for drawing the hearts of Israel from worshipping of the true
God;
16. And that was a type of the eternal perishing of all the national
priests of Baal in the world at this time, who are ministers of the
letter only, but call themselves ministers of the Spirit, and yet
the Lord Jesus sent them not; these are those croaking frogs that
keep the people in darkness, unto whom the people give their silver
for nought.
17. Again, Elias, by his asking of Elisha, in a God-like manner,
what he should do for him before he was taken up from him, with his
granting of Elisha a double portion of his spirit, if Elisha saw his
departure from him.
18. Again, Elias spake in the authority of the Father, when he told
king Ahab to his face, that it was he, and his father's house, that
were the troublers of Israel, by their departing from the living
God; with more such-like actings of his, after a God-like manner,
showing clearly his representing the Person of God the Father when
He was upon this earth; which was but a type of his representing the
Person of God the Father in the heavens afterwards.
19. But some may say, it seems very strange, the Lord having so many
glorious angels in His presence, that He should pass them by, arid
take up a mortal man, or a sinner, into that exceeding glory, of the
representing of the Person of God the Father, as beforesaid.
20. To this I answer from the Holy Spirit: All the counsels of my
God, the Man Jesus, are quite contrary to man's unclean reason; yea,
and contrary to the pure reason of the holy angels also, that God
alone may have all the glory of the revelation of His unsearchable
counsels of wisdom, from his elect men and angels.
21. Again, I declare, by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that the
man Adam, in his creation, was of the very nature or spirit of
faith, with all divine virtues of pure love, patience, meekness, and
such-like spiritual virtues in his spirit or person, which were the
very same divine virtues that lived in the Spirit or Person of God
his Creator:
22. Only in the Person of God every spiritual virtue in Him was
infinite above all measure; but in the person of the man Adam,
although they were the very same heavenly virtues, yet in him they
were in measure;
23. Thus man in his spirit was created like unto the Creator, of the
very same divine nature; only they differed in this, for the body or
Person of God was all spiritual or heavenly, not subject to
mortality; but the body or person of the man Adam was natural or
earthly, subject to mortality at the pleasure of the Creator;
24. For if the body or person of the man Adam had been spiritual in
his creation as his spirit was, then there would have been no
difference between the Person of the Creator and the person of the
creature:
25. Thus the man Adam was made like unto God, a pure natural person,
of all righteousness in mortality, like unto the spiritual Person of
God, which is all righteousness in glory.
26. Again, it is written, "The first Adam of the earth, earthly; the
second Adam, the Lord from heaven, heavenly."
27. Thus you that see by that single eye of faith, you may know,
that God became flesh, or a man, as well as Adam, who was called the
image of God, because God was a spiritual Man from eternity, as
abundantly beforesaid.
28. Now you must understand the reason why Jesus, the only God, was
called the second Adam, was this; because the body or Person of the
Lord Jesus was a pure natural body of all righteousness in
mortality, just like unto the body or person of the first Adam
before his fall;
29. Only Christ, the second Adam, had the spirit of faith in Him
above measure, and the first Adam had the spirit of faith in him by
measure as beforesaid.
30. Again, the second Adam differed from the first Adam in this, He
being made a Man of sorrows, but the first Adam knew no sorrows
before his fall.
31. And why did He become a Man of sorrows? It was to redeem the
elect seed of the spirit of faith, overcome in His image, the first
Adam, by the reprobate angel-serpent, as beforesaid.
32. Again, as for the natures or spirits of the holy angels in their
creation, they were pure reason, quite contrary to the nature or
Spirit of faith in God their Creator; only in their bodies or
persons they were spiritual, or swift of motion, like unto the
spiritual Person of God their Creator.
33. But if the nature or spirit of the holy angels had been of the
spirit of pure faith as they were of pure reason, then there would
have been no difference between the Person of God their Creator, and
the persons of the holy angels in their creation, who are but
creatures as well as men;
34. Wherefore not the holy angels, for they are not of the nature of
God, as it is written, "He took not upon him the nature of angels,
but the seed of Abraham;"
35. But Elias, as beforesaid, by the secret wisdom and counsel and
love of God unto man, above angels, was exalted upon the throne of
glory for a moment, to represent the Person of God the Father, and
he was made the protector of my God, when God became a child;
36. And it was Elias, by virtue of his commission, as a faithful
spiritual steward upon the throne of glory, that filled the Lord
Jesus with those great revelations of His former glory, that He
possessed in the heavens, when He was the immortal Father; and it
was Elias that spake those words from heaven, saying, "This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."
37. Hear him again, when Christ was transfigured upon the mount,
that His garment glittered with the glory of his transfiguration.
38. It was the visible glorious appearance of the persons of Moses
and Elias talking with Him, that were the instrumental commissioners
of that visible glory of the Lord Jesus unto His disciples, who
said, "Master, it is good for us to be here;" for that glory was so
great, that they would have been building of tabernacles for a
continuance in it.
39. Again, I declare, from the Lord, that Elias, by virtue of his
commission, did fill elect men and angels also with revelation to
keep them in obedience, until the Lord Jesus was upon the throne of
His glory again.
40. So that when the Lord Jesus, who was an absolute creature, cried
in His agony unto His Father, and when He prayed unto his Father
that that cup might pass from Him if it were possible, it being a
dreadful cup for His innocent flesh and blood to drink, He being as
sensible of pain in His body as we are in our bodies; and when He
cried out saying, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" and
"Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit;"
41. I say again, from the Lord, that Elias, by commission from this
Man Jesus, was that Father that He thus cried unto in His mortality,
Elias being then in glory.
42. And the chief ground of all those actions, and sufferings, and
cryings out of the Lord Jesus, in the condition of a creature, unto
a Father, or a Creator, was to fulfil the Scriptures foretold by His
Prophets in the time of the law. Therefore He said, "Heaven and
earth shall pass away, but my word shall not pass away."
42.(sic) Again, but you may say unto me, did God the third day rise
from the dead by His own power, or by the power of His deputy Elias?
43. To which I answer, He by His own decree, and spiritual compact
with Elias, and by that Spirit of faith in His innocent body, the
which faith died in His pure body and quickened immediately, and
brought forth, at the appointed time, that natural innocent body out
of the grave, a pure spiritual body, which naturally (at the time
appointed) ascended into glory;
44. For it was impossible for God by death to be held in the grave;
because, His Person being pure, His pure spirit and death could not
remain together, because there was no sympathy, or agreement, or
union between them;
45. Yea, they were so contrary, it was impossible for them to be
together, except one of them were absolutely extinguished;
46. Wherefore, death being too weak, the Lord Jesus, who is the only
God of all created life, brake through death, and hell, and the
grave, and through all the sins of His elect, by the shedding of His
most precious blood, and so entered into His eternal glory, that all
those that have faith in His glorious Person may be delivered at the
appointed time from sin, hell, death, and the grave, and enter into
eternal glory with Him, when He comes in the clouds of heaven.
47. Again, the reason why men's bodies in death, or after death, do
rot or stink in the grave, and come to dust, is, because there was
sin in their bodies whilst they lived, the which sin and death had a
sympathy, and, as it were, a sweet communion together, whereby death
had full power, as lord and king, to keep the spirits and bodies in
the dust, until the time appointed of the Lord of life.
48. But, on the contrary, if men had no sin in their natures or
bodies, they might live and die, and naturally rise again by their
own power, in their own time, as the Lord of life did, whose body
was too pure to see corruption.
49. Thus, unto you that have faith in the Lord Jesus, it is not
strange that Elias should represent the Person of God the Father,
until the Lord Jesus ascended into the right hand of all power and
glory of His Father Elias again.
50. Then, when Jesus was set down in the throne of the glory of the
Father again, Elias then, as a glorified creature, did return all
praise and glory unto the Lord Jesus his Creator; so that now it is
the Lord Jesus alone, by His Holy Spirit, that revealeth all
spiritual and heavenly wisdom to elect men and angels;
51. Elias having now, with exceeding joy, surrendered up his
spiritual and glorious stewardship, of representing the Person of
God the Father, unto the right owner, and sole heir of heaven and
earth, and all that therein is, the Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal
Father, God alone, blessed to all eternity.
52. I know I have spoken enough to the spiritual Christian of this
truth.
CHAPTER IX.

1. Of all Priests or Ministers in this World being false, not
knowing the true God; therefore not sent by the God of all Truth,
the Man Jesus.
AGAIN, I declare, by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that about
this fourteen hundred years, there hath not been one true prophet,
nor minister, sent with a commission from the Lord Jesus, to
declare, or write, or preach, the everlasting gospel of truth and
peace unto His elect.
2. Wherefore I declare (by virtue of my commission, received by
voice of words from the Lord Jesus) that all the ministry in this
world, whether prophetical or ministerial, with all the worship
taught by them, whether invisible or visible, to the people, it is
all a lie, and an abomination unto the Lord;
3. Both the ministry and their worship are as acceptable unto my
God, the Man Jesus, that sent me, as the cutting off of a dog's
neck.
4. Now unto you that discern truth from the Lord, I shall give you
light into this truth.
5. First I declare, that all the true commissionated prophets of the
Lord in the time of the law, from Moses unto John the Baptist, with
all the true commissionated apostles and ministers of the Lord Jesus
in the gospel, they had every one of them in their commission a
power given them, to set life and death before men, or to declare
blessing or cursing unto men, which is all one, according to their
administrations received from the Lord.
6. Again, I declare, from the Holy Spirit, that the Lord Jesus did
purpose within Himself to send His messengers three times to the
world, and but three times to this bloody unbelieving world, and no
more, for a witness or testimony unto them, and to make known unto
His elect, that He alone is the only God and everlasting Father;
7. Wherefore you shall find it written, "There are three bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit; and these three are
one." Again, it is written, "There are three bear witness in earth,
the water, the blood, and the spirit; and these three agree in one."
8. Again, I declare from the Holy Spirit, that those three in earth
are the Lord's three dispensations, given to His prophets or
messengers beforesaid;
9. The water was the commission of Moses and the prophets under the
law; the blood was the commission of the apostles, and those
ministers of the gospel chosen by appointment from the Lord; the
spirit, which is the third and last witness, by commission from the
Lord, are those two witnesses spoken of in Revelations xi.
prophesied by John, the beloved disciple of Jesus, that were to come
in the last age.
10. Whose message, or ministry, or prophecy is all invisible and
spiritual, cutting off or condemning all fleshly formal worshipping
of an invisible spiritual personal God, taken up by vain and
glorious men from the letter of the Scripture, which were the
prophets' and apostles' commissions, because they want a commission
from the Lord.
11. Again, I declare from the Holy Spirit, the Lord spake by voice
of word unto His three commissioners that He hath sent unto the
world.
12. Yea, I know, God the Father spake unto Moses as a man speaks
unto his friend, as it is written; and I know that God spake unto
the apostles in the Person of the Son, as it is written; because I
know the Lord Jesus spake unto me in the Person of the Holy Ghost,
or Spirit, as beforesaid.
13. Only, the two former witnesses saw the Person of God in part
visibly, but I saw the glory of His Person invisibly or within me,
because I am the messenger of the holy invisible Spirit.
14. Again, concerning those three bearing record in heaven
beforesaid; the meaning of those words is this:
15. God from heaven, in a threefold name or title, bare witness by
signs and wonders unto His three commissioners, according to their
several administrations given unto them.
16. Unto Moses and the Prophets, this personal God bare witness in
the name or title of the Father.
17. Unto the holy apostles, God bare witness in the name or title of
the Son;
18. And unto us, His third last messengers, God beareth witness in
the name or title of the Holy Spirit, because our commission is all
spiritual, we have to do only with the invisible spirits of men,
concerning the eternal estates of men's and women's persons, in the
great and notable eternal day of the Lord's account:
19. Therefore, instead of natural signs upon the bodies or persons
of men and women, as in the two former commissions of the prophets
and the apostles, the Lord Jesus beareth witness that He hath sent
us, by spiritual signs or wonders upon the spirits of those that are
sealed up, through our mouths, unto eternal life and unto eternal
death, as many do bear witness, whose eyes are opened at this day in
England, in this great city of London.
20. Again, this is a true testimony unto you that have faith in the
Lord Jesus, that He hath sent us by His Holy Spirit, because there
is none upon this earth that beareth witness unto that Man Jesus
that was crucified at Jerusalem, to be the only God and everlasting
Father, but we only;
21. As Moses, the prophets, and the apostles bare witness in their
times unto this Jesus, to be the only God, and alone eternal Father.
22. But on the contrary, there is hardly a minister in the world
that confesseth an invisible God; but they preach unto the people,
either a God of two persons, or a God of three persons, that is a
monster, instead of a one true personal God;
23. Or else they teach the people to worship an infinite Spirit,
that is everywhere, without a body or person; but He is fain to
borrow His creatures' bodies to live in;
24. That is, a God of words only, without any form or substance, or
an infinite Nothing, that never can be comprehended nor apprehended
in the least by any formed creature; a cursed, lying, imaginary God,
from man's own unclean blind reason, which occasioneth all kind of
bloodshed and cruelty to be committed in this wicked world between
man and man.
25. For if men understood, indeed, that there is but one only wise
God, and that this God is a distinct body or Person, as a man is a
distinct body or person, then would men understand, that all those
that are led by the voice of the Holy Spirit of God, the Man Jesus,
to work righteousness in their bodies, they lived in, they only
shall appear with bodies of all righteousness, like unto their God,
the Man Jesus, visibly to behold, face to face, the glorious body of
the God of all righteousness for everlasting, world without end.
26. Thus it is clear to the understanding of all those that are
appointed to know the true God, the Man Jesus, unto life eternal,
that there is no true ministry in the world, because they teach not
the true God unto the people;
27. Therefore as it is written, they are blind leaders of the blind,
therefore they must needs both fall into the ditch. Oh! it is an
eternal ditch.
28. These are those merchants of the letter of the Scripture, that
make the blind nations their prey; these are those ravening wolves
that come in sheep's clothing; these are those dumb dogs in
spiritual things, that bark at true prophecy and heavenly
revelation, that a man declares by commission from the Lord Jesus;
29. These are those that the apostle Paul complained of in his time,
that bewitched the people to turn from the spiritual gospel to the
legal form, who began by the apostle in spirit, but were deluded by
false hypocrites to be made perfect in the flesh; these are of those
hypocrites that were in Christ's time, who, under pretence of long
prayers, devour widows' houses;
30. These are those hypocrites that are always teaching of God what
He should do for His own glory, when indeed it is their own glory,
in lusting after things that perish, they desire when they thus
pray, or preach, or prate;
31. These are those bloody hypocrites, and workers of iniquity, that
the Lord Jesus will never own, because He never sent them.

CHAPTER X.

1. Of all heathen Magistrates, and their heathen Prophets' false
Worship, or Image.
AGAIN, I declare, by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that there is
no magistrate in this world, that bears the name of a Christian,
that hath any authority or commission from the Lord Jesus to set up
any visible form of worship whatsoever, to compel the spirits or
consciences of men to bow down to his image that he hath set up for
his own glory;
2. Because ever since the Lord Jesus ascended into His glory, He
alone is the teacher of all His elect by His Holy Spirit.
3. It is true, that in the time of the law, before God became flesh,
there were many magistrates and priests commissionated from the Lord
to set up and to declare the true worship of God unto all Israel;
4. And it was death by the command of the Lord, if the people
despised to yield obedience unto it, because it was the Lord's
worship, and not man's worship, set up by his own lying imagination,
that would be a God.
5. But he is a devil, for his creating of a worship to deceive the
people without a commission from the Lord, and by taking the
prerogative power and glory of God to himself, who will not give His
glory to another, as it is written;
6. Therefore in the Revelations, the dragon there spoken of is the
imagination of the beast; and the beast is the body of the
magistrate, wherein that dragon imagination liveth; and the false
prophet there spoken of is the magistrate's priest;
7. And the image of the beast is that false worship set up by the
imagination of the magistrate, and the serpent counsel of his false
prophet or priest, to deceive themselves, and the people with them;
8. Therefore it is written, "And all that dwell upon the earth shall
worship him whose names are not written in the book of life, of the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world;"
9. That is, all reprobates, both rich and poor, shall bow down unto
that false, idolatrous worship set up by heathen magistrates and
their heathen false prophets, the national priests, who call
themselves Christian magistrates and Christian ministers, and are
blindly called so by the people also.
10. And yet both of these devils together persecute with the sword
of steel all spiritual Christians, under the name or title of
blasphemers, seducers, heretics, deceivers of the people, and such-
like, because the spiritual Christian cannot bow down unto that
carnal, anti-christian, formal worship set up by those carnal
magistrates and their carnal ministers beforesaid.
11. Who, being both lovers of the glory of this world, loving to be
honoured as gods, for that cursed heathenish idol-worship from their
own invention, set up to deceive themselves and those appointed to
damnation with them.
12. Wherefore the dragon magistrate, and the false prophets, his
serpent ministers, that committed spiritual fornication together,
and all those of their own spirits, shall every one of them, in the
day of the Lord's vengeance, burn in their spirits and bodies
together as a lake of fire.
13. Those spirits and bodies that they shall appear with in the
resurrection, shall be that lake of spiritual fire and brimstone
that, by the decree of the Lord Jesus, shall burn together to all
eternity;
14. This is that giving them their own blood to drink, who eat up
the innocent as bread, and thought they did God good service in
shedding of the blood of the lambs of Jesus, as their forefathers
did;
15. Then will these Scriptures be fulfilled, "And those mine
enemies, that would not that I should reign over them, bring them
and slay them before my face;" and, "Go ye cursed into everlasting
fire."
16. And the carcases of the rebels shall be cast out, where the worm
never dies, and the fire never goes out.
17. And, "Tophet is ordained of old for the king;" that Tophet is
the body of man, and that king is the spirit of unclean reason in
man.
18. "For behold, the day cometh .that shall burn as an oven, and all
the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble;
19. "And the day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord of
hosts, and ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be ashes
under the soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, saith
the Lord of hosts:
20. "Fill ye up the measures of your fathers, ye serpents, ye
generation of vipers; how can ye escape the damnation of hell?
21. "For ye shall have judgment without mercy that hath showed no
mercy; but the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and
murderers, whoremongers, and sorcerers (or astrologers), and
idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which
burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death."
22. Again, the bloody persecutors beforesaid, instead of feeding and
clothing the hungry saint, quite contrary, they do not only take
away the food and raiment of the Lord Jesus, in His elect innocent
lambs, but they crucify the Lord of life afresh, in the shedding of
the blood of His believers,
23. Because they yield obedience to the spiritual law of faith and
love, or command of the Lord Jesus, either by prophesying, or
writing, or speaking the truth by command from the Man Jesus, who is
the only spiritual Magistrate and Minister unto all that are
appointed unto eternal glory with Him, in that glorious creation of
that new heaven and earth above the stars, when this creation
beneath the stars is utterly destroyed, and fitted only for
persecuting dragon-serpent devils to lament, howl, and weep to all
eternity upon this earth, where the saints by them were put to grief
for a moment.

CHAPTER XI.

1. The same Subject continued.
BUT some may say unto me, Do you not allow of the civil magistrate
to govern the rude people?
2. To this I answer: The magistrate is very needful in every
inhabited land, for the government of the people in all civil
things, to do equal justice between man and man.
3. If such a magistrate could be found, it would be a rare thing.
4. Again, I declare, from the Holy Spirit, although the magistrate
be but a heathen ruler, as he is; wherefore Christ saith of this
magistrate unto His apostles, "The kings or princes of the Gentiles
exercise lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon
them are called benefactors; but ye shall not be so: but he that is
greatest among you, let him be as the younger;"
5. Yet I say from the Lord, the magistrate beareth not the sword in
vain; but he is a type of the true spiritual Magistrate, that can do
nothing but equal justice between the just and unjust, the Lord
Jesus Christ.
6. Wherefore all men ought to yield obedience to the civil laws of
the magistrate, either by executing of his laws, or by patiently
bearing the curse of the law upon their own persons, leaving all
vengeance unto God.
7. Or else they rebel against God, and they are in danger of an
eternal curse: because the government of this world, and the glory
thereof, belongs only unto the wise and prudent heathen magistrates
in this earth, who are the very sons of Cain, that old serpent-
dragon devil, that slew his righteous brother Abel, that he and his
seed that are of his own spirit might be, the lords and rulers of
this world for ever.
8. Because Cain thought, and his dark angels think, that there is no
world at all, but this only they have purchased the lordship of this
perishing world at a dear rate, for it was the price of the innocent
blood of righteous Abel; it is their only heaven.
9. Therefore let us, that have received faith to believe in the
glorious Person of the Lord Jesus, by His power patiently suffer the
cursed spirit of Cain in his heathen magistrates to shed all our
innocent blood, if our God will have it so; that they may fill up
the measure of their fathers' sins, from the blood of righteous Abel
and the holy prophets, to the precious blood of the Lord Jesus, and
the holy apostles;
10. That our blood, that are the two last witnesses and prophets of
the Lord Jesus, may make the last persecutors of Christians complete
devils, with their father Cain, who was the first bloody persecutor
of the first suffering Christian.
11. Therefore it is written, that "Christ was a Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world," He being slain in believing Abel.
12. I say from the Lord, by the power of His Holy Spirit, patiently
let us yield up our lives with our God unto those perishing gods
beforesaid; because we that suffer with Him are appointed to enter
into an eternal kingdom of glory in another world, hid from the wise
and prudent rulers of this vanishing world.
13. Therefore it is written, "Which of the rulers have believed in
Him?" Again, as it is written, "Why do the heathens so furiously
rage together, the kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take
counsel together, against the Lord and against His Anointed," or
against His Christ?
14. Again, as it is written by Paul, "Howbeit, we speak wisdom
amongst them that are perfect; yet not the wisdom of this world, nor
of the princes of this world, that come to nought."
15. Again, it is written, "Which none of the princes of this world
knew; for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord
of glory."
16. Again, that world that we are to reign in, after we have
suffered, it was purchased also by blood; but it was the price of
the precious, invaluable undefiled blood of our God, the Man Jesus,
who by His Holy Spirit, that sent us only, maketh us willing to
taste a little of His cup that He so deeply drank of.
17. The servant is not greater than the Master, because we are to
sit down with Him upon His eternal throne of glory, to behold His
face, in the presence of all His holy angels.
18. Then these Scriptures will be fulfilled "Blessed are they which
are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven." Again, "Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely,
for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets which were
before you."
19. Again, "Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the
kingdom of their Father."
20. Again, "For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of His
Father, with His angels; and then He shall reward every man
according to his works."
21. Again, "Then shall the King say unto them on His right hand,
Come, ye blessed of my Father; inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world."
22. Again, "Then shall He say unto them on the left hand, Depart
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire; prepared for the devil
and his angels."

CHAPTER XII.

1. Of the Mortality of the Soul, and how and when it became mortal.

AGAIN, I declare, by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that, since
the fall of our first parents, the spirit and body of man are both
mortal; and that, by the decree of the Creator, the soul and body of
man are both procreated or begot together, and they are both of one
nature, and so both but one creature;
2. For it is the invisible spirit that liveth in the seed and nature
of man, that by the decree of God creates or begets that form of
flesh in the person of a man or woman according to their kind.
3. And thus it is with this whole creation; every seed or spirit
naturally, by the wisdom of the Creator, brings forth their own
bodies or kind, whether man, beast, fish, or fowl; and all things
else that grow naturally bring forth in their season according to
their natures.
4. Because the Creator, by His secret counsel and wisdom decreed
within His glorious Person, before anything was created or formed by
Him, that all things or creatures that should be created or formed
by His infinite wisdom should bring forth their own bodies or kind
only, and no other, for ever.
5. Therefore, when men's and beast's seeds are unnaturally mixed
together, contrary to their kind, the Lord discovers them both, to
their destruction, and His glory.
6. Wherefore, I declare, from the Lord Jesus, that it is a cursed
imagination in any man to think, when men die, their spirits may go
into other forms and bodies, contrary to their own natures or kind,
as many a cursed lying atheist prates, that denies the resurrection
of men's bodies, through the love of some dark fleshly lust they
live in.
7. They are in spiritual darkness, understanding nothing of the
power of God, and so erring, not knowing the Scriptures, as it is
written, nor the power of God.
8. Therefore it is a common thing for these blind atheists, in their
discourse, to say, when men die, their spirits may or do go into a
horse, or into a root, or into a flower, with many more such-like
cursed expressions.
9. They being more ignorant if it be possible, of the Lord Jesus,
through the love of fleshly pleasures, than the brute beasts,
therefore they reason against their own reason, and say, this
creation or world had never any beginning, nor ever shall have any
ending, two cursed lies.
10. Again, they call perishing nature God or Creator, saying, God is
all things, and all things is God.
11. Thus these blaspheming devils liken the incorruptible Spirit of
God, the man Jesus, not only unto the unclean spirit and cursed
imagination living in the body of corrupt man, but unto the spirits
of unclean beasts and creeping things, as those atheists in the time
of Paul.
12. These are those who received the truth to prate of it only, but
not in the love of it, having pleasure in unrighteousness, therefore
given up to strong delusions to believe a lie, that they might all
be damned.
13. Then these Scriptures will be fulfilled, "He made all things for
His own glory, and the wicked for the day of wrath."
14. Again, "He shall come in flaming fire to render vengeance upon
them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ."
15. Again, "But these, as natural brute beasts made to be taken and
destroyed, speak evil of the things they understand not, and shall
utterly perish in their own corruption."
16. Again, "They having eyes full of adultery, and cannot cease from
sin, beguiling unstable souls; an heart they have exercised with
covetous practices, cursed children which have forsaken the right
way and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam the son of
Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness."
17. Again, "Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame;
wandering stars, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for 
ever."
18. Again, "And also Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied of
these, saying, Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his
saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are
ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which they have
ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly
sinners have spoken against Him."

CHAPTER XIII.

1. The same Subject continued.

AGAIN, unto you that see by the eye of faith from the Lord, I shall
show you that general error amongst men concerning the spirit of man
in death.
2. Some say the spirit dieth not at all, but immediately goeth into
heaven or into hell; and the body goes to the dust only.
3. Others say, the spirit dieth not, but goeth into another form,
either of man, or some other creature, as beforesaid.
4. Others say, or think, all men's spirits go into a hell or
purgatory, when they die, for a season.
5. Others blasphemously say, that the spirit of man is God, and that
the body only dies and turns to dust.
6. These say also, God is an infinite Spirit, and all spirits came
from His Spirit, and so return into His Spirit again.
7. Others think and say, the spirit and body turns to dust for ever.
8. Indeed, almost all men are in darkness, because they walk by
thinking only about things of eternity; but about things that
perish, they think them hardly ever sure enough unto them.
9. Wherefore, unto you whose bodies are the temples of the Holy
Ghost, from the Lord Jesus,
I shall declare unto you the truth of this secret.
10. You may know, that the spirit is nothing at all without a body,
and a body is nothing at all without a spirit; neither of them can
live, or have a being, without the other.
11. You may know it is the spirit only in the body of man that
lives, and speaks, and walks, and works, and eats, and drinks, and
dies.
12. For the spirit is a natural fire of reason, which is that life
of light, heat, or motion, that as a fire kindleth life and strength
through all the flesh or body of man.
13. Only the principal part of the understanding of this natural
fire of the spirit of reason liveth in the head of man, because that
is the glory of the man; so that the spirit or soul is the man,
although it cannot possibly be without the form or body.
14. Wherefore when man dies and returns to his dust, it is that
natural spirit of the fire of reason that was the life or spirit of
the body that dieth, or is quenched, and goeth out within the body,
as a fire goeth out in an oven that is closed.
15. So doth the spirit of man die within his body from all sensible
life, heat, or motion, until the visible coming of the Lord of life
in the clouds of heaven at the last day.
16. Therefore it is written, "Dust thou art and unto dust thou shalt
return."
17. When the Lord spake those words, He did not speak to the flesh,
or outward form or body of the man, but He spake to the inward
spirit or soul, that understands the words of a spirit.
18. Again, it is written, "In the day thou eatest thereof, thou
shalt die the death;" that is, if thou, through disobedience to my
command, dost forfeit the image of thy creation, then thou shalt see
mortality or death within thy own body, both spiritual and natural,
and the fear of eternal death also.
19. Thus it is clear, to you that believe in the Lord Jesus, that
the spirit of man dies and returns to dust within the body, because
nothing can possibly die, but it must first live;
20. So likewise nothing can possibly quicken or live again, but that
which is absolutely dead, or dust, or asleep, void of all motion,
heat, light, life, or sense, being utterly annihilated to itself and
all other creatures, only being alive in the memory of God, that God
alone, the Man Jesus, might have all the glory in the new creating
of mankind at the last out of dust, as He had in creating of man at
the first out of dust;
21. According to that saying in the Revelation, "Behold, I create
all things new," in answer to that creation in Genesis.
32. Thus it is with the grain or body of wheat; except it dies, it
never comes to perfection, but abides alone in the dust for ever;
but, on the contrary, if the spirit of life, which is in the body of
wheat, doth absolutely die within its body, then, by the decree of
God, it quickens out of death into a new life immediately, and
brings forth a glorious resurrection in due season of many bodies in
the same form, like unto that which died, of the very same nature.
23. Thus it is, by the decree of the Lord Jesus, with the natural
spirits of all the elect.
24. First they are dead in sins and trespasses, before they are
capable, by the Spirit of truth, to live in righteousness; so
likewise the spirits of men and women must be absolutely dead, when
they fall asleep in the dust, or else they were never capable to
rise again, neither in glory nor in shame.
25. So that, by the decree of God, all life, both spiritual and
natural, must first enter into death, that through death, or in
death, they may quicken a new life of a glorious increase, both
spiritual and natural; so that death in its place is as useful for
the Creator's raising of glory to Himself as life is in its place.
26. This proves the truth of these Scriptures, "He poured out His
soul unto death." Again, "The soul that sins shall die." Again, "He
cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost." Again, "In the day
thou eatest thereof thou shalt die the death."
27. Again, "His soul was made an offering for sin." Again, "He was
put to death in the flesh and quickened in the Spirit."
28. I know I have written enough to satisfy in the proof of this
truth all spiritual Christians.

CHAPTER XIV.

1. With what Bodies the Elect shall appear after Death.

AGAIN, it is written, "And those that sleep in Jesus shall rise
first;" that is, those that fell asleep in the believing of the
visible coming of the glorious Person of the Lord Jesus in the
clouds of heaven in power and great glory, their bodies shall be
raised first out of the sleep of death.
2. Because they were united by faith unto the Person of their Lord
Jesus, who was the first that ever rose from the dead by His own
power, who raised life in death or out of death, therefore He was
called the first-fruits of the resurrection, or of life from death:
3. Again, you that see by faith may understand, that not the same
bodies that died or fell asleep shall appear any more at all than
the body of wheat doth as beforesaid, which Saul fitly compareth
together in their resurrection where it is written, "But God giveth
it a body as it pleaseth Him, and to every seed his own body:"
4. That is, as beforesaid, that grain or body of wheat that died
quickened a new life out of death, and brought forth in a glorious
manner, in due season, many bodies of the same form of that that
died, and yet that body that died appeared no more.
5. So likewise it shall be with all that died in the faith of Jesus,
not the same bodies or persons they lived in and died in shall
appear again any more, but that spirit of faith mixed with pure
love, and all other spiritual virtues, that were in their former
bodies, by the which they died unto the power of sip, and lived unto
the power of righteousness:
6. That divine seed of faith sowed in the former body died with the
first body, and immediately quickened a new life out of death by the
decree of the Lord Jesus.
7. For .you know there is no time now unto God, nor unto them that
are dead, and so brought forth a spiritual body in its form like
unto that in the dust; yea, of a body of pure righteousness, of the
same nature of that holy spirit of faith that raised it out of
death; yea, a glorious body, brighter than the sun in its strength,
and as swift as thought;
8. Yea, bodies of such a bright burning glory, that no persecuting
Canaanites can behold and live, because our spirits and bodies,
according to our faith, shall be made like unto the glorious body of
God, the Man Jesus, the which no man in mortality with his natural
eye can behold and live.
9. Then shall all the elect, in the twinkling of an eye, both those
that sleep in the dust, and those that are alive at that time, whose
bodies also shall be changed like unto those that sleep; then, I
say, they shall all ascend together as one body, to meet their head,
the Lord Jesus in the air;
10. And with their King they shall enter into His kingdom of eternal
glory, where that new heaven and new earth are before-said, there
with holy angels to behold the glorious face of the only wise God,
and everlasting Father, the Lord Jesus Christ, with new glorious
songs and praises unto their Redeemer that was dead, as it is
written, to redeem us by His precious blood from eternal death;
11. And now, behold, He liveth for evermore; therefore we eternally
live with Him.

CHAPTER XV.

1. How the Bodies and Spirits of the World of Elect Believers shall
be like unto the glorious Body of God their Redeemer, in His Glory
to Eternity.

AGAIN, I declare, by revelation from the Holy Spirit, that when the
elect are thus glorified, they are absolutely of the very same
glorious nature, both in spirit and body, as God is; as God and they
were both of one nature in mortality, sin only excepted.
2. Wherefore, as the Spirit of faith and love infinitely, in the
glorious Person of God, overfloweth, as a fountain, continually with
revelation of new heavenly wisdom, from whence flow new joys and
glory to Himself and the holy angels;
3. So shall every believer, according to his degree in glory, be as
a well springing up unto everlasting life, of revelation of new
wisdom, from whence flow new joys and glory within his own person,
like unto his God;
4. Only they shall naturally return the glory and praise unto their
fountain, the Lord Jesus, for this their exaltation upon the
glorious throne of His own likeness.
5. For it is the righteous acting and suffering that was in the
innocent body of the Lord Jesus when He was in mortality, that by
His infinite wisdom is made naturally that glorious fire to kindle
new revelation of heavenly wisdom within His body, for the  increase
of His glory to all eternity as beforesaid.
6. So, likewise, all those righteous actings and sufferings, for
truth's sake, that were acted and suffered in our former bodies, by
the appointment of our God shall be conveyed into our new spiritual
bodies, that are like unto our God, and shall be that glorious fire
naturally to kindle revelation of new wisdom, from whence flow
glorious new songs and praises unto our Redeemer, the fountain of
all our glory, for everlasting, world without end, as abundantly
beforesaid.
7. Then shall these Scriptures be fulfilled: "To him that overcometh
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my Father in His throne."
8. Again, "And he that overcometh and keepeth my works unto the end,
to him will I give power over the nations; and he shall rule them
with a rod of iron, as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken
to shivers, even as I received of my Father; and I will give him the
morning star." Again, "Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in
the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out; and I will write
upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God,
which is New Jerusalem, which cometh down out of heaven from my God;
and I will write upon him my new name."
10. Again "He that over cometh shall inherit all things; and I will
be his God, and he shall be my son."
11. Again, "Henceforth I will not drink of this fruit of the vine
until that day I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom."
12. Again, "And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful Witness, and
the first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the kings of the
earth."
13. Unto Him that hath loved us, and washed us from our sins in His
own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and His
Father, to Him be glory and dominion, for ever and ever. Amen.

CHAPTER XVI.

1. Of the Difference between the Glory of Elect Men and Angels in
Heaven above.

AGAIN, from the Holy Spirit, I shall show you the difference between
elect men and angels in glory.
2. The angels' natures or spirits being pure reason, they must
always be supplied by revelation from the Spirit of faith in the
Person of God, to keep their spirits in pure obedience unto their
Creator.
3. But, on the contrary, the believers' spirits being of the very
same divine nature of God, they are but one voice or spirit,
speaking all pure obedience within themselves unto their Redeemer.
4. To whom alone be all glory and praise from my spirit, with His
elect men and angels, to all eternity.



Quakers

The Discovery of the Great Enmity of the Serpent against the Seed of
the Woman:
William Duesbury

Source:
http://quod.lib.umich.edu/e/eebo/A35836.0001.001/1:1?rgn=div1;vJew=t
oc

Title Page

THE DISCOVERY
Of the great enmity of the Serpent against the seed of the Woman
WHICH witnesseth against him where he rules, both in Rulers, Priests
and People:
WHOSE hearts are now made manifest in this great day of the Lord's
power; wherein he is sending his Sons and Daughters in the power of
his spirit to run to and fro to declare his word.
WHICH Discovereth the state of England, who according to her own
lusts hath heaped up Teachers to herself that hath spoken smooth
things to her, calling her the beautiful Church and Spouse of
Christ; but in the day of trial she is found in enmity to Christ in
his appearance in his children, and to be in the estate deluded from
the spirit of truth, recorded in 2 Tim. 4.2.3 which cannot endure
sound Doctrine, having itching ears and turns them away from the
truth to fables; and now are England's Teachers tried, she hath
leaped up to herself; and their doctrine proved: and their Ministry
made manifest in the great enmity they manifest against Christ in
persecuting the bodies of his Saints, them to destroy whom he hath
sent to preach freely his eternal Word; for which they are stoned,
beaten, and imprisoned; and many of England's Teachers whom she
upholds, stirs up the people so to do: Being deceived, not regarding
what is spoken, that neither fornicator, nor idolater, nor
adulterer, nor effeminate, nor abuser of themselves with mankind,
nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revellers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
A TRUE TESTIMONY of him the world knows by name, William Duesbury,
and in scorn calls Quaker; who hath been by them imprisoned in York,
Darby, Leicester, and Northampton, where he is now kept in the
common Gaol for the word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ.
ALSO his Call to the Ministry of the everlasting Gospel by the still
voice of the Spirit of God and his mighty power destroying with the
flaming sword the disobedient that would not stand in his counsel,
and causing the soul to submit to his counsel the light that comes
from Christ in it to wait on him to open the seals of the Book, and
make known the mystery of eternal life to the soul, the Scripture
testifieth is in Christ the truth of it to know as it is in Jesus.
THE WORD OF THE LORD TO ALL IN ENGLAND whom the Lord hath betrusted
with power from the highest to the lowest, to see the peace be kept;
and to judge the cause of the People with righteous judgement.
WITH A LAMENTATION over all in England; who oppose Christ in his
spiritual appearance, and to slight the day of your visitation to
your own destruction.
From the common Gaol in Northampton the 25. day of the 4. month,
1655.
LONDON,
Printed for Giles Calvert at the West end of Paul's, 1655.
The Discovery of the great enmity of the Serpent, against the seed
of the woman, which witness against him where he rules, both in
Ruler, Priest and People.

Oh people in England!

AM I become your enemy, because I tell you the truth; and deal
plainly with you in declaring the mind of the Lord unto you? which
in the eternal riches of his love he hath made known unto me, by the
word of God and testimony of Jesus Christ, for which word and
testimony I suffer outward bonds and persecutions, as my Lord and
Master did; who was called a blasphemer, Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils, by the High Priests; who cried to the unjust Magistrates, to
deliver him up into their hands, that their persecuting murdering
spirits; that thirsted after his blood, might be satisfied; which
the unjust men in Authority to do them a pleasure, in satisfying
their wills abused their power, and delivered him up; and though
they proved not anything against him, they put him to death, calling
him a blasphemer; and he sealed his testimony with his blood: And
all my holy Brethren, Prophets, and apostles, were called
Blasphemers, Heretics, Seducers, and Deluders, by the false
Prophets, High-Priests, and Pharisees then; who professed the name
of God in words, but denied him in their practises; and persecuted
his children, who were guided by his word, under the names formerly
written: as I and my brethren is now persecuted by the same
generation, which profess God and Christ in words, but denying him
in their practises, living in pride, and pleasures, envy and murder:
every way persecuting, and seeking to destroy the bodies of the
Saints of the most high God; where the righteous seed is raised up,
which witnesseth against their unrighteous practises, and discovers
them in their secret hypocrisy, which is hid under their voluntary
humility, which causeth them to appear what they are, and manifests
what was hid in their hearts, under their faire coverings of outward
forms and profession of Religion, which they now manifest forth by
their fruit, whose children they are, in obedience to their father
the Devil; who was a persecuter and a murderer from the beginning,
whose works they now do that profess Christ in words, but denies to
be guided by his spirit; for his spirit is no persecuter: and so are
they made manifest (in what they do) to all that have eyes to see,
that they are strangers to Christ, while they continue in Cain's
nature persecuting the righteous seed without a cause, as he did,
and doth in this Nation: both in the North of it, and in other
Prisons in several places of it, there hath been cast into them the
Saints and Children of the most high God for obeying his will, in
witnessing forth his eternal Word that he hath made manifest in
them: And no breach of any National law proved against them, but a
Popish law made in Queen Mary's Reign, which some hath suffered
under; and many others of the Saints and Children of the most high
God, they have persecuted and cast into prisons, and not the breach
of any National proved against them; but in the pride and envy of
their hearts do they persecute the innocent, to satisfy their own
wills; as I am a witness against them who have persecuted me, and
cast me into prison under the name of a Seducer (as they say,) for
the Seducing of the people of this nation, and for suspicion of
Blasphemy, and breaking of the public peace, in dispersing
principles contrary to the truth of the Gospel, and peace of the
Nation; and not any accuser appeared to my face to prove what they
charge against me, as is formerly written, either by the law of God
or the law of the Nation; but the Serpent in whom he rules, hath
manifest his enmity against me, whom the Lord hath redeemed from the
Earth; and sent to preach the everlasting Gospel to those that dwell
upon the Earth; and to witness against the wickedness of the dark
world that the deeds thereof are evil, for which testimony the world
that hates the light that comes from Christ, whom they ever
persecuted to fulfil the measure of their fathers iniquities; hath
me and my brethren persecuted under the names as formerly written;
charging me with making tumults and breaking the public peace, for
walking in obedience to the Spirit of Christ, which guided all he
sent to preach his Gospel, to run to and fro as I have done in thee
oh England! that knowledge may be increased, as is recorded in the
Scripture of truth, Dan. 12.4. And is according to the commands of
Christ; Go your ways, Behold I send you forth as lambs among wolves,
carry neither purse nor scrip nor shoos, and salute no man by the
way, and into what city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such
things as is set before you, Luke 10, 3, 4 & 8 verses. But beware of
men, for they will deliver you up to their counsel, and they will
scourge you in their synagogues, and you shall be brought before
Governors and Kings for my name's sake, but he that endures unto the
end shall be saved, Mat. 10.17, 18, & 22 verses.

According as it is written the wicked world that always did as they
now do persecute the Messengers of Jesus Christ, who to them were
and are sent to witness against them in their markets and meeting
places that their deeds are evil; which the children of this
generation, that are strangers to the leadings of the spirit of
truth, calls them that are guided by the spirit to walk according to
the Scripture; makers of tumults, movers of sedition, breakers of
the public peace, as the unrighteous generation did, who persecuted
Christ and his apostles, whose practice was to declare the mind of
God in their synagogues and markets, as the ministers of Christ do
now; And they found him in the Temple sitting in the midst of the
doctors both hearing and asking the questions, Luke 2.46. When Jesus
came to Nazareth where he had been brought up, and as his custom
was, he went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and as was
declaring the word of eternal life to the people, all they in the
synagogue when they heard these things he spake were filled with
wrath, and rose up and thrust him out of the city, and led him to
the brow of the hill (whereon the city was built) that they might
cast him down headlong: But he passed through the midst of them, and
went his way, Luke 4.16, 28, 29, 30. And Paul an apostle of Jesus
Christ, not of man, neither by man; but by Jesus Christ, and God the
Father, who raised him from the dead, Gal. 1.1. He was a chosen
vessel unto the Lord, to bear his name amongst the gentiles, and
kings, and the children of Israel, Acts 9.15. It was his practise to
go to and fro to preach the word of eternal life to the people in
their synagogues and markets, as the ministers of Christ doth. When
Paul & Silas came to Thessalonica, where was a synagogue of the
Jews; Paul as his manner was went in unto them, and three Sabbath
days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures, Acts 17, 1,2. When
Paul went unto Athens his spirit stirred in him when he saw the
whole city given to Idolatry, therefore disputed he in the synagogue
with the Jews and with the devout persons, and in the markets daily
with them that met with him. Then certain of the philosophers of the
epicureans and of the stoics encountered him, and some said what
will this babbler say, other some he seemeth to be a setter forth of
strange Gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the
Resurrection, Acts 17.16, 17, 18. verses.

And all my Brethren this day with me; that witnesseth Christ Jesus
risen from the dead, and are sent to preach Christ the resurrection,
who hath enlightened every one that is come into the world; that all
his light that from him comes, that shows them sin; wait for his
power to cleanse them from sin, and raise them out of the fallen and
dead estate, by the power of his resurrection, to live in pure
obedience to God.

We are by these the world calls their ministers and teachers,
withstood as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses. But the Lord is
making them daily manifest that all shall see their folly, and by
them be no more deceived, 2 Tim. 3.8, 9. And as the heathen
Philosophers, before written, encountered Paul, so hath these men
encountered with us, as before written, for witnessing Jesus the
resurrection, and the true light that lighteneth every one that
comes into the world.

And as Tertullus the heathen orator accused Paul before Felix. Acts
24.1, 5. We have found this man a pestilent fellow, and mover of
sedition amongst all the Jews throughout the world, and a ring-
leader of the sect of the Nazarenes. The same spirit that was in the
heathen orator Tertullus that led him to accuse Paul before Felix,
did Edward Bowles, whom the people of the world calls minister, and
teaches in the high place in York; manifest to be in him, who never
had spoken to me, when he by that dark spirit was led to give in an
information against me; and at the time when it were expected I
should have the privilege of the law, that thieves and murderers had
by it to be tried, and my accusers to appear face to face, the said
Edward Bowles did not appear to prove against me what was written in
the information; neither a perfect copy of it would he or they that
had it in keeping give when it was demanded, lest their works of
darkness should be brought to light; but what was brought to light
when it was demanded of Edward Bowles: This is a perfect copy that
he wrote with his own hand, as followeth:
It is informed that one William Duesbury, a ringleader of the
persons called Quakers, goes up and down the country of York,
and is now in the West Riding thereof, dispersing principles
prejudicial to the truth of the Gospel, and peace of the
Commonwealth: It is therefore desired, that seeing no man is
allowed publicly to exercise his gifts to a particular
Congregation unless he be first tried and approved, that the
said William Duesbury may not be permitted to go up and down
from place to place teaching, until he receive approbation of
some persons, who shall be thought fit to judge how agreeable
his principles are to truth and peace.
This is the substance of what I delivered into Mr. Payler; but
the particular words I cannot exactly remember but I believe
they do not anything considerably vary from this paper.
E. B.

This man whom Edward Bowles call Mr. Payler was the foreman of the
Grand Jury, to whom he delivered the information against me, that
they might deliver it to Hugh Windham, who sat Judge of life and
death at the general assizes holden at York, about the time of the
13 and 14 days of the first month called March, 1653. Upon the sight
of the information given in against me, the Judge granted a warrant
in the open Court to the men that was in commission to do justice in
Yorkshire to apprehend me.

Which after that time, I being at a place called Tholthorp about 10
miles from York in the North Riding thereof, and many of the
servants of the living God with me waiting on him his power to
manifest to his glory; And while we were together there came one
George Mann in great rage two several times, with an Iron fork to
satisfy his bloody thirsty mind; the Lord with his power did him
chain, and prevented his bloody intents: To satisfy his will on me,
he went to Thomas Dickeson, who was at a place called Kirby Hall in
Yorkshire; and he accused me (as Thomas Dickeson said before him)
that I said I was Christ, upon which accusation he granted forth a
warrant on the 26 day of the second month called April: And on the
27 day, I being with the children of the Lord at Crake, John
Lockwood called high Constable apprehended me with the warrant
before mentioned; and the day being far spent, he said to the
friends with me, if they would engage for my appearance the next
day, he would show me that favour that I should stay with them that
night; (I replied these words) not any man shall engage for me,
neither desire I favour at the hands of men, if thou hast power over
the body do with it what thou hast power: Then John Lockwood said,
the day is far spent, I shall not go with thee to the Justice to
night, until to-morrow stay at thy friend's house. Reply, If thou
say I shall stay here, if the Lord please I shall be ready to go
with thee, where he gives thee power to have me; so he went away and
said he would send for me the next day: and in the night season many
of the Lord's servants and children was with me waiting on him, who
is worthy to be waited on, for he is good to the souls that wait on
him, and to the souls that seek him; when much of the night was
spent, the inhabitants of Crake in great rage and fury came to the
doors and windows of the house, like the inhabitants of wicked
Sodom, crying and rushing at the doors, and said, they would have me
forth to dispose of me according to their wills, for I should not be
there; and John Lockwood High Constable, so called, who said I
should be there until the next day, yet to do the people a pleasure,
he contrary to his word came in and took me forth, and had me into
the streets, where the people shouted with a loud voice, as they had
me to and fro from one house to another (where they sold ale) till
the people in one house let them in, and there they set two men to
watch over me until the next day, which was the 28 day of the month
before written; on which day they had me before Thomas Dickeson, who
granted forth the warrant for me to be brought before him, and did
me examine, and it was manifest before him, that what I was accused
of in the warrant, and (the day the warrant mentioned my being in
that place) was false, for I had not been in that place that day,
neither could they prove any such words spoken by me as I was
accused of; and when he had nothing against me in that warrant, then
he did commit me to prison by a warrant that he said Judge Windham
granted forth at the general assize, before written, which warrant I
never saw.

A true Copy of the Mittimus, as followeth.
North riding of Yorkshire.
To the Sheriff of the said County of York, and to the keeper of
the Gaol of the Castle of York.
Whereas there was a warrant directed for the apprehending of
William Duesbery of Stanly, for the seducing the people of this
nation, from Judge Windham the last assizes; and he being
brought before me, and refuseth to find sureties to be of good
behaviour and to appear at the next assize to be holden for the
said County, to answer the premises: You are hereby required to
receive into your custody the said William Duesbury, and him
safely to keep, until he shall be delivered by due course of
law.
Given under my hand and seal the 28 day of April 1654.
Thomas Dickeson.

According to his command, as aforesaid, I was had to York Castle,
and there kept prisoner until the general assize, which was holden
about the time of the 22 day of the 5 month called Iuly in the year
above written, and there Hugh Windham did sit judge of life and
death, who at the assizes before mentioned, which was in the first
month called March, gave order to apprehend me, and according to his
order it was done; and he coming to judge the cause between me and
my accusers, it was pressed on him by some friends of the truth (for
the truth's sake) that I might have the benefit as those had that
were arraign'd for felony and murder, to be brought before him and
the people of the country, and there my accusers to appear face to
face to prove their accusation, that I might suffer according to the
law, if I had it transgressed; otherwise that I might by it be
cleared before the country, of the lies and aspersions and false
accusations they had publicly charged me; withal his promise was I
should be brought before him, and have a fair trial at law as other
prisoners had; but he was not faithful to do as he had said, before
him I was not brought at that time nor any trial had: but at the end
of the assizes cleared me by Proclamation, and sent me a Liberato
(as they call it) to pass away.

Into prison I was cast, as formerly written, the 28 day of the
second month (called April,) and there was kept until the 24 day of
the 5 month (called July) and then was turned forth as is formerly
written, without any trial or law me read, why they had kept me in
prison that time: so for the truth's sake; to that of God in every
ones conscience I this day lay before, He that hath an eye to see
let him see.

Which after the Lord by the arm of his mighty power had me set at
liberty out of the hands of those unreasonable men; I journeyed as I
was led by his spirit, his word in Cleveland and other parts in
Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, and so to Derby, and as I was declaring
the word of the Lord to the consciences of the inhabitants of Derby,
there came two men and laid hold on me, and had me before the men
who were in commission to have done justice, who there did sit at
the general Sessions holden at the Town, about the time of the 24.
day of the 6 month called Aug. 1654.

When I before them was brought, the first question to me by them
propounded was, In whose presence dost thou stand? (the answer to
them was) in whose presence, of the ever-living God; the men called
Justices replied with these words, Jailer take him away, put him in
prison for disturbing the Court, which was done at their command,
into prison I was put, and when the day was spent Thomas Youll
called the Mayor of Derby sent for me, and when I came before him he
asked me what I came to the Town to do? The answer to him, I came to
declare the word of the Lord to the consciences of the inhabitants
of Derby; the Mayor replied, wilt thou go out of the Town? Answer to
him, when the Lord orders me to go forth then I shall go, till then
I shall stay; then Thomas Youll the Mayor commanded the man to put
me into prison again, which was done; the next day about the 9 hour
there came William Bold one of the Mayor's officers, and said to me,
if thou wilt go forth of the Town and in it no more come, I will
open the doors for thee to come forth; the answer to him, out of the
Town I shall not go until I am ordered of the Lord, and if thou
openest the door forth of the prison I shall not come till the man
that said he had authority to put me in, come by the same authority
and take me out, then away the man did go, and afterwards did come,
and the man whose name John Slalous who put me in prison, opened the
door and took me by the arm and put me forth in much wrath, and
delivered me to the other man, whose name is before written, who
said, he had order to put me forth of the Town, which he did, and
strictly charged me to depart out of their coasts with many
threatenings what should be done to me, if in the Town again I
returned; but the words of vain man was not regarded, into the Town
I returned, and there did stay till I was free in my spirit to
depart from thence.

Then I journeyed to Leicester, and was there the first day of the
week which was the 3 day of the 7 month (called September,) and with
me was many people to whom the word of the Lord was declared; and
after the testimony of Jesus was finished to them, I went into the
high place of the town which the people of the dark world calls
their Church, and after the man they call their minister had done,
the word of eternal life was declared to the consciences of the
people, who did hear with much attention, until two men came to me
and said they had order from Edmund Johnson called Mayor, to take me
away, and with violence drew me forth, and had me before the said
Edmund Johnson, who commanded his officers to put me in prison
before he did me examine, which was done; and the next day the man
that put me in prison forth me brought before the Mayor, and William
Billers another of the rulers of the town, who did me examine; and
not finding anything against me, commanded Robert Brewin keeper of
the common gaol, to put me out of the Town, and strictly charged me
to depart forth of their coasts, with many threatenings what they
would do if I again into the Town did come: but the threatenings of
man was not regarded, into the Town I did return in obedience to the
command of the Lord, to finish the testimony of Jesus, I was to
witness to the consciences of the inhabitants of the Town of
Leicester.

Then in obedience to the Spirit of truth, I journeyed into
Northamptonshire; and in a Town called Wellingborrow and thereaways
many did receive the word of life with much gladness of heart: And
at a time as I was going along the street in that Town near the
house of Thomas Andrews, whom the people of the world calls their
teacher; he to me did speak these words, Give over deceiving the
people lest the plagues of God fall upon thee; the answer to him
was, If thou say I deceive the people make it appear wherein I
deceive them; he replied, thou tells them there is no original sin;
I required of him, didst thou hear me say so? to that he made no
answer: then these words was to him declared, thou must either prove
what thou accusest me of, or own thy condemnation upon the false
accusation; he fled away and did make no answer. About the time
which was near 3 weeks after, I was ordered of the Lord to return
again to Wellingborrow, and hearing there was a meeting in the
Steeple-house where Thomas Andrew was, who had he falsely accused,
as is formerly written, for the truth's sake into the Steeple house
I did go, and in silence did stand till the man called their teacher
had done, then I declared the word of the Lord to the people, who
did hear peaceably, and afterwards I spake in particular to Thomas
Andrews to prove what he had falsely accused me of, in saying I
deceived the people, and there make it manifest before the people,
or to own his condemnation upon his false accusation; but to what
was required no answer he did make, but away fled, and the men that
was there whom the world calls their teachers: then Henry Smith who
in that Town dwells, out of the Steeple-house haled me into the
yard, where the truth to the people was declared, who did there
stand peaceably to hear, till William Baw called high Constable did
take hold on me, and had me away into the market place amongst the
people; and said, he would bring evidence against me for Blasphemy;
so had he me as prisoner to and fro in the market place, with so
doing he made disturbance among the people; but when he could not
prove what he had falsely accused me with, he let me go; who at the
present time went from amongst the people to a friend's house, and
came no more forth amongst the people in the market that day.

The next day being the 28 of the 10 month (called December) Richard
Dennis being Constable of Wellingborow came to the friend's house
where I was, and took me forth by virtue of a warrant that had no
name, but for one who is commonly called Quaker, and had me with it
before Thomas Pentlow called Justice at Wilby in Northamtonshire,
who did me examine, but would not read me any law I had
transgressed, but a Mittimus made and sent me to the common Gaol in
Northamton, on the 29 day of the 10 month called December 1654. A
copy of the Mittimus I was denied by John Snart keeper of the Gaol;
and also the men that were in commission to do Justice when it was
of them desired in the open Court, at the general Sessions holden at
Northampton the 10 day of the 11 month, by those whose names are
John Clark, John Parker called Sergeant at law, George Benson, John
Mansil, John Brown, who there did sit in Commission to have judged
the cause in righteousness between me and mine accusers; but when
the Mittimus was read where the charge against me was written, not
any appeared to prove what the Blasphemy was for which they
committed me to prison in suspicion of; neither they to me read any
law that anything charged against me, had it transgressed; but again
to prison did me commit to answer at the assizes holden at
Northampton the 10 and 12 day of the first month called March 1654.
And three times I was there brought before Matthew Hail, who did sit
judge of life and death to answer what might be objected against me;
and the last time I before him was brought Hugh Windham was with
him, who then was in commission with him to have judged the cause in
righteousness between me and my accusers; and though not any accuser
appeared against me, to prove me the transgressor of any law;
neither would these that sat to judge my cause any law to me read
that any evidence given in against me was the transgression of; but
they me committed to prison where I had been amongst those arraigned
for felony and murder; so under all these lies and aspersions false
accusations I suffer; and instead of being cleared of them (when I
was brought before those that are in Commission to judge with
righteous judgement) more accusations is laid upon me by them: which
was done by John Parker at the general Sessions before written: and
Hugh Windham at the general assizes, before mentioned, which both
did accuse me in the open Court, before the people, that I was a
seducer; and when I required them to make manifest wherein I did
seduce any, they would not answer to what then was required; and a
copy of the ground of the evidence they pretend they have against
me, they denied to be given me, in all places where they have
proceeded against me, as is formerly written, least their works of
darkness should come to light, and their folly made manifest, and
truth cleared of the lies and false accusations with which they
blind the eyes of many, and cause them to stumble at the ways of
truth, in speaking evil of the things they know not, as is manifest
in what is written.

So for the truth sake I bare testimony of, and it to clear from all
lies and aspersions cast upon it, which hath caused the simple to
stumble at the way of truth, and that they no longer be turned aside
by the lying spirit who every way seeks to murder and destroy the
truth from the earth, in persecuting the bodies of the Saints, and
shutting them up in prison under the names of blasphemers,
deceivers, seducers and disturbers of the peace, so make lies their
refuge, as that persecuting spirit ever did in all ages, to stop the
lying mouth and for the simple sake that desires in the truth of
their hearts, to know the leadings of the spirit of truth in the way
to know the only true God, I here publicly declare to the
inhabitants of England, and to all that dwell upon the earth, what I
was in the fallen estate, and how the Lord raised me up by the arm
of his mighty power, and carried me on through the great work of
regeneration, that all may know the truth, I am sent to bear
testimony to the consciences of those that dwell upon the earth, is
not any seducing nor contrary to the truth of the Gospel, but is
according to the truth, as it is in Jesus, He that hath an eye to
see let him see, and an ear to hear let him hear.
The first Birth.

I was conceived in sin and brought forth in iniquity, and in that
state lived and delighted in pride and pleasures, lightness and
vanity, as all doth in that nature, until I were about eight years
of age, though before that time when I did live in vanity, the light
in my conscience did witness against me and caused some trouble in
me, but I departed from the light, and so followed the counsel of my
own heart, that lead me into vanity to live without the fear of God?
And about the time when I was eight years of age, of my natural
birth; the word of the Lord came unto me, I created thee for my
glory an account thou must give to me for all thy words and actions
done in the body, which word enlightened my heart and opened the
book of conscience in me, where all was written I had done in the
body ever since I was a child or had any remembrance, and when I had
read my condition, how I had lived without God who created me for
his glory: The word of the Lord then came unto me, Shall the axe
boast itself against him that heweth therewith, or shall the saw
magnify itself against him that shaketh it? As if the staff should
shake itself against him that lifteth it up, or as if the staff
should lift up itself as if it were no wood; and by the power of the
word of the Lord that spoke in me, my understanding was enlightened,
and my conscience bore witness that it was my condition, I had
lifted up myself against the living God in living without his fear,
who created me to live in obedience to him, but I had lived in
disobedience to him until that day; so deep sorrow seized upon me,
and I knew not what to do that I might get acquaintance with the God
of my life, who created me for his own praise and glory: then I
ceased from my vain conversation which I had lived in, and began to
read the Scriptures and books, and mourn and pray to a God I knew
not where he was, but expected him without looking up towards the
firmament where my carnal imagination told me he was, and as I had
heard those the world calls ministers whom I went to hear whose
words did witness with my carnal imagination of God, they said he
was above the skies calling it heaven; but I felt the hand of the
Lord within me, executing justice upon the wicked in me, and what
way ever I turned to seek him in observations thither the flaming
sword turned, which was placed against me to keep the way of the
tree of life, and executed the righteous justice of God upon me: so
I stood before the Throne of the Lamb, reading in my mournful estate
the sentence of condemnation that passed upon me from the glory of
his presence, and in this condemned estate I continued, and through
the ignorance (where God was, what his worship was) I strove to
satisfy his justice in outward observations imitating what the
Saints did, sometimes in fasting and prayer which was the practise
of Cornelius and others of the Saints of the most high God, as I
found recorded in the Scripture of Truth: But notwithstanding all my
strict walking in observations, in which I was seeking the Kingdom
of God I found him not, but the flaming sword cut me down; so my
sorrow increased, for I found none in my condition that I could
declare it to: Then it pleased the Lord to order my friends in the
flesh to put me to keep the sheep where I was retired from company,
so my mind was kept in my mournful estate, where my great ease was
in mourning to a God I knew not, nor none could tell me where I
should get acquaintance with him: In the place where I was in the
outward being in a Town called Allathorp, nigh Pocklington in
Yorkshire; but hearing of a people about Leeds that walked more
strictly in profession of the name of God then any did where I was,
I had no rest in my spirit till my parents, in the flesh, sent me
thither to be an apprentice not regarding what calling, so I might
be amongst those that feared the living God, that I might be
acquainted with the God of my life, who had created me for himself,
and the desires the Lord raised up in me was answered when I was
thirteen years old of my natural birth, I was bound an apprentice to
a clock-maker in a Town called Holdbeck near Leeds; and as I heard
so it was, there was much speaking of God which they called
preaching and professing him in words from the letter of the
Scripture what the Saints had spoken forth, so intimating the
Saints' practice in their carnal wisdom, seeking the Kingdom of God
in outward observations, as I had done before I came there; but when
I met with none that could tell me what God had done for their souls
in redeeming them from the body of sin, which I groaned under, and
separated me from the presence of God, though I walked strictly with
them in their outward observations running to hear one man after
another, which they called ministers, yet I found no rest nor peace
to my weary soul, but the flaming sword, the righteous law of God
cried in me for a perfect fulfilling of the law of God, and did meet
with me wherever I was, that I could find no peace in that worship
of God the world hath set up, as in receiving the bread and wine,
which they told me was the seals of the Covenant, which were long
ere I durst receive it, because I saw not myself prepared, for the
evil of my heart stood before me, and when I was to receive it, I
sought the Lord to keep me by his power that I might receive it
worthily, and when I did receive, my desire was the Lord would seal
up his love to my soul, but I found nothing sealed up to my soul
with it: Then much fear seized upon my soul for a long time after;
and Judas' condition was cast into my mind, until it were showed
that the seal of the Covenant was the Spirit of Christ, and no
outward element; and the supper was the body and blood of Christ,
which the world doth not know, nor I at that time, but was made to
wait for the manifestation of it to me: Then I durst join no more
with the world in that practise; nor in their practise in singing
David's conditions, which they called Psalms; for the light in my
conscience let me see the evil of my heart that I was not in David's
condition; the sense of which stopped my mouth, and while they were
singing, I did mourn and weep for want of the pure spirit that David
had that caused him to sing, neither could I apply the promises
which they told me belonged to me, for I found no promise belonging
to that nature, but the wrath of God abode upon me for my disobeying
his counsel in me the light in my conscience, (but being ignorant)
it was his counsel I departed from it, and lent my ear to those
without that said they spoke from the mouth of the Lord, so was
deceived, and caused to err by their lies, that did draw me to seek
the Kingdom of God in observations without, but the word of the
Kingdom was in me, and executed the righteous justice of God upon my
adulterous heart that took counsel and not at his mouth, till I was
consumed and my body was brought so weak, I was not able to answer
the expectation of him whom the Lord hath placed me with, though my
conscience was clear I did what I were able; and he in his carnal
wisdom thought I were in a consumption, and was in mind sometimes to
have sent me away to my friends in the flesh, and othersome times he
would have the men the world calls doctors, to apply some things to
my body for my recovery, but I was not free to let them, but once
for fear of giving them offence, for I knew my infirmity was the
evil of my heart that separated me from the presence of my God, and
how to be freed from it none told me; and when I found no help in
outward observations in reading, praying, hearing, or meditating of
what I heard, my sorrow and misery was so great, it constrained me
to run to those the world calls ministers and professors, which
appeared to me had most acquaintance with God, to ask them what I
might do to be saved, and they spoke smooth things to me, to believe
in the name of Jesus Christ, and to apply the promises, but that he
was to be found within me none told me, which added to my sorrow,
telling me to believe in Christ I knew not where he was; then at
that time did the wars begin in this nation, and mine eyes being
still abroad to do something in outward observations for my life;
The men called ministers cried curse ye Meroz, because they went not
forth to help the Lord against the mighty: Then I was willing to
give my body to death, in obedience to my God, to free my soul from
sin, that I might escape the wrath I lay under, and get acquaintance
with him; I joined with that little remnant which said they fought
for the Gospel, but when I was amongst them I found as much
ignorance of the Gospel, as was in those I had been with, none told
me what the Gospel was, but the dead letter, which is the outward
testimony and declaration of the Gospel, which is Christ, who is the
glad tidings to sinners; but they called the dead letter the Gospel,
as I had heard before, so I found no rest to my soul amongst them:
Then I heard there was in Scotland a reformed Church, who they said
walked in the fear of the Lord; I journeyed into that country, and
to Edinburgh, where I found nothing but formality, their Teachers
calling to the people to seek the Kingdom of Heaven in outward
observations, as I had heard in England: Then I returned back to
England again, and went amongst those that called themselves the
Church of Christ, who is called by the names Anabaptists and
Independents, who were setting up a more glorious image in outward
observations, and said they were the children of God; but I could
not join with them, for the testimony of his love my soul wanted.
And then the Lord discovered to me that his love could not be
attained in anything I could do, in any of these outward
observations; so in all these my turnings in my carnal wisdom,
seeking the Kingdom of God in observations without, thither the
flaming sword turned, which kept the way of the tree of life, and
fenced me from it, and cut me down, and rent all my fig-leave,
coverings, and annoyed that mind that looked out to seek the Kingdom
of Heaven in observations, or to hearken any more to hear the word
of the Lord from man: then my mind was turned within by the power of
the Lord, to wait in his counsel the light in my conscience, to hear
what the Lord would say; And the word of the Lord came unto me and
said, put up thy sword into thy scabbard, if my Kingdom were of this
world, then would my children fight; knowest thou not that if I need
I could have twelve legions of Angels from my Father; which word
enlightened my heart, and discovered the mystery of iniquity, and
that the Kingdom of Christ was within; and the enemies was within
and was spiritual, and my weapons against them must be spiritual,
the power of God; Then I could no longer fight with a carnal weapon
against a carnal man; for the dead letter, which man in his carnal
wisdom called the Gospel, had deceived me; but then the Lord
discovered to me the deceits of all these men in England, that were
seeking the Kingdom of Heaven in outward observations; And the
messenger of the Covenant, forth of his mouth proceeded the two
edged sword with which he slays his enemies, cut me down and caused
me to yield in obedience, to put up my carnal sword into the
scabbard, Thus did I leave the Army.

Then I returned to my outward habitation and calling I had in the
world, and there laboured with my hands, my mind being turned within
to wait upon the Lord in the way of his judgements; and this I
witness, the administration of Moses in which Cain is banished, Esau
reprobated, Pharaoh plagued, the first born of Egypt slain, and my
will brought in subjection for the Lord to do with me what his will
was, if he condemned he might, and if he saved me it were his free
love; and in this condemned estate I lay crying in the depth of
misery without any hopes of deliverance by anything I could do to
pacify the wrath of God, till the administration of the Prophets,
that witnessed to my soul there where free redemption laid up for me
in the Lord Jesus, and by the power of the word of their testimony
there was a secret hope raised up in me to wait for his coming,
there I waited till the administration of John (Surname illegible);
and I witness that of all that is born of a woman there is none
greater than John; for he is a burning and a shining light, who
discovered more of the mystery of iniquity in me in his
administration, and the sense of my condition was more manifest, the
cry of my condemned soul was great and could not be satisfied, I
breathed and thirsted after Christ to save me freely through his
blood or I perished for ever, and in this condemned estate I lay
waiting for the coming of Christ Jesus, who in the appointed time of
the father appeared to my soul, as the lightnings from the East to
the West, and my dead soul heard his voice, and by his voice was
made to live, who created me to a lively hope, and sealed me up in
the everlasting Covenant of life with his blood; then I witnessed
the wages of sin and death, and the gift of God, eternal life
through Jesus Christ my Lord; and I witnessed according to testimony
of Scripture, death reigns over all from Adam to Moses, and Moses
until the Prophets, and the Prophets until John, and from this day
the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force; there is no rest to the soul till Christ bee manifest, and
this the Scripture witnesseth; and I witness these Scriptures
fulfilled in me, in the year according to the account 1645.

The witnesses that stood before the God of the earth, and had power
to plague the earth; having finished their testimony, the beast
ascends out of the bottomless pit, and makes war against them, and
shall overcome them, and kill them, and their dead bodies lay in the
street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and
Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified; and this Scripture was
fulfilled in me in the year according to account, 1648.

Then kindreds' tongues and the Nations of the earth made merry over
the witnesses; and I see the abomination that maketh desolate, which
is spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place where
it ought not; and then was I led by the Spirit into the wilderness
and tempted of the Devil, that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
Luke 4.1.

In that day and hour of temptation, which was in the time as the
lines following giveth testimony: I witnessed these Scriptures
fulfilled in me of Paul's condition, wherein he complained as I then
did, who found a law in my members warring against the law of my
mind, that when I would do good evil was present with me; the sense
of which caused me to cry, Oh wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? And as I was crying to the
Lord to free me from the burthen I groaned under; the word of the
Lord came unto me saying, My grace is sufficient for thee, I will
deliver thee; and by the power of his word I was armed with patience
to wait in his counsel groaning under the body of sin in the day and
hour of temptation, until it pleased the Lord to manifest his power
to free me, which was in the year according to the account, 1651.

The spirit of life from God entered into the witnesses, and they
stood upon their feet, then great fear fell upon all that saw them;
and the Temple of God was opened in Heaven, and I saw in his Temple
the Ark of his Testament, and there were lightnings, voices,
thunder, earthquakes, and great hail, then mystery. Babylon the
great, the mother of harlots, and the abomination of the earth,
which made all Nations drunk with the wine of the wrath of her
fornication, she was discovered in me, and God remembered her when
the mighty day of the Lord's power was manifest upon her, Jesus
Christ was revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, pouring vials of 
wrath upon her, and rendering vengeance upon all in me that knew him
not (and disobeyed his Gospel,) and purged away the filthy nature
(that did me imbondage) with the spirit of judgement, and with the
spirit of burning, so through the righteous law of life in Christ
Jesus, I was made free, and am from the body of sin and death; and
through these great tribulations my garment is washed, and made
white in the blood of the Lamb, who hath led me through the gates of
the city into the new Jerusalem, where there is nothing enters that
works abomination or makes a lie, but what is written in the Lamb's
book of life, where my soul now feeds upon the tree of life, which I
had so long hungered and thirsted after, that stands in the Paradise
of God, where there is no more curse nor night, but the Lord God and
the Lamb is my light and life for ever and ever; I witness I am
regenerated and born again of the immortal seed, and hath partaked
on the first resurrection, on whom the second death hath no power.

And this I declare to all the inhabitants in England, and all that
dwell upon the earth, that God alone is the teacher of his people,
and hath given to everyone a measure of Grace, which is the light
that comes from Christ, that checks and reproves for sin in the
secret of the heart and conscience; and all that wait in that light
which comes from Christ (which is the free grace of God) for the
power of Jesus Christ to destroy sin, and to guide them in obedience
to the light, so shall they come to know the only true God and
Father of light in Christ Jesus, who is the way to him: And here I
witness to all the sons of men, that the knowledge of eternal life I
came not to by the letter of the Scripture nor hearing men speak of
the name of God, I came to the true knowledge of the Scripture and
the eternal rest (they testify it in Christ) by the inspiration of
the Spirit of Jesus Christ, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who
alone is found worthy to open the seals of the book; and I witness
none else can, for he alone opened the seals of the book in me, and
sealed it up to my soul by the testimony of his own spirit,
according to his own promise, I will bind up the testimony, and seal
the law amongst my Disciples, and I will write my law in their
hearts, and put my spirit in their inward parts, and they shall not
depart from me; neither shall they need to reach every man his
neighbour, and every man his brother, for all shall know me from the
least of them to the greatest, for I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no
more: and all my children shall be taught of me, saith the Lord God,
and great shall be the peace of my children; and this here declared 
the Scriptures witness, and I witness the Scriptures fulfilled in
me; Praises, praises, Hallelujah, and eternal praises be unto thee
Lord God Almighty, who hath taken unto thee thy great power to sit
upon thy throne, and to the Lamb for evermore.

It being charged on me my imprisonment to be just until I give a
reason of the hope of my calling, and that I am unwilling so to do;
to stop the lying mouth of the false accuser, and to clear the truth
of the lies laid on it as before written, and in love to the souls
of the people that they the truth may know as it is in Jesus: Here I
have declared the work of the mighty God in revealing his Son in me,
who led me on my journey through the dark world, where I passed
through great tribulations, as formerly written, until I came to the
end of the world, over it to rejoice in the power of my God (1 Cor.
10.11. upon whom the ends of the world are come) whom the whole
world that lies in wickedness hates and persecutes: but to the pure
single eye, that is not of the world, I lay this before which is
written, that all which it minds may see the truth I bear testimony
of is not any Popish Tenet (though I was questioned concerning them
at the general assizes holden at Northampton the 10 and 12 days of
the first month called March 1654.) neither is it seducing nor
blasphemy nor prejudicial to the truth of the Gospel or peace of the
Nation, but according to the truth of the everlasting Gospel and
sound peace of the Nation, for which testimony I am still kept in
bonds in the common Gaol in Northampton, numbered amongst the
transgressors in the low prison with those arraigned for felony and
murder, waiting in rest and peace till the sufferings of the
righteous seed be fulfilled. And all you that are enemies to the
truth of God persecuting it under the names as formerly written,
calling the preaching of the truth seducing, this I declare and
confess unto you in the presence of God;  after the way you call
seducing do I worship the Lord God of my fathers: and witness fulfil
what is written in the law and the Prophets; he that can receive me
let him.

Dear friends whose minds are turned to the effectual light that
comes from Christ, all mind your own measure and be content in what
the Lord hath committed to you; with the light judge that which
would draw your minds to look forth at others conditions, and in
impatience to covet what the Lord hath given to them, before it be
manifest to you: be faithful every one in your own measure, and in
patience wait in the light for the unlimited spirit of Christ your
life to open the seals of the book, and make known unto you the
mystery of eternal life, which he will daily reveal in you that are
faithful in your own measure to follow the Lord in what he makes
manifest to you, whom he hath called into his vineyard at the ninth
and eleventh hour, be faithful to the Lord in walking in obedience
to him in the light; he will make a short work in the earth for his
seed sake, and your reward shall be rest and peace in the presence
of God in Christ, with those that came into the vineyard the third
and sixth hours and laboured the heat of the day; God almighty be
with you his chosen servants and children, and all in your measure
keep in his eternal power bold, valiant and faithful unto the end,
and crown you with eternal glory in Christ one Judge Lord and King,
God over all blessed for ever, Amen.

W. D.
To all you that rule in England from the highest to the lowest, whom
the Lord hath betrusted with power to see the peace be kept, and to
judge the cause of the people: He hath given you power therin causes
to judge with righteous judgement, the evil doers to punish, and the
righteous set free out of the hands of those that oppress them.

This is the word of the Lord God to you:

That you lend not your ears to the counsel of your own hearts, or to
the counsel of any without you that tempts you to draw your minds
from the pure counsel of God, which is the light that comes from
Christ Jesus, and calls on you in your consciences to judge with
righteous judgement as you will eternally answer before the pure
powerful dreadful God; take heed of abusing your power he hath
betrusted you with, in establishing any law which is contrary to
Scripture and the righteous law of God in the conscience, as those
did whom the Lord drave out and destroyed before you in his wrath
and overturned in his fierce displeasure, which if you uphold those
laws they made in their wills, or any other which is contrary to the
righteous law of God in the conscience, and rule according to them
laws; and exercise the power committed to you to bind the laws upon
the consciences of the children of the Lord, whom he hath chosen out
of the world, and made his jewels to fear an oath, in obedience to
the righteous laws which saith, swear not at all; which if you by
these unrighteous laws take advantage against the righteous seed
concerning the law of their God, them to ensnare under your power,
that you on them may satisfy your wills: This I declare to you from
the eternal God of Heaven and Earth, It is hard for you to kick
against the pricks; for what is done to his people he takes it as
done to himself, and better a millstone were hanged about your neck
and you cast into the Sea, saith Christ, then to offend one of these
little ones that believeth in his name and obeys his command, who
saith, swear not at all: and now is manifesting his power in his
people, that all them may know between those that swear and them
that fear an oath, which if you them that fear an oath oppress; this
know, the Lord God will plead their cause as he did the cause of all
his people in all ages, and destroyed those that oppressed them; as
in the time of Pharaoh, and in the time of Nebuchadnezzar, and in
the time of Hamon in the reign of King Ahasuerus, and in the time of
King Herod whom he smote in his righteous judgements, and consumed
him with worms, Acts 12.23. for persecuting his people and robbing
him of his glory, the righteous justice of God he manifested upon
the enemies of his people, is left upon record you to forewarn, that
you touch not his chosen anointed people, nor do his prophets no
harm, for whose sakes the King rebukes, and all that oppress them,
as is recorded in Scripture of truth; and hath been witnessed before
your eyes, in destroying the bishops, and the King that oppressed
the people of God by their power, in binding laws upon them contrary
to the righteous law of God in their consciences, and you rulers of
England who promised to the Lord God if he would deliver those that
oppressed his people into your hands, and give you power over them,
you would take away all laws that burdened the consciences of his
people, and they should have free liberty to worship him in spirit
and in truth, according to his law written in their own hearts; and
according to your desires the Lord appeared while you in his counsel
stood, and gave all into your power, according to the desires of
your own hearts; and now is the time of your trial wherein the Lord
is trying all you this day whom he hath put power into your hands,
which if you now forget the Lord God, who appeared to you when you
were little in your own eyes in the day of your distress, and deny
to perform your promises you made to the Lord when he delivered you
out of the hands of those that sought your lives; but contrary to
all your promises abuse your power you are betrusted with, to build
up again you seemed to destroy which cost the price of so much
blood, in establishing laws which are contrary to Scripture and the
righteous law of God in the conscience, and by them think to scatter
the power of the holy people, and to weary out the Saints of the
most high God in turning judgement backward, and keeping justice
afar off, that truth falleth in the streets, and equity cannot
enter, so he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey to your
wills, and the Lord God seeth it, and is displeased with you, that
there is no judgement for his people: therefore to you this is the
word of the Lord, that abuse your power you are betrusted with, in
perverting judgement, as before written; thus saith the Lord God,
The pit you dig for my people you shall fall into it yourselves, and
my people I will deliver by the arm of my mighty power, and
according to your deeds I will to you repay, and recompense fury and
vengeance to you my adversaries, and will you sweep away with the
besom of my wrath except you repent, and your blood shall be upon
your own heads, and you shall not escape, but come to your end, and
none shall help you; He that hath an ear to hear let him hear.

And be forewarned now in this day of your visitation, wherein the
Lord hath to you sent you, to forewarn of the evil that is coming
upon you, that you may speedily to him return, and lay your Crowns
in the dust at the feet of Jesus Sion's King, and in his counsel
stand; which is the light in the conscience that in you witnesseth
against every vain thought, and wicked imagination, and in the light
wait his power you to guide to perform your promises, and to take
away all laws contrary to Scripture, and the righteous law of God in
the conscience, that the righteous law of God may be your guide,
which is the guide of all the children of God; then will the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth be with you, and with the arm of his mighty
power destroy all that plot or rise up against you, before whom he
will make the unrighteous powers of the earth to shake if you abide
faithful in his counsel, and will make you a terror to the evil
doers, and a praise to them that do well, and will bring you into
the eternal peace, and rest he hath prepared for his people; but if
you reject his counsel and cast his righteous law behind your backs,
as you have done, and follow the counsel of your own hearts, all
that have an eye to see read and understand, Prov. 29.1. He that
hath been often reproved and hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed and that without remedy: and in that day I shall be clear
of your blood, who in love to your souls hath not hid the counsel of
God from you, which he hath made known to me, that you may be left
without excuse, in the day of the Lord's anger, when he doth perform
what he hath spoken. Then shall I be remembered whom the world knows
by name William Duesbury, and by some of you that professes to
minister justice cast into prison, and there kept in the common Gaol
in Northampton, for the word of God and Testimony of Jesus Christ.

From the Gaol in Northampton the 25 day of the 4 month, 1655.

O England! England! over all in thee I lament, who persecutes the
Sons and Daughters of the most high God, he hath to thee sent, thee
to forewarn of the evil day that is coming upon thee.

O THAT thou in this day of thy visitation did know the things
belonging to thy peace! which the living God tenders to thee in this
day of his mercy, wherein he waits on thee to be gracious unto thee,
and to make thee the glory of all the Nations of the world, and in
all thy straits for thee appeared, and in his mighty power hath
destroyed all that did secretly plot and rise up against thee, to
establish unrighteous laws, and them bind upon the consciences of
those that feared the Lord in thee, and walked humbly before him
according to the measure of light received; and now hath he appeared
in the day of his mighty power in thee O England, to exalt the
Kingdom of Christ in the hearts of his Saints, and hath sent them to
preach his everlasting Gospel in thee, to turn the minds of the
people from darkness to light, which comes from Christ, in it to
wait for his power to guide out of all sin and uncleanness, into
union and fellowship with the Father of light, which many of you
people in England seemed to desire above all things, and content to
give up your lives to withstand them that did appear, to bind any
unrighteous law upon you, and by it to take advantage against you,
concerning the law of God, which you professed to love, and to
delight in your liberty in it more than in your nearest and dearest
relation, or life, or any outward enjoyment, and all you in that
day, who were faithful to the Lord according to the measure of light
manifest in you, the Lord God did appear for you, and in his mighty
power hath scattered those that stood up in enmity against you, to
bind laws upon your consciences, which is contrary to Scripture, and
the righteous law of God in the heart; and the Lord hath given you
power over all those your enemies, and now have you free liberty
which they cannot take from you, to worship God in spirit and in
truth, according to the desires you seemed to manifest in the day
you cried to the Lord when you were in distress: and now is the Lord
come to visit you in his tender mercy, and hath sent his ministers
to preach his eternal word freely without money or price, in season
and out of season, to reprove rebuke exhort, with all long-suffering
and doctrine, which many of you people in England, who promised the
Lord to worship him in spirit and in truth, now his counsel rejects,
and turns to the teachers you have heaped up to yourselves,
according to your own lusts, who cries peace, peace to you in what
you do, while you put into their mouths; and now is the time come to
the fulfilling the Scripture in you, who have itching ears and
cannot endure sound doctrine, but turns from it to fables, which if
you continue in your careless minds, slighting this day of your
visitation, and not like to retain God in your knowledge, God will
give you up to reprobate minds, that profess you know God but in
works deny him, being abominable and disobedient and to every good
work reprobate, upon whom the Lord will get his glory in his
righteous judgements, and if the Lord in his everlasting love had
not left a seed in thee O England! thou with all thy teachers whom
thou hast heaped up according to thy own lusts, would have become as
Sodom, but for his own seed sake, whom he hath blessed, he will do
good to the inhabitants of England, who stands faithfully in his
counsel to be guided by his power, and will scatter all those that
stand in opposition to his righteous seed Christ, whom he is
exalting in the hearts of his elect and chosen people in England, to
rule for ever over all that stand in enmity to him, this is the day
the mighty God is giving all power unto his son Jesus, to whom every
knee shall bow; and all you proud stubborn self-willed lofty ones
that hates the light of Christ in you, that witnesses against sin in
the secret of the heart and conscience, and it rejects, and denies
to be guided by it, but turns to the counsel of your own hearts, and
the Teachers you have heaped up according to your lusts, and with
them sits at ease in the flesh, and turns the grace of God into
wantonness, and forgets the loving kindness of the Lord, who
delivered you by the arm of his mighty power, when enemies compassed
you on every side, and gave your lives for a prey, when they were
nigh unto death; and now you abuse your liberty, to walk with your
teachers according to your lusts, and with them commit this filthy
and abominable thing in the land, the Priests to teach for hire, and
the Prophets that divine for money, and you people love to have it
so, but what will you do in the end thereof, which day you put afar
off and do not regard, but that you shall not be ignorant of the
mind of the Lord, and left without excuse, in the mighty day of the
Lord's anger, who hath sent his servants and children early and
late, to forewarn you of the evil day that is coming upon you, if
you do not speedily repent, and turn to the Lord, but slight this
day of your visitation, then shall the things now belonging to your
peace, be hid from your eyes, and your end shall be according to the
word of the Lord: I declare to you; thus saith the Lord, All these
my enemies, that will not that I shall rule over them, bring them
hither and slay them before me; and this is your portion you enemies
of Christ, that hates his counsel, as is before written, he will you
consume with the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his
coming, which will overtake you that sit at ease in the flesh, as a
thief in the night and in flames of fire will render vengeance on
you that disobeys his Gospel, and will give to every one of you
according to the works done in the body, and you shall not escape
from Israel's Judge, Sion's King, who will all his people deliver,
and you proud lofty ones under bring, by his mighty power, to the
praise and glory of his righteous justice, who alone is worthy, God
over all blessed for ever, Amen.

Remember you are warned in your lifetime, and prize this day of your
visitation, while the Lord in patience and long-sufferance waits to
be gracious and merciful to you, if you speedily return to his 
counsel, which is the light of Christ in your consciences that shows
you sin, and wait in it for his power to lead you to repentance, and
to cleanse you from sin, and in the straight way of self-denial, and
the daily cross, you to guide in obedience to the Father of light,
then will the Lord God be merciful to you, and heal your
backslidings, and love you freely, and blot out your transgressions
for his name's sake, which if you will have none of his counsel but
it rejects as you have done, and still commits this filthy and
abominable thing in the land, the Priests to teach for hire, and the
Prophets to divine for money, which is the practice of your
teachers, you have heaped up to yourselves according to your lusts,
and love to have it so; then your portion you must own, what the
Lord hath spoken he will perform, and you and your teachers shall
reap the fruit of your doings, according as is declared, and in that
day I shall be remembered when you lye upon the bed of sorrow, who 
is clear of all your blood, who perish through your disobedience in
that I have not hid the counsel of God from neither Rulers Priests
nor People.

And to the light of Christ in all your consciences I clear my
conscience in the presence of the living, pure, and dreadful God,
who will perform according to his words, and the condemnation of the
evil doers slumbers not, the Lord will cleanse the land of you, and
not any that rejects Christ the corner stone shall rule in England,
for the Lord will make it the glory of all the nations of the world,
notwithstanding all that oppose him, his own work he will carry on
in it, by the arm of his mighty power will he exalt Christ Jesus, to
be King in it, to rule the people according to his righteous law,
and all that will not his laws obey, and their crowns lay down at
his feet, and to him their knee bow in perfect obedience to his
righteous law, written in the heart and conscience, he will you
break in pieces, with his rod of iron, and dash in sunder like a
potter's vessel, and not any shall escape that doth evil, and bring
the curse upon the earth, which the Lord is making as the garden of
Eden, the mouth of the Lord of Hosts hath spoken it, he that can
receive it let him, and an ear to hear let him hear: And whether you
people in England hear or forbear, in your consciences I shall be
for ever manifest; and you shall eternally witness the truth I have
declared is to you the word of the Lord God, the day will declare
it.
W. D.
FINIS.




The Lamb's Officer is Gone Forth with the Lamb's Message:
George Fox
Source: The Works of George Fox, Vol. 4. Edited by a Committee of
Quakers, London 1706; reprinted 1831 by Marcus T. C. Gould,
Philadelphia and Isaac T. Hopper, New York. pp 178-193.
https://ia902701.us.archive.org/32/items/worksgeorgefox06foxgoog/wor
ksgeorgefox06foxgoog.pdf

Which is the Witness of God in all Consciences, to call them up to
the Bar, the Judgment of the Lamb, in this his Day which is come. To
all the Parish Clerks, Vicars, Curates, and Professors in England,
Ireland, and Scotland, and elsewhere in the whole Christendom; for
you all to come up to the Lamb's Bar, in this his Day, to see if
they can stand before the Lamb to plead their Cause, Guilty, or not
Guilty, in this his Day, who have had the Scriptures, but out of the
Life, which they were in that gave them forth.—By G(eorge) F(ox).

The Lord Jesus Christ is come to reign, and his everlasting kingdom
and sceptre is set up, and the bar of judgment, and all are called
to it, and he calls all up before it. Now Christ said false prophets
should come, Matt. 7. 24. and antichrist, which should have the
sheep's clothing, but inwardly ravening wolves; this he spake to his
disciples, and before their decease they did come, 1 John ch. 2. ch.
4. and they went forth from them; and in the Revelations it is
written, all that dwelt upon the earth went after them, and the
dragon made war with the woman, and she fled into the wilderness,
the true church, and the man-child was caught up to God, and the
dragon gave his power to the beast, and the beast made war with the
saints, and overcame them, and killed them that kept the testimony
of Jesus, the spirit of prophecy: so here they killed the true
ministry, and the woman fled into the wilderness, the true church,
and the man-child caught up to God; and then power was given to the
beast over all kindreds, tongues, and nations.- [Mark,] And all the
orthodox men, the original, the beast had the power to kill the
saints, and suffered the original, the tongues to stand; the
orthodox men so called, that have the scriptures in three or four
languages, that had the sheep clothings, these inwardly ravened from
the spirit of God, and turned against them that had the spirit of
God, and killed them;and then the whore, the woman, the false church
got a-top of the beast, who had power over all kindreds, tongues,
and nations, who had his names, marks, horns, and images, and they
gave their glory and honour to the beast, and the nations drank this
whore's cup, this false church, this woman, and she corrupted the
earth; and the kings of the earth drank her cup of fornication and
she corrupted the earth, and she made the inhabitants of the earth
drunk; and this whore sits upon the waters, and the waters where the
whore sits, are peoples, and nations and multitudes, and tongues,
and she drinks the blood of the martyrs, prophets, and saints, and
so killeth the true ministers; this false church, this whore, and
false woman, suffers the tongues to live under her, the orthodox men
so called the original; and John calls them waters, the pillars of
her church. Now this whore went from something, she went from the
apostles', got the sheep's clothing, inwardly ravened, and went into
the world, as the Jews which went from the law of God among the
heathen, they whored, and so all nations drank the cup of
fornication, the kings of the earth, and the nations, being
unmarried to Christ. And again, the judgment of this great whore
should come; for as Cain, when he had killed the just, then he built
a city; this great whore that was on the beast, that had the
dragon's power, that killed the saints and killed the just, and
killed the prophets, and witnesses; and the true church, when the
woman fled into the wilderness, and the man-child was caught up to
God, then this great whore, this false woman, false church, this
great city was built, and all nations drank of her cup, and the
kings of the earth drank her cup of fornication, and all nations
have drank her cup of fornication, that have drank the blood of the
saints.

Come now, priests, guilty, or not guilty; the Lamb and the saints
shall have the victory, the judgment of this great whore is come,
and the bride and the Lamb's wife is witnessed. Priests, as I said
before, guilty or not guilty, now you are come before the bar, are
not you the tongues that the whore sits upon, which John calls
waters, who are the orthodox men, and boast of the original, having
the sheep's clothing, which have the scriptures in three or four
languages. Have not you been standing, when the martyrs', and
prophets', and saints' blood bath been drank? And did not you stand
in the day of the beast's power, when he killed the saints, and made
war with them, the true ministers? Had not he power over all
kindreds, tongues and nations, when the true ministers were killed?
was not your original Hebrew, and Greek, under the beast's power?
and hath not he power over that original? and was that ever called
the original among the saints that the beast killed, and that the
whore drank the blood of? And did not you shelter under the beast's
power, and the whore's, when the martyrs' and the prophets' and the
saints' blood was drank? And did not you turn from the dragon to the
beast, after the beast to the whore and had not the beast power over
the tongues, orthodox men, and the original? Come, guilty, or not
guilty and do you not say the church of Rome is the whore? and from
this whore, the church of Rome, have you not gotten tithes, and
Easter reckonings, and midsummer dues, and glebe-lands, and
mortuaries, and offerings? and have you not drunken this whore's
cup? guilty, or not guilty? Must not you drink the cup of the
indignation of the wrath of the Almighty, that have drank this
whore's cup, since the true woman went into the wilderness? And
come, priests, did not the whore set up your mass-houses with the
cross a-top of it, with their pictures and bells, and call it holy
ground, where it stands, and name them by St. Paul's, and St.
Peter's, and St. Michael's, and St. Gregory's, and St. Austin's?
Come, priests, have you not drank the whore's cup here? is not this
the whore's cup guilty or not guilty? if guilty, thou must drink the
cup of the indignation of the wrath of the Almighty. And come,
priests, did not the whore set up your schools, and colleges, this
false church, whereby you are made ministers, and gave them the
names of Trinity college, Jesus college, Emanuel college, where you
are made ministers, since the true church went into the wilderness?
and here have you not drank the whore's cup? guilty, or not guilty?
come, priests, answer: and did not the whore set up all these
things, and the beast that killed the true ministers, martyrs,
prophets, and saints, by the dragon, and beast, and whore's power,
since the true church went into the wilderness, true ministers
killed, man-child caught up to God? and are not you here found
amongst them in the same power, drinking the whore's cup? answer,
are you guilty, or not guilty? and was not this whore of Rome, the
first author of preaching by the hour-glass, funeral sermons, ten
shillings a sermon, twenty shillings a sermon, ten groats the grave
and mortuaries, and two hundred pounds a year for preaching? is not
this of the whore of Rome's cup? and have you not all drank it? and
do you not drink it daily are you guilty, or not guilty (which have
been set up since the true church went into the wilderness.) Did not
the church of Rome first ordain the Jesuit's tribe, the order of
black-coats? and have not you of their colleges followed their
example, and drank of her cup, and gone in the way of the Jesuit's
tribe, black-coats? are ye guilty, or not guilty? and was not the
whore of Rome the first setter up of sprinkling a little water upon
children's faces for money, and churching of women for money? and
have not you drank this cup? come, priests, are you guilty, or not
guilty? and was not the whore of Rome the first setter up of bells,
calling people together, and christening of them, and going
processioning, and setting up all your crosses? was not the whore of
Rome that false church, since the woman went into the wilderness,
the setter up of all these things 1 and have not you priests and
professors, and magistrates and rulers, and people, drank of this
whore's cup? are you guilty, or not guilty?

Now you are come before the bar of the Lamb, and his throne, and the
bride, the Lamb's wife is come, the true church which was before and
in the days of the apostles. Was not swearing, and oaths set up
since the days of the apostles? and Christ in the flesh, who said,
swear not at all, for they that swore, came into the condemnation;
for the oath in the law ended the sin, and put an end to the strife,
and the sin: and Christ the oath of God, blots out the sin and
transgression, and ends the strife, and reconciles man unto God, and
saves from sin, and redeems from the earth, and brings peace on the
earth, and good-will towards men; so he makes an end of sin. Now the
man-child being caught up unto God, and the woman fled into the
wilderness, and the prophets, and martyrs, and saints killed by this
beast; and the whore, and the false prophets, beast and antichrist
gets the sheep's clothing; so hath not all this swearing since
Christ, been set up by the false church, the church of Rome? and
have not ye priests, rulers, magistrates and people, drank this
whore's cup, this false church, and forsaken Christ's command, and
the true church, which saith swear not at all, as in James: are you
guilty, or not guilty? have you not drank the whore's cup, and so
will fine and imprison them that will not swear? is not this the
whore's cup? and have not you drank of it? are you guilty, or not
guilty? Now you are come before Christ, who said, swear not at all;
the true church was far off of fining and imprisoning people for not
swearing; Christ and the true church, but on the contrary, gave them
a command that they should not swear, and gave them an order what to
say; whatsoever was more than yea yea, and nay nay, was evil; and
the apostle follows it, and saith, condemnation followed the
swearers, saying, above all things, my brethren, swear not at all,
so are not ye the false brethren, the false church, since the true
church fled into the wilderness, and true ministers killed, which
hath drank the blood of the martyrs, prophets, saints and apostles,
and so swearing is set up by the false church, the church of Rome,
not by Christ, and his apostles and have you not drank this whore's
cup? are you guilty, or not guilty? (all people, rulers,
magistrates, and priests in all nations, that will fine and imprison
men that will not swear, and break the command of Christ) and will
not the tongues say, you must swear, which the beast and the whore
hath power on, that drank the saints' blood, which hath told the
world they are orthodox men, that have the original; but in the
spirit of God you are all comprehended: were not all your tithes,
oblations, obventions, glebe-lands, your tithe-herbs and eggs, and
mints, and sage, and rue, and beasts, and doves, and tithe-fish and
fowls, and tithe-corn and hay, and wool, and pigs, and chickens, and
smoke-penny, and plough-penny, gardens and bees, and apples, and
plums, and all other tithes? was not this set up by your mother-
church at Rome, which you say is the whore? and why do you rail
against your mother from whom you have such an inheritance, and call
her whore? but it is true enough, though you are ill-bred children, 
to clamour against your mother so; for was not she the setter up of
all these things, the whore of Rome? come, priests, impropriators,
answer, are you guilty, or not guilty? who must drink the cup of the
indignation of God? the guilty, who have drank the whore's cup; for
the true church witnesseth the end of the first priesthood, his
temple, and tithes, and among the apostles there was none, who was
the true church; but since the church fled into the wilderness, you
set up these things, and killed the true ministers, and apostatized
from the church, and so set up tithes, who have the sheep's
clothing, but out of the sheep's life; and now is the judgment of
this great whore come, and the Lamb, and the bride is known, and
come; and do you not think he will not reward you that have drank
her cup? for you all know tithes are of the whore's cup; and have
not you all drank it, priests, and impropriators, and others?

Nay, come, priests, have you not cast many into prisons, and hauled
them before your courts, and took treble damages, and almost thrice
treble from some, and cast them in prisons until death? and what
abundance you have in prison this day, because they will not give
you the whore's cup, therefore you will have their lives. Are you
not guilty here before the Lamb, and stand guilty before the bar,
and to have the judgments and plagues poured forth upon their heads?
and was not that the whore of Rome that drinks the blood of the
saints, that whips, imprisons, and kills, und banishes, and causeth
to be hauled out of the synagogues, and prisoned, and put in the
house of correction, and persecutes from city to city? And have not
you drank this whore's cup at large, and drank the blood of the
saints, and prisoning until death, and bruising, and knocking them
down in your steeple-houses? Come, priests, magistrates and people,
are you guilty, or not guilty, in this the Lamb's day, that are
brought before his throne? and hath not this killing and beating
been by the dragon, beast, and false prophet, and hauling out of
their synagogues and assemblies, and killing true ministers,
prophets, and apostles; and the woman fled into the wilderness, and
the man-child caught up to God, and the beast had power over
tongues, and the whore sat upon the tongues, which are waters, your
original, orthodox men? and were not they the inventors of your
schools and colleges, and setters of them up; your natural schools
of learning, and tell people that is the original? and have not you
drank the whore's cup, and followed the beast in this? are you
guilty, or not guilty? Answer, now you are come before the Lamb's
throne, and speak, guilty, or not guilty? And was it not among the
apostles, that if any thing was revealed to any that stood by, the
first should hold his peace; and they might all prophesy one by one,
that all might learn, and all be comforted; for God was not the
author of confusion, but peace, and the spirit of the prophets were
subject to the prophets; and since the true church fled into the
wilderness, and true ministers and prophets slain by the beast,
dragon, and great whore, doth not the order of the true church set
you all in confusion, and cry, he disturbs me, take him away, 
magistrates; and cry for a law against them that practise the order
of the true church; are you not all guilty here? let your stocks,
and prisons, and houses of correction testify it and whether or no
this has not been the whore's cup which you have drank, and all the
blood which hath been shed about religion, church ministry, and
worship in the whole Christendom? and whether or no this is not the
whore's cup? and whether you have not drank it? are you not guilty
here? and whether or no the church of Christ did any such thing
amongst the apostles, before she fled into the wilderness, and
whether or no all the martyrs and prophets which have been slain,
since the church fled into the wilderness, have not been by them
which had the sheep's clothing, which are inwardly raveners? and
whether or no you have not drank this cup? and whether or no this
was not the whore's cup, the church of Rome, your mother and whether
or no you must not drink the cup of the indignation of the wrath of 
God Almighty and are you guilty, or not guilty? come, answer me
before the Lamb's power, throne, and dominion.

And when the true woman was fled into the wilderness, the kings of
the earth drank the whore's cup; would they not make all nations to
bend, to drink the same cup, so by that means came all nations to
drink the whore's cup; so as the apostles had gone into all nations,
the whore's cup also went into all nations, false prophets, beast,
and antichrist, and killed the saints, prophets, and true ministers;
and are not you guilty in this thing, ye kings of the earth, and of
the nations, who took the inwardly ravener's cup, who had the
sheep's clothing, worrying and tearing the lambs? did ever lamb's
and sheep tear wolves, and worry beasts? and so you that prison,
that whip, that burn, that cut off ears, that banish, that prison
until death, are not you the wolves in sheep's clothing? and so the
antichrists, and false prophets, the dragon and the beast in his
power, and the whore's cup, of the beast that drank the blood of the
martyrs and saints, so are you not guilty all in this, where these
actions are found? whose fruits declare in your gaols, you not to be
the sheep, but the wolves in the sheep's clothing, the inwardly
raveners; and hath not all this hanging men for cattle, and for
money, and the creatures, when they should have restored, or been
sold for their theft, been set up since the days of the apostles,
when you should have let them live to restore, or been sold for
their theft, that they might have laboured in the thing that is
good? and are you not guilty in this? and act contrary to the law
and gospel.

Well, come, priests, are not all you who have been called of men
master, (and you love to have it so) and your salutations in the
markets, and chief seats in the assemblies, when Christ saith to his
disciples, be not ye so; and go into all nations, teaching them to
observe all things that he commands them? Is not all these things
got up since the woman fled into the wilderness, the slaying of the
prophets and saints, all these things set up by the beast, whore,
and dragon? and have not you drank this whore's cup, and taught
people that they should call you masters, contrary to Christ's
command? and was not the church of Rome the first setter up of it?
and have not you drank her cup? are you guilty, or not guilty? for
where do we read of master Paul, master Timothy, master Peter,
master John, master Matthew? And where did Christ or the apostles,
or true church, preach by the hour-glass, and no man might ask them
a question in the time of the glass's running, or going from the
steeple-house, or coming to it, without six months imprisonment, or
being whipped? And where did ever the church of Christ do so? and
have not you drank the whore's cup in this? are you guilty, or not
guilty? and are you not guilty here again, who must drink the cup of
the indignation of the Almighty, who have limited the holy one, and
quench the spirit, which was not the work of Christ and his apostles
for if any one ask you a sober question, then to be satisfied you
will prison him for a wicked malicious disturber, and have him sent
to the house of correction, and whipped. Oh! poor satisfactions doth
the priest here give to poor troubled people, that are burdened and
discontented! so it is time for them to forsake them, who get means
and estates of people for that which is not bread, and making a
trade of the scriptures. But come, priests, did not the whore of
Rome give you the names of vicars, and clerks, and parsons, and
curates, and bachelors of art, and bachelors of divinity, and all
your orders of your schools? did not the whore of Rome give you
these names and have you not drank her cup, and grown up by it? are
you not guilty here again, drinking the whore's cup? and hath not
the whore, the false church, and false woman, given you these names,
since the true church, and true woman, went into the wilderness? for
where was there any such names among the apostles? are you guilty,
or not guilty? answer this, who are come before the Lamb's power,
and day, in this his marriage; and where was there any such names
amongst Christ and the apostles?

And come, ye clerks, and parsons, and vicars, for the whore hath
many garments, and decks herself with many colours, as the beast had
many names, and likenesses, and colours; so you have many changings.
Why do you observe this Michaelmas, Christmas, and Candlemas, and
Lammas? was not this of the whore's cup? and have you not drank it,
let all the nations witness it, how deep you stick in it, what mass?
Christmas, Michaelmas, and Candlemas! Curates, and priests, and
clerks, and parsons? Oh, cry you, we will change our names, we will
be called ministers of the gospel; nay, you can no longer be hid,
now you are discovered, ministers made at schools, Oxford and
Cambridge, at the colleges; and were not the papists the inventers
of colleges, and all these things before mentioned, the whore's cup,
which ye and all nations have drank, and yet drink of them daily,
and stick in them, and your people; and all your saints' days, and
your holy-days, was not all this the whore's cup, the abomination, 
which hath corrupted the earth, and many so drunk with it, they can
hardly endure to have these things cried against; and such sports,
plays, and drinking, and games, and excess are on those days, and
many of those days, the saints' days, that they were killed on, and
died on, you feast on, and rejoice: this is the beast and the whore,
which makes merry over the witnesses, and sending their gifts one to
another,[* Rev. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10.] over the bodies of the saints,
when they have killed them, and make merry over them on the days
they were killed; and having the sheep's clothing, and killing, and
prisoning, and whipping, and banishing them that be in the same life
that they were in, which they were making merry over, and observing
the days they were killed on, with their sports, and their music,
and their wassail-pots, and their pie-times, and their Good Friday,
and Holy Thursday, and their Shrove Tuesday. How now, vicars, and
priests, and curates, and parsons, whose cup have you drank, and the
people drinking now, and the professors, and the rulers of the
earth? Is not this of the whore's cup, the church of Rome, that
false woman, that false church, and all these things got up, since
the true woman fled into the wilderness, and the true church? where
was there any such thing among the apostles, before the true church
fled into the wilderness? Come, are you guilty, vicars, curates,
priests, clerks, and rulers, and magistrates? is not this of the
whore's cup that you drink? are you guilty, or not guilty? and must
not you drink the cup of the indignation of the Almighty? and are
not these, and they that follow such things, such whom God spewed
out of his mouth, which have deceived the nations? for where was
there such Christmas and Candlemas, and Trinity college, and all
these holy-days amongst the apostles his hath been mystery, Babylon,
the great city, like Cain's, that hath killed the just, and yet
observes the days the saints were killed on, (oh, hypocrisy!) and
are persecutors of the saints themselves, and gets the sheep's
clothing! are you guilty, or not guilty? priests, and professors,
parsons, vicars, curates, and clerks, and magistrates, and people;
have you not drank this whore's cup now, who stands before the
Lamb's power, in this the Lamb's day, whose sceptre of righteousness
is set up, who will judge you according to your works, whose reward
is with him, who will judge the world in righteousness?

And come up, priests, curates, and parsons; was not the whore of
Rome the first setter up of clerks to say amen, and turners of the
hour-glass, and readers of mass, as the priest reads his sermons and
notes? are you guilty here, priests? Again, where were these clerks
to say amen among the apostles, and strain people's goods, if they
will not give them money to say amen? come, are you guilty, or not
guilty? are not these the fruits of your mother church of Rome,
which things have been set up since the days of the apostles, and
the true church went into the wilderness? Come up, priests, clerks,
and vicars, and parsons, and curates to the bar of judgment; where
had you those names of sacraments, creeds, and abundance of such
like, which are from the pope of Rome's mass book? and have you not
drank the whore's cup here? are you guilty, or not guilty? was not
the where of Rome the setter up and observer of all these days, May-
day, and Lady-day, and Whitsuntide, and Christmas, Michaelmas,
Lammas, Candlemas? Is not here the pope's order observed, and the
whore's order observed, and his authority established, and
practised, and tolerated in all your almanacs, and drank down,
swallowed down; which all the vulgar people, and the priests, and
magistrates, and the courts called by the saints' days, set up by
the authority of the whore of Rome; and for the keeping of them,
have you not all drank this whore's cup? first, priests, and
professors, magistrates and common people, are you guilty, or not
guilty? Hear, you priests, and vicars, and parsons, are you not yet
in the tribe of black-coats? and are you not they that have deceived
the nations, who have on the sheep's clothing, and observe the
sheep's days they have been killed on; you have brought the people
to that, but are of them which have killed the sheep, and not
brought people to the sheep's life, nor the spirit, nor the mind of
the sheep; nor to the life of Christ, the apostles, nor the
prophets, but you have drank the whore's cup, as your practices and
fruits declare throughout the nation; as your calendars and almanacs
declare, observing the days that the saints were killed on: and this
hath been the work of the wolves in the sheep's clothing, since the
woman fled into the wilderness; so are not you guilty here? and do
you not cry guilty here before the Lord's presence, and the throne,
and the Lamb and to judgment is your whore come, that woman that
hath brought forth so many harlots, which she hath scattered and
spread over nations; and now shall the Lamb and saints have victory,
as the deceit hath had victory. And now is the marriage of the Lamb
come, the bride, the Lamb's wife, the true church known again, and
you and your mother judged: and her flesh must be burnt with fire;
and you shall drink the cup of the indignation of the wrath of the
Almighty, poured forth upon you without mixture; and the man-child
is brought forth, which will rule all nations with a rod of iron;
and the everlasting gospel shall be preached again to all kindred',
tongues and nations, as the deceit hath been over all nations, and
the apostles were to go over all nations before deceit came up, and
the deceit trod down the apostles' work, the life, that which they
set up, and turned against it, and killed the ministers, and turned
against the church; and so got power over all kindreds, tongues, and
nations: but now shall the beast, false prophet, great whore, old
dragon be taken, which has corrupted the earth, and made the
inhabitants of the earth drunk, the kings of the earth, and
corrupted the earth, with her fornication; now shall she be taken
and cast alive into the lake of fire, and Babylon shall be
confounded, and the everlasting gospel shall be preached again to
them which dwell upon the earth, which is the power of God, whereby
life and immortality shall come to light, in which power of God, the
gospel, is the mystery of the fellowship known; and this shall go
over all the deceit of nations, kindreds, tongues, and people; and
so shall truth go over all nations; the power of God, the gospel, as
it did in the days of the apostles; the same power as was in the
apostles, in which there shall be unity with their words, and with
their lives, and Christ in whom they end, and the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and the Lamb and the saints shall have the victory,
who will kill with the sword, and slay with the sword, which are the
words of his mouth, and the joyful days are coming.

Come up, priests, clerks, vicars, curates and professors to the bar:
are not all your carnal weapons that you persecute withal, of the
whore's cup of Rome, which hath been from the dragon's and beast's
power, who hath killed the creatures, and wrestled with flesh and
blood? And Christ said; he came not to destroy men's lives, but to
save them, who was the prince of life; and the apostle said, they
wrestled not with flesh and blood, but with principalities, and
powers, and spiritual wickednesses, and rulers of darkness: and it
is said, Christ came to destroy the works of the devil, and the
devil and death, where he hath his authority, and destroys the sin
that was in their flesh; but doth not say, he destroyed their flesh,
wrestled not with flesh and blood, and so to bring the creature into
the liberty of the Son of God, (who is the redemption of mankind)
and to destroy thee who art a-destroying. Now you, since the days of
the apostles, and Christ in the flesh, the church fled into the
wilderness, who have destroyed and made war against the saints, and
killed them, and have wrestled with flesh and blood, and killed the
creature, and destroyed their flesh and blood; is not this the
dragon's power, and beast, and the whore's cup, and whipped, and
beat, and abused the creatures, and burned, and dismembered them?
Have you not drank the whore's cup here, and marred the workmanship
of God? instead of saving men's lives, have destroyed them, and
instead of wrestling against spiritual wickednesses, and powers of
darkness, whipped, beat, and imprisoned the creatures. How now,
priests and professors, is not this the whore's cup? are you guilty,
or not guilty? Whom have you been married to? is not this the
whore's cup, got up since the woman fled into the wilderness, that
drank the blood of prophets, martyrs, and saints, and tells the
people, Hebrew and Greek is the original; and hath got the sheep's
clothing in those languages, and persecutes and kills the sheep, and
prisons, and whips them? And where did the apostles say, that Hebrew
and Greek was the original, but the church of Rome? Had not Pilate,
the murderer, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and set it a-top of Christ,
the life, and crucified him? and hath not the whore of Rome set up
her schools and colleges, to make her ministers, and there the
ministers,, the orthodox men so called, have got Hebrew, Greek, and
Latin, the naturals, since the true woman fled into the wilderness,
and the man-child caught up to God? And hath not this been the
whore's cup you drank of? and have you not drank the whore's cup?
Now the bride and the Lamb's wife is known; now you are come before
his judgment bar; are you guilty, or not guilty? and the judgment of
the great whore is come, and all her children; and is not the
original the word which was in the beginning before Pilate's
tongues, who set them a-top of Christ, which the beast and the whore
of Rome hath set up to be the original, and all nations have drank
her cup, but who have their names written in the Lamb's book of
life, before the foundation of the world was? (and this is from
such.)

And hath not all your crying up sin, while men are upon the earth,
they must never be made free from sin; and is not this come from the
whore's cup, who pleads for a purgatory after death? Come, priests,
come up to the bar; are you guilty or not guilty? Is not this
doctrine come from the whore of Rome, since the woman fled into the
wilderness? The apostle said, he was made free from sin, and they
spoke wisdom amongst them that were perfect; and he that is born of
God, doth not commit sin; and as he was, so they were in this
present world; and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin;
and the new covenant blots out sin and transgression, and by the one
offering perfects for ever them that are sanctified; and Christ was
made manifest to save his people from their sin; and the church of
Christ is without spot, or blemish, or wrinkle, or any such thing;
and the work of the ministry was for the perfecting of the saints,
until they all come into the unity of the faith, and unto the
knowledge of the Son of God, and unto a perfect man, and to the
measure and stature of the fullness of Christ: Now since the
apostles and martyrs were killed, and true ministry, and the church
fled into the wilderness, do not you and your false church say, that
people must have sin while they be upon the earth, and so preaches
up their sin? and is not this the dragon's power which the beast
got, and the whore? and what good doth your preaching do, if they
must have sin while they are upon the earth? and what is your work
to the people? that doth not perfect them? and have you not here
drank the whore's cup? Come up to the bar, answer, are you guilty,
or not guilty? and was not the work of the apostles for the
perfecting the saints? and had he not perfected some when he said,
he spoke wisdom amongst them that were perfect? and is not your work
to perfect none, that tells them they must have a body of sin, and
be in their sin while they are upon the earth? and doth not that
make them imperfect? and so they can be but imperfect, who never
come out, who hear you, who are got up since the true church fled
into the wilderness, by that power that killed the prophets,
martyrs, and saints, and whipped, and prisoned, and banished them.
Are you guilty, or not guilty? answer it here at the bar; and
priests, we will not here bid you hold up your hands, and so you
have cried up all the imperfection and sin, and the body of sin
while on the earth; was not this the whore's cup which corrupts the
earth with her fornication and abominations, who is upon the beast
that hath the dragon's power? and so what can you cry up but sin;
this fenced city, mystery Babylon, mother of harlots, the great'
whore which hath been ruled by the dragon, and fenced by it, and yet
killed the martyrs and prophets, and saints, within her compass,
since this whorish woman, false church has got up, and hath enlarged
her city, since the true woman fled into the wilderness? but now the
man-child, the Lamb is come to reign, who makes war in
righteousness, and rides on the white horse, conquering and to
conquer, and the Lamb and the bride his wife is witnessed, who will
rule all nations with a rod of iron, he is come to make work with
you, and the Lamb, and the saints shall have the victory over the
beast, over the false prophet, over this whore, who will kill with
his sword, and slay with his sword, which are the words of his
mouth, and blessing and honour will be given to the King of kings,
and the Lord of lords, who is Lord Omnipotent, and everlasting.

And did not the beast who had the dragon's power after the woman was
fled into the wilderness, who made war with the saints, and overcame
them, who then had the power over all kindreds, tongues and nations,
and they gave their honour to the beast, and the whore is on this
beast, and all nations have drank her cup, and the kings of the
earth which have drank the blood of the martyrs, prophets and
saints, and is not all this hat-honour, and hat-worship, prisoning
and fining, and raging if they had it not, is not this the beast,
and whore, and dragon's power, which have been over all kindreds,
tongues and nations? was there any such things among the apostles,
and Christ and the true church before she went into the wilderness,
but by the inwardly raveners, wolves in sheep's clothing, false
prophet and antichrist, dragon, beast, and great whore, compelling
all to worship, to receive his image, his mark in their forehead, or
the hand, all that dwell upon the earth should worship him, but
whose names were written in the Lamb's book of life before the
foundation of the world; what is this beast, honour and worship?
what is the thing he looks for, if it be not the hat, to bend and
bow, and stoop to him? was not the beast, the whore, the first
author of it? Now here have you not all drank the whore's cup in the
whole Christendom? hath not she given it you to drink, and have you
not all drank it? and will you not fine and prison those that will
not do it, and stand bareheaded before you? and is not this the
false church, the false woman, and her cup, and the beast and
dragon's authority? Come up to the bar, priests; answer, are you
guilty, or not guilty? And professors, and teachers, and
magistrates, and kings of the earth; hath not this been since the
true woman fled into the wilderness, since the days of the apostles?
and did not the angel and John see her coming up, who when he would
have bowed to the angel, did not the angel bid him twice see he did
it not, then why should mortals expect such honour? And now in this
you may see where you are fallen in your pride and arrogancy, and
your oaths and swearing was from your mother the pope, whose cup you
have drank, and fines and imprisons others that will not drink it.
And hath not your marrying with rings, and the surplice, and rails,
and fonts, and altars, and the sprinkling with rosemary and bays
when you bury the dead, hath not all this been of the whore's cup?
and have not you all drank it? Now if you say you have laid away
some of these, how is it that you have not laid away all? Now come,
guilty, or not guilty? And must you not drink the cup of the
indignation of the wrath of God.

Come, priests, vicars, and curates, do you not buy your gifts at
schools and colleges for money, and sell your gifts for money? are
you not Simon Magus his brats here? guilty, or not guilty? And do
you not make merchandize of people through covetousness, and teach
for filthy lucre, and love of money, and have pierced yourselves
through many hurtful lusts, and drowned yourselves through your
pernicious ways, and have a form of godliness, and deny the power,
which hath caused the way of truth to be evil spoken of; and the
very ignorant people to cry against you, and the sober to be ashamed
of you, and made your names stink among the heathen that know not
God, or Christ, you that have professed him with your lips, and in
your will-worship, and feigned humility? Come up, priests, to the
bar, before the throne of the Lamb, are you guilty, or not guilty?
Come, priests, and curates, and parsons, and vicars, have you not
sold your birthright for a mess of pottage, for a morsel of bread,
for a handful of barley, and earthly things? and Esau-like, hunting
up and down with his sword, to kill and slay the just Jacob, and get
great benefices, and cast him into prison, and would make him to
bow, when he is got past him; but now the younger is risen, and the
elder shall be servant, who has called you to judgment; and are you
guilty, or not guilty of these things that are charged upon you?
Come, priests and curates, parsons and vicars, are you not they that
will preach peace to the people, if they put in your mouths, and he
shall be a good churchman; if not, you will prepare war against him,
cast him into prison, haul him before courts, make your names stink
before the courts in the nation, you will cast them into prison till
death? doth not the blood of many lie upon you, as in York gaol,
Lancaster gaol, Gloucester gaol, Durham, Appleby, and other places?
Come up to the Lamb's bar, and plead your own cause, guilty, or not
guilty? and see how you can stand before the throne of the Lamb, you
that are not able to stand before the Lord's servants, who are moved
of the Lord to speak to you, but call to the magistrates to take
them away, and to whip them, to the house of correction with them:
Come up, priests and vicars, parsons and curates, are not you they
that have borne rule by your means, and take away your means and you
will not bear rule over that people? and are you not such greedy
dumb dogs that can never have enough, every one seeking for your
gain from your quarter, and all looking for your own way, and not
after the ways of the Lord, who have told people you never heard his
voice, and so are they that God never sent? Come to the bar of
judgment, guilty, or not guilty?

And come, priests, vicars, and curates, and parsons, are you not
they that will not go without a bag, and those which have taken the
people's money for that which was not bread, and the messengers of
Satan, and his ministers of unrighteousness, which Satan hath
transformed himself into, that takes and will have money of them,
and means, whom you do not work for, and where you have neither
ploughed nor threshed, and where you never planted, and have made
the gospel chargeable? Come up, guilty, or not guilty? answer for
yourselves, and come up, priests, and curates, and vicars, and
parsons, are you not such as go in long robes, fashions and lusts of
the world, with your ribands and points, and double cuffs, and
wearing of gold rings, in the lusts of the flesh, and pride of life,
and the lust of the eyes, which is not of the Father, but of the
world, more like your mountebanks, and fiddlers, and stage-players,
than like unto sober men that preach the gospel? guilty, or not
guilty? Let the witness in all your consciences answer it, which is
now bringing you before the throne of the Lamb, which is his
officer; and come up, priests, and curates, vicars, and parsons, and
professors, have you visited Christ in prison, or have you not been
they that have caused him in his members to be cast into prison, yea
till death? and must they go into everlasting punishment, that doth
not visit him in prison? and have not you cast him into prison, and
taken his means from him instead of visiting of him? have you not
taken away the saints' goods? Come to the bar of judgment, are you
guilty of these things or not? whither must you go to receive your
punishment, which you must have according to your desert? are you
not come under the judgment of all the lives of the prophets, the
life of Christ, the lives of the apostles, in this the day of the
Lamb, in whom all the prophets and apostles end, and found amongst
all them that be out of the spirit of the prophets, Christ, and the
apostles, that have deceived the world, (but could not the elect?)
consider with yourselves, for now are you calling up before the
throne, and the bar of judgment, guilty, or not guilty? for now
shall the false prophets, beast, and dragon be taken and cast alive
into the lake of fire, and the judgment of the great whore come, the
false church, and the false woman, and now shall the Lamb and the
saints have the victory; glory to the Highest, and the everlasting
gospel preached to them that dwell on the earth, and the saints and
the Lamb reign, who makes war in righteousness; now is the day of
your trial come, the Lamb's throne is set up, and sceptre of
righteousness held forth, which reaches over the whole world, and
comprehends the whole world, and all the state of mankind, and now
is the judgment of God come, and the man Christ Jesus, whom he
ordained to judge the world in righteousness, according to the
gospel.

And are not you them priests, curates, vicars, and parsons, which
serve God with your lips, and call upon him with your mouths, and
your hearts afar off, being full of ravenousness, murder, and
madness, and persecution, and will drink the blood of the saints,
who be contrary to you minded, and deface and mar the creatures,
which are the workmanship of God, and yet make people believe Christ
has sent you, a company of disorderly men to mar the workmanship of
God? which is contrary to Christ and the apostles, who saved men's
lives, and wrestled not with flesh and blood, but brought the
creatures into the liberty of the sons of God, and said, there was a
glory of the first body, and a glory of the second; now you that
have destroyed creatures, and marred the creatures, whipped and
defaced them, and bruised them, have been in the dragon's power,
beast, false prophet, antichrist, great whore, and Jews, heathen,
and Judas, by your company with swords and staves, to haul before
magistrates and high priests; are you now guilty here, or are you
not guilty? Answer before the presence of the Lord God, and the
Lamb's throne, for now is your time and day wherein judgment is come
nigh to you. For is it like that all sober people should believe
that Christ should send forth din to mar the workmanship of God,
which pretend themselves to be ministers, and cause them to be
marred? or is it like that any will believe that you are Christians,
that will mar the workmanship of God about religion, church,
ministers, worship, and scriptures? and is not the creature the
workmanship of God? and did not Christ come to destroy that which
would destroy the creature, and to save men's lives, and not to
destroy them? and did not the apostles bring creature into the
liberty of the sons of God? and to wrestle with principalities,
powers, darkness, and spiritual wickedness, and not with flesh and
blood, whose weapons were not carnal but spiritual, and mighty
through God.
A Woe against Kendal:
Francis Howgill

Source: http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-
idx?c=eebo;idno=A86655.0001.001

Title Page
A WOE AGAINST THE
Magistrates, Priests, and People
OF KENDALL 
in the County of Westmorland,
Pronounced from the Lord by one of his PROPHETS.
Which may warn all the persecuting Cities and Towns in the North,
and everywhere, to Repent and fear the Lord, lest the Decree go
forth against them.
Also the Stumbling-block removed from weak Mindes, who are offended
at the strange Signs and wonders acted by the Servants of the Lord,
scornfully called QUAKERS In the Northern parts of this Nation.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1654.

The word of the Lord came unto me saying, Write and declare against
that bloody Town of Kendall, and leave it without excuse.

HEAR ye which pretend to be Rulers, and ye that pretend to be
Teachers, and ye people, the trumpet of the Lord is sounded, gather
yourselves together, for I will plead with you, your iniquities are
come up before me, and your Transgression is come into mine ears;
Woe, woe, and misery is coming upon you, you shall be as Sodom and
Gomorrah, and as Admah and Zeboim; Desolation and a cry, a cry,
lamentation, howling, bitterness and sorrow shall come upon you at
unawares, the sword of the Lord is drawn against you, it is
sharpened for a great slaughter, and you shall be cut off, because
you have despised my name, and trodden under foot my precepts, and
walk after your own wills, and the imagination of your own hearts;
and yet saith the Lord, they say I am amongst them: Woe unto you
hypocrites, I am weary of you, and of all your profession it stinks
in my nostrils, and I abhor it as much as if ye slew a man; you have
slain my Son, you have mocked my prophets, and despised my
messengers which I have sent early and late to forewarn you of the
evil to come, have not I wrought signs and wonders amongst you, as
ever was in any day, or from the beginning, have not I made the
mountains tumble down in your sight, have not I caused my Judgments
to fall upon them that have set themselves against me? Have not I
cleansed the Lepers? Have not I quickened and raised them out of the
grave, which were dead in sins and trespasses? Have not I brought
down the proud? Have not I exalted the low? Have not I caused the
weak things to confound the wise? Have not I sent signs among you,
and have sent my servants to declare against you, as I did to
Nineveh, and have you not heard it? Have not I commanded my Servants
to go bare and naked in your sight, to be a sign to you that your
covering is now rent, and your garment is to be torn, and you shall
be left naked and bare, and you shall be made a mock and a proverb
to all, as my Servants have been made a mock and a proverb to you;
and I will scatter you in my indignation, and I will cause my fury
to rest upon you till I have consumed you; ye rulers that rule by
your own wills, and ye false prophets that cry peace to this people,
and all ye people that delight in lies, is not all manner of
wickedness committed amongst you? As pride, covetousness,
oppression, persecution, mocking, stoning, and imprisoning, haling
before magistrates them who are made to do my will, and to declare
against you; ye strive against me, saith the Lord, ye cry a
confederacy, ye consult together, ye plot, ye call all your
enchanters against me; thus saith the Lord, ye shall be broken as
Pharaoh, and go down to the pit with Egypt, Meshach and Tubal, and
all the uncircumcised; Woe is me, the spoiler is come up against
you, and blackness covers you, and a consumption is entering into
your bones, my eye shall not spare, my hand shall not pity, but it
will bring this upon you, howl and lament ye oaks, ye mountains
cleave asunder, and all ye people, both great and small, be
astonished, put on sackcloth, put your mouths in the dust, for I
will make my fury to pass over you, and none shall be able to
deliver you, said the Lord; write this, let them know, but they will
not hear, till I have caused my fire to burn them up and there be no
remedy.
Written from the Spirit of the living God, by me who am a witness
for his name, whom the world knows not, but named by the world,
Franc. Howgill.

Oh ye raging Priests, who have set yourselves against the mighty
power of the Lord in his own, whereby he is manifesting his works,
his strange works his acts, his strange acts, making his servants
signs and wonders amongst the heathen, and them that know not God,
nor his power, whereby he is choosing that which seems foolishness,
to confound the wisdom of the wise, which you who stand in your own
wills and wisdom, know nothing of; but in this, as in other things,
out of your envy against the truth, take occasion to lay stumbling-
blocks in the way of others, wherein you plainly appear to be in
that generation, who will neither enter into the kingdom yourselves,
nor would suffer others; you who take occasion to Preach and Print
against the truth, because the Lord hath caused some of his servants
to go naked along your streets, as in Kendal and Kirkby-Stephen, as
signs of his wrath to come upon that pride and fullness that Priests
and people live in; and this, you who never knew what it was to obey
God, contrary to your own reason and wills, (for who act such
things, act contrary to their own wills) cry out on a delusion and
madness, thinking thereby to make the truth odious to others, but it
is that the Scriptures may be fulfilled upon you, as it hath been on
your generation before you, who counted always what the Prophets,
Christ, and the Apostles did madness, and called them mad-fellows;
but now all you who fear the Lord, and believe his Word, take heed
of the deceit of these men, and mind not what they say, who have set
themselves to speak evil of the things they know not, but search the
Scriptures and there you shall find, that the mighty God (who hath
power over all flesh, and what he commandeth none must dispute by
their Reason (though it seem never so foolish, and against their
wills) but must obey) hath always before his great Judgments which
he has about to bring on a people, or Nation, made some of his
dearest Servants to pass and act as signs to such Nations of what
was to follow, and was so usual among the Prophets, and them who
knew the word of the Lord, that the Prophet Isaiah speaking in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, saith, I and the Children whom thou
hast given me, are for Signs and Wonders in Israel, from the Lord of
Hosts that dwelleth in Zion, Isaiah 8. 18. And if ye search the
Scriptures of the Prophets, you shall see in what strange and
foolish things to the wisdom of the world they were acted in, as in
Isiah 20. the Prophet was to go Three years naked for a sign, what
the Lord would bring upon Ethiopia and Egypt: Now had these men
lived in his days, they would have cried that up as a delusion and 
madness, and not as the Word of the Lord, as they do at this day;
for they neither know the Lord, nor his Word who stand in their own
wills: Also read the 4. of Ezekiel, and see what a sign he was to
both the houses of Israel and Judah, a strange thing to the wisdom
as ever was: also read the 5. of Ezekiel, and see what a sign he was
to be, and what folly he was to act as to their wisdom, and that in
the midst of the City: also Ezek. 12. 18, 19. & 24. 16. to the end
of the chap. likewise Ezek, 12. to 17. v. and many other of the dear
Servants of God, who were not only to declare the Word of the Lord
from his mouth, but also to be signs to them to whom he was to
prophecy, that so he might leave them all without excuse.

Now those who then were Priests, and should have been teachers and
leaders of the people to fear God, and hear his Word, and observe
his signs, and repent that the Judgments might be prevented, they
were the only men that hated, reproached, persecuted, and called the
prophets, Christ and his Apostles madmen, deceivers, because of
these things, which into their wisdoms could not enter, and stirred
up the Rulers and ignorant people against them that they might put
them to death as it is at this day, but these in our days are more
inexcusable then all that ever went before them, inasmuch as they
had no Scripture to show them that the Lord had commanded such signs
formerly; but these have the Scriptures that witness to the same
thing; which scriptures they make a trade on, and cry up in words,
but are ignorant of that Spirit by which they were acted that gave
them forth, and envy and persecute that obedience that was acted in
them, in whom it is now acted; and they might as well cry out
against Isaiah for a mad-man, because he went naked at the word of
the Lord, and the rest of the prophets and servants of God for
acting such weak and foolish things, to their wisdom, as they did as
against these for obeying the Lord in the same or the like things
whatsoever, for God is not tied to any rule to walk by, but his own
will; and where he commands woe to him that doth not obey, and where
he commands not, woe to him that acts in his own will, and saith, it
is the Word of the Lord. Wherefore all ye that fear the Lord, take
heed of being stirred np by these men to speak evil of that you know
not, but consider that the priests have been always the movers and
persuaders of the people against Christ and his Kingdom, and power
in his saints, and instead of being forward to speak evil of the
things you know not, turn in your minds into the fear of God, and
mind the light in your conscience that will let you see what sins
you are guilty of, which these signs are threatenings to, that you
may repent of them, and escape the Judgment and find mercy, as they
did in the time of the prophets, who feared the Lord and escaped the
Judgment; but the envious, scorners and fools passed on, and were
punished and know this, that a wise man's eye is in his head and
such an one hath his guide within himself, and will not be hasty to
follow others though they be multitudes to do evil, and such know it
is better to be silent, then to speak evil of the things they know
not, and when was there ever any truth of God brought forth, but it
always suffered the violence of the proud and haughty, where the
seed of the serpent reigns and shows his enmity; and it is the same
now, for that which hath been is at this day, but it is that the
power of the Lord may be seen, in carrying on his simple truth,
against all the Wisdom and Power of of the World, and plotting of
the Serpent, yea and he will carry it on to his praise, and to the
confounding all his Enemies, who must stumble at the stumbling
stone, and be offended at the Rock, that must break them to pieces,
wherefore be silent all flesh before the Lord, whose foolishness is
more than thy Wisdom, and whose weakness is more than the strength
of all the World, who is a defence to his poor despised ones, in the
midst of their enemies. Eternal praises to thee who art our Wisdom
for ever.
To all you who have Eyes and yet are blind, and who have Ears and
yet are deaf, and have Hearts and yet cannot understand; to you I am
moved to declare.

THE Lord is proclaiming himself to be King, and all the mountains
and every isle and every oak of Bashan, and all the cedars of
Lebanon, and all who rule as Kings and conquerors shall bow: Hear ye
deaf, the trumpet is blown, the standard is lifted up, there is open
war proclaimed between Michael our prince and all the inhabitants of
the earth. Arm yourselves, O ye mountains and gather yourselves on
heaps O ye isles, the glittering sword of the lord is drawn, and a
fire is before him, and all ye will be found as stubble, and you are
all to be slain heaps upon heaps, and are all to go down with all
the uncircumcised rulers and people into the pit; the lord the
mighty Jehovah is revealing himself from heaven in flames of fire to 
render vengeance upon all the workers iniquity; for you have slain
the heir of the vineyard, you are killing his prophets, and
imprisoning his saints; to you all professors, rulers, and priests,
which say you are Jews, and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan;
I speak in plainness of speech unto you all who live in all the
abominations of the heathen, and yet say you love Christ, do not you
call the master of the house now Beelzebub, do not ye mock, and set
your mouths awry ye sons of the adulteress, and of Sodom, at the
light of Christ which enlighteneth every one that comes into the
world, which light did lead all saints into purity, and up to God,
and this you call natural, and them who witness redemption by the
Son, you call blasphemers; Christ which you profess and yet know
not, was accounted by your generation a blasphemer, and all the
apostles and saints were persecuted by your generation as evil
doers, as despisers of government, as disturbers of the peace, as
leaders of the people into iniquity, as the off-scouring of all
things, as sheep for the slaughter, and were all of them put to
death and in prison by that generation which professed God, and said
they had his ordinances, yet slew them who professed him and kept
his statutes; for if ye be not wilfully blind, are ye not doing the
same now; mocking, haling, imprisoning, bringing before magistrates
them that witness Jesus Christ in them, and because they bear
witness against all sin; did ever any of the saints of God
persecute, imprison, or hale before magistrates, and falsely accuse
any? Did ever the saints complain to authority to guard them? Hear
ye whited tombs, ye painted sepulchres, what gospel is this ye
profess? What God is this ye serve that must be defended with clubs,
swords, rulers, and carnal weapons; the saints who had the
everlasting gospel, said, their weapons were not carnal but
spiritual, and yet they were mighty through God to beat down strong
holds, even principalities and powers, thrones and dominions; but
your gospel and ministry can do nothing without a sword; all people
see where you are, & what you are doing, you run headlong to ruin;
those who were despised by that generation of Pharisees & professors
which you are in, were a burdensome stone, upon which all that
opposed did break themselves; so this generation whom ye set at
nought, ye shall be made to bow and throw down your crowns before
them, and before the lamb who is our leader & guider, glory unto him
for evermore; it's hard for you to kick against the pricks, for we
witness the two edged sword of the lord shall bathe itself in the
blood of his enemies, and shall be made fat with slaughter. O ye
mountains ye shall become a plain for the ransomed to come over you;
all your profession shall be as stubble, and you shall be left naked
and bare, and nothing shall be able to cover you, because you are
crucifiers of Christ and the saints, repent that you may be hid in
the day of his fierce anger, which is to come upon all the workers
of iniquity.
F. H.
FINIS

The Serpent's Subtlety Discovered: Ambrose Rigge
Source: https://play.google.com/books/reader?id=iYYw0FIW3E8C

The 
SERPENT'S 
SUBTLETY 
Discovered,
In a plain answer to a lying scandalous paper, lately come from Leonard Letchford, who calls 
himself rector of Hurst-Pierpoint in the County of Sussex.

His paper is styled, Something drawn up for the good Christian's information, and the 
Quaker's edification; in which he goes about to vilify the Quakers, as much as in him lieth, 
by slanders and false accusations; and lastly, to charge them (as his forefathers did Christ) 
with having a Devil ten particular ways, but is no more able to make it appear to be truth 
against the Quakers, than his progenitors could against Christ and his followers in the days of 
old: And therefore is his lies and false accusations returned upon his own head, which may 
serve for the universal good, and satisfaction of all honest people, who hath any scruple left 
in them concerning the Quakers. From him who is a real friend to all good Christians, but a 
living witness against all false accusers and slanderers of the truth, whose name among men 
is 
	Ambrose Rigge.

And first to his charges.

1. Leon. Letchford sayeth, A Quaker is one whose pride tells him that the pinnacle of the 
temple is a fitter place for him, than the feet of Gamaliel, one who scorns to be anyone's 
disciple, yet undertakes to teach all, though he knows neither what he sayeth, nor whereof he 
affirms. 

Answ. This charge is very false against the Quaker, (whom the Lord in the riches of his love 
and mercy to him) hath brought, both from his pride, and the pinnacle of the temple, and from 
the feet of such Pharisees as Gamaliel was, Acts 5:34, at whose feet Saul was brought up, 
who was a persecutor of the servants of God, Acts 22:4, binding and delivering both men and 
women into prison, as his posterity now doth, who are and hath been brought up at the feet of 
such Pharisees as Gamaliel was, and are as blind persecutors as ever Saul was, in binding and 
delivering into prison both men and women, as he did, let all the gaols throughout England be 
witnesses hereunto.

But the Quakers are brought to the feet of Jesus to learn of him, whose disciples they are; yet 
are not greater than their Lord, whom the blind Pharisees called the Prince of Devils, Matth. 
9:34, Mark 12:24, and so it is no marvel why such as Leon. Letchford calls them of his 
household after the same name, Matth. 10:25, and as for any man's disciples the Quakers are 
not, for what they have received hath not been from man, neither were they taught it by them, 
but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, as Paul testified, Gal. 1:11, 12. 

Priest. 2. Charge. Or he is one whose business is to deliver out their own traditions, and new 
coined truths to the world, rather than to receive the Scripture truths, in the love of them, and 
so one who hath provoked God to send him strong delusions, and to give him up to believe a 
lie, that he might be damned.

Answ. As for delivering out our own traditions and new coined truths to the world; this is a 
most horrid untruth; for that truth which we deliver to the world, is the most ancient upon the 
face of the earth besides it, even the same word which was from the beginning, by which 
many are begotten to God, into the faith & fellowship of his own son; this word was before 
traditions was, & judges them all in whomsoever they appear; this is the ancient truth and 
faith which was once delivered to the saints, and hath brought the Quakers to receive the 
Scripture truths in the love of them, by which they see under the sheep's clothing, which such 
ravening wolves as L. L. hath been so long covered withal, but would not he have called the 
appearance of Christ in the flesh, in that way and manner of ministration of life, wherein he 
never appeared before, new coined truths, if he had been in their days, who cried against 
several things, and changed several things which God commanded and established in the first 
covenant, as the temple, and the priesthood, and the law, and would he not have called this 
new doctrine, as the philosophers, epicureans and stoics said of Paul, Acts 17:18. and others 
in the same nature, who asked if they might know what this new doctrine was whereof he 
spoke, for they said he brought certain strange things to their ears, others said he seemed to 
be a setter forth of strange gods, vers. 18, 19, 20, thus they censured him in their carnal dark 
minds, which led them to call the doctrine of Christ a new doctrine, as Leo. Letchford doth of 
the same doctrine now preached by Quakers.

Pr. 3. Charge. When you see him in his outward formal, Pharisaical garb, his glittering 
outside beyond other men, wherein he boasteth not a little, you may look upon the Devil in 
him transformed into an Angel of light.

Answ. As for outward, formal, Pharisaical garb, and glittering outside, this is all denied by 
the Quakers, but where the outside is foul, there the inside cannot be clean, for as the tree is, 
so is his fruit according to Christ's words, Matth. 7. But as for boasting of our glittering 
outside, this is a false charge, which the Lord will judge thee for, but that righteousness with 
which we are covered is not of ourselves, but of him who hath covered us with his white 
raiment, as the spirit of God bears us witness: And because of this is the priest's rage so great 
against us, even to blood itself; as the same generation was against him, who could never be 
satisfied till they had his life, of whom all the prophets and apostles gave testimony that he 
was the Son of God, though the chief priests with the scribes called him a devil; and if the 
Devil were transformed in us, into an angel of light, we should be more esteemed by L. L. 
and his brethren, than we are at this day.

Pr. 4. Charge. When he meets with the commands of kings and magistrates, though not 
contradicted by Scripture, or never so concordant to it, he is that demoniac in the Gospel, 
and you may look upon the Devil in him as that unruly fiend, who breaks all bonds and 
chains asunder, and whom no man can tame.

Answ. As for the commands of kings and magistrates, which are not contradicted by the 
Scripture, or never so concordant to it, our souls are subject unto, not for wrath but for 
conscience' sake, yea to every ordinance of man, which is for the punishment of evil doers, 
and for the praise of them that do well, I Pet. 2:13, for which end alone king and rulers were 
ordained of God; and whosoever resisteth such (as such) resisteth the ordinance of God; but 
the Devil was not in the three children, who resisted Nebuchadnezzar's command, Dan. 3, 
when it was contrary to the command of God and his worship, neither was the Devil as an 
unruly fiend in Daniel, though he resisted the command of Darius the King, Dan. 6.10, when 
it was matter of conscience to God; that though Darius had established a royal statute, and a 
firm decree, and signed it; yet Daniel broke it, and prayed to his God, as at other times, 
though by the king's law he was not to pray, yet he went into his house, and his windows 
being open, he kneeled down and gave thanks before God, &c. and those men that stirred up 
Darius against Daniel, assembled together, and found Daniel praying, for which they accused 
him to the King, so that he suffered, vers. 11, 12, even as many wicked priests hath done 
against many at this day for praying to God, and worshipping him in their houses, into which 
they have often entered, and finding the people of God either at prayer, or some other godly 
exercise, have often accused them, and stirred up the rulers against them, so that they have 
deeply suffered as Daniel did, and the Devil was not in Mordecai, who disobeyed the 
command of King Ahasuerus, and would not bow unto Haman, nor do him reverence, Est. 
3:23, though the King had commanded it, and his servants urged him daily to do it, yet he 
hearkened not to them, ver. 4. but worshipped the Lord as he had commanded him, & the 
Devil was not an unruly fiend in Peter, and the other Apostles who disobeyed the strict 
command of the rulers, Acts 5:20, 21, and said they ought to obey God rather than man, but if 
these had been in L. L.'s days, he would have called this rebellion, and an unruly fiend in 
them, as he doth them that are led by the same spirit; now, though I question not but their 
souls was subject to the higher power, yea to every ordinance of man, which was ordained of 
God, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that did well, as their 
successors are at this day, neither do I question at all that the rulers aforementioned, would 
have been so cruel to the above named servants of God, if they had not been stirred up by the 
blood-thirsty priests, whose weapons in every generation was prisons, furnaces, and such like 
tortures, upon the bodies of them, whom God raised up to bear witness against their ungodly 
deeds, as this age hath fully manifested, and when that will not serve, but that they see the 
Lord delivers them out of all such tortures, then they threaten to cut their throats themselves, 
as Leon. Letchford hath done within this late years, who is so far from being a minister of 
Christ, that the Devil cannot make him more like himself, who was a murderer from the 
beginning, John 8:44.

Pr. 5. Charge. All his doctrines and principles tend to the nourishing and advance of treason, 
rebellion, and irreligion, take a taste of them. And first, I must tell you, that the name of that 
outrageous and unruly spirit was Legion, that very Devil that is in the Quakers, because he is 
many, as he sayeth of himself in the 5. of St. Mark.

Answ. For the truth or falsehood of this charge, I shall leave to the judgement of every 
judicious man who hath any true knowledge of the Quakers' doctrine & principles, whether it 
ever nourished (or so much countenanced) treason, rebellion, irreligion or confusion, and 
whether such things is not daily found among the priests, and their followers take a taste of 
them. I would fain know who it was that stirred up the whole nation against Charles the I. to 
treason and rebellion, and cursed all who would not go forth against him, till they had 
destroyed him, was it the Quakers or the priests in their pulpits, even till they had driven the 
whole nation into confusion and blood, whose lives was deadly to them while he enjoyed any 
part of his, who can but set to their seals to the truth of this, that had any understanding in that 
day, who cried both against the King, and that way of worship he had established by law, to 
the confounding and overthrowing of that which before they had cried up for Divine service, 
and then set up another thing, and cried up that for an oracle of God, because it suited with 
their profit and unrighteous gain, for the preservation of which they were ready to cry up 
anything whatsoever it pleased men to lay before them; into which Leo. Letchford did creep, 
and relinquished him called Lord Goring, when he was to suffer for the King (as 'tis said) and 
would not come at him in the time of his distress, though he had pretended much friendship 
to him before, when he did put into his mouth; yet when the said Goring was near execution 
he left him, and sided with Oliver and his party while they could put into his mouth; and now 
to cover this his treachery, he would accuse others of treason and rebellion, who both are, and 
ever were clear of such rebellion and confusion, our leader being not come to destroy men's 
lives, but to save them, Luke 9:56, who hath led us into the life of Christianity, from such 
blood-suckers, who to satisfy their thirsty stomachs, cannot have any content while their 
fellow creatures remain undestroyed.

Now to Leonard Letchford's Affirmations.

1. Affirmation. He sayeth the Devil is in the Quaker, an irreligious Devil, taking him off from 
holy duties, and bids him sit still and wait, give over praying, reading, hearing, and having 
anything to do with Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, but expect a voice within him, some 
extraordinary motions, which he must look upon as Christ the light within him, and which he 
must follow as his guide, though differing from, and standing in no conjunction with the light 
contained in the Scriptures.

Answ. That such a spirit is in the Quakers, as to take them off from holy duties, I think the 
Devil himself might blush to affirm; but as for holy duties, unholy men cannot perform them, 
whose prayers and ploughing is sin, Prov. 15:8, & 21:4, and therefore that which bids him sit 
still and wait till the Lord work in him, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure; is not the 
Devil, but the word of God, Phil. 2:13, for it is good for a man both to hope and quietly to 
wait for the salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3:26, and the Lord is good to then that wait for him, 
Prov. 20:22, but if the Devil can get the wicked to make long prayers, and can satisfy them 
with that while he can keep them in sin and transgression, he knows they are fast enough in 
his Kingdom, who knows God heareth not the prayers of sinners, as it is written, John 9:31, 
whose sacrifice is abomination to the Lord; therefore I leave the prudent to judge, whether 
such prayers were not better to be given over, which can never enter into the ear of the Lord, 
but is sin before him, but as for baptism and the Supper of the Lord, the Quakers both own 
and practice, according to the Scriptures, and therefore this is a false charge against them: but 
may it not be rightly said to be the Devil in L. L. who sends the servants of God to prison for 
practising of prayer & holy duties, which the Lord hath led them to perform, as he hath done 
many of late years; and as for any extraordinary motions which the Quakers doth own as 
Christ in them which differeth from, or standeth in no conjunction with the Scripture, I 
charge L. L. to produce any such, that the Quakers either own or practise, or else let shame 
cover his face, from condemning the innocent, without a cause.

Pr. 2. Affirmation. And now he may boldly adventure to become a seducing, and an 
erroneous devil having drawn him from the rule which is the written word which he calls 
sometimes the declaration of the mind of God, I suppose he means to other men, who are in 
darkness, he calls the Quakers to have recourse to some voice within him, which was Saul's 
delusion, I verily thought, that I might do many such & such thing, Acts 26. & to attend upon 
some new revelations and declarations of the mind of God, which he hath not given to other 
men, and which are not contained in that dull and dark lantern of the Scriptures, as they 
esteemed it, if this Devil play (as he doth with the Quaker) may not the dreams of St. Francis, 
and St. Anthony, the Revelation of St. Bridget, and St. Katharine, come to be of higher 
esteem; and to be preferred before the Scriptures, Popery, Popery, is not this making way for 
unwritten traditions, a bringing them into credit, to the slighting of the written word of God.

Answ. As for the Devil, being a seducing erroneous spirit, this hath been his practice many 
ages, having drawn both the priests and their followers from the life and power of God in 
Christ Jesus, which only redeems out of Satan's kingdom; but as for drawing the Quakers, 
from the rule of righteousness or the word of God, this he neither is, nor I hope shall never be 
able to do; for it is the sword of the Spirit; by which we have and do quench all his fiery 
darts, which either he or any of his ministers, hath or can shoot against us, but where dost 
thou read of a written word to be the rule, if thou canst prove such a word by the Scriptures 
bring it forth now because: thou hast urged that so often to make us odious, who cannot call 
the Scripture that which it doth not call itself, but a declaration we can truly call it, because 
the holy men of God did so call it, as thou mayest read, Luke 1:1, 2, which plainly 
demonstrates, that the Scriptures, or writings of the holy men of God from the beginning was 
called a declaration; And the word was God, John 1:1. And Christ who was one with his 
Father, his name was called the word of God, Rev. 19:13. And the Bereans were noble 
because they received the word, and then searched the Scriptures, Acts. 17:11, which again 
makes a manifest difference between the word and the writings which was first received 
before they could rightly search the Scriptures, for if we had not received the word of God, 
and thereby searched the Scriptures, we could not have found out the deceivableness of the 
priests, so much as we have done. And as for the Devil calling the Quaker to some voice 
within him, this was never the Devil's call, but the call of God, as thou mayest read, Deut. 
39:13, 14. And it was not the word of the Devil in Paul who said the righteousness of faith 
sayeth, the word is nigh thee, even in thy heart & mouth, that thou mayest hear it & do it, 
Rom. 10:6, 7, 8, here he called them to a voice within as God called Moses, as I have showed 
above: & it was not the Devil that led Paul to say Christ spoke in him, 2 Cor. 13:3, whose 
voice he both heard, and exhorted others to hear. And to say that that was the light within 
Saul when he said, I verily thought, &c. this is an absolute lie, for that was the same Spirit of 
darkness and delusion, which now leads his successors to think they do good service in 
persecuting the Church of Christ and the members of it, who follows their evil thoughts, as he 
did, but when he came to know the true light, word, and power of God, this brought into 
captivity every thought unto the obedience of Christ, as he himself affirmed, 2 Cor. 10. 5, and 
then instead of being a persecutor, he was persecuted by them who followed their evil 
thoughts, and among such who now follows their evil persecuting thoughts, instead of the 
true light of Christ Jesus, the imaginations of their own brain, is more esteemed than the 
sound truths, declared in the Scriptures, and as for St. Francis, St. Anthony and Bridget, I 
know no such saints; but if they follow their own dreams & imaginations, it is but as the 
priests doth at this day, who sets up that from Scripture, which bears no testimony unto it, 
which is but near Popery in the ground, though covered with a more fair cloak.

Pr. 3. Affir. He is in the Quaker a proud supercilious uncharitable, censorious devil, to cloak 
and colour, which he gives him leave to be outwardly and in show a reserved, and humble, 
and grave, and abstemious, and abounding with sanctimony, and self-denial, is the most 
religious monk or hermit, or the strictest votary in the Church of Rome, that he is not in 
lewdness like other men, there lieth the foundation of his spiritual pride, if he had not this 
boast of the Devil, could not hope to make him half so like himself, who is the king of pride, 
though he never wore ribbons, nor lace, nor bandstrings to judge, and censure, & condemn 
all men, who are not in their way, by calling themselves the blessed of the Lord, the followers 
of the Lamb, the counsel and nobility of the royal seed, is such a piece of diabolical pride, 
and uncharitableness, the Devil were a very fool, should he not be willing to give them the 
glory of that deep humility and self-denial, as the renouncing of a hatband, a pair of cuffs, 
and a bandstring.

Answ. Was that a proud, supercilious, uncharitable, censorious devil in John, who said, we 
know we are of God, & the whole world lieth in wickedness, I John 5.19. & was their grave 
humbleness & abounding with sanctimony & self-denial to be judged as L. L. would judge 
the Quakers, whose light so shines before men, that the worst of their enemies cannot but see 
& acknowledge to their good works; yet the Devil having no just occasion against them, that 
way to satisfy his malice, to make them odious, would brand them with spiritual pride, or 
liken them to the strict votaries in the Church of Rome thereby to cast dirt in their faces, for 
which God will them judge. But as for the Church of Rome, time may manifest, whether the 
priests or the Quakers are more like to her in principle & practice, who are already so near 
concordant that one can scarce discern the difference, but only the strictness of the one, & the 
lasciviousness of the other is the chiefest difference, that at present appears between them, 
but as for the Quakers, they are hated and persecuted of both, who deals proudly, 
censoriously, & uncharitably with them, & would cut their throats, if they durst, their malice 
is so great against them; and as for diabolical pride & uncharitableness to the advancing of 
which (as thou sayest) the Devil were a very fool, should he not be willing to give them the 
glory of that deep humility, &c. our humility & self-denial stands in that which judges the 
ground of all superfluity whether of cuffs, band-strings, or any other things which is needless, 
or superfluous, and of this the Devil doth not give us the glory, but odium and contempt 
because of the power of God which hath struck at the ground both of those & many more 
great evils which hath and doth torment him, and destroy his Kingdom, which hath long 
stood in the superfluity of naughtiness, both in the Church of Rome, and elsewhere, and 
because the daughters of Zion walked in such a superfluity, the Lord sent his plagues and 
judgements upon them, as thou mayest read, Isa. 3:16, to the end; and the Apostle forbade 
such superfluity and costly array, Tim. 2:9,  and yet was not a votary of the Church of Rome, 
nor had his glory from the Devil, as L. L. would charge the Quakers withal, and as for 
censuring such evils, woe unto us if we should justify that which God never did, and now 
doth so manifestly condemn.

Pr. 4. Affirmation. He is in the Quaker an uncivil, unmannerly devil, shows as little honour 
or respect to the greatest Prince or Ruler on earth, as he doth to the meanest person, these 
are like to have much from him, when he denieth him the cap and the knee, and the bowing of 
the body, he salutes other men whom he meets, as brute beasts do one another, by staring in 
the face, and passing by, plays the dumb devil, unless a thing he calls a priest in derision 
come in his way, and then he is an everlasting, prating, bawling, railing devil.

Answ. If the Devil be uncivil and unmannerly (as no doubt he is) he is manifested in none 
more than in L. L. whose nasty, uncivil, unmannerly words and actions hath far exceeded all 
the hirelings about him, as I can produce under his own hand in many particulars, that 
insomuch that he being on a certain day in the house where Sarah Welsh lives, in Hurst, he 
used such uncivil expressions, that she desired her children to go out of the room, last they 
should learn such evil communications which corrupt good manners, as the Apostle sayeth, 1 
Cor. 15:33, who strictly forbade it, Eph. 4:29: though this is not the hundredth part of his 
uncivil, unmannerly words and actions, which hath proceeded from him, which might turn 
the hearts of any civil man from him, who appears more like a mountebank upon a stage, than 
a minister of the Gospel.

But as for our showing as little respect or honour to the greatest prince on earth, as to the 
meanest person, in denying them the cap and the knee, and bowing, &c., it is confessed we 
cannot respect men's persons for their gold rings, nor gay clothing, for then we should 
commit sin, and be convinced by the Law of God, as transgressors. According to the words of 
Jam. 2:1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, For we say how can such believe who receive honour one 
of another, because Christ said so, John 5:44, & we know there is no respect of persons with 
God, Eph. 6:9, & many more instances might be produced, but yet we honour all men in the 
Lord, & if any prince or ruler upon earth rule well, he is worthy of double honour, which was 
never withheld from them by the Quakers, though they could not respect their persons with 
cap and knee, it being a heathenish invention & not commanded not practised by any 
Christian under the Gospel, but forbidden. And as for brute beasts, often when they meet one 
another in the fields, they bow their heads one to another, as the heathen do, who bow and 
cringe with cap and knee one to another, while they are inventing mischief in their hearts one 
against another. And as for the Quakers standing in people's faces, and especially on the 
priests, at whom L. L. sayeth the Devil in them, is an everlasting railing brawling Devil, 
would not he have said the same of Paul, who set his eyes on Elymas, & said, O thou full of 
all subtlety & mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, &c., Acts 
13:8, 9, 10, would not L. L. have called this an everlasting, prating, railing, bawling devil, in 
Paul, I leave this also to the prudent to judge of, whether the Quakers or Priests practice in 
this thing also is more concordant to the Scripture.

Pr. 5. Affirmation. He is in the Quaker a covetous, fraudulent, sacrilegious Devil, withholding 
that tenth part from the owners of it, which given by the piety or superstition of former times, 
he can never make appear to be his own by any Law of God or man.

Answ. This charge hath no more truth in it than the former, nor not so much, whose ox or ass 
have the Quakers coveted, or whom have they defrauded of anything which is their just and 
proper right; but if L. L. count it sacrilege to withhold tithe from a hireling priest, they are 
guilty of that though he himself questions whether it was given by the piety or superstition of 
former times, yet however it must be counted sacrilege to withhold it, though neither he nor 
any of his can ever make it appear by the Scriptures to be theirs, but if it could so be proved, 
they have robbed this whole nation in not bringing it into a store-house, & with it relieving 
the stranger, fatherless & widows, for which end it was ordained of God, Deu. 14:29, Mal. 
3:9, 10. What a nation would this be, if the tithes were put to that use for which they were 
ordained of God, in the time of the Levitical priesthood, but if these priests should so do as 
they are far enough from it, yet they must deny Christ to be come in the flesh who was the 
end of that law & priesthood that took tithes, & changed both, Heb. 7:12, & so show 
themselves Antichrists, as they are, I John 4:3. So that the ministers of the true Gospel were 
content with Christ's allowance, which was food and raiment, and did not covet after the gift 
of the Levitical priesthood, but since their days the Pope hath converted it to another use, 
which the Lord never ordained it for; and therefore to withhold it from them who have no 
right to it by the law of Gospel is not sacrilege, but a true testimony of the coming of Christ, 
who ends the law and that priesthood also, & offers up the ninths & tenths also to the Lord 
who gave it, is not to uphold such who are called of men master, & stand praying in the 
synagogues, & loves the uppermost rooms at feasts, going in long robes, & love greetings in 
marketplaces, which Christ the son of God cried many woes against, Matth. 23.

Pr. 6. Affirmation. He is in the Quaker a rebellious, traitorous devil, denying the King his 
supremacy in things spiritual, in things appertaining to the worship and service of God, such 
of time, place, gesture, conducing to the more comely and decent ordering of it, & having 
proudly, and perversely, fettered and hampered himself, is resolved to admit of no other bond 
or obligations, than those of his own humours and fancies have laid upon him.

Answ. As for the King's supremacy, let them answer to whom it concerns, but we are neither 
fettered, nor hampered, unless by the prisons, and fetters which the Devil and L. L. hath laid 
upon us, for the trial of our faith and patience, according as it was foretold, Rev. 2:10.

Pr. 7. Affirmation. He is in the Quaker an absurd, senseless, stoical devil, affirming that a 
man is not to make resistance, so much as to defend himself, if any other come to take his 
purse or his coat from him, it is likely he will say, if any come to pull the King's crown from 
his head, or his sceptre out of his hand, an excellent encouragement, to thieves, rogues, 
rebels, and traitors, what preys and booties would the Quakers (who for the most part have 
little or nothing) make, could they fool men into their doctrine and persuasion.

Answ. if it be an absurd, senseless, stoical devil, to affirm that a man is not to make 
resistance, &c. then Christ's doctrine was such, who said unto his disciples, resist not evil, but 
whosoever shall smite thee on the one cheek, turn the other, and if any man will sue thee at 
the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also, Matth. 5:39, 49, and Christ said 
unto him that smiteth thee one the one cheek, offer also the other, and him that taketh away 
thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also, Luke 6:29. Now this I leave to the judgement of 
every judicious man, whether this is an absurd, senseless doctrine of Christ or no, or whether 
if L. L. had been in Christ's days when he preached this doctrine, he would not have called 
him an absurd, senseless, stoical devil, for affirming this, yea, or nay? and have told him this 
doctrine was an excellent encouragement to thieves, rogues, and rebels, and have said what 
preys & booties would he (who had not whereon to lay his head in the world) make, could he 
fool men into his doctrine and persuasion, as L. L. now sayeth of the Quakers, who if they 
have little or nothing of the world, it is because such ravenous wolves as he hath devoured 
their outward substance, by spoiling their goods and casting their bodies into prison, which 
was never the practice of Christ nor his ministers, but of the Devil and his, as before is 
showed.

Pr. 8. Affirmation. That he is in the Quaker a trifling, piddling, ridiculous devil putting them 
upon the dispute of good English, thou or you, the tenth hour, the ninth month, about bells, 
hour-glasses, ribbons, and band-strings, to take them from weightier matters.

Answr. This the very school-masters, throughout the nation, of England will condemn, who 
instructeth youth, to put a difference between singular and plural, Tu and Vos, and would 
count it ridiculous indeed in any boy learning his Accidence, to say Vos, to a single person, it 
being false in matter and manner; yea, it would be laughed at by the very Greeks and Jews, 
who speaks thou to one, and ye to many, which is sound truth, and is testified throughout the 
Scripture; therefore, L. L. I send thee to thy Accidence again, to read there, whether it be a 
trifling, piddling, ridiculous devil, that makes a difference between singular and plural, as 
thou wouldst make the Quakers, for speaking good English: and as for the tenth hour, the 
ninth Month, &c. was not this the language of S. Matthew 20:5, 6, 9 & 27:45, 46; Mark 
15:25, 33; John 1:39; all these called the ninth hour, and the tenth hour, and yet was not 
piddling, nor ridiculous Devils; and the holy men of God did not call the months after the 
Heathens' invented names, as L. L. and his brethren doth, but called them the first month, 
Gen. 8:13; second month, II Chron. 30:2; third month, Ezek, 31:1; the fourth month, Ezek. 
1:1; the fifth month, Num. 33:38; the sixth month, Luke 7:26; the seventh month, Gen. 8:4; 
the eight month, Zech. 1:1; the ninth month, Ezek, 10:9; the tenth month, Gen. 8:5; the 
eleventh month, Zech. 1:7; and the twelfth month, Esth. 3:13. Now L. L. bring us forth any 
other names that the months hath in the Scriptures, canst thou prove March, April, May, by 
the Scriptures? is it not a piddling, ridiculous Devil in thee, to condemn others for slighting 
the Scripture, who are found more according to it than thyself, who in all thy words, writings, 
& actions, one can scarce find one thing of a hundred that is concordant to the Scripture, but 
either blundering in an heathenish, Popish invention or another, to the slighting of the holy 
Scriptures, whereby that charge which thou wouldst lay so heavy upon others, falls the 
heaviest upon thy own head, and there shall rest till thou clear thyself, both of this and many 
more evils, of which thou art deeply guilty.
Pr. 9. Affirmation. He is in the Quaker an atheistical devil, whose doctrines and endeavours 
read to the destruction of Christianity, witness his daily work which is to render the ministers 
and teachers and pastors of the people, odious and contemptible to them, using all the means 
they can to draw them from having anything to do with them, or their Ministry, laying down 
this for a conclusion, that none ought to pay them, but those that hear them, those that 
partake of their wares and commodities, which if men were left free to do, I would know 
whether (to save their purses) they do not believe that the first thing that they conceive, 
nineteen parts of a nation (if divided into twenty) would do, would not be to resolve never to 
hear a sermon more, doth not the atheistical devil (in the Quaker) put on fair to make an 
atheistical people.

Answ. One would think the Devil himself might blush at this to leave his minister at Hurst so 
naked and contemptible in the fight of God & the whole nation, what now Leonard, hast thou 
preached so long with the rest of thy brethren, till you have begat the whole nation into 
covetousness like yourselves, that the nineteenth part (to save their purses if left free) would 
resolve never to hear you more? it now appears you have run, and the Lord hath never sent 
you, so that you have not profited this people at all, as the Lord by the prophet foretold of 
you, Jer. 23:21, 22, who hath not turned them out of covetousness which is idolatry, Col. 3:5. 
It seems God hath given little increase to your planting & warring this many hundred years, 
that at the last you must force wages out of their hands, it is a signal token that God hath 
opened their eyes to see how long they have spent their money for that which is not bread, 
and how you have made merchandise of them, through covetousness, as the Apostle foretold 
of you, 2 Pet. 1:2, 3. And now they will buy your traffics no more, which day is hastening 
upon you, & will overtake you as a thief in the night, and if you were not atheistical ministers 
indeed, you would make them satisfaction fourfold, whom you have thus wronged. And 
where did Christ's ministers exact or desire wages of them, who did not hear them, and 
receive of their spiritual, nay where do any shop-keepers through this nation, force his 
commodities upon any who do not like it, though his shop-doors stand open daily to sell, yet 
if any man do not like it, he may go to the next and please himself, & that shop-keeper do not 
sue him at the law as the priests do for money, who do not affect his wares, and goes to 
another, nay it were against reason for him so to do, yet at such things the priests cannot 
blush, whose unreasonable exaction far exceeds all other merchants beside themselves.

Pr. 10 and last Affirmation. That we may not deny the Quakers their tenths, though they 
grudge us ours; He is in the Quaker a discontented blundering devil, not knowing how to 
draw up his charge against a thing called priest, so as to make both ends hang together; if 
among these he meet with any who are blameworthy, and I could wish he meet with fewer 
whom he might justly blame, though he seem to be troubled at any kind of transgression, yet 
what pleasure doth he take in the treading awry of the foot of any such servant of the Lord, if 
there be anything of trouble in him, it is not because he finds such as do amiss, but because 
he find no more iniquity in them, to open his black mouth against them, if among those he 
meets with, whose conversation seems in the eye of the world to be as unblameable as the 
most arrogant Pharisee among them, then they cry out of them for their well-doing, for what 
the law of God and the light within them (their own rule) guides them to, such as the obeying 
the just commands of superior powers, this they must forbear to do for fear of being 
clamoured against, for those that stir up the rulers of the people against them, when we know 
nothing better or more becoming us, than to stir up such to be zealous in the cause of God, 
and in the maintaining of his true, worship, and service, how shall we ever credit that 
discontented, contradiction, spirit, that rules in the Quakers, who sends us to be guided by 
the light within us, & rails against us, for doing what this tells us we are bound to do.

Answ. By this it seems L. L. hath reserved nine of the Devils to himself aforementioned, and 
hath sent that to the Quakers, which he calls a discontented blundering devil, which had been 
as fit for him to have reserved to himself, as the other nine, not knowing how to draw up his 
charge against them which he cannot do, without manifesting, the blundering devil which 
rules in him, which leads him to give forth such a loathsome dish, that the very sight thereof 
were able to turn the stomachs of all honest men, both against it & the maker of it, but to 
draw up a charge against a priest, is the easiest thing of a thousand, & to make the ends meet 
together is no hard thing, the scroll will be so long. For by the time their covetousness, pride, 
drunkenness, thievery, whoredom, & rebellion, be measured, with their luxury, murder, & 
cruelty, which is so manifest to all men, that there is scarce a county throughout this nation, 
in which there is not hundreds, which can draw up volumes against them, their actions are 
grown so foul & odious, that the ends will so meet together, that he that is half blind may 
fasten them together. But as for the Quakers taking pleasure in the priests' iniquity that is a 
very lie, for their iniquity hath made many of their hearts sad, whom the Lord hath not made 
sad, and hath grieved the Spirit of the Lord, till the earth is ready to spew them up; therefore 
let all people take heed of partaking with them in their sins, lest they partake of their plagues. 
But L. L. when didst thou hear of any of the Quakers, cry out against any one for their well-
doing, but if thou call the stirring up the rulers to persecute and imprison, the innocent well-
doing, that is cried against by the Spirit of God throughout the Scripture, for it was always the 
practice of the blood-thirsty priests so to do, which Christ and his Apostles cried many woes 
against. And I charge thee to mention where ever the cause of God or his worship was 
defended by such weapons in all the time of the Gospel, though all power in heaven and earth 
was committed to the Son, yet he never gave such authority to any of his ministers to inflict 
any corporal punishment upon any for not receiving his doctrine, or whereby to defend the 
cause of God, which he and his ministers pleads with the loss of their lives, if thou canst 
produce any, bring it forth; if not, for shame give over calling it the cause of God, lest the 
blundering devil in thee appear unto all men, not to be able to make the ends meet either by 
Scripture or by good reason, what he hath led thee to give forth under thy hand, and so put all 
people out of credit of that spirit that cannot defend itself, without sending men to prison, and 
when that will not serve to aggravate the rulers against them, to add afflictions to their bonds, 
& when all that will not do, to threaten to cut their throats, as L. L. hath done, to his own 
confusion: and as for the Quaker sending men to a light within them, and railing against them 
for doing that which it tells them they are bound to do; what now Leonard, didst not thou say 
in the second page of thy pamphlet, that the voice within was Saul's delusion which led him 
to persecute? and doth thou confess it tells thee thou art bound to stir up the rulers, &c. is not 
Saul's spirit (by thy own confession) thy leader to this, and not the true light of Christ Jesus, 
and dost thou so confess and affirm that the voice within was Saul's delusion, and yet 
confesseth at last thou harkens to this voice, and doth that which it tells thee thou art bound to 
do; here the Devil hath manifested himself to be a confused, contradictory, blundering Devil 
indeed, who hath let thee fall so foul at last, for by thy own confession, it is Saul's delusion 
leads thee to persecute the servants of the living God, and therefore thy conversion, and not 
thy destruction, is the hearty prayer of him, who wishes no. hurt to thy body nor soul, who is 
called 
	Ambrose Rigge
Written the 15th day of the 12th Month called February, in the year 1663.

POSTSCRIPT.
Being a short Answer to what L. L. hath written to my Book called the Standard; &c.

First. He asked what need had Ambrose to have been at so much cost and pains, to tell people 
what they knew him to be before; a juggler, a mountebank, an empiric, a quacksalver, a liar, 
a locust sent out of the bottomless pit, &c.

Answ. Is not the railing, bawling devil he condemns before in the Quakers now fully manifest 
in himself? Is this the Scripture language, or where hath he any such language from the 
Quakers? and if L. L. doth not prove Ambrose to be such a one as here he charges him to be; 
doth not also the discontented blundering devil appear in him, that cannot tell how to draw up 
a charge against A. R. to make both ends meet without going one in aggravation with us, to 
make A.R. appear worse than he is, as he did at the assizes at Horsham, or else neither judge 
not country will think so ill of him as L. L. would they should. 

2. The said L. L. charges A. R. with foisting in the word committing of sin, whereby he seeks 
to darken that which God hath brought to light; but as for the query I took it (verbatim) out of 
his first paper under his own hand, which if I show, this cloak must off also, but if not, his 
false reformation of the query will sufficiently manifest him unto all who is not blind, for John 
sayeth whosoever abideth in him sinneth not, whosoever sinneth hath not seem him nor 
known him, John 3:6, whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin, for his seed remains in 
him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, I John 3:9, which overthrows the priest's 
query in his new modelled sense, and again whosoever is born of God sinneth not, but he that 
is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not, I John 5:18. Now 
Leonard what better are thou than before, dare no man challenge any perfection but sinning 
while they are upon the earth, what sayest thou to these Scriptures. 
	But here again is not the everlasting, railing, bawling devil fully manifest in thee who 
cannot write a sentence without manifesting him. Here again thou callest Ambrose renowned 
hocus pocus, and calls his late printed book tagrag and rigrag, which is more like the 
language of the mountebank than a minister of Christ. But what is lately printed in that book, 
will forever stand as a true witness against L. L. unless he repent, and whether this nasty, 
scandalous paper be not fitter to be buried in a kennel, than counted an answer to the book, I 
leave to the serious consideration of all sober men who see both. 
	And instead of answering my 34 Scripture queries, by which the Devil is struck dumb 
at last, to evade this thou dost pretend, it would be my query, though it is thy own, who was 
the first founder of Gotham, and who was the first wise man of Gotham, and what was his 
name Ambrose or Thomas, which manifests thou carest no more answer my queries which 
are taken out of the Scriptures, than answer these nasty questions which are so far from 
Scripture queries, that they are not fit once to be mentioned amongst good Christians, thou 
art far from the wisdom of Solomon, and as far from his companion, though thou wouldst 
intrude thyself with him, and make him company for thee to carry on thy deceivableness of 
unrighteousness which the Lord's band is turned against. 
	And whereas thou sayest man's blessedness, lieth rather in having his unrighteousness 
hid, and his sins covered, than in not falling into sin. 

Answ. This is equivalent for he whose sin is forgiven, hid and covered, he is cleansed from it, 
and falling into it, by the blood of Christ without which nothing can ever hide, cover, or blot 
it out, Acts 3:19, 1; John 1:17, before which, he that covers his sins shall not prosper, but he 
that confesseth and forsaketh them, shall find mercy: Prov. 18:13. So that still man's 
perfection and blessedness consisteth in being cleansed from all sin, and from falling into sin 
without which they cannot be covered nor hid. 
	One thing more I mind in thy postscript, where the murdering Devil appears on thee 
again, wherein thou sayest that Ambrose is not perfect, to which nothing can be added, but 
something may be added to Ambrose, (ergo) there may be added to him a certain thing called 
Help(?), pretending several lies and false accusations to cover this murdering Spirit, who 
would have others send me to the gallows; and when they do it not, would add one thing 
more to make me perfect, viz. a knife to cut my throat, as thou had already threatened me, but 
how this will stand in the day of the Lord's account, I leave it to him to plead with thee, to 
whom vengeance belongs, who will repay it into thy bosom, if he give thee not speedy 
repentance, and I leave thee naked to the eye of every judicious man, without any cloak for 
thy sin.



Fifth Monarchists


The Bloody Vision of John Farley:
Arise Evans

Source:http://quod.lib.umich.edu/e/eebo/A38773.0001.001?rgn=subject;
view=toc;q1=Aspinwall%2C+William%2C+--+fl.+1648-1662.+--
+Brief+description+of+the+Fifth+Monarchy+--+Early+works+to+1800


Title page
THE BLOODY VISION OF JOHN FARLEY,
Interpreted by ARISE EVANS.
With Another VISION signifying peace and happiness. Both which Show
remarkable alterations speedily, to come to pass here in England,
Also
A Refutation of a Pamphlet, lately published by one Aspinwall:
called a Brief descripton of the fifth Monarchy. Showing: That the
late Parliament was that Beast mentioned, Rev. 13. that this
Representative is the Image thereof, and that the fifth Monarchy
will shortly be established in the Person of CHARLES STEWART.
Printed in the Year. 1653.

THE PREFACE.

When the Lord sent Moses to the Children of Israel which were in
Egypt; he gave him two signs to show before them, that they might
believe; & told him that if they would neither believe the voice of
the first sign, nor the voice of the latter sign, than that he
should take water out of the river, and pour it upon the dry land,
and it should become blood, Exod. 4. 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9. Beloved
friends, I have written two books & sent them forth in print, as two
signs to the English Nation; and those in power do take no warning
by them; and now also this book is going forth to show that the
water of their River must be turned into blood.

I said in my petition to the General dated the 16. of the last May,
that I would not willingly turn water into blood, nor publish that
bloody vision mentioned in the aforesaid petition; which signifieth,
that we must have a bloody war again: and that Right must have
Right, though thereby all must be turned upside down again, But now
it must not be as I will, I must publish it, or have no peace to my
soul: the Lion hath roared, who will but fear: The Lord God hath
spoken, who can but prophesy and publish in the palaces at Ashdod,
Amos 3, 8,9,10,1,. the great judgement coming upon it from the Lord
of Hosts, for the Lord God hath sworn by his holiness; That lo, the
days shall come upon you that he will take you away with hooks, and
your posterity with fish hooks, Amos 4. 2. Then will you say: Oh,
that we had believed ARISE EVANS, and taken advice by his books and
petition; as many of the King's party now mourn, and tell me the
very words that I told them 19 years ago; blaming themselves for
that they had no more regard unto the words then spoken by me, which
now they found to be true by woeful experience: yea, and some of
your late Parliament men expressing their grief now; do wish, that
they had considered my words, and been persuaded by me: but alas,
too late repentance is nothing worth: but like that of Esau and
Judas, only brings despair, Heb. 12. 16,17; Matth. 27. 3,4,5, for as
the tree falleth so it lieth, Eccles. 11. 3.

Therefore while the AXE is laid to the Root of the Tree; it is the
best time to save it, Matth. 3. 8,9,10. so before the judgement
overtake men; it is the best time for men to do righteously, and
thereby escape the wrath to come: Good Reader, I hope I shall be
clear from the blood of this generation, and leave them altogether
in excusable: for why, they have had more warning from me; than ever
any had that I was sent to speak unto, for when I spake to the King
and his party; If they had asked me whether I had spoken anything by
way of Prophecy before that time? Surely, I could have said nothing
to it then, which might have been any ways sufficient to convince
them; because that I had not before that time been sent of God to
any for to declare such things: But now it is evident how I was
called of God and sent to them, and upon their neglect was sent to
the Earl of Essex, and after that to the Presbyterians, and then to
the late Parliament, God confirming my words with as many signs as
was required of me, and also fulfilling the same always in their due
seasons. So that, if this people now shall likewise refuse to hear
me, (who have had so many witnesses to show that God is pleased to
declare his determinate will by me:) they of all others will be the
least excusable for disposing me, and so the least capable of mercy.

For, have they not known how God by me declared the most remarkable
things that befell these Kingdoms since the Wars began? How that 20
years ago, I declared the things which befell the late King, and
that I suffered 3 years imprisonment for the same? How I declared to
the Earl of Essex, 7 years before he was General, that he should be
the people's General against the late King? Have they not known how
that in the year 1646 I declared the downfall of the Presbyterians,
and suffered two months imprisonment for that also? How I declared
in the year 1651 that the King's son would come to England long
before he came to Worcester, & his success likewise? How I declared
to the late Parliament many times, that they should be destroyed
long before their dissolution? And have I not declared to them in
the last month of May, that King Charles will come in victoriously
this year 1653 and had they not a sign to confirm it, according to
their own choosing and desire? Which sign was, that if it did rain
(more or less) 7 Sundays then next following successively, they
would believe my words. And did it not rain accordingly for seven
Sundays together, as many thousands who observed it can witness,
although it was in the very drought of summer, and that there was
scarce any rain all the other weekdays besides?

Also many other signs were given by me to several persons divers
times in several places, to confirm the truth of those things,
therefore to God be the glory of all. Neither was there any
remarkable engagement of late days, either by sea, or land, since
the people began to inquire of me; but God was pleased to reveal by
me the event thereof. Surely, if these men were either faithful, or
sensible, they might see the mind and will of God, by these things,
but they are dead, Ephes. 2. 1. They will not see, Isa. 26. 11; Isa.
42. 18,19,20, But still say unto me, Job 21. 14, depart from us, for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways.

And now, as concerning you, ye murmuring people that meet every
Monday in Black-Friars Church: ye fast, ye pray, & ye preach and
complain, that God doth not hear your prayers, and ye cry to God
that he would send the spirit of prophecy by someone, or other, to
let you understand the things to come; & yet ye cannot see them now
when God showeth you all these things, by me his poor messenger,
which are made known unto you by those truths in my aforesaid books,
called The Voice  and the Echo: and as in the last of them, I said
to the late Parliament about a month before they were dissolved,
that their prayers were answered of God by those my books, and that
if they did not believe what I said, and do the same speedily; that
God would send them strong delusions, and bring sudden destruction
upon them, Isa. 65. 12. 24; Isa. 66. 34. 2 Thess. 2. 10,11,12, so I
say unto you now, that if ye will not be answered by the same things
of God in my aforesaid books, God will likewise send you strong
delusions, and bring sudden destruction upon you; for your contempt
of his truth; in not believing it: ye cry against the late Parl.
because they cheated the people of their moneys, and blame also
these men now of Westminster (as you call them) for treading their
steps, and not calling the other to an account for all the injustice
they did: alas, do ye think that these, or the like men, will ever
call them to an account? Nay we must think these will rather be more
chargeable to the people than they were.

For do ye think, that such mean men raised to such high places, who
not having means of their own, sufficiently to maintain their
greatness; will not have it out from the people, over whom they have
now the power and command? And will they not raise their children,
friends, and relations to all places of profit? Truly it were a
shame for them if they did it not: and I am confident that if ye
were in their place ye would do no less, although the country should
still suffer by it: yea, and it's like to suffer, until the King,
nobles, and gentry of England enjoy their rights again: for they
having great revenues of their own, by which they are able to bear
such places of authority, and govern the people at their own proper
charges: Therefore I say unto you if ye would have men in places of
lawful authority, that are not self-ended and covetous, why do not
ye bend the strength of your prayers for CHARLES your right King,
and his party, that they may enjoy their rights again? And then ye
may be sure, that he will call your late Parliament to an exact
account for all those moneys ye speak off, and ease the people of
their heavy taxations: and doubtless ye shall prevail with God in
prayer for him, and have all your desires accomplished.

I beseech you to consider the difference between this State-
Government, and a Monarchy; Queen Elizabeth had wars with Spain, and
wars in Ireland, and also assisted Holland: all which was done with
her own revenues, and without any taxations from the subjects: but
now where are the Crown Lands? What's become of the bishops',
deans', and chapters' lands, and delinquents' estates, and many
other things that are gone I know not where? And do ye think that
the people are ever like to be eased from the abundance of
assessments and taxes, whilst the great revenues belonging to the
Crown are gone, which saved the people from such heavy and continual
taxes, and by which large revenues Queen Elizabeth did such great
things, and yet left behind her abundance of treasures?

So that you may clearly see, that there was a great part of the
Kingdom juggled away from the nation by the late Parliament, when
the new State was set up; because what was the King's was theirs,
for the saving of their own goods, & bearing their charges: and so
was the church-lands also appointed to ease the people, that they
should be free from being at charge to pay those that were the Chief
rulers of the Church, and took care for their Souls. And now if ye
would have God to hear you, why do not ye hear him, by doing justly
to the King and Kingdom, that righteousness may run down as a river,
Amos 5. 21,22,23,24, or else all your seeking of the Lord will be in
vain: for if ye will still have your prayers granted according to
your own sense and will, that is, for you to prevail, kill and slay
all that will not submit to you; then the Lord will show your folly
to all the World. And do not you boast as some of you do, that ye
have had the spirit of prophecy these seven years; that your armies
over-coming their enemies, is the fruit of your prayers: Alas, it is
but your pride, for it was God's decree to deliver his people into
your hands for a time, to punish them for their sins: and he
revealed it unto me, 20 years ago, that your party should prevail as
they have done, and then come to a miserable end, as I have 
declared.

Thus ye may see, that it is not your spirit of prophecy which you
(deceiving yourselves) do imagine to have, nor yet is it the fruit
of your prayers, that hath done it: for if ye had never opened your
mouths such things had come to pass: & you shall see within a short
time that God will deliver you into the hands of his people to be
utterly destroyed, and all your prophesying and praying shall not
deliver you in that day. Then leave off sacrificing to your Calf,
for it is no more than if the Egyptians should have sacrificed to
their false gods, for giving them power to overcome the Israelites,
and keep them in bondage: but God had showed to Abraham long before,
that his seed should serve the Egyptians, Gen. 15. 13,14, and when
the time of the Israel's deliverance came, then neither the
Egyptians nor all their gods could keep them one day longer, Exod.
12. 40,41, so likewise the Babylonians might have gloried (as you
do) and attributed their success to their own parts, or to the power
of their gods: when they had overcome Israel: but they were more
modest than so; and knew very well that they could not detain them
any longer, then God had decreed: whereby you see that they in the
very nick of God's time set down by the Prophet Jeremiah, 2 Chron.
36. 21,22,23, Ezra 1, did send them home and restore all which was
theirs to them again.

Here I have taken an occasion by the way to speak a word also to Mr.
Feake, Mr. Simpson, and others of their party meeting in Black-
Friars, not doubting but when God shall arrest them saying, 1 Kings
21. 19, hast thou killed and taken possession in that place where
King CHARLES and his people lost their blood, in that very place
shall thy blood be spilt, even thine: and set their bloody deeds to
cry unto their consciences, saying we are thine, & we will not leave
thee until thy Judgment come: then their courage will be abated, and
they shall know that they are not for the Interest of Jesus Christ,
as they falsely affirm, but are for the interest of the Devil, who
was a murderer from the beginning, John 8. 44; 1 John 3. 8, and when
Nathan's riddle is opened unto others, saying: thou art the man, 2
Sam. 12.7; 14. For thou hast given great occasion to the Papist to
blaspheme, saying, these are the works of such as would be
altogether ruled by the Bible: they will forswear themselves, and
murder their King, and kill, rob, and steal, by authority; when like
David's Psal., 51. 3, their sin as a bloody sheet is set before
them, It will make them roar like David, saying, I acknowledge mine
iniquity and my sin is ever before me, against thee; only have I
sinned by causing the enemies to Blaspheme thy word, the holy Bible.

Oh now, I will repent and endeavour to restore the King's family and
other families; which most unfaithfully and unjustly, we have
spoiled, and I will pay my vows and stop the mouths of the
blasphemers of thy word thereby, so far as I am able, help me Lord,
that I may prevail and appease thy hot indignation against me: and I
could wish that those of Feake and Simpson's party would repent and
be of the same resolution: but I know of a certain there is a party
in this Land, that shall fall by their wilful impenitency.

Now I draw to a conclusion, desiring all in general to observe
diligently the rest of the matter following in this little book, and
if any do desire to know further of me, let them get the other books
here mentioned: for my part, if it be the will of God, I am willing
to be offered for the defence of the faith of God's elect. Titus 1,
1. But I cannot desire that God should not take me away in the midst
of my days Psal. 102. 24. because I am already past it, nor say as
Jacob said to Pharaoh, that I have not attained to the years of the
life of my Father Gen. 47. 9, for I have out-lived my Father and
elder brother in years; who died both a natural death; therefore the
remnant of days that now I have to live, I count to be
extraordinarily given me of God: even to glorify him wholly withal;
and If it please him that I die a martyr and that in my death I
glorify God, I hope he will give me strength to triumph that way;
but woe to such a party as takes my life violently from me, for
declaring to them the truth in love, committed to my charge. Truly I
have no cause to doubt these people; for though they have not
yielded to the truth: yet they have been persuaded that my
declaration was so much in the way of God's spirit, that they did
not molest me at all when I delivered my petition to the Council of
the Army, May 26. 1653, and spoke in the defence of King CHARLES, at
that time when I disputed it before them all, four hours together. I
spake there more fully for (him) than ever I did by writing; so that
I may say this word of the Prophet to God, was verified on me, Isa.
26. 3, 4. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose heart is stayed
on thee, because he trusteth in thee, I may say experimentally that
this is true, even that I had such a peace of God, as passeth all
understanding, Phil. 4. 7, that is peace and liberty to the soul and
body. Therefore, I will trust in the Lord, for in the Lord Jehovah
is everlasting strength Isa. 26. 4. And now I am as the Paul of this
time: he was a mechanic, a tent maker, Acts 18. 3. I am a tailor, I
plant and show these things, Apollo, that is the eloquent ministers
of Christ, are to water them, but God giveth the increase Acts 18.
24,25,26,27,28; 1 Cor. 3. 6. I recommend all to God and his
ministers, and I remain your faithful servant in Christ Jesus.
Arise Evans from Long-Alley in Black-Friars 
Sep. the 13, 1653

The bloody vision of John Farly interpreted, with another vision
signifying peace and happiness, &c.

Before I come to show you the visions, it will be needful to let you
understand a little of the life and quality of this Mr. Farly,
according as I have heard it, both from himself and others that knew
him very well, who acknowledged him to have been a gentleman of good
estate, living near Wallington in Shropshire, and always was counted
a very honest man, and of a mild disposition: also in these
troublesome times he paid all taxes freely to both sides, King and
Parliament, and yet was very much plundered and wronged by both,
until at last they brought him so low that he was forced to mortgage
his own lands, and afterwards to farm another gentleman's estate in
Wales: but having many crosses there likewise, he was forced to
leave that place also, not being able to manage it for want of
stock.

At this time he had a wife and eight children to maintain, and very
little money remaining, so that he knew not what course to take for
a livelihood: But calling to mind that a gentleman and a dear friend
of his was in the Lord General's Life Guard, and hoping by his means
to get some place under the Parliament, whereby to maintain his
charge.

In the year 1652 he came to London with all his family, and took a
house at the upper end of Drury-Lane, where he lived very poorly,
and could neither meet with his friend nor get any employment, but
was in great distress for want of means to maintain his charge, and
to pay everyone his own.

And on the 21 of January 1652, in the morning he being in his bed,
was very much troubled in his mind at his crosses, but yet
meditating and in his thoughts trusting in the Lord for supply, he
fell into a trance and saw the following visions, and when he came
to himself again, being unaccustomed with such things, he was much
troubled at it, and arising in haste, told his wife thereof: and
immediately went forth to several of his friends, ministers, and
others, and related what he had seen to them, desiring them to give
him their judgement there upon, for he was afraid that his visions
did only predict some misfortune to himself, and when some of them
told him, they could not give him the interpretation; or at least
would not: but that these were matters of higher concernment: he was
the more afraid to conceal the same, so that then they became a
burden unto him.

At last he came to another friend's house, and told these things
also there, and as they were wondering at the strangeness of those
visions, and could make no construction thereof: Nor what they did
signify, one being there present that hath a book of mine, called A
voice from heaven to the Common-wealth of England, and lent it to
him: and likewise directed him to me, saying it was very likely that
I could give him the right Interpretation of those things, and after
he had read some part thereof he came to my house, and being in a
kind of ecstasy, sat down and showed me the book, and declared the
cause of his coming, and how he had been all that morning in several
places to have his visions interpreted, but found none that could
interpret the same. But now was by a divine providence & my book
directed to me, he being very confident that it was given for me to
interpret it.

Then I considering with myself that in regard of the multitude of
people daily inquiring of me concerning what hopes I saw of their
redemption from these troublesome times, I having for a whole
fortnight before constantly prayed to God to send me some
extraordinary knowledge, now to satisfy and comfort the people, and
found by the strangeness of this man's coming, before he related his
visions, that he was sent of God unto me therewith, as answers to my
prayers, I desired him to declare them unto me, promising him
through God's assistance to show the interpretation thereof, and
there upon he repeated them to be in this manner.

1. I saw in a vision revealed unto me as I was standing upon stone
steps, at a place in London, there came a man riding before me, and
made a stand against me, and then I saw a coach coming between the
man and me passing by, and in the coach was a woman clothed in
scarlet, and one who stood by me, said: Behold this woman, how do
you like of her? And I answered, I liked none, but mine own, and
then the man who was on horseback, said unto me, then it seemeth you
like none, but one of your own breaking, then there came six youths,
who were in blue coats and blue caps, (like to the Hospital youths,)
and stood between the man on horseback and me, & said, behold, take
notice of the moon, and thereupon I looked up and saw a signpost,
with the sign of the moon hanging as a sign under it, which I
beholding presently there appeared a spot of blood upon the picture
of the moon, which spot spread itself over all the moon, and the
blood sparkled up upon the sky and overspread the same.

Then suddenly falling down upon my knees, and lifting up my hands to
heaven, I called upon the Lord to be my guider and defender, and
immediately upon that there appeared by the picture of the moon a
man sitting, having a candle lighted in his hand, then came another
man with a candle unlighted in his hand, and he lighted his candle
at the other candle, that the other man had in his hand, and
departed: And then the man who sat by the moon spake and said, I
thank you all for beholding the same.

Then there came a chariot with milk-white horses like as if it had
come out of a Court by the place where I stood, and as they
approached near me, I thought them to be of fire, so sparkling that
the heat thereof came mightily unto me, whereby I was forced to
shrink back from the extremity thereof, and returning two or three
steps back, I beheld the horses and chariot coming up the steps
after me, thus going back, and seeking for some place to shelter
myself from the heat thereof: but find in the street as I went,
neither door nor shop window open, I could have no place of
safeguard.

And seeing before me another chariot with horses approaching toward
me, I was greatly troubled in mind, and then beholding upon my right
hand a street turning another way in which I thought to be free,
entered the same: And having gone but a little way therein, it was
beset in like manner. And there came foremost a man having a long
light like unto a torch in his hand, which when I saw, I thought it
was Doomsday, and fell to the ground as a dead man, and could not
move hand nor foot, yet had my remembrance perfect, and when he came
unto me, he said, who is here: but I said nothing unto him, and then
he strode one foot over me, and lift me up from the earth, and held
me in his arms and blue into mine ears three or four times, then
said he there was no means to help me, but to be washed with the
blood of Jesus Christ, so soon as he had spoken I perceived myself
to be naked, and then he washed and bathed my body all in blood;
which being done he departed and went forward, and I thought he drew
me after him. Then presently I was brought like as if I had been in
some great church, wherein was much timber work, and there I saw men
washing, and besmearing all the posts and timber with blood, and
then I seemed as if I were to depart out of the same place, but
coming to the door of it, I heard as it were a rushing of a mighty
wind, with a noise of chariots and horses, with beholding of
sumptuous buildings and multitudes of men, and being astonished
therewith, I returned into the Church again, and then by that time I
seemed to have a great bundle of bladders about me which vanished
all, but three, whereof one was very little, and the rest were very
great, especially one of them, and these two seemed like two earthen
pots, which wearied me to bear. And as I went forward in a bake-way
flying from the Church, I heard a voice, saying, go apace: and when
I came to the end, at a place where I could go no further; I thought
these pots did diminish mightily, and there came a voice unto me,
saying, there will not be left the worth of a half-penny remaining
of all this fight, so I awaked.

And I being in fear and amazement at this bloody vision, within a
quarter of an hour after fell into a trance again and saw another
vision, which is as followeth:

I beheld, and lo, I was in a field (as I thought) newly sown with
wheat, and as I beheld, I saw upon the land sowed, a company of
doves being milk white, and all of them stood in a round ring, or
circle, and in the midst was only one alone by himself which
surpassed all the rest in brightness, shining like the sun-beams in
its brightness, so did this dove appear in brightness and glory, and
I awaked again.

These were the visions which he related unto me, and now I shall
give you the Interpretation thereof, as I gave it to him then.
The Interpretation of the first vision.

Whereas you saw yourself standing upon stone steps in London, it
signifies, by the firmness thereof, the certainty, and that by
degrees, your vision will be fulfilled here in England, Jer. 21.
6,9.

And whereas you saw a man on horseback coming speedily to the place
where you stood, it doth signify that they will speedily come to
pass, Ezek. 12. 22, 23, 24, 25. Habak. 1. 8. also the vision being
revealed to you in the morning, signifies the day of its fulling is
near at hand, Rom. 13. 12.

And whereas you saw a coach with a woman in it, all clothed in
scarlet passing by, that signifies this bloody Parliament and State,
which will suddenly vanish away and be consumed, Rev. 17. 3,4,16; 2
Thess. 2. 8.

 And whereas you saw six youths all in blue, they signify CHARLES
his wain, and their voice which said, behold, take notice of the
moon, signifies the comet, or blazing star, that appeared in
December 1602 near the 7 Stars, which star, or comet doth presage
the dissolution of this present power speedily also, Judg. 5. 19,20;
Job 38. 7,31,32,33; Amos 5. 8.

And whereas you saw a signpost with the sign of the moon to it, and
of the sport of blood that appeared upon it, and overspread both it
and the sky, by the sign of the moon is signified, that when this
Parliament is destroyed, they will make an image, or a
representation of the same Parliament, and in that, divisions will
break out into blood, which will overspread the kingdom more than
ever it did, Joel. 2. 31,32; Rev. 13. 14,15; Psal. 55. 9.

And whereas you saw a man sitting by the picture of the moon with a
light like a candle in his hand, and another man coming to him with
a candle unlighted, and lightning it at the other man's candle, and
so depart, and then the man sitting by the picture of the moon, his
giving thanks to the spectators: Is signified that a great Commander
at this time of division shall be hard put to it, and be forced to
issue forth a Commission to one that shall help him, and he will be
very grateful unto such as shall discover the treachery and plots
that are intended against him, Psal. 132. 17; Isa. 24. 13.

And whereas you saw a chariot with milk white horses coming out of a
court hard by you, and the chariot all of fire, so that you fled
before it, and could have no place of safeguard, and that another
chariot came against it: That signifies that the King and court
interest now begins to be violent and hot on foot again, prevailing,
notwithstanding, there is another chariot, or power coming against
it, which will meet in London streets, so hot that all will in that
day be forced to shut up their shop-windows and doors for fear, so
that he which is without doors shall not find a place wherein to
hide his head, Isa. 21. 6,7,8,9; Amos 9. 11,12,13. Isa. 24. 10.

And whereas you saw a street on your right hand in the which you
thought to escape, but found it beset with a multitude of men, and
that he which came foremost had a torch lighted in his hand, before
whom you fell as a dead man, yet your remembrance was perfect, and
he having compassion on you, calls to you, takes you up, blows in
your ears, to see if that would revive you: but seeing it would not
do, doth pronounce that you must be washed in blood, and after you
are washed, you are revived and follow him: The foremost man
signifies the King, who shall enter his kingdom at this time, and in
compassion lovingly shall send forth his declaration and
proclamation to his people: But they will not come in to him, nor
stir no more than you did when the man called to you, took you up,
and blew in your ears, then seeing that he must do it, the King will
resolve to proceed with fire and sword to wash the Kingdom with
blood, then the Kingdom will come in to him, and he will prevail,
Judg 7. 16, 19. Thus by compulsion he must draw his people after
him, Song. 1. 4.

And whereas you saw that you came into a great Church where men
washed all the posts with blood: It signifies that God will now
avenge himself on such as have destroyed, defiled, and  robbed his
sanctuaries, I mean cathedral churches, and other churches, and
things dedicated to God's service: Insomuch that God will for that
cause require the blood of those, who are guilty of these crimes, to
satisfy his hot indignation, and to cleanse his sanctuaries with
blood, for if the Lord Jesus was so sore offended with those that
sold doves for the sacrifice in the Temple at Jerusalem, and so
zealous for it that he would not suffer any to carry a vessel
through it, how much more is he offended with those that so highly
abused, robbed, and destroyed the Christian temples builded for him
to be worshipped in, Mark. 11. 16,17; John. 2. 14,15,16; Jer. 50.
28; Jer. 51. 11,51,52; Malach. 3. 9; Rom. 2. 22.

And whereas you saw yourself departing out of the church, and as you
were at the door heard the rushing of a mighty wind, with noise of
chariots clattering together with beholding of men armed in
multitudes, and sumptuous spacious buildings: It signifies that in
the City of London there shall be great bustling, troubles, and most
terrible fightings in all parts thereof at this time, Jer. 23.
17,18,19 20.

And whereas you saw that as you returned again, and found another
way to go out of the Church, you were burdened with a bundle of
blown bladders, which vanished from you as you went, saving only
three remained: By which is signified that the Parliament men, whose
wind have voted these mischiefs which are come upon this kingdom,
and the vain professors who have executed their votes, and never had
anything of truth in them, but rather delighted themselves with
their vain, wicked, windy, and fruitless notions,  now all such will
be troubled and get together, being assured that they shall now be
called to an account for their works, yet thinking to do some feats
by raising armies to preserve themselves, but they shall be cut off
in the bud one after another, as they are about it, except three
that will escape, 1 Cor. 4. 19,20; Hos. 12. 1; Tit. 1. 16; James 2.
20; Matth. 12. 35,36,37.

And whereas you saw three bladders remaining and that one of them
was a very little one, and the other two very great ones, but
especially one surpassing in greatness, and that these became too
earthen pots, which by degrees diminished as you went forward, then
the voice that said to you, go apace, and after your coming to a
place where there was a stop, that you could go no further: It
signifies that three Parliament men, one that hath been the greatest
actor in these times, the other hath acted much, but the third very
little. These three will get two flying armies, and being pursued
will diminish until at last they get into some stronghold, from
whence haply they may make their peace, Judg 20. 45.

And whereas last of all, you heard a voice, saying, that there will
not be left the worth of a half-penny of all this sight: It
signifies that of all the riches and glory that the Parliament and
their party seem to have got, there shall not be left unto them the
worth of a half-penny, Jer. 15. 13; Isa. 61. 6; Isa. 21. 16.

This is the interpretation of your first vision, which indeed is a
terrible one, and I could wish with all my heart, that if it be
possible it come not to pass: But rather that God would be pleased
to pardon the sins of this Land, and to give them grace to receive
the King in  peace, and if it be his blessed will, that the
Parliament and State would not bring utter ruin upon themselves, and
upon this distracted Nation.

Now after I had interpreted this bloody vision, he was very well
satisfied in his spirit, and desired me to interpret the other
vision, which he had within a quarter of an hour after the former,
but he said it never troubled him as the other did, and I said it
shall be also done; for it may be there is more of comfort in that,
than there is of sorrow in this.
The Interpretation of the second vision.

Then said I, whereas you saw yourself in a field newly sown with
wheat: That signifies that now there shall be a new Kingdom
established again here in Britain, more glorious than ever was upon
earth, Jer. 33. 14,15; Isa. 44. 2,3,4; Psal. 126. 6; Matth. 3. 12.

And whereas you saw a company of milk white doves upon that field,
all in a round ring, or circle: The ring, or circle signifies the
endless, everlasting, and everstanding court that shall be raised
and established here again. And the company of milk white doves
signifies the spotless nobles that have continued faithful all this
time. Therefore, both they and their seed shall triumph gloriously
in the court for ever, Isa. 66. 22; Psal. 84. 2,10; Psal. 65. 4;
Song. 2. 14.

And whereas you saw one dove alone in the middle of the ring, or
circle, which did shine like the sun in brightness, by that dove is
signified the King, who in due time will shine like the sun over all
the earth, to answer the expectation  of all nations, and fulfil the
promise of our Lord Jesus, so that Jews and Turks shall then
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be the only Saviour of Souls, Psal. 68.
13; Psal. 24. 7,8,9,10.

And after I had interpreted his visions, he called for pen and ink
and wrote them, and left them to my disposing: but I desired him to
get them fairly written, and that I would get the interpretations of
them also fairly written, and that he should carry them to the Lord
General Cromwell, and a petition with them; to show his case and
condition, telling him that the General was a good man, and would
perhaps do something for him: And then he was inclinable to take my
counsel, but two days after, he came again to see me, and brought
his wife with him, I propounded the same motion to him again,
saying, that it was best for him to go with his visions to the Lord
General. And he answered me, saying, That one Mr Wilde, (as he
heard,) was then, and had been a long time prisoner in Newgate, for
declaring a vision that he had seen, and that if his Excellency
should send him to prison upon it, both he, his wife, and children
might come to starve by that means: But said he, I refer it to God
and your discretion to publish it in due time, according as God
shall direct you.

Then I considered how I had prayed, and that God sent the visions to
him as a conduit to convey them to me, and to answer my prayers, and
as a talent for me to give an account off: therefore I moved him no
more to that purpose: And the man presently after, being much
troubled in mind, at his wants and crosses in the world, went to
Virginia with some friends  of his to try his fortune there: Now the
reasons, why I look upon these visions as an immediate warning from
God to this Nation, are these five following.

1. Because he was not factious on any side, or a seeker after new
opinions but was well grounded in the true Christian faith of the
Church of England, believing the truth of it, and without dispute
resting constantly in the same Faith that he was taught in at first,
and hence I do gather, that he was beloved of God, who showed him
those visions.

2. Because I saw that he had not a spirit of pride, or revenge in
him, for although he lost all he had in these times for no cause,
but only that he was peaceable: yet did I never hear him speak a
word against the Parliament, or any other that had wronged him, but
contrarily sought for a place under any of them, to get anywhere a
poor honest living, patiently waiting on God without any pride, or
thoughts of revenge.

3. Because that after he had seen the visions, though he said to me
that he was never so troubled before, yet now had he no rest in his
spirit, until he got a satisfactory interpretation to them from me,
and then had perfect rest and peace in mind concerning the visions.

4. Because I saw it was the fruit of my prayers to God, who since he
called me to this his peculiar service, never denied me anything
that was needful for me to know, and whereby to warn this nation:
Therefore whatsoever others think of these visions, I shall look
upon them as certain truths consonant to the Scriptures, which
suddenly will come to pass.

 5. Because that from the time I had these visions thus left with me
unto this present, it hath been a great burden to my spirit, so that
I find it impossible for me to keep them in silence, and have rest:
And although I had rather be a Jonah than a Jeremy, in pronouncing
of judgement, and that England might become a Niniveh, and not a
Jewry in matter of repentance, Jonah. 3. 4,10; Jer. 25. 8; Jer. 39,
yet God's decree must stand, Isa. 46. 9,10,11,12,13, and the stout
hearted shall bow down to it, ye stand upon your sword, saith God:
And I will call for a sword against it; throughout my mountains,
saith the Lord God, every man's sword shall be against his brother,
Ezek. 33. 16; Ezek. 38. 21; Amos 5. 6. That all flesh may know, that
I the Lord have drawn my sword, Ezek. 21. 5. Therefore be thou
instructed, Oh Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from thee, lest I make
thee desolate, a land not inhabited, Jer. 6. 8.

Now I have given you an account of these visions, to the intent that
God might be glorified, you profited, and myself eased of my burden,
I shall endeavour to inform you further of what I see and discern in
Scripture concerning this nation, but I shall direct my speech
chiefly to those gentlemen of the Representative now at Westminster,
and then to the rest of this Kingdom, beseeching all of them to
consider what I have said in my former books, the one called A voice
from heaven, and the other An Echo unto that voice, and take special
notice of the dates of those books, and likewise how those sayings
are come to pass; since they were published, and lay them to heart
seriously, and then consider, that if I keep a clear conscience I
must declare the truth.
Admonitions to all the People of this Kingdom, but chiefly to those
that have the power in their hands.
By ARISE EVANS.

Men and brethren I beseech you, let me freely speak unto you, in the
language of the Apostle, Acts 2. 25. How be it, as his speech was
distasteful then, so I doubt mine will be to many palates now, but I
hope such as fear the Lord, will hear and be pricked in their
hearts, Acts 2. 37, Truly, though I have received his spirit for my
directions herein, 2 Cor. 3. 17, Eccles. 12. 10. Yet if it were
possible I would not displease you: I confess my matter, or message
is contrary to most of your judgements: but for all that; as I shall
endeavour to deliver the same in as fair terms as I can: so I hope
ye will accordingly take the same in good part, surely I look upon
your declaration to be your real intention, and take it as a great
mercy of God that ye are such men, as be able to hear reproof, Prov.
13. 18; Prov. 15. 5,10,31, and of such qualifications to fulfil such
terrible places of Scripture, whereas if it had been the lot of some
proud, hot, intemperate men, who would not endure to be told of what
they were by their station, they might have gone to Hell without
molestation, or any to pity them.

It is averred by some that a cockatrice seeing itself in a glass,
and by beholding its own deformity immediately dieth, I do not wish
you should do so: But I wish that when I show you by the Scripture
what ye are now, that ye would become what you should be, to your
eternal happiness: I know God can turn a Saul to Paul, Acts 9. 4,5,
and I hope no less of you, for God can turn the shadow of death into
a morning, Amos 5. 8, he can make darkness light, and crooked things
straight, Isa. 42. 16, so that there shall be no shadow of death,
nor darkness where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, Job
34. 22, all these things are possible with God for them that
believeth, Mark. 9. 23, Matth. 19. 26.

Indeed my main matter is both hard for me to utter, and for you to 
understand, Rom. 16. 25,26, John 6. 27; 1 Tim. 5. 17; Heb. 5. 11;
Nahum. 1. 1,2; Hab. 1. 1,2, for I am under a burden which presseth
me sore, and have been twenty years under the same, and though many
think it but an easy thing to declare the mind of God, and to open
the mysteries of his word as they are fulfilled, yet I tell you it
is so hard, and requireth so much courage, strength, and labour,
that none knoweth it, but such as are exercised therein, Jer. 9. 3,
Jer. 23, 16,17. But it is an easy thing to be a flattering false
prophet, who swim always with the stream, crying peace where there
is no peace, and the world follow such, Jer. 6. 14, for we see the
true prophets were generally men of sorrows, condemned, and
persecuted by the world: because they did not flatter, nor spare men
in Authority, but told them their sins, for which cause they were so
rejected, that some of them wished to die, or that they had never
been born to see the truth, and their love slighted and the people
ruined, Jer. 20. 18, Jer. 22. 3,4,5,6,7,8; 1 Kings. 19. 4, and men
in Authority never wanted false prophets to flatter, and destroy
them by persuading them to go on and prosper, 1 Kings 22. 12, until
their sins were ripe, and no remedy left.

Therefore it is better for you to hear me now while the sun of
prosperity shineth upon you, than to hear those thousands who tell
you the world is yours, and cause you to bless yourselves in the
imaginations of your own hearts, Deut. 29. 18,19,20, as if God were
pleased with injustice, bloodshed, rebellion, robbery, oppression,
spiritual pride, drunkenness, and a many other abominable enormities
which the late Parliament countenanced among us, for I am assured,
that what I do now tell you is true, and will as certainly come to
pass as those truths have done, which I foretold to those that were
in authority before you.

It is certain that you do by your Declaration require a worship, and
acknowledgement of your power, as if you were a Parliament: why
should I wrong and flatter you, by giving you a false title, ye
cannot be ignorant that according to the laws of England, ye are not
a Parliament: And I wonder much that ye did take that name upon you,
ye being so unlike to it, for ye know a Parliament consists of Lords
spiritual, and temporal, and Commons called in by the King's Writ,
and chosen by the people, but the generality of them, as one said to
me, do not look upon you as a Parliament, though many be forced to
lie against their consciences by calling you so: Is it not therefore
best that I tell you the truth, which is that the people do not own
you as a Parliament, which I fear ye will find when they see a fit
opportunity, which they wait for, to rise up against you, whereof if
I should not warn you, and tell you the truth, which is so clearly
revealed unto me, I should be a murderer, and bring your blood upon
mine own head, Ezek. 3. 4,5,6,7,8,9,17,18,19, then how can I rest,
or hold my tongue, seeing no murderer hath eternal life abiding in
him? 1 Joh. 3. 15, and sure it is, that there is a heavy judgement
to come upon you, unless by repentance and amendment ye speedily
prevent it.

And now methinks I hear some of them in power say, what shall we do
to prevent this judgement? I answer, give that unto God which is his
due, and unto Caesar what is due unto him, and unto all people their
just rights and Liberties.

1. Do right unto God, and that is, restore to God all those things
which were taken from the Church by the late Parliament, or any
other in tithes and offerings, Malach. 3. 5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12. Ye
know well enough what the tithes are, and for the offerings, first,
they are the praises of God, which were sung and said daily in our
Churches, both Cathedrals and others throughout the Kingdom, which
singing and praising of God with instruments of Music in Scripture
is called the daily sacrifice, Daniel 8. 11,12,13; Daniel 12. 11;
Psal. 150, Psal. 50. 14,15; Rev. 5. 8,9; Rev. 14. 2,3, all which
praises being his due, ye ought to restore unto him again, and for
other offerings belonging to God, they are all those things which
have been given by our fore-fathers for pious uses, whether to the
Church to maintain ministers in in several places, or to the
maintenance of poor orphans and aged people, or any other ways left
to be disposed: all which ye are to restore and dispose of,
according to the mind of those good people that gave them; for those
things were sacrificed unto God, who taketh care for his ministers
and for the poor, and acknowledgeth that what was given to them,
Matth. 25. 40, was given to him, and what was taken from them is a
robbing of him, and also declareth that such as rob him in those
things are accursed, Malach. 3. 8,9.

But ye will say, those that gave these things were idolatrously
devoted, I answer: Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit
sacrilege? Rom. 2. 22. Our Church in the days of King Henry 8, King
Edward 6, and Queen Elizabeth took sufficient care for that matter:
Therefore take heed, lest ye by running away from idolatry split
yourselves upon sacrilege, and robbing of God, but rather do right
to God in restoring these things, that ye may be blessed.

2. The next thing is, that ye do right unto all men from the highest
to the lowest, and that you restore to everyone what is his birth-
right and due by the laws of the land, according to the intention of
our worthy predecessors that made them: And that ye neither alter
nor destroy those laws, they being experimentally found to be the
best in all the world for the government of a people, according to
the word of God. Insomuch that before this time Britain might have
been called the glory of the whole earth, for righteousness towards
God and man, if they had not come short in the execution of the
laws, according to the true meaning thereof, for the laws are good,
though the administrators thereof being corrupted, have through
bribery many times wrested them, and thereby wronged the subjects,
and it is a notable character of the beast, or Anti-Christ, that he
shall think to change times and laws, Daniel 7. 25. Therefore it
were good that ye would leave off your destroying of our laws, and
changing of times.

3. The third thing is; That ye restore the government of the Church,
and preserve the laws and ordinances thereof as well as of the
state, according as they were established in the beginning of these
troubles: And that for the better purging and taking away of all
abuses and errors crept in since that time, ye advise with such
conscientious learned, sober, and honest bishops, and other orthodox
clergy and lawyers as be most able to direct you as from the mouth
of God: But beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, I mean the
Presbyterian, or Puritanical faction, who have brought all this
misery upon themselves and us: for though they be now so sensible of
their errors, that many of their ministers and ring-leaders do begin
to creep toward the bishops' good old way: yet it will not be wisdom
to trust them: lest their old leprosy break out again. And now in
the name of God Almighty, I testify and affirm unto you, that this
is the very mind of God and of the most conscientious, and judicious
men in the Kingdom, which here I present unto you to be done for the
good and happiness of the Nation.

Therefore, (as I said,) whilst ye stand in the station wherein ye
are now, I dare not (for my part) lie so grossly against the truth &
mine own conscience, as to call you a Parliament, for I have proved
by the Scripture in my book called A voice from Heaven, written in
the year 1651, that the late Parliament which was rightly called
together at first, by doing those unreasonable actions which the
beast spoken of, Rev. 13, was to do; according to the Scripture,
became that beast: Now the beast being wounded by a sword and
dissolved, yet liveth in its acts, that ye are the Representative,
or image of the same beast, Rev. 13. 11,12,13,14,15. And what
penalty is appointed for any that giveth any title of honour,
worship, or reverence to the beast, or to his image is evident, Rev.
14. 9,10.

And truly, let me tell you mine own infirmities also, that it is no
small grief unto me, that I am confined upon pain of eternal
damnation, not to give you the title and reverence that ye expect
from these three Kingdoms, for I am confident that some of your
intentions and meanings are good, though your errors and want of
true understanding be very evil: so that it is harder for to bring
you, or such as profess so much knowledge to a right understanding,
than it is to bring them that never made any profession of religion
at all, to acknowledge the truth: for as the Lord Christ found more
true understanding and faith in heathens and publicans, than in the
self-conceited Pharisaical Jews, Matth. 21. 31,32. So now those that
seem to have nothing of value in them by the judgement of your
precisians, I find to be most capable to understand and to believe
the saving truth that I now declare; for the open profane through
infirmities and weakness of the flesh, being right & firm in the
true principles of Faith, are better than those who profess outward
holiness with errors in judgement & faith: yea, and are more humble
and consequently more capable to receive the truth, Luke 18.
10,11,12,13,14. But I hope better things of you, though I thus
speak.

That notwithstanding the great difference between King CHARLES and
you, ye shall find him to be a Child of God, and appointed to be the
most eminent servant of Jesus Christ in all the world, and that ye
will be yet his most glorious subjects, to vindicate him from all
the aspersions laid upon him, and to wound the head of his enemies:
and yet, truly gentlemen, if I should believe reports, there is
small cause for me to stand so much for him: for I heard it of a
certain, that some eminent pretended friends of his, (who thinks to
bear a great sway in this Kingdom;) have positively said: That when
he cometh to his throne, he must of necessity put me to death:
Because (say they) I laid too much honour upon his father, and did
blaspheme therein, but I believe they are not able to prove their
assertion from Scripture against me, though they take up the tenets
of the Pharisee: for a man may blaspheme God & the King, but to join
God and the King together in one, is no blasphemy by Scripture rule:
but howsoever, I shall both do him right, & not be daunted at their
ignorant threats: for I believe the King shall have such wisdom to
rule, that all things will not be done as such ignorants would, for
though they think the revolutions of these times to be nothing, but
accidental changes, yet wiser men who shall then bear rule with the
KING, when he cometh to his Throne, will find and believe that these
revolutions and changes came to pass, even to fulfil the words and
promises of God, which are laid down in Scripture, as they are and
have been opened and declared by me these twenty years in some
measure by God's assistance and appointment.

And whereas many say, the King's blood lies upon this man and that
man, and that the King cannot pardon such, and such a man; and that
he can never be reconciled to such a party, or parties. I am sure,
you that so think, or affirm, are as much concerned in the late
King's death, as any of them you speak of, and ye do this King more
injury then any man doth, by persuading the King and people, that
what ye report in this matter is true, so that you most unadvisedly
set one against another: And therefore the hearts of them that are
in power are so hardened against the King, that though they were
willing to restore him to his right, yet will they not do it, lest
thereby they should fall into such blood-thirsty men's hands, as
they fear you (by your own words) to be: And I am persuaded (as my
reason tells me:) that your threatening of the late Parliament and
Soldiery, was the main cause, why they put the late King to death;
for what is it that men will not do to save their own lives and
estates? Therefore they strike when you do but threaten.

But if you would enquire by humane sense and reason, from whence
these miseries came, ye will find that they did spring from the
covetousness of some clergyman, 1 Tim. 6. 9,10; 1 Tim. 3. 2,3, for
ye will find a covetous man come to the ministry, and he must have
two or three church-livings whatsoever they cost him, and he will
get some poor curates for a small matter to serve for him, who
although they be learned, yet they shall never be able to get so
much under him as will buy them books, or hardly bread, so that they
being starved, are not able to feed the people with knowledge:
whereupon they hire themselves a lectorer, and these hirelings being
Wolves, put on sheep's clothing, Matth. 7. 15,20,21,22,23, and to
fill their bags they will flatter the people, and preach them all to
be saints forsooth that follows them: so they become Puritans, and
say to the other, stand apart and come not near me, for I am holier
than thou, Isa. 65. 5,6, and while the one part of the parish are
drunk at the ale-house, and on the Sundays run into all manner of 
incivilities, for want of sober godly preaching, Isa. 5. 11,12,13,
the other part with immoderate teachings do run in spiritual
whoredom and drunkenness, Isa. 29. 9.

And this hireling becomes famous for finding that pleasing to the
people, and profitable for his purpose, he will cast out words
against the church-government and bishops, until he be taken hold
on, and questioned for it: Then most men cry him up for a gallant
man; and rail upon the bishops, as upon persecutors of godly men:
Then many others of that coat seeing this hireling-Judas, by this
means to fill his bags so fast, do take up his doctrine, John 10.
12,13, and 12. 4,5,6. Yea, the lawyer & physician finding this trade
better than their own, do follow it also for lucre's sake: Hence the
Puritanical faction getting entrance by the covetousness, and
negligence of the lazy prelates, now like a canker runs over and
poisons the whole Kingdom, 2 Tim. 2. 16,17, and the Roman Catholic
laughs at this sport, getteth a place to play his Cards once more,
and thinketh to get the game.

But we have another way to cure all this business, and that's by
calling a Parliament: of which, if the privilege had been
maintained, we had been happy by this time: now when the Parliament
was called, the Puritan and hireling ministers of London, &c. began
to stir up the city against the King, bishops & major part of the
Parliament, (which properly was the Parliament) who for fear of the
tumults durst not appear: thus judgement is turned away backward,
and equity cannot enter, Isa. 59. 13,14,15, and he that is righteous
maketh himself a prey, the truth hath no place, for lies and
falsehood prevaileth: therefore I say that on the authors of those
tumults, lies the King's blood, and all the blood that hath been
spilt since; notwithstanding the London ministers' Remonstrance at
the King's death, who like Pilate seemed to wash their hands, as
being innocent of his blood: but woe unto them, for they have gone
in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward, and they shall perish in the gain-saying of Core, Jude 11.
for they maliciously preached up the people into disorder, hoping
thereby to raise themselves in the casting down of the bishops,
everyone seeking his own advantage, but the wheel turns round, &
such as were not thought on then, now rules the roost; so that they
could not so fully compass nor enjoy the ends they aimed at.

How thirsty were the Presbyterian ministers for the innocent bishop
of Canterbury, and other men's blood, saying, the cause of their God
would never prosper until such were put to death, taxing the bishop
with Popery, &c. whereas indeed, the Pope had not such an adversary
on earth as the bishop was, who if he had lived would have drawn all
obedience from him in a short time: for the Pope feareth no
Protestant so much, as that man who cometh nearest unto him in order
and decency, yet keeps his principles in faith and doctrine: And for
those who are now in power, they are not so much concerned in the
King's blood, as the generality of the people do imagine: The Lord
General Cromwell himself could not either do much for him nor
against him at that time, but as the stream of the Parliament, Army
and people went then, so must he go, or else be disabled, ruinated,
and dealt with as a Malignant.

But many of them who are most guilty, (to clear themselves) would
fain lay all upon the Lord General, saying, that he was the busiest
in bringing the King to his end; suppose he was, Divine providence
so ordered the matter, that it was his place, for he was a servant
in it to the Parliament, to the Lord General Fairfax, to the Army,
and to the people: And if he had refused, there were many that would
have been glad of his place to have done it, so that his diligence &
faithfulness appeared in this, as in whatsoever service else he is
intrusted with, although in many things he goeth on as he did in
this with simplicity, not knowing the consequence, but hoping by the
providence of God that all will be brought about to a good issue.

Others there be, that say he promised with several solemn oaths to
the King when he was in the Army, that he would do his best
endeavour to save him, and restore him to his Throne: Truly whether
it was so, or no, I know not, God and himself knows best: but of
this I am sure, that if he had gone about to do it then, he could
not have done it: but would have disabled himself of power to do 
what he may be forced to do to that purpose now, for I am persuaded
so well of the Lord General, and of many belonging to him, that they
have a desire to deal faithfully, and truly toward God and man: And
I doubt not but they shall find an opportunity to perform their
desires. And although Mr. Feake do affirm before his congregation;
that the General and Parliament (as he calls it) are yet in Babylon:
but he shall find to his sorrow, that they will in short time obey
the truth, and come out of Babylon.

Therefore, all ye of the King's party, give up yourselves to God in
prayer, and serving of him, with a holy and sober life, not giving
yourselves to rioting, drinking, swearing, nor working of plots: for
the children of this world are wiser in their generation than the
children of God, Luke 18. 8, and God would not have you to use any
such wicked means, whereby to establish yourselves, and get the
glory from him: but rather to stand still, wait, and behold the
salvation of God, that ye may give him the glory of your salvation:
And as for you that are ministers, pray and preach with fervency of
Spirit, and by the power of the same Spirit laid down in the holy
Scriptures, glorify God, strengthen the hearts of the people in the
Faith, and thereby overcome your adversaries, and glory not so much
as ye do in your vain philosophy, Coloss. 2. 8, which by a faithful
Soul is of no more esteem, in regard of the word of God in
Scripture, than chaff is in comparison of wheat, Jer. 23. 28; 2 Tim.
3. 14,15,16,17. And I dare affirm that a sincere plain man with his
meditating and studying the Scriptures only, and conversing with the
like, shall attain to a more excellent power to maintain his
Doctrine, than many of you have, so that for all your learning, if
ye be not so expert in the Scripture as he is, he will overthrow
you.

Therefore if ye expect the blessing of restoration, Matth. 17. 11;
Mark. 9. 12; Acts 3. 20,21, leave your luke-warmness, and be more
diligent in searching the Scriptures, and in preaching them, lift up
your voice like a Trumpet, Isa. 58. 1, and 64. 1, to rouse the
people out of their slumbering sins, to be fervent in prayer that
the Lord would rend the heavens, and come down to deliver his people
from the hands of their oppressors, that we may praise him with
songs of deliverance. What is the reason that the bride-groom doth
not come? Matth. 25. 5,6,7,8,9,10. Is it not because the Bride doth
not make herself ready to receive him? what is the reason that some
of you count me a blasphemer in what I say concerning King Charles?
Is it not your ignorance of the Scriptures? Matth. 22. 29. What is
the reason, that though ye have the truth on your side, yet ye are
not able to encounter in Dispute, either with the plain Ccountry-
men, or mechanics, or heretics of these times? Is it not because of
your ignorance of the Scriptures, and luke-warmness? for ye only
desire to know them but afar off.

Ah, this negligence will never make us happy: ye shame yourselves;
that child which neither by prosperity, nor adversity will be
brought home to his father; is a lost child: Consider what I say,
and the Lord give you understanding in all things, 2 Tim. 2. 7. If
ye be the servants of Christ, your word should be a word of power,
such as all your enemies could not be able to gain-say, nor resist,
Luke 21. 15. Acts 6. 10. yea, one of you should chase a thousand,
and too put ten thousand to flight, Deut. 32. 30,31, if ye did but 
obey the voice of the Lord.

I must needs confess, I speak these things unto you with grief of
heart, for seeing ye walking as men, who have not the spirit of
courage, and boldness as the apostles had in adversity, Acts 4.
13,19; Acts 5. 28,29,30,31. I doubt very much what will become of
you, whether God will not cast you off, and put into the Ministry
men according to his own heart, that will serve him with more
diligence and fervency, with greater boldness and courage, not
fearing the faces of men, though persecutors: I do not thus speak to
all the ministers, but to the proud, envious, ignorant, and
negligent, that will neither do the work of God themselves, nor
allow of such as do it: for many of this sort, I know there be; and
some of them have come to cavil with me, and to despise me, because
God hath made me more bold than they, in declaring the truth.

But suppose now that a man should meet one of our great officers
walking in the fields, having a new scarlet cloak, and enter into
discourse with him, if the man in the midst of their discourse
should snatch the cloak off his back and rend it into twelve pieces,
and give him ten pieces of it again, saying, the Lord will divide
the army, and give you ten parts thereof & ye shall prevail, would
not such kind of ministers as you, condemn this man, for his so bold
an act? Yet he might be a prophet of God therein, & the thing come
to pass as truly now, as it did when such a thing was done by the
prophet Ahijah, 1 Kings 11. 28,29,30,31; but these men are miserable
comforters.

Again, I find a contrary spirit, not only in the ministers, but in
the generality of the King's party also; some do suppose that it is
impossible for the King to come in, because (say they) these men now
in power are so strong and mighty, speaking as if they were the Sons
of Anack, by their account, Numb. 13. 27,28,29,30,31,32,33; Others
there be of Caleb's spirit, Numb. 14. 24, who speak comfortable
words to the people, and declare the hopeful things which they
conceive, surely God is well pleased with these, and they shall
enjoy their desires: But for the other let them, take heed, (as the
Lord saith, Numb. 14. 34) lest they shall know my breach of promise.

And if our adversaries had regard to the works of the Lord against
them, they might see what is become of the most eminent of them that
rose against the King: How fell Essex, Brook, Hampden, Hotham and
his Son: how fell Hurry Poyer, Waller, Brown, Massey, and Love; yea,
Fairfax and Bradshaw are falling, how did all the Presbyterians fall
out of the saddle, where is the five treacherous Members that
withstood the late King at first: it is true, one yet remaineth to
drink the dregs of his fellow's cup: Where is the great ministers
that preached the people into tumults and rebellion? Do they not
stink now in the nostrils of those whom they preach'd up? How is
their glorious Parliament as it were sunk quick to Hell? How hath
Scotland and their great ones there, been punished for their rising
against the King, as a just reward of their folly? for of all men
living they should never have done so, how did the immediate hand of
God appear against Marlborough, it being one of the first Towns that
arose in England, and made them a wooden God to mock the King? How
is Coronet Joyce that first laid hands on the King, as also John
Lilburn, and divers others rewarded for their services, all which
fell, as commonly the enemies of Israel fell by the hand of their
own party, Judg 7. 22; 2 Chron. 20. 22,23.

And as concerning the Churches, how many men have been slain and
hurt, whilst they were in obstructing the work about St. Paul's
Church? How were those men cast down; maimed, and spoiled, when they
went about building apPreaching place for the Anabaptists in the
stone Chapel thereof? What became of the Lord Brook that grand enemy
of God's worship? when he thought his armour impenetrable, how was
he smote in the head, from the Cathedral Church at Lichfield, as
Goliath was by David, 1 Sam. 17. 4,5,6,7,49. I have said little in
comparison of what might be said in this matter, but if I should say
all that can be said, yet they would not regard it, Psal. 28. 5, for
they are blinded with their prosperity in the War, though they may
know by the things visible against them; that one day's loss now,
will keep them under for ever, and that day is not far off, for it
is with them as David saith, Psal. 55. 19, Because they have no
changes; therefore they fear not God: And as Job saith, they
prosper, and the rod of God is not upon them: Therefore they say
unto God depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, Job 21. 7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14.

But ye that hope for deliverance, are to consider, that by your
manifold afflictions ye are corrected to refine you, that ye may be
made holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15,16, and more innocent than Doves, more wise
than Serpents, Matth. 10. 16, more precious than the gold of Ophir,
Isa. 13. 12; Malach. 3. 17. The end which God hath in afflicting
you, is to bring you to such a condition: And then the Assyrian (the
rod of his anger) who thinketh not to cut off a few nations, shall
be burned; Isa. 10. 5,6,7,16,17,18,19. For the rod of the wicked
shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, Psal. 125. 3, and the
family of David; that is, the King's friends, when they sin, God
will correct them with the rod of men, 2 Sam. 7. 14,15; Psal. 89.
32,33; for God makes his rod most usually of wicked men; by which he
corrects his children, therefore say not that there is no hopes, but
rather comfort one another; look upon Portugal's deliverance! did
not God reveal it afore-hand unto them, even by a poor cobbler that
could not write a word, but got little school-boys to write for him:
who prophesied many remarkable things that came truly to pass, and
among the rest he Pprophesied that in 1640, they should have a King
in Portugal again.

Although the King of Spain for this cause sought by all means to
prevent it; yet when the time came: notwithstanding, the set year
was far spent, they considering that none of the poor man's
prophesies had ever yet failed, but that all had been truly
fulfilled, they were thereby so much the more emboldened; so that
God stirred up the spirits of the nobles, and valiant men of
Portugal, and smote the soldiery with terror, that (as it were) in a
moment the King was set on his throne: And suddenly had all the
strongholds throughout the Land surrendered unto him, and there was
not three men kill'd in the quarrel.

Then, why may not God do as much for England? Or why may not those
ten valiant commanders that took the Kingdom from the late King
CHARLES, and according as God had decreed, gave it for some time to
the late Parliament, or as it is in Scripture language, to the
beast? Rev. 17. 12,13,17. And then afterward according as God did
put in their hearts; to destroy the very same Parliament, & take the
Kingdom again from them: as you may see how it was done, Rev. 17,
from verse 12 to the end of the Chapter: I say, why may not God now
also move the hearts of the said ten Commanders to give the Kingdom
to him whose right it is, I mean the present King CHARLES, Ezek. 21.
27. We say, and it is a proverb among us, that if a man lie in a
ditch, and cry God help me, and not use his own ability to get out;
he may lay there and perish: But if a man call to God for help, and
withal do what he can to help himself, surely God will help him, for
if you understand yourselves; when you say God help us: it doth not
argue that God shall do all and you nothing; but it doth argue that
God will help you in what you go about to do; and that if you put to
your strength, God will strengthen and prosper you therein, when
your actions be right, good, and lawful, and that especially in the
fulfilling of his word.

For there is nothing more easy than to fulfil a prophecy: because
God is assistant to them, and active with them that do it: How was
God with Joshua to encourage him, 2 Kings 9; Joshua 1. How was God
with Jehu, with Josiah, with Nebuchadnezzar, with Cyrus: Yea, good
Josiah must die for going out against Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt,
who had a command from God to go against the King of Assyria, 2
Kings 23,29; 2 Chron. 35. 20,21,22,23. And what great rewards did
God give them that fulfilled his word? 2 Kings 10. 30; Isa. 45 from
verse 1 to verse 15; 2 Chron. 36. 22,23; 1 Macchab. 2. 55. How
prosperous were the late Parliament against the late King! Why?
because it was prophesied he should fall; how prosperous was the
Independents against the Presbyterians? Why? because it was army
against the late Parliament, and how easily did they dissolve it?
Why? because it was prophesied they should fall, how easily did the
Portugals set up their King? Why? because it was prophesied of
before: Then, why cannot they as easily set up the King; as they did
dissolve the Parliament? And why? even because the word is gone
forth for it, Isa. 55. 10,11; For there is no word gone forth
against them as yet, notwithstanding all the muttering of their
false Prophets against them.

It is to be considered also what a heavy judgement befell those
Nobles of Israel, who searched the Land of Canaan, that when they
came back persuaded the people that there was no hopes of getting
that land, and that it was but in vain to go up and fulfil the
Lord's word by possessing it, Gen. 15. 13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21;
for all those nobles died immediately of the plague, before the
Lord, Numb. 14. 36,37. And because the people gave ear to their
persuasion, the Lord would have destroyed them all, had not Moses
stood up and besought the Lord for them, yet for all that, the Lord
would let none of that generation go up into the Land of Canaan save
Caleb and Joshua, who were truly noble and valiant: yea, and though
the people saw what sudden judgements befell those nobles that had
persuaded them: repented and mourned for their sins of murmuring,
and immediately would needs have gone up and possessed the land: yet
they found it was too late, for the Lord was departed from them, and
had changed the time, and given out a new decree: Therefore those
that went up presumptuously were smitten before their enemies, as
you may see all this passage, Numb. 13. and 6. 14. Here was a heavy
judgement upon Israel, because they for their own good, would not
believe nor fulfil the prophesies and promises of God: but it was
well for the Canaanites, for thereby they enjoyed the Land forty
years longer.

And for certain, there will be no peace to any in this land until
the King come: but fear upon the one and upon the other, and their
hearts shall tremble for fear one another; yea, men in arms shall
have trembling hearts, and men in power shall have no rest:
Therefore I beseech you once more noble Gentlemen, to call him home
and set him up, ye have the power to do it, and thereby to save a
great deal of Christian blood: And they in whose power it is to save
men's lives, and will not do it, must expect the like dealing from
the Lord: I could wish that such as sit at the helm, would consider
the times, Things strangely work; that what a man may do today, he
may want power to do tomorrow, and what two months' time may bring
to pass in such changing times as these, may possibly amaze the
world to behold.

Surely there will some strange news be abroad before the 20 of
January 1654 be past, Prov. 25. 1,5,6; Heb. 12. 16,17; Prov. 15. 23;
Prov. 4. 18; Psal. 58. 3,4,5. I pray God it may be for the best; and
that some great person may escape the hands of his enemies: It is
true that fair opportunities misused, or neglected often bring too
late repentance, and sometimes everlasting sorrow. And who knoweth
the value of a seasonable well spent day? I hope that I do not speak
this in the ear of deaf adders: neither do I doubt but these things
are already thought upon by some; yet as we say, forewarning is half
arming: Therefore it is not hurtful for any of whatsoever degree, to
have their dangers foretold; But if like Caesar they will not
believe, then may such as be esteemed wise in many other things,
prove very unwise in the main thing as he did.
A caveat for astrologers, but more especially to George Wharton,
Esq; and concerning some passages in his almanacs, for the year
1654.

MR. Wharton, I perceive that there are two almanacs come forth under
your name for the year 1654, having two faces; the one seems to be
very much for the Romish Church, and the other as much against it,
page 34, 35; you tell us that you believe the Romish hierarchy shall
stand, and do blame those that speaks against it: And say, that we
of Britain, or England at first received the Christian Faith from
Rome: Also you blame such as apply the prophesies in sacred writ to
this mole-hill of England, (as you call it,) and to particular
persons therein, who take upon them the name of Protestants, and the
rule and government, as if this (say you) were the place and they
(forsooth) the persons only aimed at by the Prophets.

Sir, By this I find you are more for Rome than England, I wonder you
know not better by Histories, how that Joseph of Arimathea, (who was
the most Honourable of CHRIST'S Disciples, Matth. 28. 5758; Mark.
15. 43.) came hither and preached the Gospel before there was a
Church of Christ at Rome; and that he lieth buried at Glastonbury:
Besides him, was not Thomas the Apostle sent hither about the same
time, who preached Christ to us, as our ancient Chronicles declare?
And was not Lucius King of Britain, (who builded St. Peter's Church
in Corn-hill, London) the first Christian King in all the World? And
was not Constantine King of Great Britain the first Christian
Emperour in all the World? Where is the like then unto this Mole-
hill of England, for had it not the pre-eminence, in regard of its
first dominion above all the Christian World?

It may be in those times of the ten persecutions, that some came
from Rome hither for shelter and did preach, but we stood in no need
of them: for we then had preachers enough besides them, only in
love, we received them, as Christian brethren. And had nor
CONSTANTINE, by the providence of God  gone over to Rome, with an
Army of CHRISTIAN BRITONS, and CONQUERED the Tyrants there, and
elsewhere, so far as the City of CONSTANTINOPLE, which was built for
the Honour of his Name; else the Romish Church would not have had
such esteem as it had by his means: Therefore it is evident that the
Romish Church was then beholding to England, so that England may say
to God and his Church: I am like a green fir-tree from me is thy
fruit found, Hosea 14. 8; and God say of England; Unto thee shall it
come even the first dominion, the Kingdom shall come to the daughter
of Jerusalem, Micah. 4. 8; as if he should say to England: Jerusalem
hath brought thee forth, thou art her only daughter and her heir:
Thou art that new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 2.

And hath God from this mole-hill of England in those times sent such
glorious instruments to comfort all that trusted in Christ, and to
settle them in peace: And shall he not do the like now? Or doth not
the forementioned things predict, that God hath a special regard to
England, and show that it is the glorious holy mountain between the
Seas? And though Anti-Christ for the present, plant his tabernacles
here, yet he shall vanish speedily, Dan. 11. 45, and shortly after,
from this Land the glorious presence of God shall go forth into all
the world, to settle them in everlasting peace and tranquillity.

But Sir, you wheel about in the second part of your almanac 1654, as
if you had met King Henry the eight's Ghost in the way; for it is
reported that he at a certain time, when his Parliament would not
pass a bill which he would have done, to extirpate Popery; he came
roughly among them into the Parliament house with his short dagger;
saying, who is he that will not pass this bill, and so examined them
one by one, till all said: I, to it, thus did he awe them with his
terrible presence, and prevailed: Then departing the house, said
unto them, all good men, all good men: so it is like that you met
with King Henry the eight's Ghost, which made you to change your
note, for in the last part of your almanac, pag. 75, you say in
brief from this eclipse, the Pope and Hierarchy of Rome shall
exceedingly suffer: It is evident from holy writ that a time shall
come, in which Babylon must fall: And from the rules of astrology,
it is very evident that that prophecy will be fulfilled, ere time
put a period to this eclipse, which will be before the expiration of
the year 1656; howsoever, if this public ruin should at this time
escape them: I am very confident that Italy and Rome shall be in
great distress, and often troubled with tumults and uproars.

Indeed, Sir, I am glad of your conversion, if it be real, yet your
sentence here is very sudden against the Pope, and hierarchy of
Rome: and to account of it as Babylon is very harsh, from you that
was a little before so much for it. But this I tell you in love,
that your words ought to be one and the same constantly, and desire
you to take the advice of the wise man, Eccl. 5. 9,10, winnow not
with every wind, and go not into every way, for so doth the sinner
that hath a double tongue, be steadfast in thy understanding and let
thy word be the same.

I remember a story of a man that dwelt in a little Town, & he was
counted weather wise and his common custom was, when he arose in the
morning to go along the one side of the street, saying to the people
as he went, today will be a fair day, and when he came back again on
the other side, to say, today will be foul weather: whereupon they
thought he had some skill, for he had always as many for him as was
against him: So you astrologers now use many words, both for and
against, so that something must needs be true that you say: But he
that is moved and acteth by the spirit, or direction of astrologers,
or goeth to them to have his Nativity cast: and to know the event of
his Fortune, is a mere naturalist appointed unto wrath, 1 Thess. 5.
9.

It is usual for thieves to go to cunning men, or astrologers, who
tell them that their fortune is to be hanged, therefore they take
such evil courses as brings them to that end, as I have heard many
of the thieves (when I was in prison) say, they had been with the
cunning man, who told them their end was to be hang'd, therefore
they would steal and not work, yea, and others that go to them,
though they be of great quality, and they tell them of great things
that they shall do, yet commonly they tell them also of an unhappy
end too.

But when did any astrologer speak of a martyr's death? For those
that go to astrologers forsake the direction of God's spirit, and
therefore God will forsake them: for God is said to forsake his
people, because they had regard to such things, Isa. 2. 6, and God
sends spiritual Babylon to her astrologers that predict for her, and
promise her, that she shall not fall: to see if they can save her,
who answer, that they must fall with her,  as you may see at large
by comparing Isa. 47 with Rev. 18. And as I said before that
Jerusalem hath a daughter, called new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 2, who
hath only the spirit of God (in his ministers) for her direction:
Babylon hath a daughter, Isa. 47. 1, called spiritual Babylon and
Sodom, Rev. 11. 8, who persecutes the ministers of God, and will not
be directed by them: But by enchanters and astrologers, for all that
are unlawful preachers, and bring false doctrine are enchanters and
witches, Gal. 3. 10. And in the primitive times, those that went
preaching without a lawful call, and were neither sent from Christ
nor his Apostles, were beaten by the Devil.

And as those that used curious arts and were converted, even
astrologers and the like, knowing how inconsistent and disagreeable
it was with the Christian faith, they burned their books, that they
might use such arts no more, Acts 19. 13,14,15,16,17,18,19, so I
say, it is hard to judge whether those that take upon them to
foretell things by the rules of astrology be Christians or not, for
they are condemned as men contrary to the spirit of God, both in the
Old and New Testaments, and as you said in your first almanac, that
it was a strange thing to see Mr. George Wharton come forth in an
almanac, so I hope you will leave to study astrology, and show
yourself in some other way that may be more acceptable to God, and
beneficial to his people, which for your Soul's health is the desire
of your friend,
ARISE EVANS.
A REF?TATION OF A PAMPHLET, lately published by one ASPINWALL,
ENTITLED, A Brief Description of the Fifth MONARCHY.

MR Aspinwall, I shall not contradict you, in that there is a fifth
Monarchy to be expected in this World; and that it will shortly
appear. But in what you say as concerning K. CHARLES; though I be
the least of the flock, by the assistance of God's spirit, I hope to
confute and drive you away, and make it appear, that you are a
venomous asp, pulling your pine out of your wall, on which you hang
all your glory, and that your Asp-pinewall will down: For I am sure,
that you are beside the mark concerning K. CHARLES; in that you
condemn the just, and justify the unjust; and though you huddle up a
great many texts to make your matter good, and to blind the reader;
yet it is clear, that you lay a wrong foundation, and err in
applying of those texts to K. CHARLES. For, if K. CHARLES be one of
those ten horns, or kings, as you affirm him to be the last of them;
then he cannot be the little horn, as you unjustly assert him to be;
seeing the texts alleged by you, Dan. 7. 8,24, prove that the little
horn is not one of those ten; for the little horn cometh up after
the ten horns, and plucks up three of them by the roots.

The words are plain in the vision itself, v. 8: I considered the
horns, and behold there came up among them, another little horn;
before whom there were three of the first horns plucked up by the
roots. Here it is evident, that the little horn is none of the ten;
which is yet more plain in the interpretation of v. 24: And the ten
horns out of this Kingdom, are ten Kings that shall arise; and
another shall arise after them; and he shall be divers from the
first, and he shall subdue three Kings. Neither is the little horn
called a King in all the Scripture; but, He shall be divers from the
first, and he shall subdue three kings; giving us to understand,
that the little horn is an enemy to kings; as a thing of a contrary
being, or differing in nature. The little horn is also called a
beast, v. 11. And as the fourth beast is divers from the other
three, who were true to their heads; both it, and the little horn,
are alike adversaries to kingly power, as you see.

The State of Rome clipt and turn'd out the Emperor from his
superiority; So in a more barbarous manner the State of England
turn'd out, and put the late King to death. So it is evident, that
this little horn is not a king, but a State, that completeth the
wickedness of the State of Rome, and fourth Beast.

Good Reader, take heed therefore of this Aspinwall, and all such;
for this is not only a matter of life and death, but also of
salvation and damnation of souls; and know for a certain, that he
either understandeth not, or wresteth the Scriptures, as you see
apparent by what hath been already spoken; so that he is both
deceived, and deceiveth others, making them serve his turn, in
speaking for the present time, be it never so wicked.

Now M. Aspinwall, I hope you see it is clear, that you have said a
wrong foundation for your fabric, or fifth Monarchy; in applying
those texts to K. CHARLES; which doth further appear Dan. 7. 24: He
shall subdue three Kings; and this [He] you say is K. CHARLES. How
did K. CHARLES subdue three Kings? Did he ever take any Kingdoms
from any? It is true, by Birth he was Heir to three Kingdoms, and
did enjoy them, to the great happiness of his subjects; until that
unreasonable beast Parliament, violently and unjustly did wear out
his people, took his three Kingdoms from him, and his life too. And
did not that beast Parliament, v. 25, change times, and laws?

And was not that beast Parliament destroyed April 22 1653, as ye
have it v. 11? And though that beast Parliament be destroyed in
part; that is, as they were a body consisting of so many men, yet
the Parliament men being in God's account, everyone of them a beast
by himself, and are called beasts, v. 12, who though their dominion
be taken away from them at the time of their dissolution; yet have
they their lives prolonged  for a season, and time fit to call them
to a further account, and total destruction; as ye have it, v. 26.

Again, M. Aspinwall, you may clearly see your error; That K. CHARLES
was not the little horn, neither are the Kings of Europe those
beasts who had their Dominion taken away when K. CHARLES died: For
where is any of those seven Kings whereof you speak, that have lost
their Dominion? But it is evident to all; that the Parliament was
that beast, or little horn; and that the Parliament men are those
beasts; who lost their dominion when the Parliament was destroyed.

Further, by this also the little horn appeareth to be the last
Parliament; the little horn had eyes, and a mouth speaking great
things; and looked more stout than his fellows; v. 8. 20. Is not the
eyes, their knowledge, by which the late Parliament pretended to see
more from Scripture, than any other before them? So that in their
own conceits, they were both wiser and stouter than any former
Parliament: That their mouth and votes spake great and monstrous
things, even such as were never heard of before in any heathenish
assembly of state; so that all Christians, yea I am confident, some
of themselves, do now abhor the wickedness that proceeded from them,
1 Sam. 24. 13. And as concerning the ten horns or kings, there is no
judgement to come upon any of them all, but only three of them;
namely, England, Scotland, and Ireland, for they suffer very much;
and according to their sufferings, they shall be exalted again, to
reign with their King in glory. Dan. 7. 27.

For as you have it v, 9,10,13,14,18,22, By the ancient of days
there, is signified Jesus Christ; and by the Son of man, is
signified K. CHARLES; who in regard the Lord Jesus found him
faithful to the death, for the maintenance of his laws in Church and
State, will make him Ruler, (according to the promise, Luke 12.
42,43,44,) over all that he hath. So that this CHARLES Stuart (thus
being found so just a Steward) whom Aspinwall doth vilify, is indeed
that wise and faithful steward, whose seed shall rule all that the
Lord Jesus hath, for ever; and is the most High on earth; Dan. 7.
25,27, and Prince of the Host, or Prince of Princes: Dan. 8.
9,10,11,25, who (under Jesus Christ) is the only father, and
begetter of the fifth Monarchy; and his seed shall be chief in it
for ever. And the laws of England, both for Church and State, as it
was established in his time, for the maintenance of which laws he
died, even that Law shall go over all the earth, and shall be the
Law of the fifth Monarchy for ever.

And to make it yet more clear, the little horn in Dan. 7. 8, is that
beast, Rev. 13. 1, that hath its ten horns also; as is evident by
the mark in its mouth: For, as the little horn had a mouth speaking
great things; 1 Dan. 7. 8,20,25, so the Beast in Rev. 13. 5,6, hath
a mouth speaking great things. Again, the late Parliament in
Scripture is called by divers names; sometimes it is called the
little horn, Dan. 7. 8,20, sometimes the Beast, Dan. 7. 12; Rev. 13.
1, and sometimes the Whore, Rev. 17. 15,16, in regard of its
unfaithfulness and treachery to their King, head, father, and
husband of the Kingdom. And as the beast, or where was to be
destroyed with its own ten horns, Rev. 17. 16, so the beast
Parliament was destroyed, April 22. 1653, by the now Lord General,
and about ten of those horns that afore defended them; for the beast
was to be destroyed without hands; only by the spirit of his mouth;
Dan. 8. 25; Dan. 11. 20; 2 Thess. 2, 8. So that beast Parliament (a
raiser of taxes) was destroyed without anger, without battle,
without hands; only by the word from the General's mouth: whereby it
is evident, to all who are not wilfully blind, that the late
Parliament was this little horn, or beast, expressed in the former
cited Scriptures.

But as concerning K. CHARLES himself, there was much anger, and
after many battles fought against him, he, and his followers, had
many hands laid upon them, and then (according to the Word, Rev. 20.
4,) they had their heads cut off, because they would not worship and
submit to that beast Parliament.

And see how the holy Spirit long before takes notice of the nature
and cowardliness of this Beast, who (as before) saith of them, that
they should be destroyed without hands; that is, without so much as
one box of the ear; much less than to have a sword drawn against
them; And yet saith, that this Beast should have its deadly wound by
a sword, Rev. 13. 3,14. so that but only ten of their servants came
into the House, and spake to them, not in anger; the very thought of
a Sword, struck them all dead; so that they who about nine of the 
Clock came into the House, looking upon themselves to be the
greatest Princes in Europe, before eleven, went out baser than the
basest of all the people; insomuch that the very Boys in the
streets, and the most vulgar sort of people, did hiss and hoot at
them, as at the most abject and abominable creatures?  not worthy to
live; yea the very ballad-mongers had them in derision.

Whereas indeed, had they been valiant men for the truth, and worthy
to rule, before they had quitted their places, and left the nations,
who depended upon their protection, in such a distraction, as to
deliver them unto the power of the sword, hundreds of them would
have risen up, and seized on those ten, and committed them to the
Tower, and immediately also sent to the army in all places, not to
stir, on pain of death, without their commands. But the General knew
what they were; and that most of them durst not behold the drawing
of a sword, much less to contend with such a man as he is. Yet K.
CHARLES his valour was such, that he contended to the death, for the
Truth; being faithful, and trusting in God, not fearing what man
could do unto him.

And further, if we would compare K. CHARLES with them; we shall find
him to be the true shepherd, who gave his life, and all that he had,
to maintain the laws and Liberties of his people; John 10. 11,12.
But contrariwise the hypocritical hireling Parliament, that styled
themselves, The Keepers of the Liberties of England, at the sight of
a few soldiers coming to the House, where they sate, did shamefully
fly, and surrender the people into the mouth of the wolf, or power
of the sword; to have all their laws, lives, liberties, and
substance, devoured by it at pleasure. And thereby their hypocrisy
is discovered to all the world; for they gave out themselves to be
saints, that feared God, and trusted not in the arm of flesh, nor
feared it; but coming to the trial, it is evident, they trusted  not
in God, but in the arm of flesh, which they only confided in, and
feared. For no sooner did the General (who is but a mortal man)
appear, but they vanished; so that to stand out for God, and his
people, in hope of assistance from him, against the arm of flesh,
was counted folly by that hypocritical generation.

Therefore for your pretended saints, we deny them to be any of the
saints of God; or that they have any godliness, and true faith,
justifiable by God's word in them.

For, will you make solemn protestations in hypocrisy, lifting up
your hands before the Lord, who is the searcher of all hearts,
whereby to draw the people (who entrusted you) from their dutiful
obedience to the Lords Anointed, both to ensnare them, and damn
their souls with false oaths; and say, this is godliness? Is not
this the height of hypocrisy? Hos. 10. 4; Zach. 5. 3,4; Eccles. 8.
2,3,4; Rom. 13. 1,4; 1 Sam. 24. 6,10.

Will you destroy God's ministers and ordinances? Will you destroy
and defile his sanctuary? Will you rob him in tithes and offerings,
committing all manner of sacrilege against him; and say, This is
godliness? 1 Cor. 3. 16,17; Mal. 3. 7,8,9; Rom. 2. 22.

Will you break all your Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to God and
the King? Will you break your protestations and Covenants, calling
God to witness to them; and say, that all this is godliness still?
Zach. 5. 3,4; Hos. 10. 4; Prov. 24. 21,22.

Will you (contrary to your solemn oaths) destroy the King, the
Lord's anointed, for keeping his oath to God, and his people,
committed to his charge? Will you rob him, and his posterity of all
their Rights for ever; and say, this is godliness too? Eccles 8.
2,3,4; Eccles. 10. 20; 2 Chron. 13. 10,11, Zach. 3. 7.

Will you kill, destroy, and rob the Lord's people, that keep faith,
and a good conscience, by observing their oaths to God and the King;
and say, This is godliness? Jer. 7. 8,9,10,11.

Will you make Jesus Christ as your Captain who are such apparent
robbers, murderers, spiritual whoremongers, and false swearers?
Surely he will be avenged on you for these things. 1 Tim. 1. 19,20;
Luke 18. 7,8; Dan. 8. 24.

Will you (through your policy) betray the Nation of their laws,
lives, liberties, livelihoods, and their good conscience also, by
forcing them to forswear themselves; and say, This is godliness?
Isa. 29. 15.

Will you seek the ruin of other Nations? Will you yet thirst after
more innocent blood, until ye be drunk therewith; and say, This is
godliness? Isa. 10. 7; Rev. 17. 6.

Will you set up your abomination that maketh desolate in every place
where it comes; destroying the faithful ones, tolerating all sorts
of wicked atheists, blasphemers, heretics, and cursed Rebels against
God; and say, This is godliness? Matth. 24. 15.

M. Aspinwall, you know, such are your saints, on whom you put all
the glory; They come near to God with their mouths, but their hearts
are far from him, and their works abominable to God and man: And how
contrary their sending forth preachers to preach, is to the way of
Jesus Christ, who sent his disciples, is evident; They send forth
their preachers with swords,  pistols, and troops of horse; as
Vavasour Powell went into Wales, with commission to raise forces to
propagate the Gospel, as they call it; and such kind is of the
Devil, Mahomet, or John of Leyden's sending forth to preach. For
Jesus Christ when he sent forth his Disciples, though he could
command legions of Angels to go with them, doth not; Matth. 26. 53,
but he bids them take no provision for their journey, no, not so
much as a staff for their own defence; Matth. 10. 9,10; Luke 9. 3;
Luke 10. 3,4. Yet M. Powell in his commission, must have a power to
raise a troop of horse, and soldiers, to guard him, and to terrify
and plunder the Country. Jesus Christ bids his Disciples wheresoever
they came, to salute all with peace; and if the people should rise
up against them, to flee from that place to another; Matth. 10.
12,13,23; Luke 10. 5. M. Powell bids his disciples with arms to
salute the Country, and if they rise, to persecute them, and beat
them from one place to another. Jesus Christ bids his Disciples
freely heal the sick, where ever they come; Matth. 10. 8. Luke 9. 2.
M. Powell is so far from healing them, that he bids his disciples
fight and wound them. Thus you see clearly how opposite in all
things you are to the Gospel of peace, Eph. 6. 15.

For my part, I have no spleen or malice against any man's person:
God knows, I speak the truth; for I am as a dying man, lame, and
sickly, not able, but creeping about the house; every night at
death's door; yea, desiring to die, and to be with my Lord Jesus
Christ: But I would die with a clear conscience, and not have my
talents buried with me; but lay them out to the glory of God, and
for the benefit of the  living: Therefore (I beseech you) bear with
my boldness of speech (for I would not willingly offend anyone) and
though you will not, yet I must not forbear to declare, and make the
things of God fully known; for a necessity is laid upon me, and wo
is me, if I do it not; 1 Cor. 9. 15,16.

Now I proceed further concerning the late beast Parliament; which
though it be destroyed according to the word of God, yet it liveth
still in its Acts; and the same that did destroy it, commanded to
make a Representative, or image thereof. And he (the Lord General)
had power to give life to the image of the beast Parliament (which
image is this present Parliament, as they call themselves) that the
image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as
would not worship the image of the beast, should be killed.

And if you look upon the manner of the dissolution of the late
Parliament by the Lord General, and his Council, and upon the
continuing of their Acts still in force, as they were before; by
which the late Parliament seemeth yet to live; and upon the manner
and calling of this present Representative, or image of them (a
Representative being but an image like something that it doth
represent; as the image of a man, beast, or whatsoever else) as also
upon the manner how these had their power from the Lord General, as
he gave them authority, life, or spirit to act; and compare all
these particulars with Rev 13. 3,11,12,13,14,15, and you shall find
that this Scripture was so really fulfilled, both in the manner of
the Lord General's destroying of the late Parliament, and his
setting up of this; as if he had purposely set this very Scripture
before his eyes, and taken it for his absolute direction therein; he
not erring one jot in the performance of the substance thereof.

Hence you see, both what the Beast is, and his image; in the next
place I shall show you, what the mark of the Beast is; and what is
the name of the Beast; and likewise, the number of his name, Rev.
13. 16,17,18.

1. Concerning the mark of the Beast; it is a word abused: For they
call (as I proved before) the height of wickedness, godliness; and
that is the mark. For, saith the Author of the Grand Politick
Informer, Upon the seventh of July, 1653. it was resolved, That no
person should be employed, or admitted to public service, but such
as this Representative should be first satisfied of their real
godliness; saith he, This word godliness, will shortly become the
mark of the Beast.

Indeed there is a god of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. which many expound
to be the Devil; and there are those, who account that godliness,
which is most contrary thereunto; 1 Tim. 6. 5, and such as put light
for darkness, and darkness for light; Isa. 5. 20. Now if we enquire
who is a godly person after their account? It will appear to be such
an one, as hath broken his faith to God and man; or one, that is a
robber, murderer, false swearer; or hath been, or is an approver of
all the bloody Actions of the late Beast Parliament; So that this
sort of people are their godly persons; and this pretended
godliness, is the mark of the Beast, as the Apostle describeth them
sufficiently, 1 Tim. 6. 3,4,5; 2 Tim. 3. 4,5; and bids every true
believer withdraw himself, and turn away from such, as from  the
most dangerous people to converse withal. Whereby it is evident,
that this pretended godliness is the mark of the Beast; which they
that will be gainers in this Weal Public of England, must needs
have; else they shall not be preferred, trade, or prosper in these
times; Rev. 13. 16,17.

And now having showed you what the mark of the Beast is, viz. a
pretended godliness; next in order I shall (through God's
assistance) show you, what the Name of the Beast is, and the number
of his Name, Rev. 13. 16,17.

He that will have any preferment from these people, or gain by them,
must acknowledge them to be the States of England, or the
Commonwealth of England, or the Weal public of England; for if he
call this the Kingdom of England, and stick to that ancient name; he
shall be cast off, as one that hath not their stamp, and have
nothing to do in matter of office or way of profit from them, Rev.
13. 16,17. And I find, that it cannot bear the name of the
Commonwealth of England, since the election of a Parliament was
taken away from the commonalty, or generality of the people; and
that a public Party excludes all the rest, and sets up a Parliament:
But I find its proper name to be, the Weal public of England; For
the word Commonwealth is excluded long ago from a Weal Being; so
that none but those in public places do prosper; Therefore (I say)
it is not the Commonweal, but the Weal public of England. And I find
the number of this name [The VVeaL pVbLIke of EngLanD] to be 666.
for the numeral letters of it, are these; DLL. 600, LVV. 60, VI. 6,
so that in all, they come to 666.

There is also another name no less proper both to the late beast
Parliament, and to this Representative, which is its image; in
regard the people did and do so much idolize them, by their
petitions to them, and their esteem of them otherwise more than
ordinary; Rev. 14. 11, so that they way be called England's idols;
which word England's idols, in the ancient Welsh, or British
language, is, Delwau Lloiger; and I find the number of this name,
Delwau Lloiger, to be 666. for the numeral letters of it also, are
these; DLL 600, LVV. 60, VI. 6, so that in all, they come likewise
to 666. Now the words of the Scripture that declares the number of
the Beast, are these; Rev 13. 18: Here is wisdom, let him that hath
understanding, count the number of the Beast, (for it is the number
of a man,) and his number is six hundred sixty and six.

Now it remaineth that I should speak something of this Man; for it
is the number of a man, saith the Text. This Title [a Man] is a note
of eminency; which signifies a man of God; 1 Sam. 2. 27; 1 Chron.
13. 1, or, a man of a thousand, Eccles. 7. 28, so that from Rev. 13.
18 may be observed, that the man expressed by these words, for it is
a man; is such a man, as carrieth a divine majesty with him. So that
I must needs infer from those words, that the apostle John means
here a justified man, a man opposite to the Beast, though in the
number of their names they partly agree. And know, that in the new
Testament, none is called The man of God, but only a bishop; 2 Tim.
3. 15,16,17. And we may gather also from the same Scripture, and the
scope of the apostle Paul's words to Timothy, when this bishop, and
man of God is to appear; which will  be in the last days; 2 Tim. 3.
1,2,3,4; 5. 17, when men break forth into rebellion against God and
his Church; and certain it is, that the late bishop of Canterbury
was the same man: for the number of his name, as divers affirm, that
in all businesses which he subscribed, he wrote only thus, Will.
Laud. And I find the number of this name, VVILL LaVD, to be 666, for
the numeral letters are these, and they be the very same that ye
have in the other names before, DLL 600, LVV 60. VI 6, so that in
all they come to 666.

But if we take notice of the name of this man of God, as it is at
large; we shall find another mystery therein. For I find the number
of this name, VVILLIaM LaVD, to be 1667. And the numeral letters are
these, M 1000, DLL 600, LVV 60, VII 7, so that in all they come to
1667. and that is the year of rest; for before it be Anno Dom. 1667,
most of the world, yea, and Rome itself will acknowledge their
error; see the truth, and submit to William Laud's rule in form of
worship, doctrine, and discipline, as the only way to salvation, the
most decent and agreeable to God's word, being without doubt the
true way whereby to worship God, long before preordained of God to
abide, for the direction of men for ever and ever; which Rule was
given in King Edw. 6, his days, preserved and refined in Queen
Elizabeth and King James their days, sealed and perfected, to the
glory of Jesus Christ, with the blood of his noble martyrs, chiefly
of King CHARLES, and bishop William Laud; who as the Scripture
saith, Heb. 11. 35. would not accept of deliverance, when he was
offered by the Parliament to go into New England with  M. Peters;
but he chose rather to die, that he might obtain a better
resurrection.

Therefore to conclude, I say, that the Book of Common Prayer, as it
was established in the Church of England, is the only true way
whereby to worship God; as I have sufficiently proved by the
Scripture, in my Book called A Voice from Heaven; and in my other
Book, called An Echo to that Voice from Heaven; written in the years
1651 and 1652.

And as for your vain jangling, God hath not any delight in it, 1
Tim. 1. 6; 2 Tim. Titus 3. 9. for the coming near unto God with the
mouth, and the worshipping of God according to the Commandments of
private men, is a vain thing; Matth. 15. 5,6,7,8,9, that is, when
they command that everyone may do in the worship of God, what
seemeth right in his own eyes, Judg. 17. 5,6, and 21,25, as Israel
did when they had no King; But the event of such a State, was
destructive to them; as you may read and see, Judg. 19 and 30 and
21. But for the King's Command, it is said Eccles. 1. 2, I charge
thee to keep the King's commandment, and that in regard of the Oath
of God; thou hast sworn to obey him. Again, it's said, Prov. 16. 10.
A divine sentence is in the lips of the King, his mouth erreth not
in judgement. Thus a true Christian King is endued with an
infallible judgement, and so is the sentences of K. CHARLES his
mouth; to this King the apostle commands obedience in all things, 1 
Pet. 2, 13,14. Submit yourselves to every Ordinance of man, for the
Lord's sake, whether it be to the King, as supreme; or unto
Governors, as them that are sent by him: For the Apostle foresaw by
the Scripture, Zach. 14. 2, Zeph. 3. 9, That the Lord would hold
forth at last, a King whose laws in all things should be right: of
this you have more at large in my fore-mentioned books; for there is
no right nor peace to be had; but where there is a King of
righteousnes, and a King of Peace; That is, when the King Comes in
by the right way, being the right Heir.

And though the title King be given by the Scripture sometimes to
Usurpers, set up by the people's power, and by money; which is but a
molten Calf; God owns them not; but calls them, their idols, for
saith he, Hos. 8. 4,5,6: They have set up Kings, but not by me; they
have made princes, and I knew it not; of their silver, and their
gold have they made them idols; that they may be cut off; Thy calf O
Samaria, &c. And again saith he; Ezek. 43. 9: Let them put away
their whoredoms and the carcasses of their Kings far from me; and of
such Kings, he speaks Rev. 17. 12,13,14,15,16,17, as you shall find
it made clear at large in the postscript of my book, called, A Voice
from Heaven. And of such Kings the Lord saith, that they had set
their thresholds, by his thresholds; & their post, by his post;
Ezek. 43, 8; for the Lord had a post by which his Kings of the seed
of David stood; 2 Kings 11. 14, Ezek. 46. 2, according to God's
command; & it seems the usurping Idolatrous kings, set up by the
people, presumed to come there, as our great Ones presume now, to
bury their friends in the Royal sepulchres at Westminster; where
none but the King's Family was wont to be buried; yet certainly
their carcasses shall be removed, as the Lord hath spoken, Ezek. 43,
7, 8, 9.

But the true King that cometh to judge the wicked ones, is called
the glory of the God of Israel, that is, the glory of Jesus Christ;
for he is the God of Israel; and if we compare Scripture  with
Scripture, we shall find it so; for you shall find, Ezek. 43, 1,2,
that the King coming from the East with his train and army, is
called, the glory of the God of Israel; and v. 3, he saith it was
like the glory that he saw when he came to destroy the city; That
is, like Nebuchadnezzar's coming in the head of his Army to destroy
Jerusalem; and v. 5. he saith, that the glory of the Lord filled the
house, v. 6. he tells us, that this glory spake to him, and it a
man, & saith he, the man stood by me, and he said unto me, &c. v. 7,
8. he tells you what this glorious king said; to make it yet more
clear, observe v. 4. that this glory came into the house at the east
gate. And compare it with Ezek. 44, 1,2,3, and you shall find, that
the East gate must be shut, & that none must come in or out by that
gate, but the King.

Here M. Aspinwall may see, that the true Kings, set up of God; may
come to the post, and the threshold of that gate, as their own
place; Ezek. 46, 2; 2 Chron. 23. 13, and that the usurping Kings,
set up by the people, and called (their Kings) must be put away,
Ezek 43, 9. And though Saul, who indeed was the Lord's anointed, 1
Sam. 24 6; 1 Sam. 8 4; 1 Sam. 12. 13; 1 Sam. 13, 13,14; yet for that
the first moving cause for him, was from the people; his heart was
not real to God. Therefore Saul relying so much upon them, to ease
the people disobeyed the command of God, and lost the kingdom, 1
Sam. 15.

(And so, M.) Aspinwall, concerning your throwing away of our laws,
therein you talk idly; for do you think that your generation (who
are of no such wisdom and learning as our former Parliaments were)
can make better laws in one year, than our laws be, which were in
making and (maintaining) above five hundred years? and had not our
former Parliaments the word of God for their direction therein, as
well as you or any nowadays? and were they not more sober and
prudent in the understanding of those laws? I pray entertain no such
foolish conceit. And you tell us likewise of the Statutes of Omri,
Micah 6. 16, that is, even such things as you set up; for if you
observe Jeroboam, Omri and Ahab, though they had many sorts of
worship, yet anyone abject of the people, served to be a Priest, or
a Teacher of them, 1 Kings 12, 31; 2 Chron. 12, 8,9; 1 Kings, 16.
25,26. And must the statutes of David be cast away, because the
statutes of Omri be nought? must the statutes of K. Hen. 8, K. Edw.
6, and Q Eliz. which are against popery, be cast away, because other
King's statutes are idolatrous, and for popery?

And further, you tell us an untruth; That Jehoiada the Priest having
the supreme authority in his hand, took men recommended to him by
some others, whom you call the Church; to put them in civil
authority. No Sir; Jehoiada had not (as you affirm) the supreme
Authority then; for it is evident, Athaliah did reign that six years
while he was guardian to the King's Son, 2 Kings 11. 3. But in the
seventh year (he being the Priest of God) God stirred up the Spirit
of Jehoiada, to do right to the King, Princes and Levites; so that
he sent to bring the Princes, who by right were rulers over
hundreds; and took an oath of them to be true to the King, and
presented him before them; and they by his command gathered the
faithful Levites to come to their charge; neither took he any man's
advice in the business, nor was any upon the attest of others
received by him, and put into civil authority, as you falsely
assert; for he had the Spirit of God to direct him (as our . . . .
(illegible) everyone to his charge and place; and directed them in
what they should do, as from the mouth of God; and all of them did
so obey Jehoiada, that the work was perfected, even the King set on
his Throne, as you may see, 2 Kings 11; 2 Chron. 23.

But you seem (by such false grounds) to set up the tenet of the
Romish Church, which is, if a man by birth be heir to a Kingdom, and
ought there to rule, yet if the Church of Rome do not approve of
him; they will deprive him, if they can; and give his right by their
attest unto another, whereby to enjoy that civil power; so that
their Church do unjustly in this thing.

Thus, there will be brave stir, when your divided churches, which
are part of iron, part of clay, even the toes of the image, Dan. 2.
33,34,42, go about to set up men by their attest to govern, in Civil
Authority. Then Jack Straw is set up by one congregation, and Hob.
Carter, by another, to throw him down; so that there shall be an
endless war among them, until the stone cut out of the mountain
without attest of hands to justify it, smite the image upon the
feet, and break it to shivers; Dan. 2. 34,35,45; for the King needs
not the attest of men, because all know him to be the ruler by
right.

Another untruth you would force upon us, on that text in Gen. 49.
10, which saith; The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a Law-
giver from between his feet, until Shilo come; from Judah many Kings
have sprung, who gave good laws & kept the sceptre; what say you of
David and Solomon's writings, are there therein no laws given out by
them? sure they had power from God to do it, and Jesus Christ
himself alloweth of their laws; insomuch that he sometimes defends
himself thereby against his enemies; and did not Jesus himself come
of Judah, who removeth that earthly sceptre from Judah, according to
the word, and gives it to Shiloh? which Shiloh we must understand to
be another tribe, come from Japheth's loins, and not from Shem, Gen.
9. 26,27, yet you say, the kings of Judah gave no laws, nor could
any give laws, till Jesus came. How contrary to the truth, even to
Christ's own words, this your assertion is, is manifest by the
Scripture. Christ would not be troubled with such outward things;
for when the people would have enforced him to be their King, he
absolutely refused it; John 6. 15, neither would he be so much as a
judge in a civil cause, Luke 12. 13,14, nor would he take, but
rather give tribute, Matth. 22. 17 to 22, & 17. 24 to 28. Therefore
your assertion is utterly false, and you force the text to a quite
contrary sense, as you do in all the rest of your pamphlet wrest
other Scriptures.

Now for the Law of Christ, it is altogether a spiritual Law, which
serveth not for any particular country, but for all in general, as a
rule whereby to frame laws. Therefore saith Christ, By me kings
reign, and Princes decree justice; by me Princes rule, and nobles,
even all the judges of the earth; Prov. 8. 15,16, that is, what laws
they make according to his word, are made by him. For this cause the
Apostle Peter saith, 1 Pet. 2. 13, Submit yourselves to every
ordinance of man, for the Lords sake; first, to the king as supreme;
then, to them that are sent by him. And why? because whatever is
done by the king, and his nobles, or judges, is done by the Lord
Jesus; for they being his ministers, Rom. 13. 4,5,6, are directed by 
him; and the king's heart is in the hand of the Lord, Prov. 21. 1,
therefore his mouth cannot err in judgment, Prov. 16. 10. Now to
leave God's rule, and set up silly mean fellows to be judges, & they
to search for precepts, that are (as you say) scattered up and down
the Scripture whereby to rule all countries, in all causes, and then
be subject to their wresting those Scriptures what way they please,
would be a brave way of judging the people, who having no known laws
whereby to walk, must be always waiting what Scripture the judge
will make use of to please his fancy, either to make them offenders,
or to favour them; and if you say, the judge must allow a dispute,
then may the greatest offender beat him with his own weapon, and
escape; no, Christ hath not promised to rule by such vile persons,
but by men of eminency, viz. by kings, princes, nobles, & judges,
who decree justly Prov. 8. 15,16, and if that land be blessed, whose
king is the son of nobles, Eccl. 10. 17, then that land is cursed,
whose rulers are sons of clowns, that have no nobility in them.
Therefore to conclude, I beseech you to consider seriously what you
do, and pull not down your house, before you have ability, skill,
opportunity, & time to erect another; lest you become in a worse
condition than the wild beast of the field; all the statute laws,
that were in force in the days of K. CHARLES, were right. But for
the evil Customs that crept into Courts, & places of judicatory,
through the corruption of men in authority, which the Law never
intended, I am against, as much as you can be. And now M. Aspinwall
you see wherein we differ, and that it is, because you did not
search the Scriptures so exactly, as to find out the truth of them;
wherein therefore you err concerning K. CHARLES, for I am better
opinionated of you; than to think you did it wilfully, because the
times favour such things; or that you are so hardened, but that you
may be yet converted; which is the humble desire of your friend, and
servant in Christ Jesus,
ARISE EVANS.
POSTSCRIPT.

You may please to see the folly and falseness of this Aspinwall, in
his Pamphlet; who first, would needs persuade us, That the late K.
CHARLES was a fierce arrogant Tyrant; whereas indeed, the World
knows, there was not a more mild and gracious King upon Earth, to
his Subjects, than he was.

2. He would blind our eyes, and persuade us, that those people are
saints, and must govern the world, who when they had gotten from K.
CHARLES more than ever was granted by any K. of England to the
subject; rendered him evil for good, most abominably rose against
him, & deprived him of life and all. Surely there is no man, having
the spirit of Jesus Christ in him, dare say, such doings are the
deeds of Saints; or they are Saints, that to deceive, will forswear
themselves, and keep no faith toward God or man.

3. He would have us think Jesus Christ to be the Head of such
perfidious people; and that He will put the power of (His) Kingdom,
or fifth Monarchy, into such went(?) hands; as if he intended that
when they get the power of the Kingdom of Jesus into their hands,
they may serve him as they did K. CHARLES, and deprive him of all
his right on earth; But they cannot (deceive Him) who is the
searcher of the heart, as they deceived K. CHARLES, Jer. 17. 10, for
saith he: I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give
to every man according to his ways, & according to the fruit of his
doings; so that we must rather believe that Jesus will judge them
for their wicked deeds against him, & his Anointed, then put the
power of his Kingdom into the hands of such a perfidious generation;
and that he will exalt CHARLES (that was faithful to the death for
him) to the throne, Re. 2. 10 & 3. 21, that CHARLES and his seed for
ever, should have the pre-eminence ever all the earth.

4. He would persuade us to cast away our Law, made and composed by
holy men, according to the word of God; which by all men's
judgement, hath brought England to such a civility, that no Country
can be compared to it; and seek a new Law, he saying, it is
scattered up and down the Scripture. Truly the Scripture is a sweet
garden for that purpose, and serves for all the world; but since our
predecessors sought in this garden, and gathered the sweetest
flowers thereof, and composed them together into so sweet a posy,
that we, and all the world (as many of them as came among us) have
found the experience thereof, and bear witness, that there is not
the like on earth; For us to cast this Law away, and look for a new
Law from this generations composing, were, as if a man should leave
his sheep, and go shear the hogs; so he should find a great cry, but
little wool; as we found from our long sitting Parliament, great
votes, but little good laws: or as if a man have a great sack of
wool, and cast it away, and then go a-woolgathering among briars and
thorns, it could not but be counted a great folly; so for us to cast
away our laws, and be persuaded by such silly fellows as Aspinwall,
is a greater folly.

5. I beseech you also to consider this shallow brain'd fellow; a
child that can but tell 20, will tell you that ten, and one, is 11;
yet Aspinwall cannot make more of the ten horns, and a little horn,
(which ten and 1 must needs be counted 11) but ten; which
interpretation of the horns, he makes the principal matter in his
pamphlet, both in the first and last page thereof; and judge you
whether a man that is not able to tell 20, but misseth 1 in 11, is
fit to declare such high things to the world, and to presage of
times Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in
all things. 2 Tim. 2. 7.
ARISE EVANS.
FINIS.



The Resurrection of the Witnesses:
Mary Cary

Source:http://quod.lib.umich.edu/e/eebo/A35274.0001.001/1:8?rgn=div1
;view=toc

Title page

THE RESURRECTION OF
The Witnesses;
AND
ENGLAND'S Fall
from (the mystical Babylon) ROME.
Clearly demonstrated to be accomplished.
Whereby Great encouragement is administered to all Saints, but
especially to the Saints in England.
In the handling of a part of the eleventh chapter of the REVELATION.
By M. Cary,
a Minister or Servant of Jesus Christ, and of all his Saints.

PSAL. 126. 1, 2, 3: When the LORD turned again the captivity of
Sion: we were like them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with singing, then said they among the
heathen: The LORD hath done great things for them. The LORD hath
done great things for us; whereof we are glad.

London,
Printed by D. M. for Giles Calvert at the black-spread-Eagle
at the west end of Paul's, 1648.
To the Honoured FRANCIS RO?SE AND Thomas Boon Esquires, Members of
the Honourable House of COMMONS in PARLIAMENT.

Honoured Sirs,

IT being the great design of God the Father to set up his Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, as his King upon the holy hill of Sion, and
(though the Heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things,
saying, Come let us break their bonds in sunder, and cast away their
cords from us) to give him the heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. I say, this being
God's design, he hath for the effecting of it, given all power and
authority in heaven and in earth into his hand, and accordingly
Jesus Christ hath undertaken to execute all God's decrees, which are
mentioned in the prophecy of the Book of the Revelation, where we
find that God had decreed, that for an appointed term of time, his
Church, his Temple, his Saints should be in an afflicted,
persecuted, depressed, low condition, and that the Beast, and the
Babylonian enemies of his Church should have power to grow great, 
and to flourish, and to make war against the Saints, and to
blaspheme God, and his name, and his Saints, for an appointed time
also, and that after that time was expired, that then Jesus Christ
should improve that power that was for that end given to him, in
giving a glorious deliverance to his Church, and ruining totally the
Beast, great Babylon, and all his enemies, That so the kingdom of
this world may become his kingdoms, and that in such a manner, as
they were not before, even so as all that are in authority, that
will not cast their Crowns at his feet, shall be broken in pieces,
for he the Lord alone must be exalted in that day; there must be one
Lord, and his name one in all the earth. Now as it most clearly
appears to me from the divine oracles of the Scripture, having
compared the works of God, and his Word together, I have in the
ensuing discourse held it forth (for the encouragement of all that
wait for the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ for the overthrowing
of his enemies, and the deliverance of his people from their
persecutions) that the time is already come, wherein the appointed
time of the prevailing power of the Beast over the Saints, is come
to a period; and accordingly Jesus Christ hath begun to bring down
the power of the Beast, and to lift up his Saints out of that low,
afflicted, persecuted condition in which they have been, and that in
order to the perfecting of these things England is already fallen
from the mystical Babylon, Rome.

Now, Honoured Sir, you having been glorious stars, shining with a
great deal of splendour in your country both in the publicness of
your spirits, and the holiness of your conversations, wherein you
have been eminent Examples, and special encouragements unto others,
and knowing that it is the desire of your souls to see the Lord
Jesus alone advanced, who-ever be thrown down. I have presumed to
present this little treatise unto you, not doubting of your
ingenuous and favourable acceptance of it. But though I publish it
under your name and favour, yet do I not thereby desire you to
patronize anything in it (if there should be anything) that is not
truth, and for the truth that is in it, I need desire no patron; for
great is the truth, and it will prevail. Yet notwithstanding the
sons of truth, as far as the truth appears to them in truth will own
it, and contend for it, and doubtless so will you. I am
Sirs,
A petitioner to heaven for Sion's, this kingdom's and your
prosperity,
M. C.?
TO THE READER.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, in the eighteenth chapter of Luke, from the
first to the eighth verse, from the example of the importunate
widow, stirring up his disciples to importunate prayer, he there
assures them, That God will surely hear the prayers of his own elect
that cry to him day and night, and avenge them of their adversaries;
and this he will do for them, though he make them tarry long. And
hereby Saints may be assured, That God will hear their frequent
importunate prayers, which night and day they have put up against
the man of sin, the Beast, and their Babylonian enemies, who have
trodden the Saints under feet, and made war against them, and
overcome them, and dealt cruelly with them above this twelve hundred 
years: and that he will at last avenge them on these their enemies.
But says our Saviour at the eighth verse, Nevertheless, when the Son
of man cometh, shall he find faith on earth? Whereby he implies,
That when he cometh, his people shall scarce have faith to believe
that he will thus avenge them on their enemies. But when he shall
come to do it, it will be beyond their faith. And even thus is it
with Saints now, they have scarce faith to believe, that the Lord
Jesus hath now begun, and is going on to avenge his own elect on
their adversaries, the mystical Babylonians. Now for the
strengthening of the faith of Saints concerning this thing, I do
present them with this ensuing discourse, wherein as the Lord hath
discovered it to me (to the strengthening of my faith concerning the
prosperity of Sion henceforward, and giving me great joy and
pleasure therein.) I have made it to appear from the Scriptures,
That the Lord hath already lifted up his Saints from under the
vassalage of their enemies, and hath begun to put the cup of
trembling, into the hands of them that afflicted them. Which I
desire that all that love, and honour the Lord Jesus may diligently
observe.

For the most high God, of whom, and through whom, and to whom are
all things, and for whose pleasure they are, and were created, both
whose wisdom and knowledge are unfathomable; tells his people of old
by the Prophet Isaiah, as we have it in the forty eighth chapter of
his prophecy, at the third and the fifth verses, That he declared
from the beginning the things he would bring to pass, and that he
showed it them before it came to pass: and he gives the reason why
he did so, in the fourth and fifth verses, Because (said he) I knew
that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow
brass: And, least thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and
my graven image, and my molten image hath commanded them. And
therefore the Prophet Isaiah in the forty eighth chapter, and
fourteenth verse, he makes a challenge to the nations, and to the
people, to assemble themselves, and to show which among them hath
declared those things. But there is none to be found among the sons
of men that can declare anything: for he maketh the diviners mad,
&c. And Isaiah the forty third, and the thirteenth, he saith, Before
the day was, I am he, and there is none that can deliver out of mine
hands: I will work, and who shall let it. And Isaiah the forty six
chapter, and the ninth and tenth verses, I am God, and there is none
like me, Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient
times, the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall
stand, and I will do all my pleasure. And yet notwithstanding all
this, that people of Israel, who had seen and known, (or might have)
all the glorious works of the most high, and observed how he
declared things before they came to pass, and had thereby a greater
advantage then the heathen, of being convinced of his eternal Power
and God-head: Yet were they so vile, as to question it, having in
them an enmity to the true God, and chose rather to worship Idols,
and deny the Eternal God: As appears in the forty sixth chapter of
Isaiah, and therefore at the eighth and ninth verses, he says,
Remember this, and show yourselves men, and bring it again to mind,
O ye transgressors. Remember the former things of old, for I am GOD,
and there is none else, I am GOD, and there is none like me,
Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the
things that are not yet done; saying, My counsel shall stand, and I
will do all my pleasure. Remember; as if he had said, and show
yourselves men, show yourselves to be rational creatures, and be not
as the horse and mule that hath no understanding; but seeing I have
declared from ancient times, the things I would do long before they
came to pass: saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure: And be ye thereby convinced, that I am GOD, and there is
none like me. But as then, so now, are there many that are become
atheists, denying the true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, whom he hath sent,
whose neck are an iron sinew, and their brow brass, who had they not
lost the principles of reason, might by the things of the creation,
be convinced of His eternal power and God-head, Romans the first
chapter, and the twentieth verse. As also by observing how he
declared, what it was his will to bring to pass long ago, and how he
hath brought to pass what he so declared. But they have lost even
the principles of reason which they once had, by which they might
have then been convinced hereof; whereby they are left without
excuse, as the Apostle says, Romans the first and the twentieth. But
they having lost reason, are now become vain in their imaginations,
and their foolish heart is darkened; and though they profess
themselves to be wise, and are puffed up with self-conceits of
wisdom, in their frothy and blasphemous discourses: yet they are
become fools, changing the truth of GOD into a lie. And the Apostle
gives the reason why GOD hath thus given them over, in the first
chapter to the Romans the one and twentieth, and the eight and
twentieth verses, Because they did not like to retain GOD in their
knowledge, and because that when they knew GOD, they glorified him
not as GOD. The like reason he giveth, why them that perish are
deceived by the man of sin, as in the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians the second chapter, and the tenth verse, Because they
received not the love of the truth.

But now, Though atheists, and Papists, deny the Eternal GOD, and
observe not his wonderful works, how he declares things long before
they come to pass: saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all
my pleasure; and accordingly brings it to pass, because their
foolish heart is darkened: yet all his Saints do, and will observe
this: For saith the Psalmist, in the hundred and eleventh Psalm, and
the second and third verses, The works of the LORD are great, sought
out of all them that have pleasure therein. His work is honourable,
and glorious, and his righteousness endureth for ever: He hath made
his wonderful works to be remembered, &c. The LORD hath made his
wonderful works to be remembered among his Saints, though others
remember them not, yet his Saints have pleasure in them, and
therefore search them out, and they have a promise made to them,
That in the observing the wonderful things of the LORD, they shall
understand his loving kindness, it runs thus, Who so is wise, and
will observe these things, even they shall understand the loving
kindness of the LORD, as Psalm the hundred and third and the forty
third verse. Now it being so, let Saints diligently observe the
ensuing discourse, wherein it doth appear, That GOD hath brought to
pass the things he did fifteen hundred years ago predeclare; which
they observing it may tend much to the strengthening of their faith
in this, That JESUS CHRIST hath begun, and is going on to avenge
them on their enemies. For in the ensuing discourse it will appear,
That as JESUS CHRIST did long since reveal to John, how that after
the mystical Babylonians had persecuted his Saints a long time, he
would raise up his Saints out of their persecuted condition, and
bring down those their Babylonian enemies: So he hath already begun
to do this thing, even to raise up his Saints, and to bring down
their enemies, and that punctually, according to what he did reveal 
to John.

Now I know there hath been observed by many Saints, many things that
GOD revealed to John, which he hath brought to pass. Many of which
observations are already in print: but that which I chiefly aim at
in this discourse, is that which is not yet printed by any other,
and whether any other have yet observed it, I know not; but they are
passages so eminently worthy to be observed, in this present time,
because they give the Saints such ground of encouragement and
consolation, in respect of the happy success that shall be of the
very present affairs of this kingdom (how knotty and difficult so
ever for the present, or for sometime, yet they may appear to be) as
that in love to all Saints I could not but communicate them to them
in this way.

But there are two things, which it may be may cause some to retain
some unbelieving and doubtful thoughts concerning the happy success
of present things, although it be made clear in the following
discourse, That the time of Saints being clothed in sackcloth is
expired.

First, It may be some cannot receive it, because they look for
farther judgements to come upon this kingdom, (wherein outwardly the
Saints may suffer also) because of the great provoking sins of this
kingdom, as drunkenness, and adulteries, and oaths, and their
entering into so many covenants concerning religious things, for
which they have no sufficient warrant, now in the times of the
Gospel, and the oppressions of the poor, and meaner sort of people,
and the great neglect of doing justice generally, &c. Now to these I
say, That it is true, that if God should deal with this nation,
according to its demerits; then indeed no other could be expected,
but an utter desolation of it, that it might either swim in blood,
or burn with fire until it were consumed. But

First, I desire you to consider, That God hath a very great number
of his dear Saints in this kingdom, in whom he delights, and for
whose sake he may, and I had almost said, will spare this kingdom,
and spare the cities and towns, and counties where they are for if
God would have spared Sodom for ten righteous persons, we have a
great ground of hope, that he will spare London, yea all England
from a general devastation and desolation, having thousands of
righteous persons in London, and in all England a very great number.
And how many plots of wicked men, wherein they endeavoured the ruin
of this kingdom, hath God blasted? Having such a great number of his
precious jewels in it.

And secondly, What though here be in this kingdom, many that are
great enemies to Jesus Christ, yet God can by his Covenant of Grace,
bring many of them in to the obedience of Christ, and make them of
persecutors to become eminent Saints, and call those his people that
were not his people: And why should we doubt whether he would do so,
since these are the times wherein he hath promised to do so, and
hath already begun to do it? But

Thirdly, If it be so, that some are hardened to destruction, and
they are never quiet, but still are plotting against the just, to
ruin them: yet know they shall not prevail over the Saints, but in
opposing them shall ruin themselves, Zech. 12. 3. as appears in the
following discourse.

Secondly, Doubtful thoughts may be in others, that yet the Saints
may be overcome, because they see they have so many enemies abroad,
and at home, and they are speaking great words, and are still
plotting against them. To such, I say, Let them suppose that there
were none that did dare to make any opposition at all in this
kingdom, but that all things went smoothly on, in the hands of those
that are carrying it on: and if they could then believe, that indeed
God would not have his Saints in this kingdom to be trodden under
foot by the Beast any more. Then let them have the same faith to
believe it now, as knowing it is as easy with God, to carry on this
work over the mountains as over the plains, and he will make the
great mountain to become a plain before Zerubbabel, before his
people, Zech. 4. 7. He can command those that are preparing war
against them to sit still, and proceed no farther, and put a fear
upon them; or if they do go on, yet he can make it to come to
nothing, and to be the most effectual way to lay them lower, and to
raise his people higher.

Now if any particular man would be as sure of safety, as all the
witnesses in general are; then if he be a man in any public
employment, let him according to his place oppose the Beast, and act
for the welfare of all that wish well to Sion, and do justice unto
all, from the highest unto the lowest, and be more forward to act
for the meanest, then for the highest. Let him suppose the condition
of the meanest man that seeks to him for just things to be his own
condition, and act for him, as he would be dealt with himself were
he in that condition: for thus relieving of the poor and distressed
ones, is most acceptable to the Lord of Sabbath, and in so doing, I
am confident it will go well with him, however it go with others.

Again, If he be a private man; let him also in his place, wish well
to Sion, and oppose the Beast; so shall he also prosper in the
prosperity of Sion.

And now Reader, whoever thou art, if thou dost receive any benefit
of any kind, by reading the ensuing discourse, whether of
encouragement, consolation, information, or quickening, I beseech
thee to return all the glory of it to the most High, to whom alone
it is due, who for that end made use of so weak an instrument: in
whom if thou be a friend to the Lord Jesus Christ, I am
Thy friend to serve thee
M. Cary.
Revel. chap. 11. from Verse. 1. to 14.


1. And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel
stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar,
and them that worship therein.

2. But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure
it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles: and the holy city shall
they tread under foot forty and two months.

3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall
prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in
sackcloth.

4. These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing
before the God of the earth.

5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their
mouth, and devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them,
he must in this manner be killed.

6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy: and have power over waters to turn them to blood,
and to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.

7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that
ascendeth out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them, and
shall overcome them, and kill them.

8. And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city,
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was
crucified.

9. And they of the people and kindreds and tongues and nations shall
see their dead bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer
their dead bodies to be put in graves.

10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and
make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two
prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth.

11. And after three days and an half the spirit of life from God
entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear
fell upon them which saw them.

12. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, Come
up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; and their
enemies beheld them.

13. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the tenth
part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain of men seven
thousand: and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God
of heaven.

14. The second woe is past; and, behold, the third woe cometh
quickly.

The Preamble.

From these verses, I desire as the Lord shall enable me, to declare
that which God hath discovered to me: For I hope that it may be as
advantageous to others, as it hath been to my own soul.

But though the publication of what appears to me in these verses, be
that which I chiefly aim at; yet being pressed in spirit, to give
forth some meditations from the Preamble of this Book; which
Preamble is contained in the three first verses of the first chapter
of this book of the Revelation: I cannot but here insert it, as a
Preamble to the following discourse also; though it may be it may
not seem in the eyes of some so pertinent.

The three verses are as follows:

1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show
unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass; and he
sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John.

2. Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus
Christ, and of all things that he saw.

3. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein, for the
time is at hand.

In these verses is contained these five particulars:

First, The subject matter of this book.
	Secondly, The reason of the divulgation of this book.
	Thirdly, The instruments of the divulgation of this book.
	Fourthly, The fruitfulness of those instruments in the
divulging this book.
	Fifthly, The pronunciation of a blessing upon the persons that
read or hear the words of this book.

The first particular contained in these verses, is the subject
matter of this book; and that it expressed in these words, The
Revelation of things that must shortly come to pass, The word of
God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ. From whence this is the
Observation.

Observ. 1. That the whole book of the Revelation, is a Revelation,
declaration or manifestation of the mind of God, about the things
which were to come to pass, shortly after the revealing of it: which
Revelation is the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ.

This point being so evident, and clear in the text, I shall not
produce any further proofs of it, because I intend brevity, but
immediately proceed to the deductions which flow from it, which are
these.

If this book be a revelation or declaration of the mind of God about
the things, which were shortly to come to pass: then it is our duty
to observe how God hath brought to pass, the things which he did
pre-declare he would bring to pass; that so we may glorify God in
his omnisciency in fore seeing, and fore-knowledge of all things,
and in his omnipotency, in bringing the things to pass which he did
foreappoint to bring to pass: that he can do all things, and nothing
can hinder him from bringing all things to pass, according to the
counsel of his own will. When Saints do most diligently observe the
works which God brings to pass, according to what he hath pre-
declared in his word; then do they most answer the end, for which
God did before reveal these things, which was that he might be
admired and magnified by his people, in bringing all things to pass
according to his word, showing that he is God alone: for none else
can declare things to come, as the eternal God doth. But how can
Saints have experience of this, but by comparing his Word and works
together? Therefore it is the duty of Saints frequently so to do. So
much of the first.

Secondly, Is this book of the Revelation, the word of God, and the
testimony of Jesus Christ? then we are hereby informed, That it is
warrantable for us to call that which is a revelation of the mind of
God, the word of God. We see John calls it so, and why may not we? I
the rather speak of this: because some have affirmed, That nothing
may be called the Word of God, but Jesus Christ; because it is a
title the Scripture gives to him, as John 1. 1. In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. And
verse. 14. The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten Son of God, full
of grace and truth. And 1 Joh. 5. 7. For there are three that bare
record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and
these three are one. And Revel. 19. 13. And he was clothed with a
vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called, The word of God;
and the armies that were in heaven followed him upon white horses,
&c. But let these know, that though in these places that title, The
word of God, is given to Jesus Christ, he being the essential word
of God: which is the reason why this title is given to him. Yet that
the Spirit of God, gives this title also to the Scripture, to the
written word, the word which is the Revelation of the mind of God,
as appears here, and in other places, as Jer. 2. 1. Moreover, the
word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Go and cry in the ears, &c.
And verse. 4. Hear ye the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and
all the families of the house of Israel. And Jer. 7. 2. Stand in the
gates of the Lord's house, and proclaim there this word, saying,
Hear the word of the Lord all ye of Judah, that enter in at these
gates to worship the Lord. Thus saith the Lord of host, the God of
Israel: amend your ways, &c. And Jer. 14. 1. The word of the Lord
that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth, &c. And Jer. 30. 1, 2.
The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying, Thus speaketh
the Lord God of Israel, saying, Write all the words that I have
spoken unto thee in a book. And several like passages to these we
have, as in Ezekiel 6. 1. and 7. 1. and 12. 1. and 16. 1. and Hos.
1. 1. and 4. 1. And the like we have also in Joel, Jonah, Micah,
Zechary, and the rest of the Prophets: where it is clear, That that
which was the Revelation, or manifestation of the mind of God,
concerning the ways in which he would have his people to walk, or
the things which he was about to do, whether of bringing a dearth
upon a people, or any other judgement; or the doing of them good:
This title is given to it; The word of God. So that it is clear that
this title may be given to the written Word, the Scripture, both by
all the fore-cited places (besides many others that might have been
cited to the same effect) and also in the text, where this book of
the Revelation, is called the word of God. But I still acknowledge,
That Jesus Christ is more eminently the word of God, he being the
original of it: for as God doth all things else by Jesus Christ, so
he gives out his Word by him, and Jesus Christ gives testimony to
it: which is the next instruction arising from the point, and comes
now to be spoken of.

Thirdly, Is it so, that this Book of the Revelation is the Word of
God, and the testimony of Jesus Christ? Then this may inform us,
that as this: so all the Scriptures, do as truly come from Jesus
Christ, as from God the Father: for he gives testimony to what the
Father says. What the Father declares, he witnesses, and testifieth
the same; and therefore he is said to be The faithful witness. Rev.
1. 5. And it is said of him, 2 Cor. 1. 20. For all the promises of
God in him are yea, and in him amen. So much of the first
particular, the subject matter of this Book. I come now to the
second, which is.

The reason of the divulgation of this Book; and that is contained in
these words: Which God gave unto Jesus Christ to show unto his
servants. From whence arises this Observation.

Observ. 2. That it is the pleasure of God, to have his servants
acquainted with his secrets, and to know what is his mind concerning
things to come.

This we see was the reason of the divulgation of this Book: because
it was the mind of God to have his servants acquainted with it, a
suitable place to this, is that, John 15. 15. Henceforth (saith
Jesus Christ) I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not
what his Lord doth; but I call you friends: for all things that I
have heard of my Father, I have made known unto you: and Psalm. 25.
14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them of his covenant. So that it is a clear truth, That it is
the pleasure of God to have his servants acquainted with his
secrets, and to know his mind, concerning things to come.

It being so, in the first place it teaches Saints to admire, and
magnify the love of the Father, that doth express himself so
graciously to them, as to afford them that honour to be as his
friends, in revealing his secrets to them. It is a remarkable
passage, Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he
revealeth his secrets unto his servants the prophets. Oh what a high
savour is this, that the Lord should engage himself that he will do
nothing, but he will reveal it unto his servants! As a tender
husband unbosoms himself, and discovers his secrets to his beloved
wife, and cannot withhold them from her. So the Lord God doth
express his tender love unto his servants, in revealing his secrets
to them, and he will do nothing but he will discover it unto them.
What cause have Saints now to admire, and extoll that rich Grace of
God, that is extended to them herein?

Secondly, Doth the Lord reveal his secrets unto his servants? Then
ought they to be diligent observers of what he reveals unto them.
Revealed things are said to belong unto us, and if they belong unto
us, then it behoves Saints to observe them, and to improve them to
those ends for which they are discovered to us; and if we should
come short of it, we should demean ourselves very unworthily. When a
man reveals his secret unto his dear friend, if his friend should
slight him in it, and take no notice of what he discovers to him, he
were a very unkind, and a very unworthy friend: But how much more
may we be said, to carry ourselves unkindly, and unworthily; if we
should slight the love of our God, in revealing his secrets to us,
by not being diligent in observing of them? Since it pleases the
Lord, to reveal to his servants things to come; it well becomes them
to observe them exactly. And so much of the second particular, the
reason of the divulgation of this Book.

I come now to the third, which is the instruments of the divulgation
of this Book, which is contained in these words: Who sent, and
signified it by his angel unto his servant John. So that the angel,
and John, were employed as instruments in that work. From whence the
Observation is this.

Observ. 3. That though Jesus Christ could reveal immediately to al
his servants, all these things revealed in this Book; yet it pleased
him to choose rather to do it by instruments.

If it had pleased him, he might have revealed these things to all
his people, in all ages since John, immediately by his own Spirit;
but he chooses rather to do it by the writings of John: which he
preserves and keeps up in a high esteem in the hearts of all his
Saints; as his own infallible, and unquestionable truth, and
testimony: or else he might have sent a John, or some prophet of
his, to have revealed these things by mouth unto his people, in
every age, age after age: but he chooses rather to do it by
revealing it to John, so many hundreds of years ago; and his
writings must be the instruments of revealing these things unto his
people; and he might have revealed those things unto John
immediately himself, without any other instrument: but he chooses to
signify it by his angel to his servant John. So he might teach, and
edify, and build up his people immediately; but he chooses rather to
do it by instruments, by apostles, and prophets, and evangelists,
and pastors, and teachers: which he hath appointed, For the
perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ;
till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God unto a perfect man, &c. Ephes. 4. 11, 12, 13.

So he might likewise, have revealed himself immediately to all his
people of old; but generally it pleased him to make use either of
angels, or of his servants the Prophets, to be the instruments of
revealing his mind unto his people then. Now the reasons why it
pleaseth God, usually to make use of instruments to effect his
designs by, may be these.

The first is that which is the reason of all his doings; his own
will. He makes use of instruments, because it is his will to make
use of instruments: for his will is the reason, and the rule of all
his actions.

Secondly, But a subordinate reason to this, may be to show his
sovereignty over all his people; therefore he sends them about his
work, they being all at his royal command.

As a Prince hath power over all that are in his dominion, saying to
this man go, and he goeth, and to another, come, and he cometh, and
to another do this, and he doth it: So the great King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, maketh it to appear that he hath all his servants at
his beck, by sending of them about several employments.

Thirdly, Another reason why he maketh use of instruments, in
revealing and discovering his mind to his people, and building up of
his Saints, may be to maintain a communion among Saints: for if God
should reveal himself to all alike, then would not his people have
such communion one with another, as they have, to the end they may
partake one of another's gifts; and therefore doth it please the
Lord to make use of instruments, whereas if it pleased him, he could
have effected all things immediately, without means or instruments:
and since it is so then,

First, It reprehends those that have a low esteem of instruments,
and slight and undervalue means, upon this ground: that God can work
without instruments, and without means. But let such know, that it
is the will of God to make use of instruments, and in slighting
instruments, they contradict his will: and as they that slight the
King's Officers, do slight the King: So they, in slighting the
instruments and means that God hath appointed to work by, do slight
God himself, and they do as much as in them lies, endeavour to break
the Communion of Saints. And surely whatever the pretences of such
persons are, that do neglect means, and slight instruments, this
cometh not from the Spirit of God in them; for the Spirit teacheth
not to undervalue any means, which God hath appointed to be used.
Though it is true, The Spirit teaches us not to idolize means, nor
to tie God to work only by means, but to acknowledge that God can,
and sometimes doth work without means and instruments; though he
doth usually work by means and instruments: and therefore it is as
great an evil on the one side, to reject the instruments, or means
that God uses to work by, because he hath not absolutely tied
himself to them; as on the other side, to idolize means or
instruments, because God doth usually work by them.

Therefore in the second place Saints are here exhorted, to have a
high esteem of instruments, as being of God's appointment, by whom
he will reveal himself to his people, and quicken, and comfort, and
build them up upon the true foundation. Since the Lord will make use
of instruments, O Saints do not you slight them, least you slight
God himself: but esteem them very highly in love, for their works
sake. It is the rule of the Apostle, 1 Thes. 5. 12, 13. says the
Apostle there, We beseech you brethren, to know them which labour
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. The Apostle
knew very well that God could if he had pleased, have built up his
people without employing some to labour among them, in the Word, and
doctrine, and without the admonitions of men, but these being
instruments, and means of God's appointment; He therefore presses
the Saints, to esteem very highly of those instruments, for that
works sake that God had appointed them unto: for though Paul, and
Apollo, and Cephas can do nothing of themselves, yet they are to be
highly esteemed, as being instruments in God's hand, by which God 
will work. And so all the means which God hath appointed for his
people to make use of, in which he will be found of them, and in
which he will have communion with them, let them prize, and embrace,
and make use of, waiting upon God in the use of them, who will be
found of them at last, and will make it appear, that they have not
sought him in the use of means in vain. Though for a time he seem to
be silent towards them, yet at last he that shall come, will come,
an I will not tarry.

It is unquestionably the policy of Satan, to take off Saints from
using means, that they may be deprived of that comfort, and benefit
which otherwise they might obtain in the use of means.

Therefore let all Saints beware of such delusions, whereby they are
drawn to dishonour God, in slighting the instruments and means which
he hath appointed, and let them be exhorted to embrace means, and
make diligent use of them; for they are blessed that so do, as will
appear in the handling of the fifth particular. But so much for this
third particular, the instruments of the divulgation of this book.

The fourth particular, Is the faithfulness of those instruments in
the divulgation of this book, it is expressed in these words: Who
bare record of the Word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus, and
of all things that he saw. We see that as the angel signified it to
John, so John did not fail in recording anything of it, but he bare
record of all things that he saw. Whence the Observation is this:

Observ. 4. That when God setteth instruments about a work which he
will have done, they must, and they shall effect it.

Jesus Christ will have his secrets declared to his servants, and he
employeth John about this work; and John doth it punctually: he bare
record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus, and what,
of some things? Nay, of all things which he saw. And this truth is
further confirmed, by two pertinent Scriptures, which we have to
this effect. One is Amos 3. 8. The Lion hath roared, who will not
fear? The Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophesy? The other is,
Acts 4. 20. For we cannot but speak the things which we have seen
and heard. In both these places it appears, that it is not possible
for instruments to be silent, nor to sit still, when God hath spoken
to them, and given them commission to do his work.

First, Is it so that when God setteth instruments about a work which
he will have done, that they must, and shall effect it? Then this
informs us of the reason why Saints fear not persecution, nor
imprisonment, nor death, but choose rather to suffer them all, then
to conceal the truth that is discovered to them, or to desert the
work they are called to: for God having stirred up their spirits,
and set them about this work, they cannot be silent, and sit still,
but shall go on in despite of all opposition, to accomplish the work
which God hath appointed them to do. Thus did Luther, and thus have
many other Saints done, and many shall do: For if the Lord have
spoken they cannot but prophesy, speak the things they have seen and
heard: for their light is not given them to hide it under a bushel;
but their love to Christ constrains them to hold it forth, and the
strength of Christ carries them forth.

Secondly, Since it is so, it serves to encourage Saints, considering
that the work that God hath to do shall surely be accomplished, no
opposition shall hinder it: for though instruments seem to be never
so weak, yet they must, and shall accomplish God's designs.
Therefore fear not, the day shall break forth, and the shadows shall
fly away, and none of the powers of darkness shall be able to hinder
it. But I shall say more to this point in the following discourse;
Therefore so much shall suffice to be here spoken of it, and of this
fourth particular, the faithfulness of the instruments of divulging
this Book.

The fifth particular, Is the pronunciation of a blessing upon the
persons that read, or hear the words of this Book. And that we have
in these words: Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the
words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein; for the time is at hand. From whence arises this
Observation.

Observ. 5. That it is a blessed thing, to read and hear the Word of
God, and particularly that which is contained in the book of the
Revelation, so as to keep it.

This clearly appears in these words: and the Apostle James likewise
witnesseth the same, Jam. 1. 25. Be ye doers of the word (saith he
at the 22. verse.) and not hearers only deceiving your own selves.
Whereas it appears he speaks of the written Word, which men may hear
with the ear, and do not. And now at the 15. verse. he says: Who so
looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth therein; he
being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall
be blessed in his deed. What is the man that James saith shall be
blessed? It is the man that looketh into the perfect law of liberty,
(that is) heareth or readeth the word of God in the Scripture,
(which is a perfect law of liberty, spiritual liberty) and heareth
or readeth it, not forgetfully, but is a doer of it: This is the
blessed man.

Thus it is a clear, That it is a blessed thing to hear and read the
Word of God, and particularly that which is contained in the Book of
the Revelation, so as to keep it.

Then first, This condemns those that neglect the reading, and the
hearing of the word: since it is a blessed thing to read, and hear
the Word of God so as to do it.

Now they that do not read it, nor hear it, cannot do it: for says
the Apostle, Rom. 10. 14. How shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard? Implying, That without hearing the Word of God,
they cannot believe in God: but if the Apostle had not so said, yet
we see it to be true, In that the nations and people to whom the
Gospel is not preached, and that do not read it, do altogether
continue in unbelief. And so those that are under the darkness of
Popery, to whom the word in the purity of it is not preached, and
have not liberty to read it, they continue also in a dark and a
miserable condition; but among those people where the Word is
embraced, and read, and heard there are many brought into the
obedience of faith. Nay, in some places of this kingdom where they
seldom enjoy a public preacher, yet by reading the Word they are
made partakers of the sweet blessing of it. They ought therefore to
be sharply reproved for their folly, who neglect the hearing, and
reading the Word, and consequently the doing of it, in which they
might be blessed.

In the second place, Hence all sorts of people are exhorted to be
frequent in reading the Word, for all desire to be blessed, and
those that have in any measure been made partakers of the blessing
of the Gospel, they cannot but desire more of it; therefore it would
be wisdom for all to improve the means of being made blessed, which
is hearing, and reading the Word.

If a man that desires a great outward estate, should be persuaded
that if there were any way at all for him to attain that estate, it
must be such, or such a way, that man would be sure to take that
way.

Why this is the case in respect of attaining spiritual blessings;
the readiest way that any Soul can take to attain them, is a
frequent reading, and hearing of the Word of God, waiting for the
coming in of the Spirit in it. O therefore let not men discover that
they have a slight esteem of spiritual blessings, and heavenly
treasures, by neglecting the means by which they are attained: for
if men have a high esteem of gold, and pearls, if they know the
means by which they may be attained, they will make use of those
means: so according to the esteem we have of spiritual blessings,
will be our diligence in improving the means of attaining them.

Object. But it may be someone will say, I have been frequent in
hearing and reading the Word, and find it but an empty thing, I hear
and am as carnal as before, I read and am as dark, and low as
before; and therefore how can it be said that hearing, and reading
the Word, is a means of attaining spiritual blessings?

I Answer,

Answ. First, If thou findest to thy apprehension, but little benefit
from hearing or reading the Word; yet thou canst not conclude it
would be better with thee, if thou didst not read or hear the Word,
for there is no ground of hope for thee, when thou neglectest all
means of enlivening, comforting, or of heightening the Spirit.

But secondly, Though to thy apprehension thou hast no benefit from
reading, or hearing the Word, yet remember, that the Word is
compared to seed, Mat. 13. 19. and 1 Pet. 1. 23. Now you know that
seed useth to lie hid under the clods for a time, and afterward
groweth up: so may the seed of the Word seem to be hid in thee for a
time, and yet afterward it may grow up, and bring forth fruit. The
Disciples while the Lord Jesus was with them, often heard his word,
and he plainly foretold them of his Resurrection, but when their
Lord was crucified, though they had so often heard it, yet they
seemed to be altogether ignorant of the doctrine of the
Resurrection, but afterward it was sweet unto them when the Spirit
brought it, with other things to their remembrance. In the 4. of
John's Gospel, at the 36, 37, 38. verses, our Saviour tells his
Disciples, That both he that soweth, and he that reapeth shall
rejoice together, but (says he) herein is that saying true, one
soweth, and another reapeth. I have sent you to reap that whereon ye
bestowed no labour, other men laboured and ye are entered into their
labours. Others had sowed the seed of eternal life in the hearts of
the people: and therefore he said in the 35, verse. That the fields
were already white unto the harvest, but the Disciples were sent to
reap the fruit of that seed, that others had laboured in the sowing
of: So that one Minister may sow the seed of life, and joy in the
hearts of some people, and another may reap it. But the time shall
come, that both he that soweth, and he that reapeth shall rejoice
together. When the seed is sown the fruit doth not by and by appear,
and of this Saints have had experience, that have lain long under
the hearing of the Word, frequently attending upon it, and been
diligent in reading, and yet have attained to their own
apprehensions neither to faith, nor peace, nor joy, nor strength,
but have seemed to be as unbelieving, as carnal, and as fleshly as
ever, walking heavily for a long time: And that Word which hath been
sweet to others that at the same time heard it, hath been as nothing
to them. That word which hath raised the heart, and strengthened the
faith, and inflamed the love of others, hath seemed to have no
effect upon them, and thus some have continued weeks, months, nay
years together, and if they have had any reviving, it hath been but
as a morning dew; and yet at last when the Fathers appointed time
was come, wherein he hath raised them up to joy, and peace in
believing, and given them life, vigour and strength, then hath the
Spirit brought to their remembrance, the things which they heard
many years before, and then have they been wonderfully overcome, and
taken with it, and it hath brought forth fruit abundantly in them.
Therefore Saints, you that say you find little or no effect, the
word hath upon you for the present, be not thereby discouraged, but
go on to read and to hear the word still, for it is a means which is
often blessed to many.

But thirdly, Is it so, that it is a blessed thing to read and hear
the Word, so as to keep it? Then it serves to exhort all, as to hear
and read the Word, so to look beyond it, in the frequent hearing and
reading of it waiting for the coming in of the Spirit; for the
blessing is not pronounced upon the hearers of the Word only, but
such as hear it, and keep it, and hear it and do it: and then shalt
thou hear the Word so as to keep it, when the Spirit comes along
with it: Therefore when thou comest to hear the Word, do not rest
upon the bare hearing of the Word, but expect the coming of the
Spirit; and that thou mayst thus do, consider that there are
frequent presidents in Scripture, That in the hearing of the Word
the Spirit hath been given: as you have it, Act. 10. 44. While Peter
yet spake these words, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard
the Word. And in the second of the Acts at the 41. verse, we find
that there were three thousand souls converted, at the preaching of
Peter. And when Philip went down to Samaria, and preached the Word,
there were by his preaching many converted, both men, and women, as
appears Acts 8. 12. There are several other passages in the Acts to
this purpose. And Gal. 3. 2. saith the Apostle, Received you the
Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? Whereby
it appears, That the Spirit was received by the hearing of the word
of faith, and therefore it is that the Apostle calls the ministry of
the Gospel, The ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8. Therefore
let all be encouraged in the hearing of the Word to wait for the
Spirit, whereby they may not be forgetful hearers, but doers of the
Word, and be blessed in so doing.

Answ. 4. And in the last place it serves to encourage all Saints, to
be frequent in reading of, and meditating upon the book of the
Revelation; for there is a blessing particularly pronounced upon
them that read, or hear, and keep the things that are written
therein: therefore let none be discouraged from reading those things
that are written in this book, because they are so hard to be
understood, and are more dark and mysterious than most places of
Scripture. It is true, they are so, but to encourage us to be
frequent in reading of it, notwithstanding the mysteriousness of it,
the holy Ghost here pronounces a particular blessing to it, which is
a special encouragement to incite us to the reading of it. And there
is also another encouragement in these words, For the time is at
hand. And now if we be desirous to be informed, of the things that
concern the present time, then let us look diligently into the book
of the Revelation, for this word, The time is at hand, hath held
true, and doth, and shall hold true, in all ages, and times, even
until the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ, to judge the quick and
the dead, when all shall appear before the judgement seat of Christ:
for there hath been no age since the delivery of it, in which it
might not be said, The time is at hand, that is, The time is come,
in which some part or other of it, hath been fulfilling: for at the
time when this Revelation was given to John, then was fulfilling
that which is spoken concerning the seven Churches; and soon after,
that which was to be done in the opening of the seals, began to be
fulfilled, which is not yet fully accomplished, and about four
hundred year after John's time, began that to be fulfilled, which is
spoken of concerning the rising of the beast, and what is revealed
concerning the actions of the beast; and the pouring out of the
vials upon the beast, hath been since that and now is a fulfilling,
and what is spoken concerning the total ruin of the beast, and the
happy deliverance of the Saints, and the glorious state of the
Church after deliverance, shall be hereafter fulfilled. So that
still it might, and now, and hereafter it may be said of the
prophecy of this book, The time is at hand: therefore it concerns us
to be frequently looking into it, and diligently to observe the
things, that are written therein.

And now since the following discourse, is on a part of the book of
the Revelation; let these two motives, which here you have to stir
you up to the reading of the whole book; as, that it is a blessed
thing, and it concerns the present time, incite you to the reading,
and the serious consideration of what is herein delivered,
concerning the exact accomplishment, of some of the things contained
in this book, which comes now to be spoken of.
AN EXPOSITION UPON
Part of the eleventh chapter
OF THE REVELATION.

The Exposition of the first Verse.

And there was given unto me a reed like unto a rod]

In the 21. chapter of this book at the 15. verse, when the holy city
was put into a delivered, enlarged, raised condition, there is
mention made of a golden reed wherewith it was to be measured. But
here is not a golden reed, but a reed like unto a rod, importing,
that it is a chastised and afflicted, depressed, low condition into
which it was at this time to be put: and that it was indeed so,
appears in what follows.

And the angel stood, saying]

This angel, chap. 10. 1. is thus described: And I saw a mighty angel
come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rain-bow was upon
his head, and his face was as it were the Sun, and his feet as
pillars of fire. This description resembles that which is given of
Jesus Christ, chap. 1. 15, 16. by which it appears, That this angel
here spoken of is Jesus Christ. It is indeed the Lord Jesus Christ,
that doth order and dispose all things in, and concerning his
Church, and all things in the world, and therefore it is, that all
power is given unto him, in heaven, and earth, Mat. 28. He is the
King of the holy hill of Sion, Psalm. 2. And he must rule the
Nations with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters
vessel, and he must reign until he have put all his enemies under
his feet.

Rise and measure]

The Lord Jesus doth not leave his people in the hand of enemies, nor
under the rod of the wicked in a careless manner, as if he did not
care how much they were given up to the hand of the enemies: no, but
they are measured out to affliction, and so far as they are measured
out unto it so far shall they be under affliction, and no farther.
So God measured Job to affliction, All that he hath is in thy power
only upon himself put not forth thine hand, Job 1. 12. and again,
Behold, he is in thine hand, but save his life. The wicked shall not
go a hair's-breadth beyond the measure. Jesus Christ hath such a
tender respect unto all his people in their sufferings, that they
shall have no more than need, 1 Pet. 1. 6.

Measure the Temple]

The word Temple in the old Testament, is used only for that House
that Solomon built in Jerusalem unto the Lord, which was called the
Temple of the Lord; it being the place wherein God was in a special
manner present, and wherein he would in a special manner be
worshipped. But in the new Testament it is used, first, for the
Church, the Saints of God, of which that Temple was a figure: for as
God was in a special manner present in that Temple, so he is in a
special manner present in his people. And so we have it, 2 Cor. 6.
16. For ye are the temple of the living God, as God hath said, I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and
they shall be my people. & 1 Cor. 6. 19. What know ye not that your
bodies are the Temple of the holy Ghost, which is in you, &c. and
thus the word Temple in the new Testament is used for the Saints, as
the Temple was a figure of them, as they have a special presence of
God in them. Which is likewise spoken of Isa. 66. 1, 2. Thus faith
the Lord, the Heaven is my throne, and the Earth is my foot-stool:
where is the house that ye build unto me, and where is the place of
my rest, for all these things hath my hand made, and all these
things have been saith the Lord, but to this man will I look; even
unto him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembleth
at my word. So that he that is of a poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and trembleth at the word of God, shall be the house, the Temple of
God. As we have it also Isa. 57. 15.

But secondly, The word Temple in the new Testament, as it is used
for those in whom there is a special presence of God; so it is used
to signify that means by which knowledge, and instruction is given
out: as the Temple of old was the place where people were to receive
instruction and knowledge. And in this sense it is used, Rev. 21.
22. And I saw no Temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and the
Lamb are the Temple of it. This is spoken of the new Jerusalem, of
that glorious state the Church shall be in, when they shall be all
taught of God, from the greatest to the least.

Now the word Temple here in the Text, doth signify these.

First, It signifies the Saints of God, as they are they in whom God
in a special manner dwells. And

Secondly, It signifies the ordinances, and means whereby knowledge
is dispensed, and instruction is received: for it is the Saints that
are as lights in the world, and they both instruct the ignorant, and
edify one another, especially when they are congregated, assembled
together to worship God, according to his own will, and to prophesy
to edify one another.

The Temple of God and the altar, and them that worship therein]

It clearly appears in these words, that the word Temple here,
includes the Saints, both as they are an habitation of God through
the spirit; and so are his Temple, and as they are being assembled
together, the means of instruction and increasing knowledge, and do
worship God aright: For least the word Temple should not be full
enough to express this, it is added, And the altar (which in the
Temple was the place where they worshipped God) and them that
worship therein. Not only the place of worship, but the worshippers.
So that this takes in all Saints, as they are a Temple, as their
assemblies are the place wherein God is worshipped, and instruction
is given, and received; and as they are worshippers as Saints
worshipping God, and possessing God.

Verse 2.

But the Court that is without the Temple]

The Court is said to be without the Temple: as of old the Court was
without the Temple, and was a more common place, not so holy as any
part of the Temple was; so that the Court here being without the
Temple, it is some outside thing, it is no part of the Temple. Now
it being apparent that Saints only are the Temple of God, this Court
here mentioned, though it seem to be near the Temple, yet is not the
Temple, is none of the Saints, but some outside professors, that
seem to the outward eye to be near to Saints: as the Court was near
to the Temple, yet they are not of that holy place, they are but an
outside, they are without the Temple.

But the Court that is without the Temple leave out, or cast out, and
measure it not]

Though Jesus Christ have a tender care of his Saints under
affliction, and they are measured out to the chastisement appointed
to them; yet hath he no such respect unto such as are not his.
Though they are professors. Though they seem to be near the Temple,
yet if they be not the Temple, though they do profess him, yet if
they do not possess him as the Temple doth, they must be left out,
cast out of the care of Jesus Christ.

Jesus Christ will not own that as his, and therefore it must not be
measured. For it was the Temple and the altar, and them that
worshipped therin, that was measured out to chastisement: So then it
was it that was to be given unto the Gentiles by measure; so that
this word (for it) may be read thus (for the Temple)

Is given unto the Gentiles]

The word Gentiles in the old Testament, when the Temple was in its
glory, was used to express such as were not of the Church of God;
for the Israelites only were accounted the Church: & all others were
looked upon as strangers to it, such as were afar off: as such as
were enemies to the Temple, and would have the Temple ruined and
laid waste. But note, though the difference between Jews and
Gentiles since the days of the Gospel be taken away, and the
Gentiles, as well as the Jews may now be of the Church of God, if
they be built upon the Lord Jesus; yet the word Gentiles is here
used to express those that were not of the Church, nor of the
Temple; but would have the Temple ruined. And as the Babylonians of
old had the Temple for a while given unto them: So now Jesus Christ
gives his spiritual Temple, into the hands of these Gentiles the
mystical Babylonians for a while.

And the holy city] This title, the holy city, we find in Scripture,
is first given unto the city of Jerusalem, the city wherein the
material Temple was situate, as appears Matth. 37. 3. where it is
said at the death of our Saviour, That the graves were opened, and
many bodies of the Saints which slept arose, and came out of the
graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and
appeared unto many. Which city it is evident was the city of
Jerusalem. And indeed Jerusalem was then accounted a city more holy
then others; because it was the place wherein men ought in a more
especial manner to worship God. And therefore says the woman of
Samaria, Ye say in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to
worship; And our Saviour doth not contradict this, (for indeed it is
out of all contradiction) that Jerusalem had been the place where
men ought to worship, for God had placed his name there, and there
he would be worshiped; because the Temple was there wherein was his
special presence. So that in this respect, Jerusalem was once a more
holy city then others.

But when the cause was taken away the effect ceased, when Jerusalem
ceased to be the place where men were enjoined to worship God, and
God had removed his special presence from the Temple; then Jerusalem
was no more holy then another place.

And because that Jerusalem was to cease to be the place of worship,
and the holy place; therefore it is that our Saviour, John 4. 21,
23. saith, The hour cometh when ye shall neither in the mountain of
Samaria, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father; but the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit, and in truth: for
the Father seeketh such to worship him. As if he had said, Jerusalem
shall not be the place of worship, men shall not worship God there,
for if men do perform Jerusalem worship, that is, worship with that
worship that hath respect to an outward place, it shall be accounted
as no worship, no, men shall not worship in Jerusalem, but such as
worship the Father must worship him with an inward, spiritual
worship, and in truth, that is, in the Son, in the Spirit, and in
the Son, and such the Father seeks to worship him, such he is now a
seeking out, both of Jews and Gentiles; and such worship is most
pleasing unto him. So that Jerusalem had once the title of the holy
city. It was once the place wherein God was worshipped, but it is
now ceased to be so.

But secondly, This title, The holy city, is given in Scripture unto
that city, of which that Jerusalem of old was a figure, and that is,
the Saints, and people of God, who are all citizens of the holy
city. And therefore Paul writing to the Saints at Ephesus, saith he,
Ephes. 2. 19. Ye are no more strangers, and foreigners; but fellow
citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God. And that
Jerusalem of old was a figure of this Holy city, appears Hebr. 12.
22. and Gal. 4. 26. where the Saints are called by the name of
Jerusalem, only they are differenced from the material Jerusalem, in
that they are called, The heavenly Jerusalem, and Jerusalem which is
above. Now that this Heavenly Jerusalem, which is compacted of
Saints, and sanctified ones, and therefore must needs be a Holy
city. I say that this spiritual Jerusalem hath this title, The holy
city, given to it doth appear, Revel. 21. 2. And I John saw the holy
city, new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared as
a bride adorned for her husband. Who is the spouse, the bride that
is adorned for her husband Jesus Christ, but his Saints? They then
are the new and heavenly Jerusalem, they are the holy city.

And the holy city shall they (that is the Gentiles fore-spoken of)
tread under foot]

To be trodden under foot by an enemy, is the highest kind of
insultation of an enemy over a people that possibly can be: for what
greater contempt, and scorn, and envy can an enemy express, then by
treading, a person or a people, under feet? And yet this is the
condition, the Church was put into, which is spoken of in the
prophecy of Isaiah, chap. 51. 23. where it was said that those
enemies, that afflicted the Saints, said to their souls bow down,
that we may go over, and their bodies was laid as the ground, and as
the streets to them that went over. And this is the condition which
the holy city, the Temple of God, his precious Saints are here also
appointed unto, even to be trod under foot, to be depressed, and
greatly persecuted, to be bowed down under the feet of their
enemies, to be made as the ground, and as the street to them to go
over.

Query. But now, before I proceed any further, the Query will be,
What those Gentiles are in particular, to whom the Temple, and the
holy city was to be given, and by whom they were to be trodden under 
foot? For as Jerusalem, and the Temple of old were given to the
Babylonians in particular: so the question is now, Who the
particular enemies are to whom the Temple, and the holy city now are
delivered? For though the holy city hath many enemies, yet she is
not given to them all.

Answ. I answer, Though in this chapter there be no other description
of them, but only this, the Gentiles: yet we have a large
description of them, in three several chapters of this prophecy:
which descriptions as they lie, I shall here insert.

The first is, Rev. 12. 3. 4. And there appeared another wonder in
Heaven, and behold a great red Dragon having seven heads, and ten
horns, and seven Crowns upon his heads, and his tail drew a third
part of the Stars of Heaven, and did cast them to the earth.

The second place in which the enemies of the Saints, (to whom they
are given for a while) are described is, Rev. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. verses, which is as follows. And I stood upon the sand of the
sea, and saw a Beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and
ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his head the name
of blasphemy. And the Beast which I saw was like unto a leopard, and
his feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a
lion, and the dragon gave him his power, and seat, and great
authority. And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death,
and his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondered after
the Beast, and they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the
Beast, and they worshipped the Beast saying, Who is like unto the
Beast? Who is able to make war with him? And there was given unto
him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies, and power was
given unto him to continue forty, and two months. And he opened his
mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his
tabernacle, and them that dwelt in heaven. And it was given unto him
to make war with the Saints, and to overcome them: and power was
given him over all kindreds and tongues, and nations, and all that
dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written
in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world.

The third place where the enemies of the Temple, and the holy city,
viz. The Saints are described, is Rev. 17. 3, 4, 5, 6. as it
followeth.

And I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet coloured Beast, full of names
of blasphemy, having seven heads, and ten horns, and the woman was
arrayed in purple, and scarlet colour, and decked with gold, and
precious stone, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand, full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication: and upon her
forehead was a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER
OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. And I saw the woman
drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her I wondered with great
admiration.

Thus now the enemies of the Church, the Temple or holy city, which
in the text in hand are only described by this word (the Gentiles)
in these passages are more largely characterized.

But these expressions used in these descriptions of these enemies,
being for the most part very mysterious: we have these mysteries
opened, and unveiled in the 17. chap. from the 7, verse. to the end
of the chapter, as it follows.

And the angel said unto me wherefore didst thou marvel? I will tell
thee the mystery of the woman, and of the Beast that carrieth her
which hath the seven heads, and ten horns. The Beast that thou
sawest was, and is not, and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit,
and go into perdition; and they that dwell on the earth shall
wonder, whose names were not written in the book of life, from the
foundation of the world, when they behold the Beast that was, and is
not, and yet is. And here is the mind which hath wisdom: The seven
heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sitteth, and there are
seven kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet
come: and when he cometh, he must continue a short space. And the
Beast that was and is not even he is the eighth, and is of the
seven, and goeth into perdition. And the ten horns which thou
sawest, are ten kings which have received no kingdom as yet: but
receive power as kings one hour with the Beast. These have one mind,
and shall give their power and strength unto the Beast. These shall
make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are with him, are
called, and chosen, and faithful. And he saith unto me the waters
which thou sawest, where the Whore sitteth, are peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues. And the ten horns which thou
sawest upon the Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and shall make
her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire, for God hath put in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to
agree, and give their kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God
shall be fulfilled. And the woman which thou sawest is that great
city which reigneth over the kings of the Earth.

In these words, we have the mystery opened of what is delivered in
the 12, 13, and 17. chapters, concerning the Beast, and the Woman,
and the Heads, and the Horns, and the many waters: which are all
mysterious expressions, and hard to be understood, (as those were,
Dan. 7. from the 1, to the 9, ver. until the interpretation was
given to Daniel at the 16, verse and so on) but the angel having in
this 17, chap. opened these mysteries, now the meaning of them is
more apparent: So that,

First, If it be queried, What is the Beast?

We have it answered, verse 8. in these words, The Beast that thou
sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless pit,
and go into perdition. Now by comparing this with some passages in
the 12, and 13. chapters, we shall plainly see what the Beast is. In
the 12. chap. at the 9. verse, the Dragon there mentioned, is said
to be, That old serpent called the Devil, and Satan which deceiveth
the whole world. And in the 13. chap. at the 1, and 2. verses, it is
said, That a Beast did rise up out of the sea, having seven heads,
and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the
names of blasphemy: and the Beast was like unto a leopard, and his
feet were as the feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a
lion; and the Dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great
authority.

So then; The Beast that hath seven heads, and ten horns, and is like
unto a leopard, &c. is some wicked one in whom the devil reigns; who
hath power, and a seat, and great authority in the earth: which
power, and seat, and great authority, was given unto him of the
devil. And though that wicked one, that hath that devilish power,
and authority, be distinct from the devil; (as he that receives is
distinct from him that gives:) yet they are so one, as the devil is
said to be in the Beast: for what the Beast is said to do, the devil
is said to do: for in the 13. chapter, at the 7, verse. it is the
Beast that is said to make war with Saints: but in the 12. chapter,
at the 17, verse, the devil is said to do it. And again, they are so
one, as the Beast is said to be the devil; and therefore when the
angel comes to declare what the Beast is, in the fore-mentioned
place, says he, The Beast shall ascend out of the bottomless pit. It
is not said he shall receive his authority from him that ascends out
of the bottomless pit, (though that be the meaning of it, as before
appears:) but he shall ascend out of the bottomless pit; to show the
oneness of the devil, and the Beast. Thus the mystery of the Beast
is unfolded; and it appears, that the Beast is a wicked one, that
hath a devilish power, and authority, and is one with the devil.

This is he of whom it is said, All the world wondered after the
Beast; and worshipped the Dragon that gave power unto the Beast; and
worshipped the Beast saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able
to make war with him? And of whom it was said, That there was given
unto him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies; and power
was given unto him to continue forty and two months, &c. As you have
it above.

But secondly, If it be queried, What that woman is, that is said
chapter 17. 3. to sit upon this Beast?

We have an Answer to this, in the 18, verse of this 17. chapter, in
these words: And the woman which thou sawest, is that great city
which reigneth over the kings of the earth. Now what that great city
was, that did then reign over the kings of the earth; though it were
not so apparent in several other histories as it is; yet the
Scriptures could sufficiently inform us: for it informs us, that
tribute was paid to Caesar; Matth. 22. 17. And that because Caesar
was he that reigned over the kings of the earth, the Jews said to
Pilate, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend. And
that Paul appealed to Caesar, as being the highest authority that
then was: as appears, Acts 25. 10, 11. Now the place where Caesars
royal seat was then, was the city of Rome, as appears in that Paul
was sent thither. So that Rome was the city that then reigned over
the kings of the earth. And therefore it was that it was accounted
such a privilege to be a Roman, Acts 22. 25, 26.

Now since it is clear in Scripture; (and all histories do
acknowledge it,) that Rome was the great city that reigned over the
kings of the earth; Then it appears, That Rome is that woman that is
said to sit upon the Beast. Now this being apparent, it doth appear
the more clearly what the Beast is.

It was clear before, That the Beast was a wicked one in whom the
Devil reigned, that had received power, and a seat, and great
authority from the Devil: but it did not so clearly appear who that
wicked one in particular is. But here it appears that it is
particularly he upon whom the city of Rome sitteth: he that supports
it.

Now it is apparent that it is that wicked one the Pope, that is the
support of the cursed city. He it is that bears her up in her pomp,
and pride, and filthy abominable, Sodomitical practises. He is the
Beast upon which that great whore sitteth. And the city of Rome hath
been, and to this day is such a fountain of filthiness, and
whoredoms, and all cursed abominations: as this name appears so
perspicuously in her forehead, as he that runs may read it, MYSTERY,
BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE
EARTH. And it is apparent, that she is drunken with the blood of
Saints, and the blood of the martyrs of Jesus.

But thirdly, If the question be, What the seven heads of the Beast
are?

The angel gives an answer to that, at the 9, verse of the 17.
chapter. The seven heads are seven mountains upon which the woman
sitteth. The woman being the city of Rome; the seven heads of the
Beast, are said to be the seven mountains upon which that city was
built. And with this Historians agree, and say, that the city of
Rome was founded upon seven mountains. Now these may as properly be
said to be the seven heads of the Beast; as the ten kings may be
said to be his ten horns: as will appear by and by.

Fourthly, If it should be enquired, What the ten horns are,
mentioned chap. 12. 3. and 13. 1. & 17. 3?

The angel answers that in the 12. verse of the seventeen chapter, in
these words: And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings,
which have received no kingdom as yet, but receive power as kings
one hour with the Beast. These have one mind, and shall give their
power, and strength unto the Beast; these shall make war with the
Lamb, &c. In these words the angel unveils this also, and tells us,
that those which are mysteriously expressed by the ten horns of the
Beast, are the ten kings, which did give up their power, and
strength unto the Beast with one consent, & one mind, and thus it
came to pass: for when the devil gave the Pope that power, and
authority, whereby the Emperor of Rome was subjected to him, then
the ten kingdoms that were under Rome, did likewise willingly give
up their power to him also; and were subjected to the Beast, and as
he, so they also made war with the Lamb the Lord Jesus in his
Saints: and so became the ten horns of the Beast, by which he became
the more dreadful, and terrible: for he had not been so dreadful, if
he had but only had the strength of his seven heads, of that great
city that is seated upon seven hills: but having these ten horns
also, these ten kingdoms he was become very terrible.

But fifthly, If it should be queried, What the many waters are upon
which the woman sitteth, mentioned chap. 17. 1. & 13. 1?

The angel answers that also, in the 15. verse of the 17. chapter, in
these words: The waters which thou sawest where the whore sitteth,
are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. So that this
is not left in the mystery neither; but the angel plainly declares,
That by the waters is meant the peoples, and nations, and
multitudes, and tongues. And the Whore is said to sit upon them;
because they have willingly subjected themselves unto her, to be as
it were vassals to her.

Now by this time it appears from these 12, 13, and 17. chapters,
what those Gentiles (mentioned in the text, to whom the Temple, and
the holy city was given,) are in particular: for it appears that as
though the Church of old had many enemies, yet they were
particularly given to the Babylonians, the Chaldeans: So now, the
Church is particularly given to be trodden under foot of mystical
Babylon, Rome, and of that wicked one the Pope, that hath received
from the devil, his power, and his seat, and great authority.

Now that these particular enemies did as the text declares, Tread
the holy city under foot, appears also in these following passages:

Rev. 12. 13, 14, 15. The Dragon persecuted the Woman, which brought
forth a man-child: and to the Woman were given two wings of a great
Eagle, that she might flee into the wilderness, into her place,
where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time from
the face of the serpent; and the serpent cast out of his mouth water
as a flood after the Woman, that he might cause her to be carried
away of the flood. That by the Dragon here mentioned, is meant the
Pope who is one with him, appears above.

Now he is here said to persecute the woman, (the Church) that is
clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her feet. And this wicked
one persecutes the Church, as she is thereby driven into the
wilderness: that is, into a desolate, bewildered, barren, and sad
condition; and that, so long as the Beast remains: (for that's the
meaning of a time, times, and half a time, as will appear in what
follows,) as if it were not possible for the Church to be in any
other then a wilderness condition, until the ruin of the Beast, and
the fall of Babylon were come. And when he had driven the Church
into that desolate wilderness condition, he was not therewith
satisfied, but cast out water as a flood after her, that he might
cause her to be carried away with the flood. And hath it not been
even thus? Did not that scarlet coloured Beast so persecute the holy
city, all the Saints of God ever since his first rise, as that they
have been in a desolate, sad, wilderness condition ever since? And
yet is he not so satisfied, but is sending out of his floods of
malice, and fury after the Saints; and would swallow them all up if
it were possible.


Again, chapter 12. 17. he is said to be wroth with the woman, and to
make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the Commandments
of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. And chap. 13. 6, 7.
And the Beast opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to
blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwelt in
heaven; and it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and
to overcome them. And hath not that Beast, the Pope punctually done
as is here spoken of him, in opening his mouth in blasphemy against
God, to blaspheme his name and his Saints? Hath he not said himself
was the head of the Church, and that he could forgive sins, with
many other blasphemies? And hath not he made war with the Saints,
which kept the commandments of God, and the testimony of Jesus
Christ? Have not they been the only ones with whom he hath made war?
The most vilest, and most abominable persons were most nourished by
that cursed Beast; and the most precious Saints have been most
hated, and hath he not also overcome them? For, for this twelve
hundred years he hath so overcome them, as they never had power to
rise up against him until of late. Again, chap. 17. 6. the great
Whore is said to be drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. And chap. 18. 24. It is again said of
Babylon, the city of Rome, the great Whore, That in her was found
the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain
upon the earth. And most evident it is, That Rome hath not only made
others drunken with the cup of her abominations, and filthiness of
her fornications; but is herself drunken with the blood of the
Saints, and the blood of the martyrs of Jesus, which she hath taken
in greedily, and eagerly, and in her it will be found, when with
violence she shall be thrown down, and become the habitation of
devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every
unclean and hurtful bird. Thus by this time it appears by whom, and
how the holy city hath been trodden under foot.
And the holy city shall they tread under foot, forty and two
months.]

It being apparent, what the enemies of the Church are, and that they
have trodden the Temple, and holy city under foot. The next thing to
be cleared, is the time how long those enemies of the Church were to
tread her under foot. And that is here said to be forty and two
months. Now what the meaning of this is, will more clearly appear,
by comparing it with four other passages in the prophecy of this
Book. One is chap. 12. 6. And the woman fled into the wilderness,
where she had a place prepared of God, that they should feed her
there a thousand two hundred and threescore days. A second, chap.
12. 14. And to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that
she might flee into the wilderness: into her place; where she is
nourished, for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of
the Serpent. A third, is chap. 11. 3. And I will give power unto my
two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and
threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. A fourth, is chap. 13. 5. And
there was given unto the Beast, a mouth speaking great things, and
blasphemies; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two
months. & it was given unto him to make war, &c.

Now the text speaks of the afflicted condition of the Church, under
the expression of being trod under foot: and the first of these
passages speaks of the afflicted condition of the Church, under the
expression of flying into the wilderness; because of the persecution
of her enemies. The second of these passages, speaks likewise of the
afflicted condition of the Church, under the same expression as the
former, of fleeing into the wilderness. The third of these
expressions, speaks of the afflicted condition of the Church, under
the expression of being clothed in sack-cloth, and the 4. speaks of
the afflicted condition of the Church, under the expression of the
Beasts making war with the Saints and overcoming them, and they all
speaking the same thing: the affliction of the Church, do also speak
of the same time of the continuance of that affliction, with this in
the Text. Now in the Text, that time is expressed under the
expression of forty and two months. And

 In the first of
 A thousand two hundred and threescore days.
 In the second of
 A time, and times, and half a time.
 In the third of
 A thousand two hundred and threescore days.
 In the fourth of
 Forty and two months.

Now that these agree in one, appears thus.

In forty and two months, accounting thirty days to a month, there is
just a thousand two hundred and threescore days: so that forty and
two months, and a thousand two hundred and threescore days, agree in
one. Again in three years and a half, we have just forty and two
months, accounting twelve months to a year: So that a time, times,
and half a time, that is, one year, two years, and half a year,
which is three years and a half, agrees with forty and two months.
And with a thousand two hundred and threescore days. So that the
time the Church was to continue under affliction, to be trodden
under foot, was a thousand two hundred & threescore days.

Now as the Prophet Ezekiel was to account a day for a year (Eze. 4,
5, 6.) so this one thousand two hundred and threescore days, is to
be accounted a thousand two hundred and threescore years.

So then whereas in the text it is said, that the Church should be
trodden under foot forty and two months by the Gentiles; that is
particularly, by that wicked one the Pope, and his adherents, the
mystical Babylonians: the meaning of that forty two months is, A
thousand two hundred and threescore years. And it must of necessity
be acknowledged to be so; for the Beast hath trodden the holy city
under foot, for above twelve hundred years already.

Verse. 3.

And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy
a thousand two hundred, and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.]

That this word (my two witnesses) cannot be confined only to two
men, that should be the witnesses of Christ Jesus; is most apparent:
because they are said to continue so long, as the holy city was to
be trodden under foot of the Beast; which is a thousand two hundred
and threescore years. Now twelve hundred years, is a term of time
which no man ever lived when men lived longest: much less since the
flood, therefore since the two witnesses are said to continue twelve
hundred and sixty years; they cannot be confined only unto two men,
but do include all the Saints, that have been witnesses of the
truths of Jesus Christ, ever since the Beast began to persecute the
Church: for Jesus Christ during all that time, did never leave
himself without witnesses, though for the most part of that time,
the number of them were very small, in comparison of the false
prophets of the Beast: which may be the reason, why they are here
expressed by the smallest of numbers, the number two. But I say,
Jesus Christ hath never left himself without witnesses; but hath had
some at all times, that have been witnesses of his truths, in
opposition to the Beast. And those are they, that are here in the
text said to prophesy, a thousand two hundred, and sixty days. Now
as this text holds forth, That Jesus Christ hath had witnesses,
during all the reign of the Beast, and the persecuted condition of
the Church: so other passages in this prophecy confirm it, as chap.
6. 9. I saw under the altar, the souls of them that were slain for
the word of God, and for the testimony which they held. These were
some that had witnessed, and testified the truths of Christ against
the Beast, and sealed their testimony with their blood; for they
were slain for the Word of God, and for the testimony which they
held. And to show that these were not all that witnessed the truths
of Christ, but that Jesus Christ had continually some that were his
witnesses, which the beast should continually be slaying; it is said
in the 11. verse of that chap. That they should rest yet for a
little season, until their fellow servants also, and their brethren
that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled: So that
Christ had a further number of witnesses, which were also to honour
him, by laying down their lives for his truth. And chap. 12. 17. The
witnesses of Christ, are again mentioned, for it is said, That the
Dragon did make war, with them which kept the commandments of God,
and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. And verse 12. they are said,
To overcome the devil, by the blood of the Lamb, (by which all
Saints do overcome him) and by the word of their testimony: for they
loved not their lives unto the death. Here it appears that the
Saints did so witness the truths of Christ; as they counted not
their lives dear unto them, but laid them down to seal the truth
which they held, which was a means of convincing many of the truth,
and thereby they were overcomers of the Beast. And chap. 18. 24.
when Babylon came to be thrown down, it is said, That in her was
found the blood of Prophets, and of all that were slain upon the
earth: whereby it appears, That during all the reign of the Beast,
he hath been slaying the Prophets, witnesses, and Saints of Jesus
Christ.

Thus by these several passages it is evident, That Christ hath had
his witnesses during all the reign of the Beast; and it is apparent
that this word, My two witnesses includes all those witnesses of
Christ, that have been during all the reign of the Beast: for they
have been said to prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore
years.

Object. But how could all the witnesses of Christ, be said to
prophesy?

I answer, Every Saint in a sense, may be said to be a Prophet. For
they are Prophets to whom God discovers his secrets: and there is no
true Saints, but the secrets of God are discovered to them, Psal.
15. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he
will show them his covenant. The truth is, it is the discoveries of
God, and of Jesus Christ, and of hidden truths that maketh Saints.
If the Lord did not reveal his secrets unto poor souls, it would not
be possible for them to be Saints. Now then as soon as the soul is
made a Saint, it is made a Prophet: for when the Lord hath revealed
himself unto the soul and discovered his secrets to it, made it to
see the wonderful things of his law, and caused it to rejoice in the
sweet discoveries of his grace, the soul cannot choose but declare
them to others. Yea the word is as a fire in its bosom, and it
cannot hold it in, according to that rule, When thou art converted
strengthen thy brethren. This is ever the sweet temper of a real
Saint, he cannot but give vent to the bubblings of Christ upon his
heart: and that in opposing gainsayers, contending earnestly for the
faith, and in the edifying, exhorting, and comforting of other
Saints.

Now that this is prophesying, is most evident in these Scriptures, 1
Cor. 14. 3. He that prophesieth, speaketh unto men to edification,
and exhortation, and comfort. Now this all Saints in some measure or
other can do, and sometimes doth; though some Saints can do it far
more excellently then others, yet he that speaketh to edification,
exhortation and consolation, though with much weakness, doth as
truly prophesy as he that hath greatest abilities. Another Scripture
is Act. 15. 32. And Judas and Silas being prophets also themselves,
exhorted the brethren with many words, and confirmed them. Here it
is evident, That to speak the word of exhortation, and information,
to the confirming of Saints in the truth, is to prophesy: for Judas
and Silas are said to exhort and confirm the Saints, as they were
Prophets. Another passage to this purpose is Revel. 19. 10. For the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. This passage gives a
most clear answer to the question, What is it to prophesy? The angel
had said, chap. 18. 24. That in Babylon was found the blood of
Prophets, and of Saints. Now here he makes it to appear, what the
Prophets were that Rome had slain; namely, they were they that had
the testimony of Jesus; for (saith he) The testimony of Jesus is the
spirit of prophecy. So that all Saints that have the testimony of
Jesus, have the spirit of prophecy: and so all that were slain for
the testimony of Jesus, were they that did prophesy in sackcloth.

I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.]

Jesus Christ having in the former verse, declared that the holy city
should be trodden under foot, which is the afflicted condition of
the Church, he doth here declare, what supplies they should have in
that condition: in that he says that he would give unto them this
gift, that they should prophesy. Though they are to be destitute of
outward comforts and outward liberties by the enemies persecuting of
them, yet they are to have inward comforts: the Lord will reveal his
secrets to them, which shall exceed all outward comforts; they shall
have the testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of prophecy.

I will give unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days.]

That this one thousand two hundred and threescore days, is a
thousand two hundred and threescore years, appears above. Where it
is evident, that it is the same term of time with that in the former
verse, and with that in former passages of this book; and that the
meaning of them all, is a thousand two hundred and threescore years,
there appears.

Clothed in sackcloth]

While the Church was in the material Babylon, they were in a sad and
mourning posture; for they wept and hung their harps on willows, and
could not sing the songs of Sion: So the Church now being in
mystical Babylon, and insulted over by their enemies, God having for
a time given them to be trodden under foot by them, they are in
mourning, sad and sable garments; clothed in sackcloth: though they
inwardly enjoy the discoveries of the bosom secrets of the Father,
the comforts of the Spirit, though they have the Spirit of prophecy:
yet they prophesy in sackcloth, their outside, their clothing is
sackcloth, to the outward eye they are in a sad posture: and they
cannot be otherwise, while they are under the power and tyrany of
Babylon.

Verse 4.

These are the two olive-trees]

These, that is, these two witnesses, are the two olive-trees. In
that they are said to be (the) two olive-trees, it implies it hath
reference unto some passage of Scripture, wherein there is a former
mention of them. Now the place where they are mentioned, is Zech. 4.
so that Zechariah doth prophesy of these two witnesses, under the
expression of two olive-trees; and therefore the holy Ghost
mentioning the witnesses here, declares, that these are they that
are elsewhere called the two olive-trees. Now in that place, Zech.
4. 4. we find that the Prophet doth ask the angel, What these be?
And then the angel makes this answer, This is the word of the Lord
unto Zerubbabel, saying; not by might, nor by power, but by my
spirit, saith the Lord of hosts: Who art thou, O great mountain?
Before Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain, and he shall bring
forth the head stone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, Grace
unto it. Now this is somewhat a mysterious answer; but thus much
appears in it: That though the Saints seem to be little in the eyes
of men, and their enemy (whether it be the material Babylon, or the
mystical Babylon) seem to be a great mountain, as if it were
impossible for the Saints to remove their mountainous enemy: yet
they shall be removed out of their way, the great mountain shall
become a plain before them; and those Saints that seem to be little,
but as an handful to a mountain, they shall when the great mountain
is become a plain; again, become a glorious Temple, and when it
shall be thus, there shall be shoutings, crying, Grace, Grace unto
it. And this appears to be spoken of the two witnesses in the Text;
for they have seemed to be small and little, and their enemy a great
mountain: but undoubtedly this mountain shall become a plain before
them, and they shall again become a glorious Temple, a mountain of
holiness, the praise of the whole earth. But the Prophet at the 12
verse, is said again to ask the angel, What the olive-branches are?
and receives this further answer: These be the two anointed ones,
that stand by the Lord of the whole earth: here is another
description of them, in which it is most evident, that by the two
olive-trees is meant the Saints, Servants and witnesses of Jesus
Christ; for this is a plain character of Saints; for first, Saints
are anointed ones, and are said to be anointed, 2 Cor. 1. 21. and
are said to have received an unction from the holy One, 1 Joh. 2.
20. Again secondly, as Saints are anointed ones, so it is they only
that can come into the presence of God; it is they only that can
enter into the Holy of Holies, by the new and living way, which
Jesus Christ hath made for them.

Now by this time it is clear, That by the two olive-trees, is meant
all Saints: for they are anointed ones, and they stand in the
presence of God; they then are the two olive-trees, which have
prophesied, clothed in sackcloth, and though they have been but as a
handful, compared with that great mountain the Beast, so that they
could not prevail by might, nor by power, yet by that unction, by
that anointing, that Spirit that is upon them they shall prevail.

These are the two olive-trees, and the two Candle-sticks]

These witnesses are also said to be candle-sticks, because all
Saints as they are anointed ones, so they are the light of the
world, Mat. 5. 14. they are light in the Lord, and they shine as
lights amidst a crooked and perverse generation.

These are the two olive-trees, and the two Candlesticks, standing
before the God of the earth.]

The wicked (saith the Psalmist) shall not stand in thy presence,
neither shall evil dwell with thee. It is indeed only the
prerogative of those holy ones, that are washed in the blood of the
Lamb, that are unblameable and unreprovable in his sight: and to
these doth he hold out the golden scepter of his grace, and these do
stand in the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.

Verse 5.

And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth,
and devoureth their enemies.]

The Saints in a sense, are the Judges and Executioners of their
enemies. Behold a king, saith the Prophet (Isa. 32. 1) shall reign
in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment; speaking of
the reign of the Lord Jesus, and his Saints ruling with him, so that
as he judgeth, so do they; and they pass sentence with him upon
their enemies, and therefore is it here said, If any man will hurt
them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, and devoureth their
enemies: That is, that breath of the spirit that proceedeth out of
their mouth, in their prayers doth both pronounce the sentence and
bring down the fire of wrath upon their enemies. And this is clear,
Revel. 8. 3. for there it appears, That when the prayers of all
Saints were offered upon the golden altar, that then the angel took
the censer, and filled it with fire of the altar, and cast it into
the earth, and there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings,
and an earth-quake. So that this is the power that Saints have to
devour their enemies, and though their enemies be never so high and
potent, yet they are not so high, nor so potent, but they can reach
them, either to kill or destroy them, or to bind and imprison them.
And this is further witnessed unto by the Psalmist, Psalm 149. 6, 7,
8, 9. where speaking of the Saints, says he, Let the high praises of
God be in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their hands, to
execute vengeance upon the Gentiles, and punishments upon the
people, to bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with
fetters of iron; to execute upon them the judgement written: This
honour have all his Saints. Here the Psalmist speaks of executing
vengeance upon the Gentiles, and punishments upon the people, of
binding kings in chains, and nobles in fetters of iron. Why? Who
must do thus? Must it not be some great and mighty potentate? No,
but this is to be done by Saints, and that not only by some Saints,
but as well by the weakest of Saints, as by the strongest; For this
honour have all his Saints. All Saints do execute vengeance upon
their enemies; If any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of
their mouth; from their prayers proceedeth a fire of wrath, and
devoureth their enemies.

And if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.]

As a fire proceedeth out of their mouth, that devoured their enemies
in general: so if any man will hurt them, he must in the same manner
be killed, that is, by the fire that proceedeth out of their mouth.

Verse 6.

These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy.]

As the fire mentioned in the former verse, was not material fire,
but it was mystically spoken: so the rain here mentioned, is to be
mystically understood, as it is in several places of scripture. I
will cite but only two places, for they will be sufficient: and in
both of them, what is to be understood by water or rain, is
declared. As Isa. 44. 3. I will pour water upon him that is thirsty,
and floods upon the dry ground. Now would we know, what is here
meant by water and floods? it follows in the next words, I will pour
my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. So
that here the Spirit, and the blessings of heaven are expressed by
water, and by floods. The other place, is Joh. 3. 38, 39. He that
believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water. The next verse explains this, This he
spake of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive.
So that we see what the scripture means by water, when it speaks
mystically of it: so that it is in this sense, that the Saints are
said here during the prevalency of the Beast, to shut heaven that it
rain not: for it cannot be understood of material rain, for that
hath been extended to the unjust, as to the just: and if material
rain should be withheld, the Saints and witnesses might have as well
suffered by the withholding of it, as others: no, it is not the
withholding of material rain, but a greater judgement then that: for
as the Saints had power to bring a fire of wrath upon their enemies:
so to shut up the rain of spiritual blessings, that the floods of
the spirit do not descend upon them. But whereas the Saints are like
the tree, that is planted by the rivers of water, that is always
green and flourishing; their enemies are for want of these waters,
as a dry tree that brings forth no fruit, and must be hewn down and
cast into the fire.

That it rain not in the days of their prophecy]

We see what the days of their prophecy is, at the third verse, where
they are said to prophesy, clothed in sackcloth, a thousand two
hundred and threescore days: which hath been showed to be so many
years, which is the term of time which the Gentiles, the Beast is to
prevail, and the holy city, the Saints are to be trodden under foot;
these we see are said to be the days of their prophesying, clothed
in sackcloth; not but that they might prophesy after that time is
expired: but those were the days of their prophesying in sackcloth,
because they are trodden under foot, and they are given to the
Beast, the Babylonians, and during these days of their prophesying
in sackcloth, they have power to shut heaven, that it rain not
spiritual blessings upon their enemies. And hath it not been even
thus? Hath not the Beast, and all his adherents been as dry trees,
and have they not continued to be so, without ever obtaining a drop
of spiritual grace? Have they not been as the dry ground, obdurate
and hardened in their hellish ways? insomuch as it is to be admired,
that they should so continue without any relenting or returning for
so many hundred years, although they have had the Scriptures, and
many of them great outward parts and abilities, and the writings of
many precious Saints; which are means by which God uses to work; but
none of these means could work anything, because they had the Heaven
so shut, that none of the waters of the Spirit did descend upon
them. Therefore it was that the letter of the Word, and all other
advantages could do nothing, for they are all nothing without the
Spirit.

And have power over waters, to turn them to blood]

This is another plague distinct from the former (but it is also
mystically expressed) therefore these waters, are not those that are
said to be shut up from them: for it is not possible for them to be
turned into blood: that is, to be made useless, as waters are, when
they are turned into blood: but they are those waters which their
enemies the Babylonians made use of, instead of the waters of the
Spirit: And what were they? It were their canons, and decrees, and
constitutions which they gave forth, as equivalent unto the very
dictates of the Spirit itself: and they declared them to be of as
great authority, and of these waters they made all that did adhere
to them to drink: and with these waters they contented themselves,
never caring for the waters of the Spirit. Now the Saints had power
over these waters, to turn them to blood; which they did by the
Spirit of prophesy which they had; whereby they did so hold forth
the testimony of Jesus Christ, in the purity of it, as all the
Romish doctrines, and Popish canons were turned to blood, rendered
useless unto others, and discovered to be corrupt. And this is that
which was done by those angels or saints, that poured out the second
and third vials. Revel. 16. 3, 4.

And to smite the earth with all plagues, as often as they will.]

How Saints may be said to smite the earth, or earthly men with all
plagues, doth in part appear above, where it appears, That they do
it by their prayers: for when the prayers of the Saints ascended up
before God, then it is said, Revel. 8. 5. That fire was cast upon
the earth, or earthly men, and produced dreadful effects; as voices
and thundering, and lightnings, and an earthquake. Thus Saints do
smite the Earth with all plagues by their prayers. But they do not
only smite the Earth by their prayers, but also by their
prophesying, and holding forth the testimony of Jesus Christ: for by
the earth here spoken of, is peculiarly expressed those earthly men,
that in a more especial manner trod the Saints under foot. Now they
(as before appears) were the Beast, the Pope, and his complices, the
Babylonian Romans, and all that were of that faction. Now these the
Saints do smite with all plagues, by their holding forth the
testimony of Jesus Christ against them (as well as by praying
against them:) for thereby is their doctrine discovered, to be a
pack of abominable lies; and this proves a plague unto them, and
this pains them at the very heart: for by this plague, they are like
to die, it is like to prove a mortal disease unto them, and
therefore is very grievous, Revel. 12. 11. The Saints are said to
overcome the Dragon by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of
their testimony; for they loved not their lives unto the death:
Whereby it is evident, That by holding forth the testimony of Jesus
Christ, and sealing it with their blood, the Saints do smite the
devil in the Beast, so as to overcome him. And thus by their
prayers, and by the word of their testimony, Saints do smite the
earth, that is, their Babylonical enemies with all plagues as often
as they will.

Verse 7.

And when they shall have finished their testimony.]

It is but a prefixed term of time, as appears in the third verse,
That Jesus Christ will have his people prophesy in a despicable,
sad, and low condition, clothed in sackcloth: and that is so long as
the Beast is to continue, as appears by comparing the third verse of
this chapter, with the fifth verse of the thirteenth chapter: and
that term of time which the Beast was to continue, and the Saints to
be trodden under foot, and to prophesy in sackcloth, is a thousand
two hundred and threescore years, as appears above. Now this 1260
years, being added to the year wherein the Beast received his
devilish power, and seat, and great authority, in the reign of
Phocas the Emperor: which was, as say historians, in the year 404. I
say adding to this, 1260. it makes up, 1664. And this year, 1664
should be the year wherein the witnesses should finish their giving
testimony, clothed in sackcloth: If this 1260 years should be
computed according to the rule of Astronomers, allowing 365 days to
a year, and to every fourth year adding a day more. But we find that
the holy Ghost in this prophecy, not observing that rule, doth allow
but 360 days to a year, and according to that rule, 1260 days to
three years and an half.

And therefore in computing the time of the witnesses, prophesying in
sackcloth, we are to observe the rule which the holy Ghost here lays
down, to allow 360 days to a year, and so the time of the witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth, is to expire eighteen years, and almost an
half, sooner then as by the other account: and so the beginning of
the year 1645. was the time when the witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth, and of being trodden under foot of the Beast, and his
adherents did expire.

And when they shall have finished their testimony, the Beast that
ascendeth out of the bottomless pit]

That the Pope is the Beast that ascended out of the bottomless pit,
is made evident above. And therefore it is the Pope, that is
expressed here also, by the name of the Beast that ascendeth out of
the bottomless pit.

The Beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit, shall make war
against them.]

This war which is here mentioned, that the Beast was to make against
the witnesses, the Saints of Jesus Christ, is the late war that hath
been by him made in Ireland and England, as will perspicuously
appear, by comparing it with that description of it, which is given
in this and the following verses.

And first that this war was made by the Beast that ascended out of
the bottomless pit, that is, by the Pope, is most evident: For,

First, What is done by any of the ten kingdoms, that are of his
horns is his act. And

Secondly, Whatever is done by his instigation, is done by him: Now
in both these respects, the war late in England, and in Ireland is
the Beast's war. For

First, All that have acknowledged any kingdoms to be the horns of
the Beast, have acknowledged England to be one of them. Therefore
this war being made by the authority of one of the ten horns of the
Beast, was made by the Beast.

But it may be objected: But England was fallen from Rome before the
war, which was begun in 1641. for Queen Elizabeth long since cast
off the Pope's supremacy, and it was never since acknowledged by the
kings of England; and together with the Pope's supremacy, was the
Popish Canons and Decrees rejected, and for matter of doctrine, the
doctrine embraced in England, was purely refined from the dregs of
men's inventions, And how could England then be said, (these things
being done) to be one of the horns of the Beast, and a part of the
Babylonical city of Rome?

Answ. Although England had done these things, yet England was still
one of the horns and a part of that city. And this will appear, if
we consider, what it was that made the bishop of Rome to become the
Beast, and what made the city of Rome, to become the mystical
Babylon. Now the bishop of Rome did then become the Beast, when he
did receive from the devil (for Jesus Christ never gave it him) a
power to exercise authority, over the consciences of all that did
profess Christianity: and by this power he did oppress, and trouble,
and afflict the precious Saints of Jesus Christ; by this means also
did Rome become the mystical Babylon; for hereby did it enslave, and
vassalize the Saints, as Babylon of old did the Church that then
was: and then consequently all the ten kingdoms, that did exercise
this authority over the conscience, did thereby become a part of
Babylon, and the horns of the beast; by which he did push, and gore,
and destroy the Saints of Jesus Christ. And hereby was the holy city
trodden under foot.

Now then, though Queen Elizabeth cast off the Pope's supremacy, and
a great part of his devilish doctrine; yet England did
notwithstanding remain one of the horns of the Beast, and a part of
Romish Babylon: because there was a party retained, which did
exercise authority over the consciences of Saints; which hath proved
a great bondage to them, and hath persecuted the Saints, as the
Beast was wont to do: for even in Queen Elizabeth's days, there were
some Saints persecuted, that did scruple in some things to conform
to the bishops; though the bishops then, were not so bad as they
have been since: but since the bishops grew worse, and worse, and
became more profane, and filthy, and wicked (as all that usurp
authority over the consciences do, and as the bishop of Rome did) I
say since Queen Elizabeth's time, that they grew worse and worse,
they have grown higher, and higher in the persecution of Saints; so
that a real godly minister could scarce be suffered to abide in the
kingdom: but many were fain to fly to Holland, and New England, and
other places; and those that did abide in the kingdom, were
exceedingly persecuted. And thus England did remain a horn of the
Beast, and a part of Babylon; because there was a power retained,
that did exercise authority over the conscience.

And hereby it is evident, That the late war in England and Ireland
was made by the Beast. For

First, That war was made by one of his horns, England being then a
horn of the Beast. And

Secondly, This war was made by the Beast: because it was by his
instigation; for it was evident that this war was, Bellum
Episcopale, the bishops' war; and that they together with the Queen,
acted for the Beast, and were thereunto instigated by him: and to
that end the Pope's Nuncios, and Jesuits were so long resident in
England, and Ireland; and all the Papists in England and Ireland,
were violent in the prosecution of it. So that this is clear, that
the late war in England and Ireland was made by the Beast.

But secondly, as the war in England and Ireland was made by the
Beast; so it was made by him against the witnesses, the Saints, and
precious ones of Jesus Christ: for that which is done against the
most considerable number of Saints, is done against the whole; as
being the way to prevail over all. Now in England there are a more
considerable number of the faithful servants, and witnesses of Jesus
Christ; then is in any kingdom in the world. As one truly said,
England is the richest ship in the world; for God hath more of those
precious jewels in it, than he hath in any other kingdom in the
world. It is true that in other kingdoms, as in France, and Germany,
and Scotland, &c there are a vast number of such as are called
Protestants; but they are exceeding formal, and lukewarm generally;
they are professors, but few possessors of Christ: but for sincere,
real Saints that walk close with God, in a pious & holy
conversation; England exceeds all other kingdoms in the world. Now
the war being made against these, it was made against all the
witnesses, against all Saints. Now that it was made against the
Saints in England. is also evident for it was the rooting out of
such as were called Puritans, and Independents, and Brownists, that
was chiefly aimed at in that war; and therefore it was given out,
that they would leave no more Puritans in England, then there were
protestants in Rome. And this was made evident in all their
proceedings, for the Puritans were they, against whom they expressed
their greatest malice. And such as they called Puritans, were the
most precious Saints of Jesus Christ. Thus it is evident, that this
war was made by the beast against the Saints, the witnesses of Jesus
Christ.

And the Beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit, shall make
war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them.]

In this war that was made by the Beast against the Saints, and
witnesses of Jesus Christ, he did so prevail as he did overcome
them; for at the very first breaking out in Ireland, there was such
terrible blow given unto the Saints, and they were so overcome, as
the Beast, and his adherents thought themselves sure of overcoming
all the rest in Ireland, and England; so that all the rest did then
seem to be as dead men; and as at the beginning they overcame, so
they continued overcoming, & keeping the witnesses under, for they
did both prevail in the field, and exceedingly overcame them that
opposed them, and also took cities, and towns, and castles, and got
possession of country after country; so that the witnesses whom they
chiefly opposed, were brought to such a low ebb, as for three years
and a half, they seemed to be as dead, as lost, and had little hope,
and less confidence of overcoming the enemy, but on the other side,
the enemy had great confidence, that the Puritans and Round-heads
(as they termed them) should not rise again; for they looked upon
them as dead.

Verse. 8.

And their dead bodies]

The witnesses being overcome, and brought to such a low ebb, and
seeming to be so unable to recover strength again to overcome the
Beast, they were looked upon as dead bodies; as no more able to
overcome the beast, than so many dead carcases.

And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city,
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was
crucified]

There is a mention made of Rome, Revel. 17. 18. And there this title
is given to it, The great city. And here again the same title is
given to it, The great city. But lest this should not express it
clearly enough; here are some other distinguishing characters given
to it: and they are these:

First, That it is Spiritually called Sodom; for the abominable
filthinesses, and sodomitical practices, that are in it; for the
abominations of that city are so many, and so apparent; as there is
no city in the world, that may so fitly be called by the name of
spiritual Sodom, as it.

And secondly, It is spiritually called Egypt: and this name also is
most fitly given to that city; for as Egypt of old, was a house of
bondage to the people of God; so hath Rome been a house of bondage,
to the Saints, for above twelve hundred years.

Thirdly, It is distinguished by this character, Where also our Lord
was crucified: because it was by the power of Rome, that our Lord
was crucified; so that though it was not in Rome, but near
Jerusalem, yet Jerusalem being then under the power of Rome, it was
accounted as a part of Rome. These are the characters that are given
to Rome; whereby it is made evident, that this great city is Rome.
Now that the witnesses being overcome, that their dead bodies did
lie in the street of this great city is apparent; for England being
one of the ten horns of the Beast, is a part of that great city. And
so the dead bodies of the witnesses being in England, did lie in the
street of that great city.

Verse. 9.

And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations shall
see their dead bodies]

These that are here expressed by those titles of the people, and
kindreds, and tongues, and nations, are some that are distinct from
the witnesses; for they are said to see their dead bodies: so that
they are another sort of people, that is, they are not Saints, are
not of the holy city, but of the people, and kindreds, and nations
of the world.

Shall see their dead bodies three days and a half]

Those days as these mentioned in the 3. verse, are prophetical days;
so that by these three days and a half, is meant three years and a
half.

And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations shall
see their dead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer
them to be put in graves]

These people, and kindred, and nations, and tongues, though they be
not of the witnesses, and Saints; yet they are not for the Beast,
but do help the Saints against the Beast; for they are said to keep
the dead bodies of the Saints, from being put in graves: when the
Beast had overcome the Saints so as they seemed to be quite lost,
they seemed to be dead: then they would not suffer them to be
interred; though they were brought low, yet they would not suffer
them to be brought so low, but kept them from being totally removed
out of sight; from being put into a condition, wherein they should
not be in such a capacity of rising, as when they were unburied.
Suitable to this, is that passage, Rev. 12. 16. where it is said,
when the Dragon poured out waters as a flood after the Woman, that
he might cause her to be carried away of the flood; that then the
earth helped the Woman, and opened her mouth, and swallowed up the
flood.

Here it is evident, that the Church being followed by the Beast,
with a flood of persecution, that the people of the earth do keep
off the fury of the Beast, from destroying the Church utterly; so
that the people of the earth are made instruments of helping the
Saints, against the persecution of the Beast. And so it was in the
late war in England, the Lord made some such as were but carnal, and
profane, to be instruments of helping the Saints, from being totally
overcome of the Beast; for those of the Saints that were in the
Parliament's Army, that fought against the Beast, were but a small
number compared with the others in that Army, that were not Saints.
And indeed it is very wonderful to consider, how by an over-ruling
providence, the hearts of carnal men were commanded to stand up in
the defence of the witnesses, against the Beast: for there were many
thousands, that did engage themselves with the Parliament, in their
defensive war, that were not the witnesses. Thus God made them of
the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, to be
instruments of keeping the bodies of the witnesses, from being put
in graves, from being put totally under the earth, under the Beast,
although they were brought so low, as they were as dead in their
own, and the account of the Beast.

Verse. 10.

And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and
make merry, and shall send gifts one to another]

They that were the adherents of the Beast, are here expressed by
this character, They that dwell upon the earth. For this is a
character most proper to them, and is most usually used to express
the Beast, and his faction, in the prophecy of this Book; as chap.
16. 1. where the seven Angels, are bid to pour out their vials upon
the earth, which was upon the Beast and his adherents, as appears
throughout the chapter, and so again in the 6, verse of this 11.
chap. it is said, The witnesses had power to smite the earth, with
all plagues as often as they will. Which is peculiarly spoken of the
members of the Beast: for it is they that the witnesses do more
especial plague; and so it is they, (I say) that are here thus
expressed, They that dwell upon the earth.

They that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another]

The witnesses being overcome, and lying for dead; they that are of
the Beast do therein rejoice, and express a great deal of delight,
that they have in it, and make themselves as merry with it as
possibly they may, and a mad mirth it is.

And thus they did here in England, for that three years and a half,
that the witnesses seemed to be dead. For in Oxford, and other
places where they that were for the Beast were resident; they had
feasting, drinking healths, and ringing bels, and making bonfires,
and roaring, and carousing, and swearing, and cursing, and banning,
and damning; and all the hellish mirth they could invent. And why?
Because the Puritans, and Round-heads, and Anabaptists, Brownists,
and Tub-preachers (as they termed the witnesses) were overcome.

They that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and send gifts one to another; because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth]

The witnesses, prophets, Saints, of Jesus Christ, do kill, plague,
and torment those that dwell upon the earth: that is, those that
were members of the Beast, and how they do so, hath been showed in
the opening of the 5, and 6. verses: and because they do so, is the
reason why they are so hated of them, and why they do so much
rejoice in the casting down of them; for they cannot endure those
torments, that the prophets of Jesus, do inflict upon them, when
they hold forth the truth of Christ, so as to overthrow their
devilish doctrines, and turn their waters into blood; when they do
so hold forth the truth, as to throw down the pomp, and pride, of
their Clergy: they cannot endure this, and when they do declare
against the sottishness, and blindness, and profaneness of the
people which they nourish up, and admit to partake of sealing
Ordinances: this proves a torment to them, as doth also the holding
forth of other truths of Christ, which do oppose them in their
lusts, and in their crooked ways: and because the Saints do so
torment the Beasts crew, therefore do they rejoice so much when they
have any hope of rooting them out.

Verse. 11.
And after three days, and a half, the Spirit of life from God
entered into them]

As the late war made by the Beast against the witnesses, doth fully
agree with all the circumstances of it, laid down in the former
verses; so it agrees exactly with what is laid down in this verse
also: for after the witnesses had been in so low a condition, as
they were (as Paul was when he was stoned) supposed to be dead, for
three years and a half: they did not lie as dead a day longer, but
at the very day, when the three years and a half were expired; then
the Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they began to
stand upon their feet.

For on the 23. day of October, 1641. did the Beast begin the war in
Ireland; and he continued overcoming the witnesses, the Saints of
Jesus Christ, in Ireland, and in England, until the 5. day of April,
1645. and from the 23. of October, 1641. unto the 5. of April, 1645.
there is just a thousand two hundred, and sixty days; which
according to the Scripture account, (though not according to the
Heathen account) is three years and a half complete: and when this
three years, and a half were expired; which was, I say, one the 5.
of April, 1645. then was the resurrection of the witnesses: for they
having lain dead for three years and a half before; then the Spirit
of life from God entered into them. And the year 1645. as it is the
year wherein the witnesses were raised from the dead; so it is the
year, wherein the term of time in which they were to prophesy in
sack-cloth, and to be trodden under foot was to expire, and the year
also wherein the prevailing power of the Beast over the Saints was
to expire, as is made evident in the opening of the 2. verse above.
Now that one the 5. day of April, 1645. the Saints, witnesses, and
servants of Jesus Christ, were raised up, and that then a spirit of
life from God entered into them, appears thus:

On the 5. day of April, 1645. the Parliament's Army, who had stood 
for the defence of the Saints against the Beast; and had been before
that time exceedingly overcome, and were brought into a very low
condition at that time, being new modelled, and having a great many
precious Saints in it, both eminent commanders, inferior officers,
and common soldiers; and being then put under the conduct of Sir
Thomas Fairfax; they then began to march against the enemy, and then
had a Spirit of life from God, that entered into them, as did appear
in all their actings afterward; for they went on with such vigour,
courage, life, and fortitude, as they effected every work they took
in hand; defeated all the enemies with whom they did encounter; had
the victory in every battle they fought; never sat down before any
city, town, or castle, but they took it in, before they raised their
siege: Thus they acted like men raised from that dead, low,
condition they were in before, And why? Because now a Spirit of life
from God was entered into them: and unto God did they give all the
praise, and so let them do still: for they had as surely fled before
their enemies, and been beat down as the mire in the streets then,
as ever they had been before, if the Spirit of life from God had not
been put upon them.

Thus the 5. day of April, 1645. did the witnesses, the Saints, (of
whom the Beast thought to make an utter end,) stand upon their feet
having a spirit of life from God put upon them; when the army that
fought their battles, and defended their righteous cause, began to
march against the army of the Beast, to the overthrowing of it.

And they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them that
saw them]

The Saints being raised from the dead, from that dejected, low
condition in which they were, for three years and a half; a Spirit
of life from God being put upon them: they then stood upon their
feet, to the fear, and amazement of their enemies. Before indeed the
Saints did lie dead in the street, and were as the street to them
that went over them: but since the Spirit of life from God entered
into them, they have stood upon their feet; and as men that stand
upon their feet, so long as they do stand upon their feet, are not
in a capacity of being trod under foot of men: So the witnesses, and
Saints of Jesus Christ, since they stood upon their feet, could not
be trodden under foot of men. Though they have been trodden under
feet a thousand two hundred, and threescore years, and the Beast
hath had power so long to trample them under feet; yet since the
Spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their
feet, it was not possible for the Beast, nor any of his adherents,
so to trample them under foot any more.

And they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them which
saw them]

The witnesses standing upon their feet, as men risen from the dead,
did cast a great fear, and terror upon their enemies: for now they
begin to fear what will become of themselves, and their great Idol,
The Beast; they seeing the witnesses of Jesus to stand upon their
feet, fearfulness doth surprise them; because now they conceive that
their kingdom is going down; as indeed it is going down wonderfully,
as they did rejoice, and make merry, when they saw the Saints, or
Puritans, as they termed them, brought into a low condition, when
they lay dead; so now on the contrary, they seeing these Puritans,
the precious Sons of Sion to stand upon their feet, now a fear, a
great fear is fallen upon them.

Verse. 12.

And they heard a great voice from Heaven, saying, unto them, come up
hither. And they ascended up to Heaven in a cloud, and their enemies
beheld them]

As the Beast, and they that join with him, are in several places of
the prophesy of this book, called; The earth: So the Saints, and
witnesses of Jesus Christ, are in opposition to the Beast, called,
Heaven As Rev. 13. 6. it is said of the Beast, That he opened his
mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his
tabernacle, and them that dwelt in Heaven. By them that dwelt in
Heaven, is meant, the Saints of God, who are called, Them that dwell
in Heaven. As the members of the Beast are called, Them that dwell
upon the earth, Rev. 11. 10. And so Rev. 15. 5. It being said (in
the former verses) of the Saints, that had gotten the victory over
the Beast, and over his image, and over his mark, that they sung the
Song of Moses the Servant of God, and the Song of the Lamb; saith
John, After this I looked, and behold, the Temple of the Tabernacle
of the testimony in Heaven, was opened. And chap. 11. 19. And the
Temple of God was opened in Heaven; and there was seen in his
Temple, the Ark of his Testament, &c. It is evident, that in both
these places the Saints, the Church of God, is called Heaven; for it
cannot be understood of Heaven itself; for there is no Temple. So in
this verse, whereas it is said the witnesses heard a voice from
Heaven: by Heaven, here also, is meant, the Church, the Saints of
God. So that, the meaning of this verse, is this, The witnesses of
Jesus, being raised from the dead, and having a Spirit of life from
God put upon them; and standing upon their feet like living men;
that part of the Saints that in a more especial manner, acted in
opposing the Beast, and had a most eminent spirit of life, and
courage put into them, did hear a voice from the churches of Christ;
from most of the Saints, wherein they expressed their great
affection to them; and owned them, and embraced them in their
societies. They said unto them, Come up hither, and they again
mutually embraced them; they went into the Heavenly societies of the
Saints, they ascended up to that Heaven: but it was in a cloud, it
was not clearly seen of men, but though not clearly, yet it was seen
by them; for their enemies beheld them; their enemies beheld them
though in a cloud, in an obscure manner.

And thus it was with those Saints that were in the Army on the
Parliament side, as before they stood upon their feet, and prevailed
against their enemies, they had the prayers of all other Saints: so
afterward, were they with great affection, received into the
societies of Saints, and embraced by them, and this did appear to
their enemies; though not very clearly.

Verse. 13.

And the same hour was there a great earth-quake.]

The kingdom of the Beast being called the earth, it is that earth of
whom this earth-quake is spoken. Now this earth-quake, is said to be
the same hour when the witnesses being risen from the dead, did
ascend into the societies of the Saints; and were by them received,
and embraced: in that same hour, there was a great earth-quake. The
state of the Beast hath been shaken before. The witnesses have made
a former earth-quake in the kingdom of the Beast, which was
mentioned, chap. 7. 5. but that is not said to be a great earth-
quake; but this is said to be a great earth-quake. And indeed this
was a greater earth-quake; a greater shaking to the kingdom of the
Beast, then any that hath been before it, as doth appear by the
effects of it, mentioned in this verse. Though it is true, this is
not the greatest earth-quake that shall come on the kingdom of the
Beast; for there shall be a far greater earth-quake that shall come
upon it: as appears, chap. 16. 18. yet this was a very great earth-
quake; a very great shaking to the kingdom of the Beast: For in this
earth-quake,

The tenth part of the city fell]

This word, The city, hath reference unto a city, formerly mentioned
in this chapter, and that is verse. 8. and it is there so plainly
described, as it doth evidently appear to be the mystical Babylon.

And the tenth part]

The ten kingdoms that were the ten horns of the Beast, were ten 
several parts of mystical Babylon, which did reign over them. So
that England being one of them, was a tenth part of mystical
Babylon.

And a tenth part of the city fell]

This was one of the effects of the earth-quake, which was occasioned
by the resurrection of the witnesses, the Saints in England; it did
so shake the great Babylon of the Beast, as a tenth part of it fell.
And this most exactly came to pass, in the year of the Resurrection
of the witnesses, 1645. for then did the kingdom of England (which
was a tenth part of great Babylon) fall from Rome; for then was that
removed from it, whereby it had continued to be a part of Babylon
(the place of Saints' slavery) namely, the power of men over the
consciences of Saints: For after the Army, which was for the
witnesses, stood upon their feet, in 1645. they so cast of that
power that men had had over their consciences, and over their
persons and estates for their conscience sake; as it was not
possible for the Beast, nor any of his adherents to recover that
power again, over the consciences of the Saints in this kingdom
(though they did with all their strength, and greatest industry
endeavour it afterwards) for the witnesses then standing upon their
feet; there was such an earth-quake, great Babylon was so shaken, as
England fell from it; the yoke of bondage which was upon the
consciences of Saints in England, was then cast off: And this was
one effect of the great earth-quake, which there was in mystical
Babylon, at the resurrection of the witnesses: that England fell
from it.

Thus England is fallen from the great whore, mystical Babylon; and
is become a president to the other kingdoms; who must all in time,
cast off the yoke of bondage under which they are; and hate the
whore, and make her desolate, and naked, &c. Revel. 17. 16.

And in the earth-quake were slain of men seven thousand.]

This was another effect of the earth-quake, that as a tenth part of
the city fell, so there were slain of men seven thousand.

What is meant by the fall of the tenth part of the city, is already
apparent, and it is not the material falling of a tenth part, of any
material city, but the mystical falling of the tenth part of a
mystical city. And suitable to this, is the meaning of this slaying
of seven thousand men, not by the material falling of any part of a
material city. But the earth-quake being a mystical shaking of
mystical Babylon; this is a mystical slaying of seven thousand men;
whereby they die mystically, that is, cease to live any longer to
mystical Babylon, being by beholding the great victory, which the
Saints had over the Beast converted, and fallen off from the Beast,
which seven thousand men were before, either secretly, or openly
lovers and worshippers of the Beast.

But it may be objected, How doth it appear that seven thousand men,
or persons were so converted, by the resurrection of the witnesses?

Answ. Though it do not visibly appear to the outward eyes of any; 
yet it is sufficient to persuade me, and should be to persuade all
Saints to believe it: in that this Scripture, this oracle of Heaven,
saith it. When there was no true worshippers of God in Israel, that
were visible to Elijah the Prophet, and that then the Lord telling
him, that he had left seven thousand in Israel, who had not bowed
the knee to Baal, nor had kissed him with the mouth; it was
sufficient to persuade Elijah to believe it: although not one of
those seven thousand did visibly appear to him. Therefore much more
ought Saints now, not to question the truth of this; that seven
thousand are in this mystical earth-quake, mystically slain, though
it be not altogether so visible to us (as other things are) because
this Scripture says it. And besides, what the Scripture says in it,
there is a probability of it, for it is very probable, that many are
convinced, that the witnesses, the Saints, are God's people, and
those that sight against them, are enemies of God, and do fight
against God. I say it is probable, that many are convinced of this,
because God hath so owned his people, and given them such victory
over those vile wretches that did oppose them, and formerly reproach
them, and say, Where is your God? And now God appearing to be for
them, when the enemy were come to such a height of impiety and
insolency: there is no question, but that many were convinced by it,
and fell from the Beast, and that the number of these so fallen from
the Beast is, no less than seven thousand. And this was the effect
of the great earth-quake.

And in the earth-quake were slain of men seven thousand, and the
remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.]

This remnant here spoken of, are distinct from the witnesses,
whether they be such as were for the Beast, or others; they are not
of the witnesses, but were some that were affrighted at the
witnesses, having a spirit of life from God put upon them; and their
standing upon their feet: and therefore not of them, but some
others, and they were not of the seven thousand neither, because
they are said to be the remnant, or the residue. So then, the
meaning of this clause, is this; that the raising up of the
witnesses in such an eminent manner, to the shaking of great
Babylon, did so work upon the residue of people, as were not of the
witnesses, nor of the seven thousand, as that either they were
affrighted at it, or had their mouths opened to glorify God in it,
or both.

And thus it was in the year 1645. the generality of people, both in
the kingdom, and in others, that either saw or heard of the great
things God did for the Saints, were either affrighted, and amazed at
it, or else did glorify God in working so wonderfully as he did: for
when God did work so wonderfully, and beyond expectation, in giving
victory upon victory, and success upon success unto his people; so
as they seemed to be, as them that dreamed: I say, when God did
thus, then the generality of people did admire, and acknowledge God
in it, and give him the glory of it, They glorified the God of
heaven, that had done such great things, in such an unexpected
manner, and in so short a time. And thus the remnant were
affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

Verse 14.

The second woe is past, and behold the third woe cometh quickly.

In the 8. chapter at the 13. verse, it is said, That an angel did
fly through the midst of heaven, saying, with a loud voice; woe,
woe, woe to the inhabiters of the earth; by reason of the other
voices, of the trumpet of the three Angels, which are yet to sound.
And at the 9. chapter in the former part of that chapter, there
being a description of a great judgement of God, upon wicked men,
such as had not the seal of God in their fore-heads, at the 12.
verse it is said, One woe is past, and behold there come two woes
more hereafter. And now upon the resurrection of the witnesses,
which brings in such a great earth-quake at the same hour with it; 
which gives such a terrible blow to Babylon, and the Beast; it is
said in this verse, That the second woe is past, and the third woe
cometh quickly. So that there remaineth one great woe more to come
upon the inhabiters of the earth. And what this woe is which is to
come, now quickly upon the inhabiters of the earth will be, appears
in the following verses of this chap. as the taking off the kingdoms
of this world, from the Beast, and from all others, to be subjected
only to our Lord, and his Christ; for him to reign over them for
ever and ever, &c. and now, that the witnesses are risen, this is to
be expected, and that quickly; and that to the great joy of all
Saints, and to the casting down of all their enemies that are
implacable. And thus much for the Explication of that part of the
chapter which at this time I intended to treat of. I now come to
draw some deductions from it, wherewith I shall conclude this
treatise.
The Application.

These verses being thus opened, many profitable deductions do arise
there-from. But I shall pass by some of them, and be as brief as I
may in others, that are points fully and sweetly held forth by
others in other Treatises, because I shall take liberty to be more
large in some things that are not as yet clearly held forth in print
by any other, that I have heard of.

Deduction 1.

That Deduction that first in order arises from the first verse, is a
word of comfort for all afflicted Saints; and the word of comfort
for such is this, That all their afflictions, whatever they be, are
measured out unto them by their God, who hath a tender love unto
them, and care over them in their affliction. The Saints of God who
are his Temple, and the holy and beloved city, we see here are
measured out unto an afflicted, sad condition: and their afflictions
come not at random, nor according to the will of their enemies: no,
but they are measured unto affliction, and their enemies could have
no power over them, but that they were by their God given unto the
Gentiles, to be trodden under foot, otherwise it could not have been
possible, for the Gentiles to have trodden them under foot. Now
since it is God's act towards his people, it must needs be for their
good, and therefore Paul speaking of the afflictions, and the
sufferings that Saints undergo, speaks of it as their privilege,
Phil. 1. 29. Unto you it is given, in the behalf of Christ, not only
to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. And the holy
Ghost in the prophecy of Micah, speaks of the rod of affliction, as
of the food of the people of God, Micah 7. 14. Feed thy people with
thy rod; the flock of thine heritage, which dwell solitarily in the
wood. And as in Micah, God is said to feed his people with his rod;
so he is said to comfort them with his rod: for saith David, Psal.
23. 4. Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. And therefore let
Saints in an afflicted condition, be comforted in this
consideration, That their affliction, whatever it be, is that which
comes not by chance, as men use to say; nor according to the wills
of men; but their God hath dispensed it out unto them, who doth it
in great wisdom, and great love, and gives them out affliction, as
their privilege, as their food, and for their comfort. O therefore,
let poor souls in affliction be no more cast down, and walk no more
heavily, nor go mourning all the day long no more, because of their
afflictions, but walk comfortably under afflictions, because they
come from a loving God, who hath appointed them thereunto, 1 Thes.
3. 3.

Deduction 2.

In the second place, it serves to inform us, That it is of God, that
enemies do rise up against the Saints; for we see here, that the
Gentiles, the mystical Babylonians, were by God appointed to afflict
the people of God; to tread the holy city under foot, before ever
they had a being. Now as God doth in love suffer his people to be
afflicted: So in wrath he usually gives up wicked men to be the
instruments of afflicting his people. For as the sufferings of
Saints work out for them a greater weight of glory, (2 Cor. 4. 17.)
So the wrongs and violence; that wicked men do offer unto the
Saints, doth procure for them a greater weight of vengeance. And 
therefore the Apostle, Phil. 1. 28. bids the Saints, To be in
nothing terrified by their adversaries; which is to them (saith he)
an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of
God. And 2 Thess. 1. 6. It is (saith he) a righteous thing with God,
to recompense tribulation unto them which trouble his Saints. So
that God raises up wicked men to afflict his people, that he may
pour out the fuller vials of wrath upon them. And therefore, when
God told Pharaoh, That he would at that time send all his plagues
upon his heart, and upon his servants and people, Exod. 9. 14. saith
he at the 16. verse. And in very deed, for this cause have I raised
thee up, for to show in thee my power, and that my name may be
declared throughout all the earth. So that no enemy can rise up
against the people of God; but it is of God, and God usually doth
it, that he may pour out the fuller vials of wrath upon them. I say
usually, it is so, but it is not always so: for some enemies of
Saints are sometimes chosen vessels, as Paul was: but ordinarily, it
is so, and so it shall be with the Beast: for both Babylon of old,
and this mystical Babylon, after they had afflicted, and oppressed
the people of God, so much as was before ordained, were appointed to
take off the dregs of that cup of trembling, which they put into the
hands of the people of God, Isa. 51. 21, 22, 23. Hear now thou
afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine: thus saith thy Lord, the
Lord and thy God, that pleadeth the cause of His people; behold I
have taken out of thy hand, the cup of trembling, even the dregs of
the cup of my fury; thou shalt no more drink it again, but I will
put it into the hand of them that afflict thee, which have said to
thy soul, Bowe down, that we may go over, and thou hast laid thy
body as the ground, and as the street to them that went over. And
how this was done, and shall be done, both to the material and the
mystical Babylon, appears at large in the 47. chapter of Isaiah, and
the 51. of Jeremiah, and the 18. of the Revelation: besides in
several other Scriptures. Now then, we may cease to wonder, why
wicked men do prevail so much, and continue so long in doing
violence unto Saints; for we see it is of God; for ordinarily he
suffers it, that vengeance may fall the heavier upon them at last.
Babylon hath multiplied her abominations for a long time, and made
herself drunk with the blood of Saints; but at last she shall be
rewarded double for all the cruelties she hath done to the Saints.

Deduction 3.

Thirdly, Saints are here instructed to beware how they be too hasty
to get out of an afflicted condition; and especially to beware how
they use any indirect means, that so they may come the sooner out of
affliction: for it is vain and sinful for them so to do: for the
time how long they shall remain in an afflicted condition, is fixed
by the Father, and so long they shall remain under affliction,
though they strive and struggle never so much, to come sooner out of
it. For we see here the holy city, was to be trodden under foot of
the Gentiles, to be in an afflicted condition forty and two months,
and so long they did abide in that condition; it may be they might
expect deliverance the first month of years; but if not then, yet
the second month, when sixty years were expired, they might then
hope deliverance was near. For the material Babylon, held the people
of God but seventy years, but yet deliverance came not in three, nor
four, nor five, nor twenty months of years; but when they had been
five hundred years under persecution, there came no deliverance from
the tyranny of the Beast, but the Saints were to remain seven
hundred years longer, and why? because the time appointed for
deliverance was not come till then. The decree was past, that the
holy city should be trod under foot forty and two months, and the
decree being past, so long it must, and so long it did remain to be
trodden under foot. It is wisdom therefore for Saints, quietly to
submit to the will of their God, in affliction, and not to be too
hasty to get out, before the appointed time of their God be come;
but if he tarry they must wait.

Deduction 4.

Fourthly, In the next here is a further word of Consolation to
Saints in affliction: and that is, That when the time of affliction,
in which they are to abide under affliction, is expired, then they
shall be delivered out of affliction, and nothing shall longer
prolong their affliction: for we see that though the holy city must
be trod under foot, forty and two months: yet when that time is
expired, they must be delivered. The rod of the wicked must not
always rest upon the lot of the righteous: No, the Father hath
appointed a time, wherein deliverance must come. The Saints must not
always be laid low, and therefore saith the Church, Micah 7. 8.
Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; when I fall, I shall rise
again. So, though the witnesses be clothed in sack-cloth, a long
time, yet it shall not be always so, They shall at last have beauty
for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise, for
the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61. 3. And though they have for a time
lain among the pots; yet shall they be, as the wings of a Dove,
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold, Psal. 68.
13. And of this we are to be confident under any affliction, that we
shall have deliverance, and nothing shall be able to hinder it, when
the appointed time for our deliverance is come, though not before.

Deduction 5.

Fifthly, In the next place, Is it so, that Jesus Christ hath had
some that have prophesied, during all the twelve hundred and odd
years that the Beast hath tyrannized over the Saints, during all the
time, the Saints have been under the bondage of mystical Babylon,
then this may serve to convince those of their error, who will not
hear (such as they acknowledge to be real) Saints, to hold forth the
word of truth, the testimony of Jesus, to the edification,
exhortation, and comfort of others: and the reason why they will not
hear them, is, because they conceive, that since the rising up of
the Beast, and the Babylonish darkness, there hath been no true
Pastors, nor Teachers, nor Prophets. Now for the convincing of those
of their error herein; I shall be the more large in this use,
endeavouring to make it clearly to appear to be their great weaknes.

And now, you that lie under this scruple, in the spirit of love and
meekness, I desire you to consider, how evident it is, that Jesus
Christ hath had some true prophets, during all this twelve hundred
years, that the Beast hath trodden the Saints under foot: For Jesus
Christ saith expressly, I will give power unto my two witnesses, and
they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty days, clothed
in sackcloth. And this hath been made good, for it appears, that in
all times since, Christ hath had some that have prophesied, that is,
have held forth the testimony of Jesus Christ; For the testimony of
Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. And indeed every true Saint is a
Prophet, because the Lord revealing his secrets to a soul, as it
maketh it a Saint, so it maketh it a Prophet, and so the Lord looks
upon his Saints as his witnesses and prophets. Now this being
evident, That Christ hath had true prophets; this maketh it clear,
that as it is said, Ephes. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. That Jesus Christ,
when he ascended up far above all heavens, gave some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers,
for the perfecting of Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come into the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. So
this word hath been fulfilled, Jesus Christ hath always continued
these. For,

First, Apostles have been continued for the edifying of the body of
Christ, as it is here said: for the Apostles being the eye-witnesses
of the Lord Jesus Christ, in all that he did and suffered, and of
his Resurrection, as it is evident in that expression of Peter, when
another Apostle was to be chosen in the place of Judas, Acts 1. 21,
22. Wherefore of these men which have accompanied with us, all the
time that the Lord Jesus went in, and out among us. Beginning from
the baptism of John, unto that same day he was taken from us, must
one be ordained to be a witness with us of his Resurrection. I say,
they being eye-witnesses of the Lord Jesus, their witness which they
gave of him is left still upon record, in which Apostles still
continue useful to the Church, for perfecting of Saints for the work
of the ministry, and for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we
all come, &c. and in this sense Apostles have continued: but
prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers have actually continued
in the Church; and that doth appear by this, because we here see it
is evident that Prophets have been continued. Now a man that is a
true Prophet of Jesus Christ may be, and in some degree truly is an
evangelist, and pastor, and a teacher also. For

First, To be an evangelist, is to be able to hold forth the Gospel,
in the grace and sweetness of it, and he that is so is an
evangelist. And

Secondly, To be a pastor, is to be able to feed the flock of Christ,
both the sheep and tender lambs, with the wholesome, saving truths
of Christ, to the nourishing, and strengthening of their Souls. And

Thirdly, To be a teacher, is to be able to unfold the mysteries of
the Gospel, and clearly to hold forth the truths of Christ, to the
instruction of the ignorant, and increasing of knowledge; and he
that is so is a Teacher.

Now he that is a prophet, may be all these:

First, He may be a man that publisheth the glad tidings, of the
Grace of the Gospel.

And secondly, A man that teacheth, and instructeth people, with
knowledge and understanding.

And thirdly, A man that feeds the flock of Christ, with wholesome
saving truths. I say a prophet may be, an evangelist, a pastor, and
teacher, and so was Paul: that he was a prophet, appears, Acts 13.
1. and that he was a pastor, appears, in that he was so frequent in
feeding the Church of God: and that he was a teacher, appears, Acts
13. 1. and 2 Tim. 1. 11. and Acts 20. 27. and that he was an
evangelist, appears in all his Epistles, by his full, and sweet
holding forth the Grace of the Gospel in them, and as Paul was so:
so it might be also said of Apollo, and Peter, and Barnabas, and
Timothy, and others.

But here it may be objected, If one man may be both a prophet, and
evangelist, a pastor, and teacher, Why doth the Apostle speak of
them particularly, as given to particular persons; For saith he,
Jesus Christ when he ascended gave some apostles, and some prophets,
and some evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers. And again, 1
Cor. 12. 29. he saith, Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all
teachers? Implying that the Spirit had dispensed out the gift of
prophesying to one, of teaching to another, of Apostleship to a
third, and not all these gifts to one.

Answ. Though it be true, That a prophet may be also an apostle, an 
evangelist, a pastor, and teacher, as Paul was; yet the Scripture
speaks particularly of them, because they are several gifts, and
sometimes they are severally dispensed; so that one man may be more
properly said to be an evangelist, because he may be more able to
hold forth the sweet word of the Gospel, and to be a son of
consolation, and to be more evangelical then other, and so may be
more properly said to be an evangelist. And so of the rest, one man
may be more eminent in one of these gifts, then in the rest; and so
may be more properly said to be, either a pastor, or a teacher, and
yet notwithstanding, he that is an evangelist, may in some sort be
able to act, as a pastor, or a teacher: so he that is a pastor, may
in some sort, be able to act as an evangelist, or a teacher, though
in an especial manner he may be fitted to do the work of a pastor,
and so of the rest: So that the reason why they are particularly
spoken of, is, because that some Saints may be more eminently fitted
for one of them, then for the rest; and not that they, that have one
of these gifts, have only one of those gifts, and is utterly void of
the rest, and this will be the more confirmed, and cleared by
comparing this, with that passage, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. For to one
is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge, by the same Spirit, to another faith, by the same Spirit,
to another the gifts of healing, by the same Spirit, to another the
working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of
Spirits, to another divers kinds of toungues, to another the
interpretation of tongues. Here the Apostle speaks of several gifts,
and saith that one is given to one, and another to another, and a
third to a third, &c. And his meaning is, That one Saint is more
eminent for one gift, and another for another, and not that he that
had the word of wisdom, had no knowledge, nor no faith, &c. Nor that
he that had faith, had not wisdom, nor knowledge, &c. Nor that he
that had knowledge, had no faith, nor wisdom, nor prophecy, &c. Nor
that he that had discerning of Spirits, had no knowledge, nor
prophecy, nor wisdom, nor faith, &c. But this is the Apostle's
meaning, That he that had the word of knowledge, might not have so
much faith, nor wisdom, nor discerning of spirits, &c. as he that
had less knowledge, so he that was full of faith, might have less
wisdom, and discerning of spirits, and knowledge, &c. then those
that were more weak in faith. But now as some might be eminent in
one of these gifts only; so some might be eminent for two, or three:
and others might be eminent for them all. And those that were
eminent for one only, could not be said to have none of the rest.

Now by this time the reason is evident, why the Apostle speaks of
prophets, evangelists, pastors, and teachers distinctly, and withal
it is evident, that he that is a prophet is an evangelist, a pastor,
and a teacher. for as it cannot be said of him that hath faith, that
he hath no knowledge, nor wisdom, nor discerning of spirits, &c. So
it cannot be said of a prophet, that he is no evangelist, nor
pastor, nor teacher.

And now, it is evident, That prophets have been continued all the
while, the Saints have been in Babylon; and in the continuance of
prophets, there hath been a continuance of evangelists, and pastors,
and teachers, whereby that Scripture hath been made good, Ephes. 4.
10, 11, 12, 13. which says, they must all continue, Till we all come
in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
&c. And this being so evident, it appears to be from weakness, and
darkness that any have questioned, whether any of these have been
during the time, that the Saints have been captivated to Babylon.

But here this query may be made; May there be prophets, evangelists,
apostles, and teachers, that were never ordained by the laying on of
hands?

Answ. Yes they may; for the Scripture speaks not of laying on of
hands upon any, but only of bishops, and deacons; and they only had
the laying on of hands because they were ordained, to do some
particular things, which were to be done by them, and was proper to
them only, and none in the Church else, were to act in them, but
only they. But prophesying, and evangelizing, and feeding, and
teaching, and building up one another, was common to all in the
Church, as everyone had received the gift, so to minister, as good
stewards of the Grace they had received! For their gifts are not
given to be laid up in a napkin, But the manifestation of the
Spirit, is given to everyone to profit withal. So that, these I say
were not restrained only to be done by bishops, and deacons, who
only were persons ordained, by the laying on of hands; but were
common to be done by all.

Now a bishop, (which the Scripture indifferently calls, either a
bishop, or an elder, or a presbyter,) is ordained by the laying on
of hands; because he is appointed to the work, which is proper to
that Office, and not to any other in the Church.

Now the works that are proper to a bishop, elder, or presbyter are,

First, To rule, and guide, and govern the Church: and this is clear
by that of the Apostle, 1 Tim. 5. 17. Let the bishops that rule well
be counted worthy of double honour. And 1 Tim. 3. 4. the Apostle
says, That a bishop must be one that rules well his own house;
implying, that he is not fit to rule the Church of God, if he do not
rule his own house well. And of those it is that the Apostle speaks,
Hebrew. 13. 7. Remember them which rule over you, who have spoken
unto you the word of God. And verse. 17. Obey them which have the
rule over you and submit, for they watch for your Souls. And of
these he also speaks, 1 Thes. 5. 12. Know them which labour among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you.

Moreover, secondly, It is the work of a bishop, or presbyter, to
ordain elders, or bishops in the Churches where they are wanting, as
appears, Titus 1. 5. The Apostle there speaking to Titus, who was a
bishop or presbyter, saith, For this cause left I thee in Crete;
that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting; and
ordain elders in every city. And so Timothy being a bishop, it was
his work, as appears by that rule given him, 1 Tim. 5. 22. Lay hand
suddenly on no man. Again it likewise is made evident, to be the
work of presbyters, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 2 Tim. 1. 6.

Now these things were proper to the office of a bishop, and others
that are not ordained to be bishops, have no warrant to take upon
them to act in these things.

But there are other things that bishops are also enjoined to do,
that may be and ought to be done by other brethren, but bishops are
enjoined to do them, in an especial manner, and they are these:

First, To feed the flock over which they are made over-seers, and
this is that Paul enjoins the elders of the Church of Ephesus to do,
Acts 20. 29. Take heed unto yourselves, and unto all the flock over
which the holy Ghost hath made you over-seers, and feed the Church
of God, which he hath purchased with his own blood. And this is that
which Timothy, who was an elder, or bishop, was enjoined to, in
these passages, 1 Tim. 4. 3. Preach the word, be instant in season,
and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering,
and doctrine. And verse. 5. Do the work of an Evangelist, make full
proof of thy ministry. And 2 Tim. 2. 15. Study to show thy self
approved unto God, a work-man that needeth not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth. Thus ought bishops in a more
especial manner to feed the flock of God, and to instruct and
admonish them. But this is not their duties only, but the duty of
all the brethren, according to their several abilities. But

Secondly, It is the duty of bishops, or presbyters, to be good
examples to believers: this also Timothy was enjoined unto, 1 Tim.
4. 12. Be thou an example to believers, in word, in conversation, in
love, in spirit, in faith, and purity. And this Titus, who was a
bishop, was also enjoined unto, Tit. 2. 7. In all things show thy
self a pattern of good works: in doctrine showing uncorruptness,
gravity, sincerity. And 2 Tim. 2. 2. The things which thou hast
heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful
men, who shall be able to teach others also. Thus it is the duty of
elders, or presbyters, to be a good example to believers: but it is
not their duty only, but the duty of all other Saints also.

Thirdly, It is the duty of bishops, to watch over the souls of the
flock which are committed to them; for they must give account of
them to God, and this the elders, or bishops of the Church of
Ephesus, are enjoined unto, Acts 20. 28. Take heed (saith the
Apostle) unto yourselves, and unto the flock over which the holy
Ghost hath made you over-seers: for I know (says he) that after my
departure, there shall grievous wolves enter in among you: So that
the elders of the Church ought to look to the flock, to keep them
from the pernicious Doctrines of wolvish men, and Heb. 13. 17. saith
the Apostle, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
yourselves; for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
account, that they may do it with joy. So that it is evident, that
it is the duty of the Elders of the Church, to watch over the souls
of the people. But this is not their duty only; but the duty of all
believers, to watch over one another.

Thus the Scripture declaring that bishops are ordained, by the
laying on of hands, declares what things are to be done by bishops,
as bishops, and not by other Saints; and what things are to be done
by them, which is to be done by others also. Now the Scripture
speaks but of one Office more, to which persons are ordained by the
laying on of hands, and that is of deacons.

Now the Office of a deacon the Scripture expresses distinctly also,
namely, that they are to receive the collections for the poor, and
to distribute it to the poor, to widows, and to such as are in want,
and to all according to their necessities. And this appears, Act. 6.
1. 2, 3. and 4. verses compared together; this was the work which
deacons were ordained to do, and which is to be done by them only,
and not by others in the Church. But we find that Stephen and Philip
being deacons, were such as did feed the flock, preach the Word,
opposed gainsayers, were teachers, and did the work of apostles and
evangelists, and wrought miracles, and wonders among the people, as
appears in the sixth, seventh and eighth chapter of the Acts; but
these are the duty of deacons; but not their duties only, but the
duties of all the brethren, in which they are to act according to
the measure of grace received.

And now, since the Scripture speaks but only of bishops and deacons,
that were ordained by the laying on of hands, and declares it is the
duty of the rest of the brethren in the Church, to prophesy, as 1
Cor. 14. 31. Ye may all prophesy one by one; and that it is the duty
of others in the Church to do the work of evangelists, pastors and
teachers. It is hereby clear, that they may be apostles, prophets,
evangelists, pastors and teachers, that were never ordained by the
laying on of hands. And so much for answer to that query.

And since it is made so evident, that prophets, apostles,
evangelists, pastors and teachers have continued all the while the
Beast hath continued, I hope, hereby they that through darkness have
been of the contrary mind, will be hereby convinced of their error
herein. And now be ye exhorted to frequent the assemblies of Saints;
and come to those meeting places, where such as are precious Saints,
do hold forth the word of truth; and by the Spirit of prophecy do
speak unto men, to edification, exhortation and comfort. O come you,
and partake of those gifts of the Spirit, whereby some are enabled
to hold forth the glad tidings of the Gospel, to publish peace, and
grace, and mercy through Jesus Christ, and to do the work of an
Evangelist, and partake you of those gifts, whereby others are
enabled to unfold the mysteries of the Gospel, and to teach, and
instruct the simple, and to do the work of a Teacher. In a word,
Come and partake of apostolical, prophetical and pastoral gifts, of
all the particular operations and manifestations of the Spirit of
Christ in his Saints: which are given to profit withal. Consider
that Jesus Christ saith, I will give unto my two witnesses, and they
shall prophesy. It is the gift of Jesus Christ unto his people,
which he gives not only for the good of the persons in whom it is,
but for the good of others also. Saints have an interest in one
another's gifts; and therefore Paul speaking of such as were
Prophets, as himself and Peter, and Apollo, saith he to the Saints
(1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.) all are yours, whether Paul or Apollo, or
Cephas, &c. Thus the gifts that are given to others, are given to
them for me, and the gifts that are given to me, how weak soever,
are not altogether for myself, but for others also: for Jesus Christ
hath so disposed of it, to give several gifts to several Saints, to
this end to maintain Communion among Saints. O therefore you that
are Saints, have Communion one with another, that you may receive
benefit from one another, as Christ hath appointed: For he gave some
apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and some pastors
and teachers; What to do? For the perfecting of Saints, for the work
of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. Now do you
desire to be edified? Do you desire to press forward toward
perfection, that you may not be as children, carried about with
every wind of doctrine? Then frequent the assemblies of the Saints,
that you may partake of their gifts. Jesus Christ hath given them to
effect these things in you, and all his people: and for the keeping
a spirit of love among Saints, that they receiving benefit one from
another, may not say one to another, I have no need of you, as those
seem to do, that forsake the Assemblies of Saints: but that all
being joined and knit together, may increase with the increase of
God. And so much shall suffice to be spoken to this.

Deduction 6.

Sixthly, The next instruction that I shall come to (though it be not
the next in order, yet I shall place it here, because of the
affinity it hath with this) is this. That since the witnesses, the
Saints of Jesus Christ, have had a spirit of prayer, all the while
the Beast hath continued; whereby their enemies have been devoured,
as by a spiritual fire: then hereby they may be convinced of their
error, that say they are in Babylon, and therefore do not join with
any, in pouring out their fouls to God in prayer, nor yet do it
themselves.

Now let such consider, that in the darkest mid-night of Popery,
Saints have had a spirit of prayer; and indeed it is not possible to
be a Saint, and not to have a spirit of prayer. It is the very
nature and constitution of the spirit of a Saint, to ascend upward
to God in prayer, at all times, and upon all occasions.

The truth is, that though the Saints may be without other
Ordinances, as baptism, and breaking of bread (though I know no rule
they have willingly to neglect them neither:) yet they cannot be
without the use of prayer and prophesying; and therefore we see that
Saints have always enjoyed them, during all the time they have been
trodden under foot: the spirit of prayer, and prophesy hath been
still upon them. And herein they have appeared to be both living
Christians, and waking Christians: a dead man cannot breathe, nor
can a sleeping man speak; but when a man breathes and speaks, he is
discovered to be, both a living, and a waking man. Now if Christians
be not dead Christians, then sure they will both breathe, and speak
as soon as the breath of spiritual life is in a man, he is a man
that breaths toward God in prayer continually: and when he is grown
up a little, he is able to speak, to edification, exhortation and
comfort; though some are more fluent in speaking, and have better
utterance then others, yet all in whom there is true spiritual life,
in some sort or other, do so speak as to edify, exhort, and comfort
one another. Let such therefore as are in this error, beware how
they entertain principles, so contrary to the very life of
Christianity. And O do you not stop your breath; what though you be
in Babylon? yet you must breathe there, otherwise you are stifled.
Beware therefore of being stifled, breathe freely toward thy God,
wherever thou art. Thou mayest have Communion with him in any place.
Though thou art with Daniel in Babylon, and in a Lion's den; yet the
breathings and the pantings of thy soul after God, are acceptable to
him.

Object. But perhaps some may say, When I go about to pray, I find
much deadness, fleshliness, carnality and coldness in myself, both
when I am to pray publicly with other Saints, and when I am 
privately retired; and I look upon this as an effect of Babylonish
darkness. I question therefore whether I may pray, until it be
wholly done away.

Answ. The Apostle, when he bids us, In all things to make known our
requests to God, and to pray without ceasing, and to continue in
prayer, and to pray continually, Phil. 4. 6. 1 Thess. 5. 17. Col. 4.
2. did very well know, That Saints did carry flesh about them, which
would be opposing the Spirit•; and therefore he himself saith, When
I would do good, evil is present with me; and, The flesh lusteth
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, and these are
contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot do the things that
ye would, Gal. 5. 17. I say the Apostle knew this, That the flesh
would oppose, but he would not have Saints, upon that ground to
neglect spiritual duties: for that were to suffer the flesh to get
the victory; but rather to be the more frequent in spiritual duties,
and to be the more incessant in holy performances, especially in
prayer, that so they might overcome the flesh that so opposeth.

Again secondly, When the Apostle presses Saints to spiritual duties,
he speaks to them as knowing, that though they carry flesh still
about them, yet that they have a spirit in them, in which they are
to act toward God: and that though flesh be acting in them; yet at
the same time, that spirit may act in them. And therefore when
Saints come to pray, though the flesh do endeavour, to put out the
life of the Spirit, yet the Spirit strives to mortify the flesh: and
though both act at the same time, yet God is able to distinguish,
between what cometh from his own Spirit, which is always in his
Saints, and what comes from flesh in them. And though the flesh do
act its part, yet Jesus Christ having by one offering, done away all
the corruptions of the flesh in his people: God can notwithstanding
the flesh in them, smell a sweet savour in those performances, in
which there is much weakness and flesh, and but little of the Spirit
appearing; there being an atonement already made, for the sins of
their holy things. So that Saints, you having Spirit in you, as well
as flesh, you are not to neglect to perform spiritual duties,
because you do not see flesh wholly subdued (for that was never yet
done in any Saint, while he remained in this tabernacle) but in that
spirit to act, especially in prayer, even when you find flesh also
acting; for if you have but a spiritual desire, to have that flesh
subdued, that desire cometh from the Spirit; and that spark being
neglected, may seem to die; but if according to the rule of Paul to
Timothy, we stir up that gift of the Spirit we have received, how
weak soever it may seem to be, that spark may grow up into a flame,
and get strength in a great measure, to burn up that corruption that
so troubles and burthens us. Therefore the Apostle gives this rule,
To continue in prayer. Saints do you desire to have flesh subdued?
then continue so desiring, and be continually lifting up your
spirits, to your God in prayer against it: and that you may do so,
take all opportunities to retire yourself, from other employments,
that you may lift up your souls unto God in prayer: and do not
content yourselves with barely having these desires, and so be
continually plunging yourselves in worldly employments, in
conversing with sublunary things: but improve all opportunities, to
retire yourselves, from conversing with these things, for the
enlivening and enflaming of your spirits; and do not persuade
yourselves, that while you are discoursing of your bargains, and
tradings, and lands, and livings, and clothing, and I know not what;
that you pray as well, as when you retire yourself into a private
place, to lift up your souls in secret to God in prayer: For our
Saviour gives you this direction; When you pray enter into your
closets, and shut your doors, and pray to your Father which is in
secret, &c. Matth. 6. 6. And our Saviour himself observed the same
rule: for it is often said of him, That he went apart into a
mountain to pray; and continued whole nights in prayer unto God: the
night being the time in which he was free from other employments.
And so Act. 10. 9. it is said, That Peter went upon the house to
pray. And truly if Saints did improve more opportunities, and take
more advantages thus to retire themselves to converse with God; so
much coldness and lukewarmness, worldliness, covetousness, pride,
and contention would not appear in them. But it hath been the design
of the common enemy, to take off Saints from these warrantable,
profitable and advantageous retirements, wherein they might enjoy
Communion with God, to the end they may continue in a more loose and
carnal frame, to the sadding of their spirits, and to the scandal of
their most holy profession.

But another may say, I find that our Saviour saith unto his
Disciples, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, Joh.
14. 13. And John saith, We have confidence toward God, and
whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, 1 Joh. 3. 21, 22. And again,
This is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask anything
according to his will, he heareth us; and if we know that he hear
us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we
desired of him, 1 John 5. 14, 15. And by these passages it appears,
That Saints in the primitive times, before the great falling away,
and the rising of the Beast; when they prayed, had assurance that
they should have the petitions they desired. But when I pray, I have
no such confidence in many things: and many times it is a long time
before my petitions are answered; and in some petitions i have a
plain denial; and therefore I question, whether it be not sinful for
me so to continue praying, until I am fully come out of Babylon: and
then I conceive that I shall have such a spirit of prayer, as the
Saints had in the primitive times, and have confidence, that
whatsoever I ask of God, I shall receive of him.

Answ. First, That the Saints while they have been under the bondage
of Babylon, have had a spirit of prayer; and have had their
petitions heard, is evident. For their prayers have brought
judgements upon their enemies, being presented upon the golden
altar. And if it have been no sin, for these to continue praying,
though they were in Babylon: then doubtless it would be no sin for
thee to pray, though thou shouldst be in Babylon. But

Secondly, Whereas thou sayest, That in some things thou hast no
confidence that thou shalt be heard; and sometimes it is long before
some petitions are granted, and other petitions are plainly denied.
Let me tell thee, That if in those things, in which thou hast no
confidence, thou do pray for them with the submission of thy will,
unto the will of the Father, it may be no sin for thee so to pray,
for the things that thy soul desires, though thou hast no confidence
of them; if they be such things, as be not sinful in themselves, as
such as these are not, viz. to be delivered from bodily distempers,
to be kept from dangers in travelling, whether by sea or land; to be
delivered from the tyranny of unreasonable men, that seek to do thee
hurt: or to have parents, or children, or wife, or husband, or
brethren, or sisters, or any other friend delivered from bodily
distempers, or dangers in travelling, &c. or to have them brought to
the knowledge of the truth, from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to God: or to have them kept from errors and seducing
spirits. I say these, and such like things, which are not sinful in
themselves, if thy soul desire them, it will be no sin for thee to
pray for them, though thou hast no confidence that they shall be
granted; so thou pray for these, with the submitting of thy will, to
the will of the Father. And this is clear, in that the Lord Jesus
himself, in whom was no sin, did pray so, with submission to the
Fathers will, for deliverance from that bitter cup, which he was to
drink of, though he had no confidence that his petition should be
granted. So that Saints may pray, for those things which they do not
infallibly know, to be according to the mind of God: and yet it may
be no sin so to pray, if they do pray with submission to the
Father's will. And in so praying they may be acceptable to the
Father, who many times doth grant some of those petitions, as soon
as they are put up; and at other times, after he hath made his
people to wait long, and to pray importunately for them. And if some
of them be denied, yet their persons and prayers may be accepted,
and may be, and sometimes are granted another way, God giving them
in that, which is better than the thing desired. But

Thirdly, All Saints may have, and doubtless many Saints have as much
confidence now in prayer, as the Saints had in the primitive times;
for what was the confidence that Saints then had? Saith John, This
is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask anything
according to his will, he heareth us. This was the primitive Saints'
confidence, and what Saint hath not this confidence now, that if we
ask anything according to his will, he heareth us? Saints are now
confident, That the things they pray for which God wills, and
intends to give unto them, shall be granted, only they have not an
infallible spirit, so as to know in all things, what it is the will
of God to bestow upon them. But many things they do know, and others
they have strong persuasions of, when God in a more than ordinary
manner, moves their spirits to pray for them.

Thus Saints have a holy boldness and confidence, in approaching to
the throne of Grace, by the mediation of Jesus Christ, coming to God
in the spirit of adoption, being confident of having every good
thing, that a gracious and loving Father sees good for them, all
their petitions are heard. They are confident, that if they ask
anything according to his will, he heareth them. And no Saints in
the primitive times had other confidence. So that Saints, it is no
sin for you to continue praying, making known your requests to God,
but it is your duty so to do. But

Fourthly, Though flesh do break out, and in some things Saints do
not pray aright, yet they are not therefore wholly to neglect
praying: knowing that God still delights in the breathings of his
own Spirit in them; although they have many weaknesses and
infirmities in them. And

Fifthly, If they find their faith is not so high, nor their
confidence so strong, as some primitive Saints were, then ought they
to pray for the increase of faith. If they be weak in faith, let
them have recourse to him, who is the author and finisher of faith,
for the strengthening of it; who will give liberally, and will not
upbraid his people, though they be weak. Though a man that is
altogether faithless, hath no promise sure to him; yet the man weak
in faith, hath as many promises made to him, as he that is strong in
faith. So that though it be weak, yet if it be a true faith in him
that prays for the increase of faith, he shall find access to the
throne of grace. And so much for the clearing of this.

Deduction 7.

Seventhly, The next Deduction is to discover the excellency and
preciousness of Saints, from the 4 & 5 verses, they are discovered
to be excellent, in that they are said to be olive trees, they are
not as the dry tree, who is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be
burned, Heb. 6. 8. But blessed and happy is the condition of Saints:
For they have an unction from the holy Ones, they stand in the
presence of the Lord of the whole earth. They are precious in the
eyes of God, and profitable to men: for they empty the golden oil,
they have received from the holy one into others; the Spirit as it
floweth from them, sometimes penetrates into those that are
strangers, aliens to Jesus Christ, whereby they are brought home to
the embraces of Jesus Christ: and then Saints are excellent in their
eyes also. And so David calls them, Psal. 16. 2, 3. My goodness
extendeth not to thee; but to the Saints that are in the earth, and
to the excellent in whom is all my delight. And excellent they are.

Secondly, Because they are not only as olive-trees, but as candle-
sticks. For as it is said of Jesus Christ, so it is said of them,
They are the light of the world, Mat. 5. 14. They are as light
shining in a dark place. Now how precious is light, to them that are
continually in a sensible darkness? Light is one of the most
precious things in the world: it puts a beauty upon other things, it
cheers and comforts the heart; it causes men to see the dangers that
are in their way, that so they may avoid them: and many others, are
the excellent properties of this natural light; but many more, are
the precious effects of spiritual light. And this is that that
Saints have; though others are in the darkness of hell, yet they
enjoy the light of heaven: The Lord God almighty, and the Lamb are a
light unto them, Rev. 21. 23. And in this respect also Saints are
excellent and precious ones: But I would be brief in this
particular, and therefore shall not further enlarge it.

Deduction 8.

Eighthly, The next Deduction, in which I shall be brief also, is to
discover from the fifth verse, the dangerous condition of those
wicked men, that are enemies to Saints. Though Saints seem to be
poor, weak, despicable creatures, and their enemies in outward
appearance seem to be strong and potent, and to be overcomers of
them: yet these seeming weak Saints, are strong, and mighty: for
they can but send up a message to heaven, and bring secret and
invisible arrows from thence, which shall destroy their enemies. The
breath of their mouth kindles coals of fire, that destroys their
enemies; And if any man will hurt them, he must with this fire be
killed. Little do wicked men think, that when they deal cruelly with
Saints, they bring coals of fire upon their own heads; yet so they
do, if they continue irreconcilable enemies unto them. There is a
notable place, to show the danger men run upon, when they offer to
wrong the Saints of God, it is Zech 12. 3. In that day, saith the
Lord, will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all
that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces; though all
the people of the earth shall be gathered together against it.
Though the spiritual Jerusalem, the Saints of God, had all the
people of the earth gathered together against them; yet so potent
and strong are they, through the Lord of host their God, as they
should overcome them all; they should be as a burdensome stone, and
should crush in pieces, all that burden themselves with them.
Therefore it would be wisdom in men, to beware how they offer any
violence to any one of the Saints of God, either to their lives or
liberties, how colourable so ever the pretences be, upon which they
do it; seeing it is such a dangerous thing to abuse Saints: as that
in wronging them, men be devoured or destroyed by them. And so I
have done with this particular also.

Deduction 9.

Ninthly, In the next place from the sixth verse, might be discovered
the reason, why there hath been such a hardness of heart and
impenitency upon the Beast, and the Babylonish crew; namely, because
that as a judgement upon them, for persecuting the Saints of God;
the heavens have been so shut up against them, as that none of the
waters of the spirit have descended upon them. But I pass this by,
with some other particulars that might be observed in that verse.

Deduction 10.

The tenth deduction is from the seventh verse, where it is said, The
Beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit, shall make war, &c.
It doth inform us, that this title, The Beast, is the most proper
title of the Pope; as is evident in the comparing of the several
passages in this prophecy, where the Beast is mentioned together;
which is done in the explicatory part of this discourse; where it
appears evidently, that by the Beast is meant the Pope: Now in all
the other passages, of the prophesy of this book, where the Pope is
mentioned; and in this seventh verse, he being called the Beast, it
is evident, that this is his most proper title. Though it is true,
the Pope is Antichristian, yet we do nowhere, in the prophecy of
this book, nor in any other Scripture where he is expressly spoken
of, find the title of Antichrist given to him. But generally, in the
prophecy of this book, and in the prophecy of Daniel, where there
are some things spoken of him, he is called the Beast. And for the 2
Thess. 2. where he is also expressly spoken of, and plainly
described, he is not called there Antichrist neither, but is there
called, That man of sin, the son of perdition, and that wicked.

Now it is said, there are many Antichrists, 1 John 2. 19. But it is
nowhere said, There are many Beasts, and therefore he is called, The
Beast, and that man of sin, the son of perdition, and that wicked.
As we use to say, The King of such a kingdom; and The governor of
such a place; and, The mayor of such a city or Town; importing there
is but one: So the Pope is called, The Beast. For though there be
many Antichrists, yet there is but one Beast; but one Pope, who is,
The Beast. I do the rather observe this: first to discover, the
exceeding greatness of the wickedness, and the abominableness of the
Pope; who for his opposition to God, and his enmity to the Saints,
is expressed by a peculiar title, that is proper only to that wicked
one: to show that he is above all others hateful and cursed.

And secondly, I do the rather speak of this, because some do
confusedly speak of the Beast and Antichrist, confounding the Beast
with Antichrist, whereas there be many that are, and may be called
Antichrists, especially some that are risen up lately, That deny
that Jesus is the Christ, making themselves equal with the Lord
Jesus Christ: and who do also deny, That Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh; or at least have a light esteem of Christ's coming in the
flesh: by looking upon that flesh, which was so united unto the God-
head, as when the life of it was laid down: it was said to be the
life of God, 1 John 3. 16. as no more to be esteemed then the flesh
of a common man. I say these, and such as these are Antichrists, as
is clear, 1 John 2. 22. and 1 Joh. 4. 3. But though there be many
Antichrists, yet there is but one that may be called the Beast: but
by confounding the Beast with Antichrist, some look upon the Beast
only as Antichrist, whereas there be many Antichrists, which are to
be rejected and avoided, besides the Beast; though they have more
specious pretences than the Beast's pretences now are, and are
thereby the more like to prevail upon the more knowing professors of
the time. So much for this particular.

Deduction 11.

Eleventhly, In the eleventh place, it serves to justify the
Parliament, and all that joined with them in the late defensive war.
Now although they have been branded with the odious titles of Rebels
and Traitors, and what not: yet here their justice and righteousness
in that act, appears as clear as the Sun.

For first, we see here, that the enemies which they did oppose was
the Beast, that did ascend out of the bottomless pit. And who the
Beast is, and how the Beast did appear to be he, that did wage the
late war in England and Ireland, is made evident in the explicatory
part of this discourse. Now since it was the Beast, that cursed 
enemy of Jesus Christ, and all his Saints, that raised this war, it
was a most righteous act in the Parliament, and all that did adhere
to them, to oppose him, and his party in it.

But here by the way I desire to declare, That though I do affirm, 
that that war was raised by the Beast, that cursed enemy of Jesus
Christ: yet do I not hereby condemn every particular man that did
engage in this war; nor any particular man, high or low: for I know
not, but that it might be possible, for some by colourable pretences
to be drawn to engage in this war, that never intended to fight for
the Beast, but on the contrary hated him. But this I affirm, that
the generality of those (especially of the chiefest) that engaged in
this war, were such as were thereunto incited by the Beast, and
intended the advancement of the Beast.

And now I say, seeing the war, that was raised against the
Protestants in Ireland, and against the Parliament, and such as were
styled Puritans and round-heads in England, was a war made by the
Beast, that ascended out of the bottomless pit, and contrived in
Rome and hell: it was a most righteous thing for the Parliament, and
those that adhered to them, to defend themselves against it: God
having put a power into their hands to do it: and yet were they no
Rebels, unless it were rebellion to oppose the Pope and the devil.

And secondly, The righteousness of the Parliament, and those that
adhered to them, is made further evident, by considering the ends
for which the Beast did raise this war; and they were,

First, To destroy the witnesses, to make an utter end of all the
Saints and servants of Jesus Christ, and to leave none that should
oppose or speak against the Beast, the Pope, that so he might bring
all men into a professed subjection to himself. And knowing that the
Puritans were the only obstructers hereof (for others would easily
enough have been persuaded unto a uniformity, and would say, that
there was little or nothing in the Romish doctrines, but might have
been embraced, rather than to make any division, if the Puritans
were removed out of the way) therefore one main end the Beast had in
this war, was to overcome the witnesses. Now this being one end of
the Beast in that war, it was a righteous thing for the Parliament,
and those that adhered to them, to oppose the Beast, for the
rescuing of, and preserving of the Saints of Jesus Christ, from the
tyranny of the Beast.

It being a righteous act in Abraham to rescue and deliver one just
Lot, from those that would have captivated him, and his family: It
is much more a righteous act in the Parliamentary party, to rescue
and deliver, all the precious Saints of Jesus Christ: (for all
Saints had a share in this deliverance) from the cruelty and tyranny
of the Beast, that sought their ruin. But

Secondly, Their righteousness in that act, will appear, if we
consider the other end of the Beast in the late war, and that was to
thrust out Jesus Christ, from reigning as King, and to set up his
own kingdom, by subjecting the consciences of all that profess Jesus
Christ, both in this kingdom, and all others, unto his laws. Now
this being his other great design in that war; it was a most
righteous thing to oppose him in it. And it had been a great sin for
the Parliament to stoop themselves, and to suffer all the rest in
the kingdom, thus to be subjected to the Beast; and lay aside the
Regal power of Jesus Christ: God having put power into their hands,
to oppose the Beast herein.

Thus, the righteousness of those that did oppose the Beast, appears,
if we look upon the ends of the Beast in that war. And

Thirdly, Their righteousness in that act of opposing the Beast, is
made the farther evident, because it is in part a fulfilling of that
righteous sentence, which God hath passed upon the Beast, Revel. 18.
6, 7. where God says to his people thus, Reward her even as she
rewarded you, and double unto her double according to her works; in
the cup which she hath filled, fill to her double: how much she hath
glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow
give her. Now this sentence is in this war (wherein the Beast hath
been overcome, and his designs frustrated, and a tenth part of
Babylon is fallen) in part fulfilled: for in this war Babylon hath
in part had of the same cup, which she filled to the Saints, as she
overcame them, so they have in part overcome her; and this is the
beginning of her torments, which are coming on apace, and ere long
the cup that she hath filled, shall be filled to her double.

Now the Parliament, and those that adhered to them, having in the
late defensive war, in part fulfilled that righteous sentence of God
upon Babylon; it doth therein most clearly appear to be a righteous
act.

Deduction 12.

Twelfthly, In the next place here is a discovery of the reason why
the Parliamentary Army, did not more prevail for the first three
years and an half, and why after that period of time it was so
successful and victorious: The reason of it here plainly appears to
be, because it was (according to fore-appointment) the mind of God,
to have his people brought to a low ebb, for such a period of time;
so that they should be looked upon as dead men, and the enemy should
rejoice over them, as if they were all totally overcome for three
years and an half: And since it was so, it was not possible for the
instruments that were then employed, if they had been never so
faithful, so active and diligent, to do any more, then that which
God had raised them up for; which was only to keep the dead bodies
of his people from being buried: and so much they did: they still
defended the cause of the witnesses against the enemy, so as it was
only kept, as it were above-ground, though it seemed to be as dead.
And so God would have it to be, for the first three years and an
half: but when the first three years and an half were completely
(according to Scripture account) expired; then it was not possible,
for the adverse party to prevail over them; for then the time was
come, in which the witnesses were to be raised, and then the Spirit
of life from God entered into them: and that was the reason why they
went on like active, living men, so courageously and victoriously:
for God had appointed them to carry on his work, for the fall of
this kingdom from Rome.

Deduction 13.

Thirteenth, In the next place, this serves to exhort all those that
were drawn to engage in the late war against the Parliament, and
those godly people that adhered to them, to relinquish that act of
theirs. And that,

First, Because it is so apparent, that in so doing, they were
instruments of upholding the kingdom of the Beast, and that they did
in it endeavour to support the Beast, as much as in them lay,
whatever the pretences were upon which they were drawn to engage in
it: and therefore if they desire to be enemies to the Beast, let
them be enemies to this act of theirs: for in it they went about to
support the Beast, though it was in vain, the time of his ruin being
come: and therefore it behoves them to repent of what they have done
in it; for it is not good pretences can justify an evil action. It
would be their wisdom therefore, now at last to renounce it, as they
renounce the Beast himself. And

Secondly, It concerns them to repent of this deed of theirs,
considering against whom they fought, not against ordinary men, but
against the choicest of men, the witnesses and servants of Jesus
Christ: nay they fought not against them only, but against Jesus
Christ: for as Jesus Christ saith to his Disciples, That the world
hated them, because it hated him; and he that hateth him, hateth the
Father also, Joh. 15. 18. & 23. So it may be said, that they that
fought against the Saints of Jesus Christ, fought against Jesus
Christ himself, and against the Father also. Now therefore, you that
were active in that quarrel of the Beast, how doth it concern you to
renounce what you have done therein? least you be found to be
fighters against God: and let no longer a spirit of enmity and
difference remain between you, and those that you opposed in that
particular, but be of one mind with them, in a mutual opposing of
the Beast with them. And this do, least persisting in that way of
defending the Beast, you be destroyed with the Beast.

Deduction 14.

Fourteenthly, In the next place it informs all those that did engage
in the late defensive war, that they have cause to rejoice in what
they have done, in that particular, and no cause to repent of it.
Have you contributed to the maintenance of the war in England and
Ireland, by lending plate, and disbursing money? And have you sent
horses, and arms, and provisions to the Army? And have your servants
or children, or yourselves in person, been actually in that war? You
have cause to rejoice in all that you have done therein: for you see
it was a most just and righteous act, and God hath by it brought a
most glorious work to pass, in the bringing this kingdom from that
vassallage to Rome, in which it hath been this twelve hundred years,
and putting the cup of trembling into the hands of the enemies of
Jesus Christ, the dregs whereof they shall at last take off. And
therefore you have no cause to repent, but to rejoice in what you
have done therein; to rejoice that you had the honour to be in any
measure instruments of promoting such a cause; and if you suffered
any losses, by being opposers of the adverse party, yet it was far
better to be losers in opposing them, then in any measure to comply
with them. And you that have received wounds, or lost limbs, for
promoting that cause may glory in them: for what soever you have
herein done, or suffered, it hath been in, and for opposing that
grand enemy of Jesus Christ, The Beast, and in being instruments of
bringing God's design to pass, for the ruining of great Babylon, and
the setting up the kingdom of Jesus Christ. And therefore, however
you seem to be rewarded of men for it; yet never repent of it, but
rejoice in what you have done in it.

Deduction 15.

Fifteenthly, In the next place this may convince those of their
error, that take to themselves a power over the consciences of
Saints, to rule over them, and make laws for them, and to force them
to obedience to those laws.

Let such seriously consider this, that this is apparently that
cursed power that the Beast hath usurped to himself, or at least it
had no other donor then the Dragon, the old Serpent, the Devil: who
gave the Beast his power and seat, and great authority. and by this
power the bishop of Rome, first became, and still continues to be
the Beast. And this is a Power that is abhorred of God; for those
men that exercise this power, do take away the legislative power of
God, who is the King, the judge, and the LAW-GIVER of his Saints;
and do give Jesus Christ less honour, than the heathens do their
idols, who do allow them to be the orderers of their own worship.

O that these men therefore might be convinced of their error, in
imposing their laws upon the consciences of Saints, and constraining
them to worship God, according to the rules that they have hammered
out from them; though they dare not affirm that they themselves are
infallible: for surely, if they persist in it, God who is jealous of
his glory, and will not give it to another, will break out in the
fire of his jealousy against them, as well as against the Beast,
that great man of sin, who sitteth in the Temple of God, and takes
upon him to make laws as God. It concerns them therefore, to beware
how they go on in these ways, lest they be destroyed with that son
of perdition.

Again, Let such consider, that all those that ever exercised this
power, for the generality of them were always enemies of the most
precious, and most spiritual Saints; and were followed with a curse.
Let them but look upon the bishops, and generally they were enemies
of Saints, and a curse rested on them, even a blindness of mind, and
hardness of heart; and at last they were brought down, and shame and
contempt cast upon them.

And it may be some of you, that have endeavoured to take the same
power, have opposed the bishops for the same thing: O therefore,
that in the consideration hereof you might at last lay down that
imposing power, although thereby you may seem to lose, that honour
that you seek from men, and to lose much of these outward things,
the things of the world, which at best are but vanity: for it is far
better to be without these, and have a good conscience, than to
enjoy much of these, either with a troubled, or seared conscience,
and a hardened heart. It is better to be at enmity with the Beast
herein, and lose much of the world, then to enjoy abundance of the
world, and soon after to perish with the Beast.

Again, This let me tell you with all, that if you shall persist, in
endeavouring to get such an imposing power (it being that by which
the Beast reigns in any place where it is) it is in vain for you to
endeavour it in England, for England is fallen from Rome, and is no
more a part of Rome; and therefore it is in vain to seek to exercise
a Romish power any longer in it. And England being thus fallen, is
become a president to the other kingdoms so to do, and shall not
return to Rome again, for England and all the other kingdoms must
hate the whore, and make her desolate.

And thus much I cannot but speak, to you that endeavour to take such
a power upon you, whether you will hear, or whether you will
forbear.

Deduction 16.

16. The next particular arising from these verses thus opened, is an
exhortation to all the Saints in England, to dwell together in
unity. O you precious sons and daughters of the Almighty, the
Saints, and witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ, that are in this
kingdom of England, Consider you what your condition was about seven
or eight year ago; at what time you were trampled upon by the
bishops (which was a treading under foot of the Beast) Call to mind
how some of you were pilloried, and had your ears cropped and many
of you imprisoned, and fined, and by several other ways were
persecuted, and troubled by the members of the Beast your
adversaries: and that only for acting that which in your conscience,
you were persuaded was according to the mind of God; and which if
you had for fear of men, or for any other reason left undone, your
conscience told you, that you should in so doing be disobedient to
your heavenly Father. I say, call these things to mind, and what a
great pressure it was to your spirit, that you could not with
liberty, and freedom follow the Lamb; but men did what in them lay
to enforce you to worship the Beast, and to embrace for doctrine,
the commandments of men. O how grievous was this oppression to you!
And what a burden was it? And how did you groan in your spirits to
be delivered? What a grief was it to you to see precious Saints
cruelly, and rigidly dealt with, by the enemies of Jesus Christ? And
how many frequent prayers did your souls breath out, and lift up to
heaven against your enemies, and for deliverance, from their yoke of
bondage? I say, call these things to mind, and remember that this
was the condition of you all, whether you are such as are commonly
called Presbyterians, or Independents, or Anabaptists, if you were
Saints, if you loved the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, you were
all alike hated of, and opposed by the Beast: and it was a grief,
and burden to all your spirits, to see the enemies of Jesus Christ
to prevail so much, and you all, both Presbyterians, Independents
and Anabaptists did pour out many effectual, fervent prayers against
the Beast, and the bishops his adherents in England.

Again, Consider, as the Beast was thus an enemy to you all alike, so
it was a mercy to you all alike, when in the year 1645. God gave you
all, a full victory over the adherents of the Beast in this kingdom:
for then the bishops, and them that fought for them (and in them the
Beast) was overcome. And this, I say, was a mercy to you all alike,
and it was alike answer to all your prayers, and alike joy to all
your spirits, to see your enemies, and the enemies of Jesus Christ
overcome. And now since you are all children of the same Father, and
have all one Lord Jesus Christ, and have all one Spirit, and have
all drank of one cup of affliction, and had all one common enemy
that hated you all, and persecuted you all, because you had all the
one holy Spirit of the Father, and of the Son in you: and since your
Father in love to you all, and in answer to the prayers of you all,
gave you all alike deliverance from that enemy of you all. O unite,
unite, unite! since your God hath made you one in his love, O be you
one in your love one to another! and let it appear that you dwell in
God, by dwelling in love. What a low, unworthy thing is it, for you
that dwell in God, to grow cold in love towards your brethren, the
children of your Father, for differing from you in judgement, in
some circumstantial things only? What if some be weak, and do not
know so much of the mind of God, in some circumstantial things as
you (whether you be Presbyterians, Independents or Anabaptists)
conceive you do? Will you therefore not love your weak brother, for
whom Christ died, and who is beloved of your Father, because your
Father in his wisdom, hath yet withheld that light from him, which
he hath given to you? What a weakness is this in you thus to do? Do
you not know, that it is not for your merits that you have more than
him, but it was from grace, from free favour that you have it? And
doth what you have received from grace, work such an effect in you,
as to make you grow cold in love toward your brethren? O let it be
far from you!

And what though some are Presbyterians and some Independents, as
they are commonly distinguished? Though I could wish, that these
distinctions of difference might be all laid aside, and that all
that belong to Jesus Christ might only be called Saints, and the
servants of Jesus Christ, and by such general expressions as include
them all, though they still differ in circumstances: for there were
no such distinctions used among Saints in the primitive times,
though there were differences in some circumstances. But I say, What
though some are Presbyterians and some Anabaptists, &c. Yet if they
are such as you judge to be in Christ Jesus, and to be beloved of
the Father: resolve you in the strength of Christ, to suffer none of
their differences from you in judgement, to withdraw your affections
from them: but since you love your God and Father, love you his
beloved children, and your brethren: and since you sincerely love
the Lord Jesus Christ, let it appear in loving of those upon whom
his image is stamped: For there is no reason, why you should not
love Presbyterians, as well as Independents, and Anabaptists, as
well as Presbyterians, &c. unless you look upon them as no Saints,
as such as are no lovers of the Lord Jesus: but if you look upon
them as Saints, then if you love the Lord Jesus, you cannot but love
them, whatever their judgements be. And if you be deficient herein,
you are to condemn yourselves in it, and to be humbled for it. And
henceforth, considering the oneness that is between you all,
whatever your judgements are, and that you have been as one in your
sufferings, and as one in deliverances from sufferings, do you still
be one in love, and then upon you will the Lord command the
blessing, even life for evermore. Psal. 133. 3.

Deduction 17.

17. The next, and the main Deduction that flows from these verses,
being thus explained, is a special encouragement, in particular to
the high and honourable Court of Parliament, and to his Excellency
the Lord FAIRFAX, and the honoured his Council of War, and all
inferior officers and souldiers, and in general to all the witnesses
of Jesus Christ in this kingdom of England.

First, It is of special encouragement unto the high and honourable
Court of Parliament; for as much as (a great number of them, being
the witnesses of Jesus Christ) they were the primary or first
instruments, that God made use of to defend the cause of his people,
and to preserve them from the tyranny and fury of the Beast.

Now you being the first instruments that God made use of, to plead
the cause of his people, God having into your hand first put the
power of opposing the Beast: and that wonderful hath been the spirit
of courage and constancy, that hath been put upon you in that high
Court of Parliament, that make it your design to advance the honour
of Jesus Christ, and the good of the Saints, and of all the subjects
of this kingdom in general: so that though you have been opposed by
great and potent enemies, yet your courage hath not failed, but you
have persisted constant, in prosecuting the same designs, since you
first began to oppose Strafford and Canterbury, in 1641. unto the
year 1645, still opposing the adverse party; and you have not basely
complied with them (though some corrupt members deserted you, and
did so) but you still stuck to your first principles; and God having
put power into your hands, hath enabled you to carry on his design
in the worst of times, and after all, having graciously given you
good success, to your unwearied pains and labours through which you
had gone, by giving you a happy conquest over your enemies.

And in all this, the word of God being fulfilled, these things being
according to what is written, even your being first laid low, and
also your raising again, it being written, predeclared, that the
Beast should make war with the witnesses (of whom you are a part,
and whose cause you defend) and should overcome them, and kill them,
and that they should lie dead three years and an half, and after
three years and an half, should be raised to the terror of their
enemies, and that in their rising, a tenth part of Babylon should
fall, &c. These things being written and fulfilled, the Beast having
made war against the witnesses (whose cause you have been principle
instruments of defending against him, and his adherents,) and having
overcome them and killed them, both in England and Ireland, and they
being dead for three years and an half, the enemy rejoicing over
them, and making merry, because they thought they had been so slain,
as they should never recover life again; your armies being overcome,
and your garisons being possessed by the enemy, and after three
years and an half, the spirit of life being put upon your Army, and
they, as it is written, standing upon their feet, and therein at the
same time, England being fallen from the Beast, from being a part of
great Babylon, and this in the year 1645. and that year being the
year, wherein it is written, The prevailing power of the Beast
should come to a period. I say, these things being so, here is
special encouragement to you witnesses, in the high Court of
Parliament, to go on in defending that cause, that God hath given
you the honour hitherto, to be instruments of defending: I say, to
go on to defend it. And that,

First, By doing justice upon your, and the enemies of Jesus Christ.
Hath God delivered any of the chief actors of this unnatural, bloody
war into your hands? then you being a Civil Power, ordained of God,
are to do justice upon evil doers: for the Apostle saith of a Ruler,
Rom. 13. 4. He is the minister of God, and he beareth not the sword
in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that doth evil. And they are evil-doers in a high degree,
that are thieves and murderers: and such are the chief actors of an
unjust war. Now if God have delivered any such into your hands, you
are to execute wrath upon them: for it is an observable passage, 1
King. 20. 42. The Prophet of the Lord there tells Ahab King of
Israel, after he had let Benhadad King of Syria, whom the Lord had
delivered into his hand, to go away with his life; that Ahabs life
should go for his life. Therefore it is not safe, to neglect doing
justice upon such persons, although they consent to such Articles of
agreement (being constrained to do it, for their own ends) as
Benhadad did, 1 King. 20. 34. Now you in the high Court of
Parliament, whom God hath honoured to be the chief instruments of
defending the righteous cause of the witnesses, have special
encouragement to go on to execute just wrath upon such gross evil
doers, without fear.

And also secondly, You have encouragement to go on, to deal well
with all the witnesses and servants of Jesus Christ, that walk
soberly and justly toward men, and holily towards God, that are
under your jurisdiction; whether they be such as are commonly called
Presbyterians or Independents, or Anabaptists, &c. even to deal well
with them, and all the Subjects of the kingdom, and to undo the
heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and to break every
yoke, and to establish just and righteous laws. I say, here is
special encouragement for you to do thus; for in doing thus, you
shall prosper and become a glory to the kingdom; and no enemy shall
ever henceforth be able to prevail against you: for though formerly
you were brought into a low condition, and the enemy prevailed over
you with a very high hand; yet henceforth the enemy shall no more
prevail against you, although they were in number a hundred thousand
more then they are.

And secondly, From these verses thus opened, here is special
encouragement in particular, for his Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX,
and the honoured Council of war: since as the Parliament are the
primary, so they are the secondary instruments, of defending the
cause of the Saints of God against the Beast. Now, since you, and
the army under you in an especial manner (according to what is
written, and declared long ago) were they that had a spirit of life
from God put upon you, in the year 1645. whereby life was put into
all the witnesses, and whereby you were enabled to act like living
men, men that had a life from God, in the overcoming the Beast and
his adherents in this kingdom: and seeing you have been instruments
of defending that cause ever since: I say, seeing God hath honoured
you, so as to make you such eminent instruments of this great work,
and the hearts of all the Saints in England, are generally knit unto
you, and the eyes of all the Saints in England are upon you, most
Noble General, and Worthy Commanders; here is, I say, special
encouragement for you to go on still to improve the power that God
hath given you, for the same end for which it was given you, viz.
The suppressing of the Beast, and defending all the Saints and
servants of Jesus Christ in this kingdom, and to go on (having the
honour of Jesus Christ, and not your own, and public good more then
private ends in your eye, and in your heart) to endeavour to cause
justice and righteousness to abound in this kingdom: and this is
your encouragement, that in so doing, as you have always been since
1645. So you shall ever be conquerors in all the battles you fight,
and overcomers of all the enemies with whom you encounter, no weapon
that is formed against you shall prosper, nor no enemy shall be able
to stand before you; yea though all the people of the Earth should
be gathered together against you; yet you should be but as a
burthensome stone unto them, and all that burden themselves with
you, should be broken in pieces.

And thirdly, Here is special encouragement, for all the Saints in
England in general, to be of good courage, not to fear the menaces
or threatenings of any enemy: for no enemy shall ever any more
prevail over them.

Now what I say, for the encouragement of the Parliament, and of the
General, and chief Commanders of the army in particular, and of all
the Saints in England in general, is clearly grounded in the
Scripture, and therefore is it unquestionable, and to be received
and observed of the Parliament, army and Saints in England. Indeed
if I should declare anything to you, and tell you that I had it by
vision or revelation, and it were not apparent in Scripture, I know 
no warrant you had to receive it, or to have any confidence of it:
For as Paul speaking of the day of Christ, saith to the
Thessalonians, Now we beseech you by the coming of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering unto him, that you be not soon shaken
in mind, nor be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by
letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand; Let no man
deceive you by any means; for that day shall not come, except there
come a falling away first, &c. So may I say, you have reason to
beware that you be not soon shaken in mind, or troubled, neither by
spirit, nor by word, nor by letter from any, concerning anything for
which they do not bring a word from the Scripture: and let no man
deceive you, for you may be deluded and deceived, if you receive
anything from any, which is not according to what is revealed in the
Scripture, as the young prophet was deluded by the old prophet, when
he received that doctrine which was contrary to the word of the
Lord, which before he had received: So may you, if you should so do.
Therefore if a prophet, or an apostle, or an angel from heaven,
should bring any message which is not consonant unto the Word, which
you have already received in the Scripture, you are not to be shaken
in mind, nor to be troubled by it, nor to embrace it. But now the
Scripture grounds, upon which I do for their encouragement declare
and affirm, That the Parliament, and the army in prosecuting the
righteous cause of the Saints (and that all the Saints of England in
general) shall all overcome their enemies, and go on victoriously
hence forward are these.

First, Because the witnesses are raised from the dead, The Spirit of
life from God is entered into them, and they do stand upon their
feet.

Secondly, Because England is fallen from Rome, and is no more a
tenth part of that great mystical Babylon.

Thirdly, Because the one thousand two hundred and threescore years,
in which the Beast was to tread the holy city under foot, did expire
in 1645.

Now the first of these grounds, is evidently drawn from Scripture,
as appears in the explicatory part of this discourse; where it is
evident, That that great and considerable number of Saints in
England, and all real Saints of Jesus Christ, of whom it is said,
That the Beast should make war against them, and overcome them, and
that they should lie dead three years and an half, the Spirit of
life from God should enter into them, and they should stand upon
their feet, to the fear of their enemies, and to the glory of their
God. And it is evident, that this which this Scripture hath said of
them, is punctually come to pass; The Beast did make war against all
Saints, in making war against that great number of the Saints in
England in the late war, the Beast did overcome them, and kill them,
and they were mystically dead for three years and an half, and as
soon as the three years and an half were completely expired, the
Spirit of life from God entered into them, a Spirit of life, vigour
and courage was put upon them, and they did no longer lie as dead
men, but like living men, they stood upon their feet, to the fear
and amazement of their enemies, and to the glory of their God, who
had put such a Spirit of vigour, and courage upon them. And now upon
this ground, may all the Saints in England, and those worthies in
the Parliament of England, and their army, who have been instruments
of bringing down the power of the Beast in England, be encouraged to
continue opposing the Beast, and acting justly and righteously
toward all, and be assured (God having put a Spirit of life upon
them, and made them to stand upon their feet) they shall overcome
every enemy, that shall rise up against them, and the enemy in no
battle, shall be able to stand before them, nor give them one
defeat, but shall fall before them, and be cut down as mown grass,
and the men of war shall not find their hands, but turn their backs,
and flee before them: for they shall now find them living men, such
as have a Spirit of life from God put upon them.

The second ground, upon which I affirm, That no enemy shall be ever
able to prevail over them, is clear in Scripture. For it is also
evident in the Explicatory part of this discourse, That England is
that tenth part of the City, which the holy Ghost in this Scripture
speaks of, where it is said, That upon the raising of the witnesses,
and their having a Spirit of life from God put into them, and their 
standing upon their feet, A tenth part of the city fell. And it also
appears, That England being that tenth part of the city, is fallen
from mystical Babylon, and is no longer a part of it, but is
overcome by the Lord Jesus, he is now King of it, who is King of
kings, and Lord of Lord's, who will keep it for himself, and will
not suffer it to be subjected to the Beast any more: The Saints in
England are brought out of the bondage of mystical Babylon, and
shall return no more to it, and therefore they may be confident,
That none of the Romish power, of any of the other nine kingdoms,
neither those that are more remote, or those that are nearer
neighbours to it, shall ever be able to prevail over England.

Thirdly, The third ground of my affirming that the Parliament, army
and witnesses in England, shall hence-forth overcome all the enemies
that shall rise up against them, is evident also in Scripture: for
it appears also in the explicatory part of this discourse, That the
one thousand two hundred and threescore days, in which it is said in
this Scripture, That the holy city should be trodden under foot, and
that the witnesses should be in sack-cloth, by reason of the
Gentiles, the spiritual Babylonians tyrannizing over them, is one
thousand two hundred and threescore years, and did expire, Anno
Domini 1645. as appears by computing the time of the Beast's
continuance (as it ought to be computed) by the Scripture account:
And also, this one thousand two hundred and threescore years of the
Beast's continuance, appears to be then expired, because it is said,
That when the witnesses had finished their prophecy in sack-cloth,
that then the Beast should make war with them, and overcome them.
Now the Beast having made war against them, and overcome them, and
they being raised again, and set upon their feet, to the fear of
their enemies, in the year, one thousand six hundred forty and five.
It is by this evident, that that year, the one thousand two hundred
and threescore years, wherein the holy city, the Saints should be
trodden under feet by the Beast, did expire. And now you witnesses
in the Parliament, and Parliamentary Army, and kingdom of England,
may be confident, that all the combined power, both of men and
devils, which shall conspire against you, shall never be able to
prevail against you; for you shall be trodden under foot no more,
the Beast shall prevail over you no more; for the time of his
prevailing over you is expired, and he must hence-forth be trodden
under foot himself, and you must henceforth prevail over him, and
you must reward great Babylon, as she hath rewarded you; the Cup
which she hath filled, you must go on to fill to her double.

Now in these considerations, and from these grounds, held forth in
the Word of Truth, the Scripture, and that part of it in this book
of the Revelation, which Revelation God gave unto his Son Jesus
Christ, to show unto his servants. Let all the Saints in England be
strong, and of a good courage, and fear not what man can do unto
them. Let not the heart of any one Saint be troubled, fearing that
either Popery, Prelacy, or Presbytery shall recover any power in
England, to Lord it over God's heritage, to tyrannize over the
witnesses of Jesus Christ, or to restrain them from walking in that
way, which appears to them to be according to the mind of God. But
Saints, be you assured it shall never be, since you have a Spirit of
life from God put upon you; and since England is fallen from
Babylon, and since the time of the Beast's tyrannical power over
you, is expired, therefore cast off all unbelieving thoughts, and
all distrustful fears of these things; and be confident, That Jesus
Christ will by you, go on conquering, and to conquer. And what
though a great Army should be a preparing to overcome you, as there
was in July, one thousand six hundred and forty seven? Yet as then,
they were soon blasted, so they shall be for the future: For you
have a Spirit of life and courage from God put into you; therefore
men shall not prevail over you. And you are no more a part of
Babylon, therefore you cannot be kept in bondage, and the time of
your being trodden under foot is expired: and therefore though all
the malignants in this kingdom, and in Scotland, and all those
foreign Forces, that those factors of Rome, that are gone from
England into France, or else-where, can possibly procure, were
conjoined together in one body, and marching against you; yet should 
not your hearts be troubled, nor be afraid, but be assured they
should be overcome by you: And what though you seem to be small in
number? You know that God hath formerly commanded others to stand
for you, and can do so still, if it be consonant to his wisdom now
also; but if it were not so, it were an evil in you to distrust his
power, to whom it is all one to save by few, or by many; For victory
cometh not from the strength of horses, or the legs of men, but from
the Lord of hosts.

And therefore upon these grounds, let all the witnesses of England,
be confident of overcoming all that shall rise up against them, by
the strength of the Lord of hosts their God. And having experience
that God hath done thus for them ever hitherto, since one thousand
six hundred and forty five, let them not be of such unworthy
spirits, as to be distrustful for the future.

Deduction 18.

The last particular that I shall hence observe, is, To stir up the
hearts of Saints to joyfulness and praises. O Saints considering
what God hath done for you, seeing he hath put a Spirit of life upon
you, and hath made you that lay dead to stand upon your feet; And
seeing that England is fallen from mystical Babylon; and that now
your enemy the Beast shall have no more power over you, he that hath
trodden you under feet a thousand two hundred and threescore years,
shall tread you under foot no more; and that now your time of
prophesying in sack-cloth is expired: Put you now on, instead of
your sack-cloth, the garments of joy and praise, and walk no longer
sadly, being delivered out of the bondage of spiritual Egypt, and
from the oppression of your enemies; let your hearts be affected
herewith, and your souls rejoice in the apprehension of it. For
suppose that when you were under that bondage, so that you were
driven into corners, and your enemies hunted after you to make a
prey of you, and having taken some of you, did imprison some, and
fine others, and banish others, and pillory others: if one should
then have come into your meetings, and told you as an infallible
truth, That within one month your enemies should be brought down,
and tyrannize no longer over you, but you should be set at liberty
to worship the Lord Jesus, in that way which he should discover to
you, to be most agreeable to his own mind. How would your spirits at
the apprehension hereof, have been filled with joy? Your joy would
have been such, as would have been beyond expression. O let your joy
be now no less, since this is actually done; and especially having
assurance that you shall be brought under bondage no more: but let
your hearts leap and sing for joy! And in your joy let the high
praises of God be in your mouths, and let him be exalted in your
spirits. O be frequent in offering up the sacrifices of praises, in
the secrets of your spirits unto your God, that hath done such
things for you! I will extol thee, O Lord (saith David) for thou
hast lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me.
This is now the case of all the Saints in England. The Lord hath
lifted them up, and doth not suffer their foes to rejoice over them.
O that with that sweet singer of Israel, they might extoll the Lord
their God in it, and for it; for Praise is comely, saith that holy
man, For the upright (Psal. 33. 1.) And it is a good thing (saith
he) to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises unto the name
of the most High, and to show forth his loving kindness in the
morning, and his faithfulness in the nights, Psal. 92. 1, 2. Let
Saints therefore be much in this comely, good and pleasant work of
praise; and improve all opportunities to exercise themselves in this
work. Let them sing praises unto the most High in the morning, and
show forth his loving kindness and faithfulness in the nights.
Though others forget God, and he is not in all their thoughts, and
they do not remember the great things he doth for his people, yet
let him be much in the thoughts of his Saints, yea much in their
thoughts to praise him for his benefits. And let them say within
themselves; Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits. O let them not forget to praise him for what he did for
them, in the year, 1645. but let them register in their hearts, the
particular acts of the great things he then did for them: and let
them not forget, what he did do for them in July 1647. Let them not
suffer these things to slip out of their mind, but let them call to
mind how frequent and importunate they were with God in prayer, for
to obtain these mercies for themselves, and for the kingdom: and
having now attained them, let them be as frequent, and as ready to
praise him, Call upon me, saith God, in the day of trouble, and I
will hear thee, and thou shalt glorify me, Psal. 50. 15. O now, you
that called upon God in the day of trouble, and were heard: be you
much in that heavenly and angelical work of glorifying God! Let all
that love the Lord in England, remember that it is the duty, as well
as the privilege of those that have got the victory over the Beast,
to sing a song of praises, unto him that fits upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb for ever and ever, Revel. 15. 3. And since they are
the persons, that have now got the victory over the Beast: Let them
with enlarged hearts, sing that new song of praise, and let not
doubtful, nor distrustful thoughts of the power and faithfulness of
God for the future in the least measure sad their spirits, or keep
back their praises: but let the voice of joy and praise be heard in
the tabernacles of the righteous in England: for the right hand of
the Lord is exalted, the right hand of the Lord hath done valiantly
for them, and they shall not die but live, and declare the works of
the LORD, Psal. 118. 15, 16, 17.
The Postscript.

IT being so, that (since my finishing of this discourse) there are
some further mutations in these kingdoms, which may seem to give to
some some ground to question that which I have here asserted, viz.
That the witnesses are slain by the Beast, and that (according to
this prophecy) after they had lain dead three years and an half,
they are risen and do stand upon their feet: If this be so, may
someone say, then how cometh it to pass, that there is such a
probability that the enemies of the Saints shall again get ground of
them, and bring them again into a low condition? For Inchiquin in
Ireland, and Poyer in Wales, and a great party in Scotland do seem
to act afresh for the Beast, and do expressly declare against the
witnesses under the titles of Independents and Sectaries, &c. but if
the witnesses were indeed slain and raised, then undoubtedly they
should indeed go on conquering and overcoming the Beast, and the
Beast should no more recover power over them, to put them into a
distressed condition; for then the days of their prophesying in
sack-cloth, in sad and sable garments is expired: But how can it be
said to be so, since the Beast seems in a probable way of recovering
power over them again?

Now that this seeming ground of fear may be removed, I shall lay
down these three considerations.

First, That though the Beast shall no more prevail over the
witnesses to bring them down, yet he may and must endeavour to
oppose the witnesses, and again to make war against them that they
may bring him down: for now that the time of his prevalency over the
Saints is expired, he must not long continue in his present station;
but as he shall not go higher, so he shall go lower, yea he shall
come down wonderfully, and how shall that be but by his opposing the
Saints, who shall be as a burden some stone, and all that burden
themselves with it shall be cut in pieces? And therefore the more we
see that that the accomplices of the Beast do endeavour to oppose
the Saints, the nearer we may conclude that he and they are to their
ruin; and therefore their risings and stirrings should be rather
encouragements then discouragements unto the Saints. But

Secondly, That the witnesses are indeed slain and risen, and do
stand upon their feet, is altogether unquestionable, because (as
appears by the fore-going discourse) this prophecy of the slaying of
the witnesses, and of their rising, &c. is in every particular iota
and tittle of it most exactly accomplished, I will not here
recapitulate any of the particulars, but refer the Reader to the
fore-going discourse, but shall here only desire the Reader to
consider of this one in a more especial manner, viz. That the holy
Ghost expressly declares, that the falling of a tenth part of the
city should immediately follow the witnesses, standing upon their
feet, and be in the same hour with it as an effect of it. Now that a
tenth part of the city (particularly the kingdom of England) is
fallen from the mystical Babylon, that is to say, from being a place
of bondage to the Saints is most evident, and therefore it is
undeniable, That the witnesses are slain and risen.

Thirdly, It is no wonder that the witnesses being raised, and having
a spirit of life from God put upon them, that the Beast doth
endeavour to oppose them; for that spirit of vigour and courage that
is put upon them, is to be exercised and actuated, and they must go
on in it to give that scarlet Whore blood to drink, and to reward
her, as she hath rewarded them, and of the cup which she hath filled
to them to fill to her double: for the Saints are those Armies in
heaven, which are said to follow him that is faithful and true, and
in righteousness doth judge, and make war, who is clothed with a
vesture dipped in blood, and whose name is called the Word of God,
when he cometh to make a final end of the Beast, and the false
prophet, and them that worship his image, and to cast them a live
into a lake of fire burning with brimstone. Now that the Saints may
be actual instruments, not only of beginning to ruin the Beast, but
of the total ruining of the Beast: it is no wonder that he
endeavours again to recover strength against them; and therefore
when the Dragon and his Angels (the Beast and his imps) do fight
against Michael and his Angels (Jesus Christ and his Saints) it is
said that they prevailed not (that is after the witnesses were risen
to oppose the Saints) but were cast out, and that was the shortest
way they could take to be overcome, and to be cast out, even their
opposing Jesus Christ, and his Saints, which have a spirit of life
from God put upon them. Thus much for the removing of that doubt.

Now that I may not be mistaken, I shall here add a caution, and so
conclude: It is this,

I desire it may be observed, That though I have particularly (in
this discourse) mentioned the Parliament and the army (having good
ground so to do from what they have done, and have been instruments
of already) encouraging them to go on in opposing the Beast, and his
adherents, and defending the witnesses of Jesus Christ, assuring
them of success in their undertakings, yet it is upon no other
grounds, then as they shall so go on; but if they shall turn aside,
and aim more at corrupt and self ends then at the promoting of
justice and righteousness, then at the public good of the kingdom,
then enlargements shall come for the Saints, and they being
delivered from the rage of the Beast, shall be preserved wholly from
his fury some other way, and by some other means, when corrupt
persons may perish in carrying on of corrupt designs, but I hope
(and have persuasions of) better things of those Worthies, even that
as God hath begun, so he will go on to grant them the honour, and
the happiness still to remain glorious instruments in his hand, of
setting up his King upon his holy hill of Sion, and subjecting these
nations unto his royal sceptre, that judgement may run down among us
as water, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

FINIS.
