Bibliographic Note

     The Vanity of Dogmatizing, the first work of Joseph Glanvill to
be printed, was published in 1661. It probably appeared around March
of that year since the dedicatory epistle, which also gives some
account of its composition, is dated March 1, 1660. (In those days
the year began on 25th March; so 1 March 1660 by Glanvill's reckoning
is 1 March 1661 by ours.)

     The second edition is entitled Scepsis scientifica: or, Confest
ignorance the way to science . . . (&c.), and is dated 1665, though
it was presented to the Royal Society in December 1664.

     The two editions are much the same except for some
rearrangements, minor stylistic changes, and slight omissions and
additions. Of these omissions, the one of most general interest is
the story on which Matthew Arnold based his Scholar-Gypsy. The
second edition does not contain the dedicatory epistle addressed to
Joseph Mynard, the Preface to the reader (a part of which, however,
was recast to form chapter III of the Scepsis), or the three
commendatory verses. In place of these the Scepsis Scientifica
contains the long dedicatory epistle addressed to the Royal Society.
Following the main treatise in the Scepsis scientifica there is
added a reply to Thomas White's Sciri, sine sceptices & scepticorum
a jure disputations exclusio (1663), which had attacked The Vanity
of Dogmatizing.

     The final version of The Vanity of Dogmatizing is that in
Glanvill's Essays on Several Important Subjects in Philosophy and
Religion (1676). The first essay in this volume, Against confidence
in philosophy, and matters of speculation, is in the main a reprint
of the principal discourse as it appeared in the Scepsis
Scientifica, with further omissions and slight rearrangements. The
essay begins with the third chapter of The Vanity of Dogmatizing
(the fourth of the Scepsis Scientifica), the dropping of these
preliminary chapters being the only alteration in material of any
consequence. Of decided importance, however, are the stylistic
changes, which are complete and thoroughgoing.

     This edition has been created by combining the full text of the
second edition (taken from an 1885 reprint by Kegan Paul, Trench &
Co.) with the dedicatory epistle, introduction, three poetical
testimonials and the story of the Scholar-Gypsy, in the first
edition (taken from a facsimile published by the Facsimile Text
Society, 1931).  The spelling has been modernized.

The Dedicatory Epistle

     To the reverend my ever honoured friend, Mr. JOSEPH MYNARD,
B.D.

     SIR;
     I dare not approach so much knowledge, as you are owner of, but
in the dress of an humble ignorance. The lesser Sporades must veil
their light in the presence of the Monarch Luminary; and to appear
before you with any confidence of science, were an unpardonable
piece of dogmatizing. Therefore whatever be thought of the discourse
itself, it cannot be censured in this application; and though the
pedant may be angry with me, for shaking his endeared opinions; yet
be cannot but approve of this appeal to one, whose very name would
reduce a sceptick. If you give your vote against dogmatizing: 'tis
time for the opinionative world, to lay down their proud
pretensions: and if such known accomplishments acknowledge
ignorance; confidence will be out of countenance; and the sciolist
will write on his most presumed certainty; this is also vanity.
Whatever in this discourse is less consonant to your severer 
apprehensions, I beg it may be the object of your charity, and
candour. I Betake my self to the protection of your ingenuity, from
the pursuits of your judicious censure. And were there not a benign
warmth, as well ss light attended you, 'twere a bold venture to come
within your beams. Could I divine wherein you differ from me; I
should be strongly indeced to note that with a deleatur; and revenge
the presumption, by differing from my present self. If anything seem
to favour too much of the Pyrrhonian: I hope you'll consider, that
Scepticism is less reprehensible in enquiring years, and no crime in
a juvenile exercitation. But I have no design against science: my
endeavour is to promote it. Confidence in uncertainties, is the
greatest enemy to what is certain; and were I a sceptick, I'd plead
for dogmatizing: for the way to bring men to stick to nothing, is
confidently to persuade them to swallow all things.

     The treatise in your hands is a fortuitous, undesigned
abortive; and an equivocal eject of a very diverse intention: for
having writ a discourse, which formerly I let you know of, of the
soul's immortality: I designed a preface to it, as a corrective of
enthusiasm, in a vindication of the use of reason in matters of
religion: and my considerations on that subject, which I thought a
sheet would have comprised, grew so voluminous, as to fill fourteen:
which, being too much for a preface; I was advised to print apart.
And therefore reassuming my pen, to annex some additional
enlargements to the beginning; where I had been most curt and
paring: my thoughts ran out into this discourse, which now begs your
patronage: while the two former were remanded into the obscurity of
my private papers: the latter being rendered less necessary by his
majesty's much desired, and seasonable arrival; and the former by
the maturer undertakings of the accomplished Dr. H. More.

     I have no apology to make for my lapses, but what would need a
new one. To say they are the erratas of one that hath not by some
years reached his fourth climacterical, would excuse indeed the
poverty of my judgement, but criminate the boldness of this address.
Nor can I avoid this latter imputation, but by being more criminal:
and to than this respectful presumption, I must do violence to my
gratitude. Since therefore your obligations have made my fault, my
duty; I hope the same goodness, that gave birth to my crime, will
remit it. Hereby you'll further endear your other favours and make
me as much an admirer of your virtues, as I am a debtor to your
civilities: which time I cannot do them right in an acknowledgement;
I'll acknowledge, by signifying that the greatness of them hath
disabled me from doing so: an impotence, which a little charity will
render venial; since it speaks yourself its author. These your
endearments necessitate me to a self-contradiction; and I must
profess my self dogmatical in
this, that I am,
SIR
Your most obliged and affectionate servant
JOS. GLANVILL
Cecil-house, in the Strand,
March 1, 1660



The Preface.

     To complain in print of the multitude of books, seems to me a
self-accusing vanity, whilst the querulous reprehenders add to the
cause of complaint, and transgress themselves in that, which they
seem to wish amended. 'Tis true, the births of the press are
numerous, nor is there less variety in the humors, and fancies of
perusers, and while the number of the one, exceeds not the diversity
of the other, some will not think that too much, which others judge
superfluous. The genius of one approves, what another disregardeth.
And were nothing to pass the press, but what were suited to the
universal gusto; farewell typography! Were I to be judge, and no
other to be gratified, I think I should silence whole libraries of
authors, and reduce the world of books into a fardle: whereas were
another to sit censor, it may be all those I had spared, would be
condemned to darkness, and obtain no exemption from those ruins, and
were all to be suppressed, which some think unworthy light; no more
would be left, than were before Moses, and Trismegistus. Therefore,
I seek no applause from the disgrace of others, nor will I
hucksterlike discredit any man's ware, to recommend mine own. I am
not angry that there are so many books already, (bating only the
anomalies of impiety and irreligion) nor will I plead the necessity
of publishing mine from feigned importunities. Those that are taken
up with others, are at their liberty to avoid the divertisement of
its perusal: and those, to whom 'tis not importunate will not expect
an apology for its publication. What quarter the world will give it,
is above my conjecture. If it be but indifferently dealt with, I am
not disappointed. To print, is to run the gauntlet, and to expose
oneself to the tongue-strappado.  If the more generous spirits
favour me, let pedants do their worst: there's no smart in their
censure, yea, their very approbation is a scandal.

     For the design of this discourse, the title speaks it. It is
levied against dogmatizing, and attempts upon a daring enemy,
confidence in opinions. The knowledge I teach, is ignorance: and
methinks the theory of our own natures, should be enough to learn it
us. We came into the world, and we know not how; nn live in't in a
self-nescience, and go hence again and are as ignorant of our
recess. We grow, we live, we move at first in a microcosm, and can
give no more scientifical account of the state of our three quarters
confinement, than if we had never been extant in the greater world,
but had expired in an abortion; we are enlarged from the prison of
the womb, we live, we grow, and give being to our like: we see, we
hear, and outward objects affect our other senses: we underhand, we
will, we imagine, and remember: and yet know no more of the
immediate reason of most of these common functions, than those
little embryo anchorites: we breathe, we talk, we move, while we are
ignorant of the manner of these vital performances. The dogmatist
knows not how he moves his finger; nor by what art or method he
turns his tongue in vocal expressions. New parts added to our
substance, to supply uur continual decayings, and as we die we are
born daily; nor can we give a certain account, how the aliment is so
prepared for nutrition, or by what mechanism it is so regularly
distributed; the turning of it into chyle, by the stomach's heat, is
a general, and unsatisfying solution. We love, we hate, we joy, we
grieve: passions annoy us, and our minds are disturbed by those
corporal aestuations. Nor yet can we tell how there should reach our
unbodied selves, or how the soul should be affected by these
heterogeneous agitations. We lay us down, to sleep away our diurnal
cares; night shuts up the senses' windows, the mind contracts into
the brain's centre. We live in death, and lie as in the grave. Now
we know nothing, nor can our waking thoughts inform us, who is 
Morpheus, and what that leaden key, that locks us up within our
senseless cells: there's a difficulty that pincheth, nor will it
easily be resolved. The soul is awake, and solicited by external
motions, for some of them reach the perceptive region in the most
silent repose, and obscurity of night. What is't then that prevents
our sensations; or if we do perceive, how is't, That we know it not?
But we dream, see visions, converse with Chimera's, the one half of
our lives is a romance, a fiction. We retain a catch of those pretty
stories, and our awakened imagination smiles in the recollection.
Nor yet can our most severe inquiries find what did so abuse us, or
show the nature, and manner of these nocturnal illusions: when we
puzzle our selves in the disquisition, we do but dream, and every
hypothesis is a fancy. Our most industrious conceits are but like
their object, and as uncertain as those of midnight. Thus when some
days, and nights have gone over us , the stroke of fate concludes
the number of our pulses ; we take our leave of the Sun and Moon,
and bid mortality adieu. The vital flame is extinct , the soul
retires into another world , and the body to dwell with dust. Nor
doth the last scene yield us any more satisfaction in our
autography; for we are as ignorant how the soul leaves the light, as
how it first came into it; we know as little how the union is
dissolved, that is , the chain of the so differing subsistencies,
that compound us, as how it first commenced. This then is the
creature that so pretends to knowledge , and that makes such a
noise, and bustle for Opinions. The instruction of Delphos may flame
such confidents into modesty ; and till we have learn't that honest
adviso, though from hell, G?OT? S?????? [Greek: GEOTHI SEAYTON];
confidence is arrogance, and Dogmatizing unreasonable presuming. I
doubt not but the opinionative resolver, thinks all these easy
knowables , and the theories here accounted Mysteries, are to him
Revelations. But let him suspend that conclusion till he hath
weigh'd the considerations hereof, which the Discourse itself will
present him with; and if he can untie those knots, he is able to
teach all humanity, and will do well to oblige mankind by his
informations.

     I had thought here to have shut up my Preface, being sensible
of the tedium of long preliminaries. But lest the ingenious rumble
at my threshold, and take offence at the seemingly disproportionate
excess, which I ascribe to Adam's senses: I'll subjoin a word to
prevent the scruple. First then, for those that go the way of the
allegoric, and assert pre-existence; I'm secure enough from their
dissatisfaction. For, that the ethereal Adam could easily sense the
most tender touches Upon his passive vehicle, and so had a clear and
full perception of objects, which we since plunged into the grosser
hyle are not at all, or but a little aware of; can be no doubt in
their hypothesis. Nor can there as great a difference be supposed 
between the senses of eighty, and those of twenty, between the
opticks  of the blind bat and peripicacious eagle, as there was
between those pure uneclipsed sensations, and aide of our now-
embodyed, muddied sensitive. Now that the pr-existent Adam could so
advantageously form his vehicle, as to receive better information
from the distant objects, than we by the most helpful telescopes;
will be no difficult admission to the friends of the allegory. So
that what may seem a mere hyperbolical, and fanciful display to the
sons of the letter; to the allegorists will be but a defective
representation of literal realities. And I cannot be obnoxious to
their censure, but for my coming short in the description.

     But I am like more dangerously to be beset by them that go the
way of the plain: and 'twill be thought somewhat hard, to verify my
hypothesis of the literal Adam. indeed, there is difficulty in the
mechanical defence; and Dioptrical impugnations are somewhat
formidable. For unless the constitution of Adam's organs was diverse
from ours, and from those of his fallen self, it will to come seem
impossible, that he could command distant objects by natural, as we
do by artificial advantages. Since those removed bodies of sun and
stars (in which I instance) could form but minute angles in Adam's
retina, and such as were vastly different from those they form in
ours assisted by a telescope. So that granting Adam's eye had no
greater diametrical wideness of the pupil, no greater distance from
the cornea to the retiformis, and no more filaments of the optic
nerves of which the tunica retina is woven, than we: the
unmeasurable odds of sensitive perfections which I assign him; will
be conceived mechanically impossible. These difficulties may seem
irresistibly pressing, and incapable of a satisfactory solution.

     But I propound it to the consideration of the ingenious
objectors, whether these supposed organical defects might not have
been supplied in our unfallen protoplast by the vast perfections of
his animadversive, and some other advantageous circumstances: so
that though it be granted, that an object at the distance of the
stars could not form in the eye of Adam any angles, as wide as those
it forms by the help of a tube; yet I think my hypothesis may stand
unshaken. For suppose two eyes of an equal and like figure, in the
same distance from an object; so that it forms equal angles in both:
it may come to pass by other reasons, that one of these eyes shall
see this object bigger than the other: yea, if the difference of the
reasons on both sides be so much greater, one eye shall see it
clearly, and the other not at all: for let one of these eyes be
placed in an old body, or in a body deprived quite, or in a great
measure of those spirits which are allowed the instruments Of sight,
or of the due egress and regress of them, in their natural courses
and channels; and let the other have a body of a clean contrary
quality; or let the soul that actuates one of the said eyes, be
indued with an higher faculty of animadversion (I mean with a
greater degree of the animadversive ability) than the soul hath,
that actuates the other. In either of there cases, the forementioned
difformity of vision, will fall out in the same uniform case of
dioptrical advantages. For a little angle made in the eye, will make
as discernible an impression to a soul of a greater animadversive
power, and assisted by more and meeter instruments of sight; as a
greater angle can make to a soul of a less power, and destitute of
those other instruments, which are as necessary to sight as those
dioptrical conveniencies. So that grant that the object set at the
same distance made angles in the eye of Adam, no wider than those it
forms in ours; yet that which we discern not, might have been seen
by him having more and better spirits, and being endued with a
stronger animadversive, according to mine hypothesis. For there is
the same proportion between a great power, and a little help, or a
little angle which is between a small power, and a great help, or a
great angle.

     If all this satisfy not, I beg from the ingenious the favour of
this consideration: that some grains must be allowed to a rhetorical
display, which will not bear the rigour of a critical severity. But
whether this mine hypothesis stand or fall, my discourse is not at
all concerned. And I am not so fond of my conjectures, but that I
can lay them down at the feet of a convictive opposition.



Three Poetical Testimonials

To the Learned Author, of the Eloquent and Ingenious Vanity of
DOGMATIZING.

Poets are but libellers, I implore no Muse;
Parnassian praise is an abuse.
Call up the Spirit of Philosophy:
Your worth's disgraced by Poetry.
Summon Descartes, Plato, Socrates:
Let this great Triad speak your praise.
Other Encomiasts that attempt, set forth
Their own defects, and not your worth.
As if a Chamber-light should dare essay,
To gloss the beauty of the day.
He that thinks fully to describe it, dreams:
You're only seen by your own beams.
And only Eagle eyes can bear that light;
Your strength and lustre blinds weak sight.
Let pedants quarrel with th' light that detects
Their beloved vanities and defects.
And let the Bat, as soon as day's begun,
Commence a suit against the Sun.
Let reprehended Dogmatizers stamp;
And the scorched Moore curse Heaven's lamp:
While nobler souls, that understand what's writ,
Are debtors to your strength and wit.
You have removed the old antipathy
'Tween Rhetorick, and Philosophy:
And in your book have clothed Socratic sense,
In Demosthenian eloquence.
You've smoothed the Satyr, and the wanton have
Reformed and made Rhetorick grave.
And since your Pen hath thus obliged them both
'Tis fit they club t'express your worth.

     H. Darsy, Esq;


To his Worthy Friend Mr. JOSEPH GLANVILL;
Upon the Vanity of Dogmatizing in Philosophy, displayed in his
ingenious book.

NO controversies do me please,
Unless they do contend for peace:
Nor scarce a demonstration,
But such as yours; which proves, there's none.
Doubtful I lived, and doubtful die:
Thus ?'???'S[Greek: A'YTO'S] gave ?"F? [Greek: EPHE] the lie;
And with his own more aged critics,
Expunged his youthful analytics.
To make my shrift, that certain I
Am only of Uncertainty;
Is no less glorious, than due,
After the Stagirite and You:
I am absolved, if the hand
Of great Apollo's priest may stand.
You have made Ignorance a Boast:
Pride hath its Ancient channel lost;
Like Arethusa, only found
By those, that follow'd underground:
Title your Book, The Works of Man;
The Index of the Vatican:
Call it Art's Encyclopedia
The Universal Pansophy
The State of all the Questions
Since Peter Lombard, solved at once;
Ignorance in a learned dress,
Which volumes teach, but not profess;
The learning which all ages knew
Being epitomised by you.
You teach us doubting; and no more
Do libraries turn o'er and o'er:
Take up the Folio, that comes next,
'Twill prove a comment on your text;
And the quotation would be good,
If Bodley in your margin stood

     A. Borset, M.A.


To His Ingenious Friend the Author, on his Vanity of Dogmatizing.

Let vaunting knowledge now strike sail,
And unto modest ign'rance veil.
Our firmest Science (when all's done)
Is nought but bold opinion
He that hath conquered every Art
Th' Encyclopedia all by heart;
Is but so,e few conjectures better
Than he that cannot read a letter.
If any certainty there be,
'Tis this, that there's no certainty.
Reason's a draft, that does display,
And cast its aspects ev'ry way.
It does acknowledge so back parts
'Tis faced like Janus, and regard's
Opposite sides; what one frowns on,
T'other face sweetly smiles upon.
Then may the Sciolist hereby
Correct his Metoposcopy.
Let him, e're censure reason, found
And view her lineaments all round
Let him with you his nescience own.
Weakness acknowledged is best;
And imperfection when confessed.
Meek and unboasting ignorance,
Is but a single impotence:
But when 'tis clad in high profesion,
'Tis then a double imperfection.
A silly ape struttingly dressed
Would but appear the greater jest.
But your example teacheth us
To become less ridiculous.
He that would learn, but what you show
The narrow bounds of what men know:
And would but take a serious view,
Of the foundations with you:
He'd scarce his confidence adventure
On bottoms which are so unsure.
In disquisition's first gust
It would be shipwrecked, sunk, and lost.

     P.H.




AN ESSAY ON THE LIFE AND WORKS OF JOSEPH GLANVILL.
By 
John Owen.

     Of the great and many-sided mental throes through which England
passed in the 17th century, especially of the reaction, political,
religious, and literary, which is marked by the Restoration, it
would be hard to find a better exponent than the author of the
Scepsis Scientifica. Glanvill's was one of those eclectic,
sympathetic intellects, which, like a glass with many facets,
reveals in brilliant prismatic hues not one or two, but all the
great Thought-forces which surround it; while in response to this
varied intellectual sensitiveness, doubtless serving also as a
stimulus, was his environment; for his lot chanced to be cast in one
of the most stirring epochs of English History.

     The chief events in Glanvill's uneventful life may be briefly
summarized. He was born at Plymouth, in 1636. Of his earlier life
and education we have no trustworthy record beyond a few casual
hints scattered throughout his writings.[*Note 1.] He seems to have
been brought up, if not as an extreme sectary, at least in some
school of Puritanism which allowed small scope for independent
judgment. Thus he tells us, in his "Plus Ultra" (p. 1 42): "In my
first education I was continually instructed into a religious and
fast adherence to everything I was taught, and a dread of disputing
in the least article,"-- a mode of education which he was wont in
after life vehemently to denounce. He entered the University of
Oxford in 1652, and took his degree three years after. In the dearth
of more direct information, his love of culture and mental
independence may fairly be inferred from his associates. Thus he was
a personal friend of, and for some few years chaplain to, the well-
known Francis Rous, Provost of Eton, who, notwithstanding his
Puritan proclivities, and the facility with which he accommodated
himself to Cromwell's designs, was a man of considerable culture as
well as liberality. Another of his theological friends was
Baxter,[*Note 2.] while his circle of literary and scientific
acquaintance comprised names as famous as Boyle and Meric Casaubon.
Glanvill used to lament in after life that his friends had not sent
him to Cambridge, so that he might have reached the "New Philosophy"
of Descartes -- already domiciled in that University -- by a shorter
route than that which his circumstances compelled him to follow.
Indeed, the Aristotelianism which was still the ruling philosophy of
Oxford seems to have sat as heavily on Glanvill's soul as did the
Puritan dogmatism which was its prevailing type of religion. From
these twin Incubi he resolved to free himself at the earliest
possible moment. His liberation from Aristotle is marked by the
publication of his first work, in 1661, while the Restoration may be
taken as the date of his emancipation from the religious thraldom of
Puritanism. No sooner had that event taken place, than Glanvill
renounced the small modicum of Nonconformity he had hitherto
professed, and took orders in the Church of England. Of this conduct
Anthony Wood characteristically remarks, that at the Restoration
"Glanvill turned about and became a Latitudinarian," but the altered
position thus sneeringly alluded to was in Glanvill's case, as in
that of others, not so much a change of front as a natural and
inevitable movement in advance. His own judgment of such a
transformation by development is indicated in his account of Bishop
Rust, who similarly took advantage of the Restoration to "turn
about" from Puritanism to the English Church. "He was one of the
first," says Glanvill, "that overcame the prejudices of the
education of The late unhappy times in that University (Cambridge),
and was very instrumental to enlarge others, He had too great a soul
for the trifles of that age, and saw early the nakedness of phrases
and fancies. He outgrew the pretended orthodoxy of those days, and
addicted himself to the Primitive Learning and Theology, in which he
even then became a great master." Glanvill soon became a marked man
among the clergy of his time, and his preferment was rapid. First
instituted to a small rectory in Essex, he was promoted shortly
after to the vicarage of Frome, in Somerset. About the same date
(1664) he was made a fellow of the newly-founded Royal Society -- an
honour which he seems to have attained by his attack on Aristotle
and Scholasticism, and his enlightened advocacy of the new methods
of Descartes and Bacon. In 1666 he became Rector of the Abbey Church
in Bath, and resided in that city until his death. In 1672 he
exchanged the vicarage of Frome for the rectory of Street in
Somerset, and about the same time was appointed one of the chaplains
in ordinary to Charles II. A few years later (1678) he was installed
Prebendary of Worcester. He died of fever in 1680, and was buried in
the north aisle of the Abbey Church in Bath, where an inscription
may still be seen recording his virtues, and insisting especially on
the fact that the twenty-four years of his brief maturity were spent
"in studio et contemplatione verbi et operum Dei."
[*Note 1: Comp. Reliquie Baxteriane, Pt. II. P.378]
[*Note 2: The chief authorities for Glanvill's life -- all of them
unsatisfactory -- are Prince's Worthies of Devon, p. 431, the
Biographia Brittanica, ad. voc., and Horneck's Preface to Glanvill's
Remains.]

     Such are the chronological dry bones of Glanvill's life, and to
these, so far as is known, nothing worthy of record can be added.
The real extent of his fame and influence must not, however, be
meted by the brevity and comparative unimportance of the chief
events of his life -- the meagreness of his biographical data being
largely compensated by the fulness of his literary remains. By his
written works, now consigned to, in most instances, a most
undeserved oblivion, Glanvill exercised no inconsiderable sway on
English thought during the latter half of the 17th century. To the
student of that period they still attest his high mental qualities,
his keen intellectual perception, his variedly-sensitive
imagination, what Wood terms his "quick, warm, spruce and gay
fancy," his genial, many-sided receptivity, his fearlessness in
enouncing his opinions, his quaint, pithy, pregnant and forcible
style. Nor are they of less importance as reflecting the
undercurrents of speculation then in activity among cultured
Englishmen. Employing them for this latter purpose, and thereby
illustrating the drift of the following treatise, we may take
Glanvill as a fair exponent of the following thought-movements of
his time. Thus he exemplifies:

     1. The Reaction against Philosophical and Religious Dogmatism,
which, though not caused, was materially aided by the collapse of
the Puritan regime.

     2. The study and advocacy of the foreign humanism imported into
English literature in the 16th century, but the development of which
had been arrested by the rapid growth of Puritanism and by the
political troubles of the reigns of James I. and Charles 1.

     3. The liberalizing tendencies of English Theology, which
centred around the school of Divines known as the Cambridge
Platonists.

     4. The early growth of experimental and natural Science,
denoted by Bacon's works and the founding of the Royal Society.

     5. The imperfect conception of the true methods of scientific
enquiry, which allowed the grossest superstitions a place side by
side with the most enlightened researches of Science.

     I. Glanvill was one of the first thinkers of the Restoration
epoch to place on a philosophical basis the many-sided reaction
which forms its chiefest characteristic. Just as Milton recognised
an intensified ecclesiasticism in certain forms of Puritanism,
Presbyter being but Priest "writ large," so Glanvill and others had
no difficulty in detecting beneath its sour austerity and
theoretical self-abasement a very real substratum of Omniscience.
This was none the less specious in itself or less mischievous in
operation for being ostensibly founded on religious sanctions, and
assuming the place and function of a divine Revelation. From this
standpoint of superior and superhuman knowledge, Puritanism opposed
itself to all kinds. Its leaders, excepting a very few far-seeing
thinkers, lumped all secular learning under the opprobrious title of
"carnal knowledge." Their omniscience rendered all ordinary science
superfluous, and the supposedly divine origin of their own
enlightenment imparted to every other culture a kind of sinful
character. Under these circumstances it was clearly necessary for
liberal thinkers like Glanvill to enter the court of human judgment
with the counter-plea of Ignorance. The attempt was in its essence
precisely that which Socrates set himself in ancient Greece, and
which the leaders of the Renaissance undertook when they opposed the
dogmatism of mediaeval Rome. In fact, Glanvill and his fellow-
thinkers were the apostles of the reactionary doubt which is
invariably engendered by excessive or tyrannical dogma. The
enterprise was not, however, exclusively secular in their case. The
religious dogmatism which they opposed was only part of a general
intellectual despotism, under which English thought of the freer
sort had long groaned. Aristotle shared with Calvin supreme
authority in English opinion -- his rule in the realms of science
being as absolute as Calvin's in the domain of religious doctrine.
There was indeed no little similarity in spirit and method between
the two systems, as then conceived and administered; both agreed,
e.g., in arrogating finality each in its own province, and therefore
in opposing Novelty of Thought as the deadliest of human errors.
According to Bacon's definition, Aristotle was Antichrist, and
Glanvill, together with other free-thinkers, were not far wrong in
discerning a similar antagonism to Truth in certain phases of
Calvinism.

     Against these twin giants, the "Pope and Pagan" of English
Thought during the first half of the 17th century, Glanvill soon
proceeded to set the battle in array. He attacked both the religious
and scientific liberal culture of Dogmatism directly by pointing out
their defects, and indirectly by inculcating as a counteracting
principle what he terms the skeptical or free Philosophy. His first
onslaught was made by his publication, in 1661, of a work entitled
"The Vanity of Dogmatizing or Confidence in Opinions"--"A remarkable
work," says Hallam, "but one so scarce as to be hardly known at all
except by name." He republished this work in an altered and improved
form in 1665, prefixing to it a warm panegyric on the Royal Society.
This amended edition is even rarer than the "Vanity of Dogmatizing,"
the greater part of the impression having been destroyed in the
Great Fire. Glanvill entitled it "Scepsis Scientifica," and it is
this work which is presented to the English reader, after a lapse of
two hundred and twenty years, in the ensuing pages.

     But although he styled his thought sceptical, and himself a
sceptic, Glanvill did not employ those terms in the commonly
received sense of wanton or unreasonable disbelief, but in the
classical meaning of enquiry and judicial suspense. It is true he is
not careful to discriminate accurately between suspense and
negation, and his definition of scepsis is always in the most
general terms,[*Note 3.] but there is no mistaking his usual
conception of the principle or the mode of its application. It is
best described as the principle opposed to excessive dogma, whether
in Philosophy, Science or Religion. He defends his method in a
noteworthy passage in the second of his collected essays (p. 44),
which, as giving the key-note of the following treatise, deserves
quotation.

     "But the True Philosophers are by others accounted Skeptics
from their way of Enquiry: which is not to continue still poring
upon the writings and opinions of Philosophers, but to seek Truth in
the great Book of Nature, and in that search to proceed with
wariness and circumspection without too much forwardness in
establishing maxims and positive doctrines: To propose their
opinions as Hypotheses that may probably be the true accounts,
without peremptorily affirming that they are. This among others hath
been the way of those great men, the Lord Bacon and Descartes, and
is now the method of the Royal Society of London, whose motto is
Nullius in Verba. This is Scepticism with some, and if it be so
indeed, 'tis such Scepticism as is the only way to sure and grounded
knowledge, to which confidence in uncertain opinions is the most
fatal enemy."

     [*Note 3: Some mode of discrimination between Skepticism in its
proper and primary sense of Enquiry, and in its perverted but usual
sense of disbelief or Negation, seems urgently needed. The writer
has endeavoured to effect this in his work, "Evenings with the
Skeptics," and elsewhere, by spelling the word when employed in its
original sense as Skepticism. The persistent confusion that occurs
between Suspense and Negation, even in accredited works on
Philosophy, is not very complimentary to the progress of human
thought. Few persons seem able to realize that Skepsis is as much
opposed to Dogmatic Negation as to Dogmatic Affirmation. In the
following treatise the reader will find Glanvill's view of the
relation between Suspense and Negation; and perhaps the writer may
be pardoned for referring on the same point to his work on the
Skeptics above-mentioned.]

     That the mode of thought thus indicated was well adapted to the
needs of the time is obvious, though Glanvill never loses sight of
the fact that it is likely to operate only among comprehensive and
cultured thinkers. Readers of the Scepsis will find in chaps. XXvi.
and XXvII. remarks on the mischief which he considered had been
caused in England by excessive dogma, and similar reflections occur
throughout his works. In his defence of the Scepsis, e.g. he thus
addresses his chief antagonist (Thomas White), who was a rabid
Aristotelian: "If we differ, then, 'tis only in this, that you think
it more suitable to the requisites of the present age to depress
skepticism, and perhaps I look on dogmatizing and confident belief
as the more dangerous and common evil." But although Glanvill
designed his treatise as a counteractive to the thought-tendencies
of his time, it is in itself an indirect outcome of the very
influences which he deprecates. His assault on the Aristotelian
Philosophy is conceived in the spirit and carried out by the method
that marks mediaeval and scholastic Peripateticism, while he attacks
current dogmatic Theology from the basis of the primary article in
its creed. The latter point seems to merit a few remarks, as
indicating the germ and evolution of his Skepticism. Curious as it
may seem, it was a direct outgrowth of his Puritan education, for it
had as its starting point, The Fallible nature of humanity by means
of the Fall. Few things indeed are more remarkable among the many
strange mutual relations of Philosophy and Theology than the
reciprocal action of the Philosophical doctrine of the weakness of
human reason, and the Theological Dogma of the natural degeneracy of
mankind. While among the Greeks and ancient Hindus the experience of
intellectual impotence and limitation induced a theory of natural
fallibility, among Christian thinkers such as Augustine and Pascal
the dogma of the fall issued into a Skeptical theory of Intellectual
imperfection. Thus Skepticism is oftentimes found to be in Christian
speculation nothing else than the philosophical form of Original
Sin. In Glanvill's case the Theological form of the doctrine not
only leads up to its philosophical form, but becomes merged and lost
in it. He enlarges on this theme more in his Vanity of Dogmatizing
than in his later Scepsis Scientifica. His introductory chapter in
the former work consists of some bold speculations as to the
perfection of Adam's Intellect before the Fall. So we are told that
"all the powers and faculties of this copy of the Divinity, this
medal of God, were as perfect as beauty and harmony in Idea. The
soul was not clogged by the inactivity of its mass as ours; nor
hindered in its actings by the distemperature of indisposed organs.
Passions kept their place as servants of the higher powers, and
durst not arrogate the throne as now . . . Even the senses, the
soul's windows, were without any spot or opacity: to liken them to
the purest crystal were to debase them by the comparison, . . . Adam
needed no spectacles. The acuteness of his natural optics (if
conjecture may have credit) showed him much of the celestial
magnificence and bravery without a Galileo's tube: and 'tis most
probable that his naked eyes could reach near as much of the upper
world as we with all the advantages of Art. His sight could inform
him whether the Loadstone doth attract by Atomical Effluviums. It
may be he saw the motion of the blood and spirits through the
transparent skin as we do the workings of those little industrious
animals (bees) through a hive of glasse Sympathies and Antipathies
were to him no occult qualities, &c." (Vanity of Dogmatizing, pp. 5-
7). Much of this introduction may justify Hallam's criticism of it
as rhapsodical, and Glanvill's fanciful surmises, which are,
however, not more extravagant than similar theological speculations
of a bygone age, are considerably toned down in the "Scepsis," where
the reader will find the following disclaimer, better becoming a
Skeptic:--"But a particular knowledge of the blest advantages and
happy circumstances of our primitive condition is lost with
Innocence, and there are scarce any hints of conjecture from the
present." Nevertheless, though more briefly and cautiously, the
Scepsis Scientifica also insists upon man's inherent incapacity for
knowledge, which Glanvill somewhat incongruously both laments as a
lapse from his original perfection, and claims as a primary
condition of wisdom. The second chapter is on "Our Decay and Ruines
by the Fall," and consists of a lengthy elaboration of that subject.
Succeeding chapters expand and illustrate the argument of human
impotence, and insist on its only possible outcome of scepticism or
judicial suspense on most moot points of speculation.

     Ii. But although the Scepsis has its germ in Theological Dogma,
its final development in Glanvill's mind must be ascribed to other
influences, viz., to the freethinking liberalizing culture which
English literature of the 16th and 17th centuries had derived from
Continental sources, chiefly from the leading thinkers of the
Italian and French Renaissance. It is not sufficiently borne in mind
that the Restoration, which brought back Charles II. and reinstated
in a modified form the old monarchy, was also a Restoration of a
literary movement which the civil troubles and rapid growth of
Puritanism had arrested. During the Elizabethan era the works which
still hold their place as the highest products of English culture
were indebted largely for suggestion and shaping to Ariosto,
Boccaccio, Dante, Montaigne, and Rabelais, and other names of "light
and leading" in France and Italy; but during the Civil War and the
Commonwealth this importation of foreign thought became almost
extinct. The fact, no doubt, admits of easy explanation. These
foreign commodities were held to be contraband, for the two reasons
that they were incompetent to decide grave questions of political
and religious controversy, and their free humanizing tendency was
diametrically opposed to the Puritan spirit. They shared the fate
which befel all mere secular literature, all culture of the
intellect for its own sake. They were sacrificed to that sour
disdain of those graces which adorn and refine both letters and
human life, which forms the ugliest feature of extreme Puritanism.
But the stream of Continental enlightenment from whence Shakespeare
and Spencer slaked their thirst had in reality not been destroyed by
Puritanism, it had only been dammed, and when it burst its dykes at
the Restoration, we cannot be surprised if it displayed all the
greater force and volume on account of its confinement. Glanvill's
works are among the earliest indications of this reflux of
Continental thought. His chief teachers are Descartes, Montaigne,
Charron, Gassendi. Many of the utterances in the Scepsis would
suggest a close study of Montaigne's Essays. He often quotes him by
name, and never without some commendatory epithet. But it is
probable that Glanvill, like Sir Walter Raleigh in his Sceptic, may
have been indebted largely for his sceptical reasonings either to
Henry Stephens' translation of the Hypotyposes of Sextus Empeirikos,
or to Gassendi's reproduction of the same arguments. In others of
his writings Glanvill displays a similar predilection for the
leading spirits of what he terms the Free Philosophy. This will
serve to account for the suspicion and malevolence which his
writings seem to have excited, for he became identified, albeit most
unjustly (see his sermon, "Against Scoffing at Religion"), with the
excessive libertinism which marked the thought and manners of
Charles II.'s reign, and which was largely traceable to Continental
sources. Not, however, that these supplied all the motive causes of
the reaction. There can be little question that Puritanism,
notwithstanding its undeniable merits, helped to engender by its
excessive austerity the licence that ensued upon the Restoration.
Glanvill fully recognised this fact, and often takes occasion to
remark on it in his writings. Thus he observes sententiously in one
of his sermons, "The (religious) follies and divisions of one age
make way for Atheism in the next." Indeed, Puritanism itself had, as
every oppressive scheme of human thought and conduct must needs
have, its own licentious side, besides inducing a reactionary excess
in other systems. This is abundantly shown by its own distinctive
literature, such works, e.g. as Edwards' Gangrena, and Bailey's
Letters and Journals. The aim of Glanvill was to direct as far as he
could the swollen current of free thought into proper and innocent
channels -- to show that Continental Humanism and Philosophy were
reconcilable with a moderate and rational Christianity; in a word,
to prevent intellectual liberty from becoming "a cloak of
maliciousness." For such an attempt no commendation can be deemed
excessive. The methods of Puritanism, with its extreme other-
worldliness, its 'rigid formalism, its stress on minutiae in
speculation and conduct, its malevolent opposition to every form of
recreation and pleasure -- whatever appeared likely to enliven human
existence -- had a peculiarly cramping, numbing influence on men's
minds. It operated as Mephistopheles said of the school logic

"Da wird der Geist euch wohl dressirt
In Spanische stefeln eingeschnürt."

     with the intensification that its strait-lacedness claimed to
have a religious basis. Some mode of liberation from this narrow and
fanatical obscurantism was urgently needed---what Glanvill
indignantly terms "that Barbarism that made Magic of Mathematics and
Heresy of Greek and Hebrew." What his proposed remedy was readers of
the Scepsis will see for themselves; but there is one passage in his
Essays wherein he speaks so explicitly of the broadening effects of
Humanism and the Free Philosophy as opposed to current Superstition,
Enthusiasm, and other foes of human Reason and Religion, that it
merits quotation. The passage has an additional interest from its
relation to Glanvill's well-known opinions on witchcraft.
"Superstition consists either in bestowing religious valuation and
esteem on things in which there is no good, or fearing those in
which there is no hurt. So that this folly expresseth itself one
while in doting upon opinions as fundamentals of Faith, and
idolizing the little models of fancy for Divine Institutions, and
then it runs away afraid of harmless indifferent appointments, and
looks pale upon the appearance of any unusual effect of Nature. It
tells ominous stories of every meteor of the night, and makes sad
interpretations of each unwonted accident. All which are the
products of Ignorance and a narrow mind, which defeat the design of
Religion, that would make us of a free, manly, and generous spirit,
and indeed represent Christianity as if it were a fond, sneaking,
weak and peevish thing, that emasculates men's understandings,
making them amorous of toys, and keeping them under the servility of
childish fears, so that hereby it is exposed to the distrust of
larger minds, and to the scorn of Atheists. These and many more are
the mischiefs of superstition, as we have sadly seen and felt."

     "Now against this evil spirit and its influences the real
experimental Philosophy is one of the best securities in the world.
For by a generous and open enquiry in the great field of Nature,
men's minds are enlarged and taken off from all fond adherencies to
their private sentiments. They are taught by it that certainty is
not in many things, and that the most valuable knowledge is the
practical. By which means they will find themselves disposed to more
indifferency towards those petty notions in which they were before
apt to place a great deal of religion; and to reckon that all that
will signify lies in the few certain operative principles of the
gospel and a life suitable to such a Faith. Besides which (by making
the soul great), this knowledge delivers it from fondness on small
circumstances, and imaginary models, and from little scrupulosities
about things indifferent, which usually work disquiet in narrow and
contracted spirits, and I have known divers whom Philosophy and not
disputes, hath cured of this malady." (Essay iv., pp. 13-14) In thus
asserting a broad culture of Humanism and scientific thought as the
best antidote to a narrow, intolerant Theology, Glanvill acted in
conformity not only with his own free instincts, but with the best
teachings of history -- no law of human progress being better
attested than the beneficent effects of Nature study and liberal
speculation, on those who have been dieted too exclusively on
Theological food.

     III. The last sentence of this passage is interesting as
probably referring to the Latitudinarians, as they were termed by
"men of narrower thoughts and fiercer tempers," says Burnet. They
formed that party in the church who found refuge in Philosophical
Research and Platonic metaphysics from the religious and other
controversies of the time, and whose credenda might be succinctly
described as Armenianism; A stress upon human Reason as against
extraneous authority; Aversion to dogma on speculative subjects;
Belief in Immutable Morality; Large if not universal tolerance of
religious opinions; and Belief in the Pre-existence of Souls. It is
true Glanvill's name does not occur in ordinary enumerations of the
leaders of this party, or, if mentioned, occupies only a secondary
place, but readers of the Scepsis will readily perceive how entirely
his sympathies accord with the tenets we have just named. Indeed,
with two of the most prominent members of the party, Dr. Henry More
and Bishop Rust, he seems to have been on terms of personal and
intimate friendship. It is however certain that he considered
himself as much a member of that school of thought, as that he was a
Fellow of the Royal Society. Nor does he manifest any dislike to the
epithet Latitudinarian, when duly interpreted, which was its
customary designation. It conveyed a protest against narrowness and
intolerance, which he appreciated just as heartily as Bishop
Thirlwall in our day, and for the same reason, did the title of
Broad Churchman. Omitting for lack of space other points of affinity
which connect Glanvill with the Cambridge Platonists, we limit our
remarks to his undogmatic and comprehensive presentation of
Christianity, with regard to which he may claim a place second to
none of the party.

     Glanvill's view of the Christian Religion may be summed up by
the epithets Primitive and Rational. Like Pascal he is an example of
that appeal to the personal teaching of Christ, which is the best
and only resource of the thoughtful intellect, when distracted by
conflicting and irrational Dogmas. From the swollen and turbid
stream of ecclesiastical tradition, he turns back to the pure and
limpid fountain, which rises amid the mountains of Galilee. Hence he
assures us that "he owns no opinion in Divinity which cannot plead
the prescription of above 1600." . . . As a believer in Immutable
Morality, he contends that, "Divine Truths were most pure in their
source and Time could not perfect what Eternity began. Our Divinity,
like the Grandfather of Humanity, was born in the fulness of Time,
and in the strength of its manly vigour." He maintains a distinction
in this respect between Natural and Divine Truth, "Natural Truths
are more and more discovered by Time . . . But these Divine Verities
are most perfect in their fountain, and original. They contract
impurities in their streams and remote derivations." This theme,
incidentally touched upon in the "Scepsis," is fully developed in
his Essays, and in his sermon "On the Antiquity of our Faith" whence
the last extract is taken. He calls the two great commandments of
the Gospels, "Those Evangelical Unquestionables." The comparative
allegiance he conceives himself to own to Primitive Christianity on
the one hand, and the tenets of the English Church on the other, he
thus indicates:-- "Contenting myself with a firm assent to the few
Fundamentals of Faith, and having fixed that end of the compass, I
desire to preserve my liberty as to the rest, holding the other in
such a posture as may be ready to draw these lines, my judgment
informed by the Holy Oracles, the Articles of our Church, the
apprehensions of wise antiquity and my particular reason shall
direct me to describe: and when I do that," he adds with noble and
Christian tolerance, "'tis for myself and my own satisfaction. I am
not concerned to impose my sentiments upon others, nor do I care to
endeavour the change of their minds, though I judge them mistaken,
as long as Virtue, the Interests of Religion, the Peace of the
World, and their own, are not prejudiced by their errors."
Glanvill's significant simile of the compasses, and his idea of the
latitude the church allowed in ordinary matters of speculation,
receives a further illustration from his preface to "Lux
Orientalis." "It is none of the least commendable indulgences of our
church that she allows us a latitude of judging in points of
speculation, and ties not up men's consciences to an implicit
assenting to opinions not necessary or fundamental . . . Nor is
there less reason in this parental indulgence than there is of
Christian charity and prudence; since to tie all others up to our
opinions and to impose difficult and disputable matters under the
notion of Confessions of Faith, and Fundamentals of Religion, is a
most unchristian piece of tyranny, the foundation of persecution,
and every root of Antichristianism." Nor is he unprepared with an
answer to the delicate and crucial question -- What are
Fundamentals? His reply forms the fifth of his Collected Essays, and
of a sermon ad clerum, which he entitled ????? ???s?e?a [Greek:logou
threskeia] (The Service of Reason), to which we must refer our 
readers. Suffice it to say, that Glanvill's opinion of the
essentials of Religion is marked by extreme simplicity, the most
generous comprehension, and the noblest scorn of long and difficult
Creeds and Confessions. Such schemes of Belief were, we need hardly
say, very frequent during the years immediately following the
Restoration. Hardly a Divine of note could be named, either among
the clergy or the Nonconformists, who did not try his hand at
devising a system of Belief for the National Church. As a rule these
designs serve only to illustrate the narrow conceptions of the
would-be ecclesiastical architects. The scheme propounded by
Glanvill is probably unique for its exceedingly broad and undogmatic
spirit. That it should have been deliberately put forth amid the
scenes of ecclesiastical and political tyranny, which disgrace our
annals from 1662 onwards, gives it the appearance almost of a grave
satirical jest. The church erected on Glanvill's Fundamentals might
have been acceptable to some ideal community -- some imaginary city
of Bensalem, in New Atlantis -- it was evidently unsuited by its
very excellencies for the England of the 17th century.

     Iv. But Glanvill is not only an advocate of broad religious and
literary culture, as required by the exigencies of his time, he also
insists on a specific pursuit of natural science -- i.e. the New
Philosophy of Experiment, such as was taught by Bacon, Descartes and
the Royal Society. The advocacy was in truth urgently needed. For we
must remember that this new movement of thought, notwithstanding a
few propitious circumstances, soon found itself in antagonism to
various reactionary forces, which followed upon the Restoration, and
which may be described as a recoil towards Medievalism. It is true
the Royal Society received its charter in 1662, and its small band
of Fellows were doing their utmost to promote experimental Science
as it was then understood; but this at first was no more than an
insignificant back-eddy by the side of a broad and rapid onward
current. Of this retrograde movement, the House of Commons, which as
Macaulay says, "was more loyal than the King, and more Episcopal
than the Bishops," was the political centre, but of its
philosophical and Theological phases, the University of Oxford was
the stronghold. Here then were two concurrent reactionary movements,
each aided by the other, towards Scholasticism in Philosophy, and
Sacerdotalism in Theology. The first took the form of an exclusive
devotion to Aristotle, and the second so far shared this worship as
to maintain that all the Philosophy and Science an orthodox divine
needed were contained in the same repository of Greek wisdom. The
advice of Marlowe's Faust:--

"Having commenced, be a Divine in show,
Yet level at the end of every art,
And live and die in Aristotle's works,"

     Still summarized the essentials of clerical training as taught
by the largest English University. Bearing this in mind, we are able
to discern what the animus against Aristotle, disclosed in the
Scepsis Scientifica, and Glanvill's other writings, really
signified. It was not mere opposition to the doctrines of the
greatest of Greek Scientific Teachers. From his long and intimate
connexion, almost amounting to identification, with medieval
Catholicism, the name of Aristotle had become the symbol of pre-
Reformation ideas, not only in Philosophy, but in Theology as well.
It was the recognized banner of an antiquated Dogmatism, from which
the freer minds of Europe were detaching themselves. The extent of
this movement which had derived impetus from the ascendancy of
Puritanism (for all the leading Calvinists were Aristotelians) is
sufficiently shown by the number of Peripatetic Teachers
contemporary with Glanvill, and some of them his own personal
antagonists. Even enlightened thinkers, like Meric Casaubon, felt
compelled to take up arms in defence of the Stagirite, and to
deprecate a too hasty or complete sundering of the associations that
clustered round his venerable name. If among a number of concurrent
causes, any single one be selected as the chief power, which in
England helped to dethrone Aristotle, and the medievalism with which
his name had become identified, it is the foundation of the Royal
Society, and the newly awakened enthusiasm, on behalf of Natural
Science, of which it was the focus. Those who have dipped into the
earlier volumes of the Philosophical Transactions, are aware of the
fact that the proceedings of the Society constituted at first a kind
of tacit crusade against Aristotle. No doubt the Society itself was
only a practical outcome of the Philosophies of Bacon and Descartes,
but it is characteristic of the English intellect, that mere
philosophical theory obtains little popular recognition until it has
been embodied, enforced and illustrated by actual experiment.
Glanvill was a foremost combatant in the struggle. He came forward
as the advocate of Freethought and experimental Science, the
uncompromising foe of Aristotelianism, the enthusiastic disciple of
Bacon and Descartes. To the great French thinker we must ascribe a
preponderating share in the moulding of his intellect, for though
his veneration for Bacon was great, it was exceeded by his regard
for Descartes, whom he addresses in terms of fulsome, and even
extravagant, panegyric. He speaks of him as "the grand Secretary of
Nature, the miraculous Descartes." "That great man, possibly the
greatest that ever was," &c. Probably the more critical analytic and
direct method of the French Thinker was better suited to Glanvill's
intellect than the practical, yet somewhat ponderous, system of the
English Philosopher. Certainly the Discourse on Method afforded a
shorter road to Skepticism than the devious route supplied by the
Novum Organum.

     Besides the attack on Aristotle contained in the Scepsis
Glanvill returns to the subject in more than one of his subsequent
writings, especially in his work Plus Ultra, published in 1668, and
afterwards epitomized in the third of his collected Essays "Of the
modern Improvements of Useful Knowledge." His stand-point in the
Plus Ultra, and his other writings on the same topic, are even now
of considerable interest. We are thereby made aware that Glanvill's
age was emphatically an age of Discovery and Invention in every
department of human knowledge. Galileo's "tube" was as yet a
novelty; Harvey had not long discovered the circulation of the
blood; the Barometer, Thermometer, Microscope and Air-pump were
comparatively recent inventions. New discoveries in Geography, and
thereby, as Glanvill remarked, a larger field for human speculation
were of continual occurrence. At the very time the Plus Ultra was
published, Newton, then a young man of twenty-four, was pursuing
those studies which gave to Glanvill's enthusiastic forecast of the
future a far more prophetic character than he, even in his most
sanguine moments, would have dared to anticipate. In short, the
human intellect, after long and devious wanderings, had reached the
bounds of the "Wonderland" of Modern Science, and expectation was
rife as to the disclosures likely to follow; Glanvill was one of the
first to prognosticate a glorious future for English and European
Science. His enthusiasm is in part depicted in his address to the
Royal Society, prefixed to the Scepsis. But its fullest expression
is found in his Plus Ultra. This is indeed a cheering cry of
"Forward" for all lovers of Knowledge, as well as a much needed
protest against the Dogmatic and Immobile "Ne Plus Ultra" of the
past.

     v. It is with regret that we turn from that phase of Glanvill's
intellect which has most affinity with the present to another aspect
of it, closely allied with the remote past, from the enlightened
advocate of natural Science to the apologist for antiquated and
gross superstition, from the author of Scepsis Scientifica and Plus
Ultra to the writer of Sadducismus Triumphatus; or, a Full and Plain
Evidence concerning Witches and Apparitions. Such a conjunction is,
however, not unparalleled. Many instances occur both among ancient
and modern thinkers of a cautious skepticism in one direction being
counterbalanced by a surplusage of faith in another. Nor is
Glanvill's philosophical suspense totally unrelated to his witch-
beliefs. Skepticism, we must remember, is largely a cleansing
process, and may possibly result in the admission into the swept and
garnished intellect of some other spirits more wicked than the
single one exorcised. He indeed calls attention to the connexion
between his Scepsis and his Book on Witches (Sad. Tri. p. 7), the
plea for the existence of such supernatural beings as witches being
based on that very ignorance of the hidden processes of Nature which
it is the object of the Scepsis to set forth and demonstrate. There
are besides other points of connexion between this superstition of
Glanvill's and his general environment and mental conformation. With
all his desire to emancipate himself from the Puritanism of the
Commonwealth, his thought betrays occasional sympathies with its
origin, as we have already incidentally noted. Here, at least, he is
in full accord with the despised Sectaries. No article of Puritan
faith was more firmly grounded than that which related to the
reality and malefic power of witches, and Glanvill's work on the
subject is only one of a large number written by "enthusiasts" and
Sectaries whose other credenda he would have disdainfully rejected.
No doubt the dominating element in his intellectual formation was
not Sentiment nor Intuition, but Reason. Still, it was Reason
qualified by emotional sensitiveness, as well as by an eager
powerful imagination, which sometimes carried him further than he
wanted to go. His "warm, spruce and gay fancy" is apparent in all
his works, even in those which treat of science and philosophy; but
in no direction does he allow it freer flight than within the
confines of the spirit world. We must therefore find in his
uncompromising belief in the existence and perpetual activity of
non-material Beings a primary motive of his witch-faith. But the
work had also a polemical object. It was written to confute the
materialists of his time. "'Tis well known," he says, "that the
Sadducees denied the existence of spirits and the Immortality of
Souls, and the heresie is sadly revived in our days." (Essay iv. p.
8). On the truth of the latter statement it is needless to dilate.
All who are acquainted with the chief under-currents of English
speculation during the latter half of Charles II.'s reign are aware
that not the least influential among them was an unthinking and
gross materialism, -- which was in itself, let us add, only the
natural reaction of Puritan dogmatism -- as to the manifold
activities of the world of spirits. This materialism Glanvill
attacks in the most vehement fashion. Not only was the denial of
spirits unjustifiable, but it was unphilosophical. It set an
absolute barrier to speculation. It asserted a finality which was
both arbitrary and incapable of proof, and it left many unquestioned
facts in human history without any rational basis. But once the
existence and continuous energy of good spirits were admitted, then,
according to Glanvill, there must needs be bad spirits as well, and
their activities will probably be no less varied. The inference,
though in an opposite direction, was precisely that by which
Göethe's Supernaturalist on the Brocken inferred the existence of
good spirits:

"Denn von den Teufeln kann ich ja
Auf Gute Geister schliessen."

     We have no space to dwelt further on Glanvill's "Vanquished
Sadducieism," nor to resuscitate the Demon of Tedworth and other
fantastic spectres of equal authenticity from the oblivion which is
their just due. The argument of the book is in form Inductive.
Glanvill bases his proof on what he terms a choice collection of
modern Relations, but it is in truth a travesty of the Inductive
method, and betrays a ludicrous misconception of the nature of human
testimony. But while we assign to Glanvill's witch-beliefs their
merited estimate, we must remember that we cannot fairly blame him
for not being in advance of his time. His benighted condition on
this subject was shared by most of his compeers in English thought.
Boyle, Henry More, Meric Casaubon, Baxter, Cudworth, all believed
fully in Witchcraft, and most of them wrote in its defence.
Glanvill's own co-Fellows of the Royal Society were similarly fully
persuaded of the truth of Alchymy, and in some cases attested their
scientific instincts by a diligent search for the philosopher's
stone. Bacon himself believed in the transmutation of metals, and
Sir Kenelm Digby's sympathetic powder and weapon salve found
numerous recipients as credulous as their author. On the whole,
then, while we cannot exonerate the author of the Scepsis from
sharing an unworthy and degrading superstition, we must allow him
the extenuating circumstances which are always due when a man's
errors are the outcome of his environment. After all, a thinker's
claim to stand in the forefront of the speculation of his time must
be determined not by an impossible freedom from all the errors by
which he is surrounded, but by such a comparative immunity from some
of them, as enables him to reach forward to, and represent the
Knowledge and enlightenment of the Future. Readers of the Scepsis,
the Plus Ultra, and the collected "Essays," will have no difficulty
in claiming such a position for Joseph Glanvill.

     Our space rather than the interest of the subject is exhausted.
All we have attempted is to set before the readers of the ensuing
treatise, such particulars as to the life and thought of its author
as seemed likely to enhance their appreciation of his work, and to
aid its fuller comprehension. Let us add, that the spirit and intent
of Glanvill's work seems to us of more durable worth than its form,
though this also is charged with manifold interest. As long as men
are constituted as they are, the peace and welfare of the world will
always be imperilled by excessive dogma, or too confident Belief on
many moot points of speculation, not only in Philosophy and
Theology, but in Science, Politics, and other departments of human
thought which deal with indeterminable matters and issues, and
therefore there will always be room for a Scientific Skepticism --
for the enquiry and judicial suspense of the truly wise man.



AN ADDRESS TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY.

     Illustrious Gentlemen,

     The name of your honorable society is so august and glorious,
and this trifle to which I have prefixed it, of so mean, and so
unsuitable a quality; that 'tis fit I should give an account of an
action so seemingly obnoxious. And I can expect no other from those,
that judge by first sights and rash measures, then to be thought
fond or insolent; or, as one that hath unmeet thoughts of himself,
or you. But if a naked profession may have credit in a case wherein
no other evidence can be given of an intention; I adventured not on
this address upon the usual motives of dedications. It was not upon
design to credit these papers (which yet derive much accidental
honour from the occasion.) Nor to compliment a society so much above
flattery, and the regardless air of common applauses. I intended not
your illustrious name the dishonour of being fence against
detraction for a performance, which possibly deserves it. Nor was it
to publish how much I honour you; which were to fancy myself
considerable. Much less was I so fond, to think I could contribute
anything to a constellation of worthies from whom the learned world
expects to be informed. But, considering how much it is the interest
of mankind in order to the advance of knowledge, to be sensible they
have not yet attained it; or at least, but in poor and diminutive
measures; and regarding your society as the strongest argument to
persuade a modest and reserved diffidence in opinions, I took the
boldness to borrow that deservedly celebrated name, for an evidence
to my subject; that so what was wanting in my proof, might be made
up in the example. For if we were yet arrived to certain and
infallible accounts in nature, from whom might we more reasonably
expect them then from a number of men, whom, their impartial search,
wary procedure, deep sagacity, twisted endeavours, ample fortunes,
and all other advantages, have rendered infinitely more likely to
have succeeded in those enquiries; then the sloth, haste, and babble
of talking disputants; or the greatest industry of single and less
qualified attempters? If therefore those (whom, I am in no danger of
being disbelieved by any that understand the world and them, if I
call the most learned and ingenious society in Europe.) If they, I
say, confess the narrowness of human attainments, and dare not
confide in the most plausible of their sentiments; if suck great and
instructed spirits think we have not as yet phenomena enough to make
as much as hypotheses; much less, to fix certain laws and prescribe
methods to nature in her actings: what insolence is it then in the
lesser size of mortals, who possibly know nothing but what they
gleaned from some little system, or the disputes of men that love to
swagger for opinions, to boast infallibility of knowledge, and swear
they see the sun at midnight.

     Nor was this the only inducement to the dishonour I have done
you in the direction of these worthless papers; but I must confess I
designed hereby to serve myself in another interest. For having been
so hardy as to undertake a charge against the philosophy of the
schools, and to attempt upon a name which among some is yet very
sacred, I was liable to have been overborne by a torrent of
authorities, and to have had the voice of my single reason against
it, drowned in the noise of multitudes of applauders: that I might
not therefore be vapoured down by insignificant testimonies, or
venture bare reasons against what the doting world counts more
valuable, I presumed to use the great name of your society to
annihilate all such arguments. And I cannot think that any, that is
but indifferently impudent, will have the confidence to urge, either
the greatness of the author, or the number of its admirers in behalf
of that philosophy, after the Royal Society is mentioned. For though
your honourable and ingenious assembly hath not so little to do, as
to dispute with men that count it a great attainment to be able to
talk much, and little to the purpose: and though you have not
thought it worth your labour to enter a professed dissent against a
philosophy which the greatest part of the virtuosi, and enquiring
spirits of Europe have deserted, as a mere maze of words, and
useless contrivance: yet the credit which the mathematics have with
you, your experimental way of enquiry, and mechanical attempts for
solving the phenomena; besides that some of you (to whose excellent
works the learned world is deeply indebted) publicly own the
Cartesian and atomical hypotheses; these, I say, are arguments of
your no great favour to the Aristotelian. For indeed that disputing
physiology is of no accommodation to your designs; which are not to
teach men to cant endlessly about materia, and forma; to hunt
chimeras by rules of art, or to dress up ignorance in words of bulk
and sound, which shall stop the mouth of enquiry, and make learned
fools seem oracles among the populace: but the improving the minds
of men in solid and useful notices of things, helping them to such
theories as may be serviceable to common life, and the searching out
the true laws of matter and motion, in order to the securing of the
foundations of religion against all attempts of mechanical atheism.

     In order to the furtherance (according to my poor measure) of
which great and worthy purposes, these papers were first intended.
For perceiving that several ingenious persons whose assistance might
be conducive to the advance of real and useful knowledge, lay under
the prejudices of education and customary belief; I thought that the
enlarging them to a state of more generous freedom by striking at
the root of pedantry and opinionative assurance would be no
hindrance to the world's improvement. For such it was then that the
ensuing essay was designed; which therefore wears a dress, that
possibly is not so suitable to the graver geniuses, who have
outgrown all gaieties of style and youthful relishes; but yet
perhaps is not improper for the persons, for whom it was prepared.
And there is nothing in words and styles but suitableness, that
makes them acceptable and effective. If therefore this discourse,
such as it is, may tend to the removal of any accidental
disadvantages from capable ingenuities, and the preparing them for
inquiry, I know you have so noble an ardour for the benefit of
mankind, as to pardon a weak and defective performance to a laudable
and well-directed intention. And though, if you were acted by the
spirit of common mortals, you need not care for the propagation of
that gallantry and intellectual grandeur which you are so eminently
owners of since 'tis a greater credit, and possibly pleasure, to be
wise when few are so; yet you being no factors for glory or
treasure, but disinterested attempters for the universal good,
cannot but favourably regard anything, that in the least degree may
do the considering world a kindness; and to enable it with the
spirit that inspires the Royal Society, were to advantage it in one
of the best capacities in which it is improvable. These papers then
(as I have intimated) having been directed to an end subordinate to
this, viz., the disposing the less stupid minds for that honour and
improvement; I thought it very proper to call up their eyes to you,
and to fix them on their example: that so natural ambition might
take part with reason and their interest to encourage imitation. In
order to which, I think it needless to endeavour to celebrate you in
a professed encomium; since customary strains and affected
juvenilities have made it difficult to commend, and speak credibly
in dedications; and your deserts, impossible in this. So that he
that undertakes it, must either be wanting to your merits, or speak
things that will find but little credit among those that do not know
you. Or, possibly such, as will be interpreted only as what of
course is said on such occasions, rather because 'tis usual, then
because 'tis just. But the splendour of a society, illustrious both
by blood and virtue, excuseth my pen from a subject, in which it
must either appear vain, or be defective. I had much rather take
notice therefore, how providentially you are met together in days,
wherein people of weak heads on the one hand, and vile affections on
the other, have made an unnatural divorce between being wise and
good. These conceiving reason and philosophy sufficient vouchees of
licentious practices and their secret scorn of religion; and those
reckoning it a great instance of piety and devout zeal, vehemently
to declaim against reason and philosophy. And what result can be
expected from such supposals, that 'tis a piece of wit and gallantry
to be an atheist, and of atheism to be a philosopher, but irreligion
on the one side, and superstition on the other, which will end in
open irreclaimable atheism on both? Now it seems to me a signality
in providence in erecting your most honourable society in such a
juncture of dangerous humours, the very mention of which is
evidence, that atheism is impudent in pretending to philosophy; and
superstition sottishly ignorant in fancying, that the knowledge of
nature tends to irreligion. But to leave this latter to its
conceits, and the little impertinencies of humour and folly it is
fond of: the former is more dangerous, though not more reasonable.
For where 'tis once presumed, that the whole fabric of religion is
built upon ignorance of the nature of things; and the belief of a
God, ariseth from unacquaintance with the laws of matter and motion;
what can be the issue of such presumptions, but that those that are
so persuaded, should desire to be wise in a way that will gratify
their appetites: and so give up themselves to the swinge of their
unbounded propensions? Yea, and those, the impiety of whose lives
makes them regret a deity, and secretly wish there were none will
greedily listen to a doctrine that strikes at the existence of a
being, the sense of whom is a restraint and check upon the licence
of their actions. And thus all wickedness and debauches will flow in
upon the world like a mighty deluge, and beat down all the banks of
laws, virtue, and sobriety before them.

     Now though few have yet arrived to that pitch of impiety, or
rather folly, openly to own such sentiments; yet, I doubt, this
concealment derives rather from the fear of man, men from the love
or fear of any being above him. And what the confident exploding of
all immaterial substances, the unbounded prerogatives are bestowed
upon matter, and the consequent assertions, signify, you need not be
informed. I could wish there were less reason to suspect them
branches of a dangerous cabbala. For the ingenious world being grown
quite weary of qualities and forms, and declaring in favour of the
mechanical hypothesis, (to which a person that is not very fond of
religion is a great pretender) divers of the brisker geniuses, who
desire rather to be accounted wits, then endeavour to be so, have
been willing to accept mechanism upon Hobbian conditions, and many
others were in danger of following them into the precipice. So that
'tis not conceivable how a more suitable remedy could have been
provided against the deadly influence of that contagion, than your
honourable society, by which the meanest intellects may perceive,
that mechanic philosophy yields no security to irreligion, and that
those that would be genteely learned and ingenious, need not
purchase it, at the dear rate of being atheists. Nor can the
proleptical notions of religion be so well defended by the professed
servants of the altar, who usually suppose them, and are less
furnished with advantages for such speculations; so that their
attempts in this kind will be interpreted by such as are not willing
to be convinced, as the products of interest, or ignorance in
mechanics; which suspicions can never be derived upon a society of
persons of quality and honour, who are embodied for no other
interest but that of the public, and whose abilities in this kind
are too bright to admit the least shadow of the other censure. And
'tis to be hoped that the eminence of your condition, and the
gallantry of your principles, which are worthy those that own them,
will invite gentlemen to the useful and ennobling study of nature,
and make philosophy fashionable; whereas while that which the world
calls so, consisted of nought but dry spinosities, lean notions, and
endless alterations about things of nothing, all unbecoming men of
generous spirit and education; of use nowhere but where folks are
bound to talk by a law, and professed by few but persons of ordinary
condition; while, I say, philosophy was of such a nature, and
clothed with such circumstances, how could it be otherwise then
contemptible, in the esteem of the more enfranchised and sprightly
tempers? So that your illustrious society hath redeemed the credit
of philosophy; and I hope to see it accounted a piece of none of the
meanest breeding to be acquainted with the laws of nature and the
universe. And doubtless there is nothing wherein men of birth and
fortune would better consult their treble interest of pleasure,
estate, and honour, then by such generous researches. In which (1.)
They'll find all the innocent satisfactions which use to follow
victory, variety, and surprise, the usual sources of our best tasted
pleasures. And perhaps human nature meets few more sweetly relishing
and cleanly joys, than those, that derive from the happy issues of
successful trials: yea, whether they succeed to the answering the
particular aim of the naturalist or not; 'tis however a pleasant
spectacle to behold the shifts, windings and unexpected caprichios
of distressed nature, when pursued by a close and well managed
experiment. And the delights which result from these nobler
entertainments are such, as our cool and reflecting thoughts need
not be ashamed of. And which are dogged by no such sad sequels as
are the products of those titillations that reach no higher then
fancy and the senses. And that alone deserves to be called so, which
is pleasure without guilt or pain. Nor (2.) have the frugaller sons
of fortune any reason to object the costliness of the delights we
speak of; since, in all likelihood, they frequently pay dearer for
less advantageous pleasures. And it may be there are few better ways
of adding to what they are afraid to waste, then inquiries into
nature. For by a skilful application of those notices, may be gained
in such researches, besides the accelerating and bettering of
fruits, emptying mines, draining fens and marshes, which may hereby
be effected, at much more easy and less expensive rates, then by the
common methods of such performances: I say, besides these, lands may
be advanced to scarce credible degrees of improvement, and
innumerable other advantages may be obtained by an industry directed
by philosophy and mechanics, which can never be expected from
drudging ignorance. But though those inquisitive pursuits of things
should make out no pretence to pleasure or advantage; yet upon the
last account (3.) Of honour, they are infinitely recommendable to
all that have any sense of such an interest. For 'tis a greater
credit, if we judge by equal measures, to understand the art whereby
the almighty wisdom governs the motions of the great automaton, and
to know the ways of captivating nature, and making her subserve our
purposes and designments; than to have learnt all the intrigues of
policy, and the cabals of states and kingdoms; yea, then to triumph
in the head of victorious troops over conquered empires. Those
successes being more glorious which bring benefit to the world; then
such ruinous ones as are dyed in human blood, and clothed in the
livery of cruelty and slaughter.

     Nor are these all the advantages upon the account of which we
owe acknowledgments to providence for your erection; since from your
promising and generous endeavours, we may hopefully expect a
considerable enlargement of the history of nature, without which our
hypotheses are but dreams and romances, and our science mere
conjecture and opinion. For while we frame schemes of things without
consulting the phenomena, we do but build in the air, and describe
an imaginary world of our own making, that is but little akin to the
real one that God made. And 'tis possible that all the hypotheses
that yet have been contrived, were built upon too narrow an
inspection of things, and the phases of the universe. For the
advancing day of experimental knowledge discloseth such appearances,
as will not lie even, in any model extant. And perhaps the newly
discovered ring about Saturn, to mention no more, will scarce be
accounted for by any system of things the world hath yet been
acquainted with. So that little can be looked for towards the
advancement of natural theory, but from those, that are likely to
mend our prospect of events and sensible appearances; the defect of
which will suffer us to proceed no further towards science, then to
imperfect guesses, and timorous supposals. And from whom can this
great and noble acquist be expected, if not from a society of
persons that can command both wit and fortune to serve them, and
professedly engage both in experimental pursuits of nature?

     The desired success of which kind of engagements cannot so
reasonably be looked for from any in the known universe, as from
your most honourable society, where fondness of preconceived
opinions, sordid interests, or affectation of strange relations, are
not like to render your reports suspect or partial, nor want of
sagacity, fortune, or care, defective: some of which possibly have
been ingredients in most former experiments. So that the relations
of your trials may be received as undoubted records of certain
events, and as securely be depended on, as the propositions of
euclid. Which advantage cannot be hoped from private undertakers, or
societies less qualified and conspicuous then yours. And how great a
benefit such a natural history as may be confided in, will prove to
the whole stock of learned mankind, those that understand the
interest of the inquiring world may conjecture. Doubtless, the
success of those your great and catholic endeavours will promote the
empire of man over nature; and bring plentiful accession of glory to
your nation; making Britain more justly famous then the once
celebrated Greece; and London the wiser Athens. For you really are
what former ages could contrive but in wish and romances; and
Solomon's house in the new Atlantis was a prophetic scheme of the
Royal Society. And though such august designs as inspire your
enquiries, use to be derided by drolling fantastics, that have only
wit enough to make others and themselves ridiculous: yet there's no
reproach in the scoffs of ignorance; and those that are wise enough
to understand your worth, and the merit of your endeavours, will
contemn the silly taunts of fleering buffoonery; and the jerks of
that wit, that is but a kind of confident, and well-acted folly. And
'tis none of the least considerable expectations that may be
reasonably had of your society, that 'twill discredit that
toyishness of wanton fancy; and pluck the misapplied name of the
wits, from those conceited humourists that have assumed it; to
bestow it upon the more manly spirit and genius, that plays not
tricks with words, nor frolics with the caprices of frothy
imagination: but employs a severe reason in enquiries into the
momentous concernments of the universe.

     On consideration of all which accounts, I think it just you
should have acknowledgments from all the sons and favourers of
wisdom: and I cannot believe it a crime for me to own my part of
those obligations (though in a slender offering) for which all the
thoughtful and awakened world is your debtor; no more then 'twas a
fault to pay the tribute penny to Caesar, or is a piece of guilt to
be dutiful. And though perhaps I have not so well consulted the
repute of my intellectuals, in bringing their weaknesses and
imperfections into such discerning presences; yet I am well content,
if thereby I have given any proof of an honest will, and well-
meaning morals; and I think, I can without repugnance sacrifice the
former, to an occasion of gaining myself this latter and better
testimony; of which disposition, I say, I am now giving an instance
in presenting so illustrious an assembly with a discourse, that hath
nothing to recommend it, but the devotion wherewith 'tis offered
them. And really when I compare this little and mean performance,
with the vastness of my subject; I am discouraged by the
disproportion: and methinks I have brought but a cockle-shell of
water from the ocean: whatever I look upon within the amplitude of
heaven and earth, is evidence of human ignorance; for all things are
a great darkness to us, and we are so unto ourselves: the plainest
things are as obscure, as the most confessedly mysterious; and the
plants we tread on, are as much above us, as the stars and heavens.
The things that touch us are as distant from us, as the pole; and we
are as much strangers to ourselves, as to the inhabitants of
america. On review of which, methinks I could begin anew to describe
the poverty of our intellectual acquisitions, and the vanity of bold
opinion; which the dogmatists themselves demonstrate in all the
controversies they are engaged in; each party being confident that
the other's confidence is vain; from which a third may more
reasonably conclude the same of the confidence of both. And methinks
there should need no more to reduce disputing men to modest
acknowledgments, and more becoming temper, then the consideration;
that there is not anything about which the reason of man is capable
of being employed, but hath been the subject of dispute, and
diversity of apprehension. So that, as the excellent Lord Montaigne
hath observed, [mankind is agreed in nothing; no, not in this, that
the heavens are over us;] every man almost differing from another;
yea, and every man from himself: and yet every man is assured of his
own schemes of conjecture, though he cannot hold this assurance, but
by this proud absurdity, that he alone is in the right, and all the
rest of the world mistaken. I say then, there being so much to be
produced both from the natural and moral world to the shame of
boasting ignorance; the ensuing treatise, which with a timerous and
unassured countenance adventures into your presence, can pride
itself in no higher title, than that of an essay, or imperfect offer
at a subject, to which it could not do right but by discoursing all
things. On which consideration, I had once resolved to suffer this
trifle to pass both out of print and memory; but another thought
suggesting, that the instances I had given of human ignorance were
not only clear ones, but such as are not so ordinarily suspected;
from which to our shortness in most things else, 'tis an easy
inference, and a potiori, I was persuaded, and somewhat by
experience, that it might not be altogether unuseful in the
capacities 'twas intended for: and on these accounts I suffered this
publication; to which (without vanity I speak it) I found so faint
an inclination, that I could have been well content to suffer it to
have slipped into the state of eternal silence and oblivion. For I
must confess that way of writing to be less agreeable to my present
relish and genius; which is more gratified with manly sense, flowing
in a natural and unaffected eloquence, than in the music and
curiosity of fine metaphors and dancing periods. To which measure of
my present humour, I had endeavoured to reduce the style of these
papers; but that I was loth to give myself that trouble in an
affair, to which I was grown too cold to be much concerned in. And
this inactivity of temper persuaded me, I might reasonably expect a
pardon from the ingenious, for faults committed in an immaturity of
age and judgment that would excuse them; and perhaps I may have
still need to plead it to atone for the imperfections of this
address: by which, though I have exposed deformities to the clearest
sunshine, that some others prudence would have directed into the
shades and more private recesses; yet I am secure to lose nothing by
the adventure that is comparably valued by me as is the honour of
declaring myself,
Illustrious gentlemen,
The most humble admirer of your august Society,
Jos. Glanvill.    



Scepsis Scientifica;
or,
The Vanity of Dogmatizing
Chap. I.
A general description of the state of primitive ignorance; by way of
introduction.

     WHATEVER is the innocence and infelicity of the present state,
we cannot, without affronting the divine goodness, deny, but that at
first we were made wise and happy; for nothing of specific
imperfection or deformity could come from the hands that were
directed by an almighty wisdom; so that, whatever disorders have
since befallen them, all things were at first disposed by an
omniscient intellect that cannot contrive ineptly; and ourselves
exactly formed according to the deeds of that mind, which frames
things consonantly to the rules of their respective natures. But a
particular knowledge of the blest advantages, and happy
circumstances of our primitive condition, is lost with innocence;
and there are scarce any hints of conjecture from the present.
However, this perhaps we may safely venture on by way of general
description:

     That the eternal wisdom from which we derive our beings,
enriched us with all those enoblements that were suitable to the
measures of an unstraightned goodness, and the capacity of such a
kind of creature. And as the primogenial light which at first was
diffused over the face of the unfashioned chars, was afterwards
contracted into the fountain luminaries; so those scattered
perfections which were divided among the several ranks of inferior
natures, were summed up, and constellated in ours. Thus the then
happy temper of our condition and affairs anticipated the aspires to
be like gods; and possibly was scarce to be added to as much as in
desire. But the unlikeness of it to our now miserable, because
apostate, state, makes it almost as impossible to be conceived, as
to be regained. 'Twas a condition envied by creatures that nature
had placed a sphere above us; and such as differed not much from
glory and blessed immortality but in perpetuity and duration.

     For since the most despicable and disregarded pieces of decayed
nature are so curiously wrought, and adorned with such eminent
signatures of divine wisdom as speak it their author, and that after
a curse brought upon a disordered universe: with how rich an
embroidery then think we were the nobler composures dignified in the
days of spotless innocence? And of how sublime a quality were the
perfections of the creature that was to wear the image of the prime
perfection? Doubtless, they were as much above the hyperboles that
fond poetry bestowes upon its admired objects, as their flattered
imperfect beauties are really below them. And the most refined
glories of subcelestial excellencies are but more faint resemblances
of these. For all the powers and faculties of this copy of the
divinity, this medal of God, were as perfect, as beauty and harmony
in idea. The soul being not cloyed by an unactive mass, as now; nor
hindered in its actings, by the distemperature of indisposed organs,
passions kept their place, and transgressed not the boundaries of
their proper natures; nor were the disorders began which are
occasioned by the licence of unruly appetites. Now though perhaps
some will not allow such vast advantages to the terrestrial Adam,
which they think not consistent with the history, and circumstances
of his defection: yet those that suppose the allegory and
preexistence, will easily admit all this, and more of the ethereal
condition. But I'll not determine anything in matters of so high and
difficult a nature; whichever is the truth, this general account I
have given is not concerned; I asserting only what both will
acknowledge, that the first condition of our natures was a state of
blessedness and perfection.



Chap. II.
Our decay and ruins by the fall; particularly those of our
intellectual powers.

     BUT, 'tis a miserable thing to have been happy. And a self-
contracted wretchedness, is a double one. Had felicity always been a
stranger to our natures, our now misery had been none; and had not
ourselves been the authors of our ruins, less, we might have been
made unhappy, but since we are miserable we chose it. He that gave
them, might have taken from us our other enjoyments, but nothing
could have robbed us of innocence but ourselves. That we are below
the angels of God is no misery, tis the lot of our natures: but that
we have made ourselves like the beasts that perish, is severely so,
because the fruit of a voluntary defection. While man was innocent
he was likely ignorant of nothing, that imported him to know. But
when he had transgressed, the fault that opened his eyes upon his
shame, shut them up from most things else, but his newly purchased
misery. He saw the nakedness of his soul with that of his body, and
the blindness and disarray of his faculties, which his former
innocence was a stranger to. And what disclosed this poverty and
these disorders, caused them, whether the understanding and
affections were the most criminal authors of that unhappy
defailance, need not be disputed. And how evils should commence in
so blessed a constitution of affairs, and advantageous temper of
them both, will perhaps difficultly be determined: merciful heaven
having made it easier to know the cure, then the rise of our
distempers. This is certain, that our masculine powers are deeply
sharers of the consequential mischiefs; and though Eve were the
first in the disobedience, yet was Adam a joint partaker of the
curse: so that we are not now like the creatures we were made, but
have lost both our maker's image, and our own. And possibly the
beasts are not more inferior to us, then we are to our ancient
selves: a proud affecting to be like gods having made us unlike men.
For (to pass the other instances of our degradation which indeed
were a plentiful subject, but not so press to my design) our
intellectual and highest faculties are deplorable evidence of our
ruins. And upon these I shall fix my observations.

     For whereas our ennobled understandings could once take the
wings of the morning, to visit the world above us, and had a
glorious display of the highest form of created excellencies, they
now lie groveling in this lower region, muffled up in mists, and
darkness: the curse of the serpent is fallen upon degenerated man,
to go on his belly and lick the dust. And as in the Cartesian
hypothesis, the planets sometimes lose their light, by the fixing of
the impurer scum; so our impaired intellects, which were once as
pure light and flame in regard of their vigour and activity, are now
darkened by those grosser spots, which disobedience hath contracted.
And our now overshadowed souls (to whose beauties stars were foils)
may be exactly emblemed, by those crusted globes, whose influential
emissions are intercepted, by the interposal of the benighting
element, while the purer essence is imprisoned by the gross and
impervious matter. For these once glorious lights, which did freely
shed abroad their harmless beams, and wantoned in a larger
circumference, are now pent up in a few first principles (the naked
essentials of our faculties) within the straight confines of a
prison. And whereas knowledge dwelt in our undepraved natures, as
light in the sun, in as great plenty, as purity; it is now hidden in
us like sparks in a flint, both in scarcity and obscurity.

     For, considering the shortness of our intellectual sight, the
deceptibility and impositions of our senses, the tumultuary
disorders of our passions, the prejudices of our infant educations,
and infinite such like (of which an after occasion will befriend us,
with a more full and particular recital) I say, by reason of these,
we may conclude of the science of the most of men, truly so called,
that it may be trussed up in the same room with the Iliads, yea it
may be all the certainty of those high pretenders to it, the
voluminous schoolmen, and peripatetical dictators, (bating what they
have of the first principles and the word of God) may be
circumscribed by as small a circle, as the creed, when brachygraphy
had confined it within the compass of a penny. And methinks the
disputes of those assuming confidents, that think so highly of their
attainments, are like the controversy of those in Plato's den, who
having never seen but the shadow of an horse trajected against a
wall, eagerly contended, whether its neighing proceeded from the
appearing mane, or tail, ruffled with the winds. And the dogmatist's
are no less at odds in the darker cells of their imaginary
principles about the shadows and exuviae of beings; when for the
most part they are strangers to the substantial realities. And like
children are very busy about the babies of their fancies, while
their useless subtleties afford little entertainment to the nobler
faculties.

     But many of the most accomplished wits of all ages, whose
modesty would not allow them to boast of more then they were owners
of, have resolved their knowledge into Socrates his sum total, and
after all their pains in quest of science, have sat down in a
professed nescience. It is the shallow unimproved intellects that
are confident pretenders to certainty; as if contrary to the adage,
science had no friend but ignorance. And though their general
acknowledgments of the weakness of human understanding, and the
narrowness of what we know, look like cold and sceptical
discouragements; yet the particular expressions of their sentiments
and opinions, are as oracular, as if they were omniscient. To such,
as a curb to confidence, and as an evidence of human infirmities
even in the noblest parts of man, I shall give the following
instances of our intellectual blindness: not that I intend to pose
them with those common enigmas of magnetism, fluxes, refluxes, and
the like; these are resolved into a confesssed ignorance and I shall
not persue them to their old asylum; and yet it may be there is more
knowable in these, then in less acknowledged mysteries: but I'll not
move beyond ourselves, and the most ordinary and trivial phenomena
in nature, in which we shall find enough to shame confidence, and
unplume dogmatizing.



Chap. III.
A general account of our ignorance of our own natures.

     To begin then with the theory of our own natures; we shall find
in them too great evidence of intellectual deficience and deplorable
confessions of human ignorance. For we came into the world, and we
know not how; we live in't in a self-nescience, and go hence again
and are as ignorant of our recess. We grow, we live, we move at
first in a microcosm, and can give no more scientifical account, of
the state of our three quarters confinement, then if we had never
been extant in the greater world, but had expired in an abortion; we
are enlarged from the prison of the womb, our senses are affected,
we imagine and remember; and yet know no more of the immediate
reasons of these common functions, than those little embryo
anchorites: we breathe, we talk, we move, while we are ignorant of
the manner of these vital performances. The dogmatist knows not how
he stirs his finger; nor by what art or method he directs his tongue
in articulating sounds into voices. New parts are added to our
substance, to supply our continual decayings, and as we die we are
born daily; nor can we give a certain account, how the aliment is so
prepared for nutrition, or by what mechanism it is so regularly
distributed; we are transported by passions; and our minds ruffled
by the disorders of the body; nor yet can we tell how these should
reach our immaterial selves, or how the soul should be affected by
such kind of agitations. We lay us down, to sleep away our cares;
night shuts up the senses' windows, the mind contracts into the
brain's centre; we live in death, and lie as in the grave. Now we
know nothing, nor can our waking thoughts inform us, who is
Morpheus, and what that leaden key is that locks us up within our
senseless cels: there's a difficulty that pincheth, nor will it
easily be resolved. The soul is awake, and solicited by external
motions, for some of them reach the perceptive region in the most
silent repose, and obscurity of night. What is't then that prevents
our sensations; or if we do perceive, how is't that we know it not?
But we dream, see visions, converse with chimeras; the one half of
our lives is a romance, a fiction. We retain a catch of those pretty
stories, and our awakened imagination smiles in the recollection.
Nor yet can our most severe inquiries find what did so abuse us, or
show the nature and manner of these nocturnal illusions: when we
puzzle ourselves in the disquisition, we do but dream, and every
hypothesis is a fancy. Our most industrious conceits are but like
their object, and as uncertain as those of midnight. Thus when some
days and nights have gone over us, the stroke of fate concludes the
number of our pulses; we take our leave of the sun and moon, and lay
our heads in ashes. The vital flame goes out, the soul retires into
another world, and the body to dwell in darkness. Nor doth the last
scene yield us any more satisfaction in our autography; for we are
as ignorant how the soul leaves the light, as how it first came into
it; we know as little how the union is dissolved, that is the chain
of the so differing subsistencies that compound us, as how it first
commenced. This then is the proud creature that so highly pretends
to knowledge, and that makes such a noise and bustle for opinions.
The instruction of delphos may shame such confidents into modesty:
and till we have learned that honest advise, though from hell, G?OT?
S?????? [Greek: GNOTHI SEAYTON], confidence is arrogance, and
dogmatizing unreasonable presuming. I doubt not but the opinionative
resolver, thinks all these easy problems, and the theories here
accounted mysteries, are to him revelations. But let him suspend
that conclusion till he hath weighed the considerations hereof,
which the process of our discourse will present him with; and if he
can unty those knots, he is able to teach all humanity, and will do
well to oblige mankind by his informations



Chap. IV.
Some great instances of our ignorance discoursed of, (i) of things
within ourselves. The nature of the soul and its origin, glanced at
and passed by: (1) its union with the body is unconceivable: so (2)
is its moving the body, considered either in the way of Sir K.
Digby, Descartes, or Dr. H. More, and the Platonists. (3) the manner
of direction of the spirits, as unexplicable.

     But that I may more closely pursue the design I am engaged on,
I shall discourse some great instances of our ignorance in a way of
more press and strict survey. And those I shall insist on are such
as (1) concern the soul, both in its common nature, and particular
faculties. Or (2) such as are drawn from the consideration of our
own, other organical bodies, and matter in the general. And (3) some
trite and common appearances. Of which I discourse in order.

     If certainty were anywhere to be expected one would think it
should be in the notices of our souls, which are indeed ourselves,
and whose sentiments we are intimately acquainted with. In things
without us, ignorance is no wonder; since we cannot profound into
the hidden things of nature, nor see the first springs and wheels
that set the rest a-going. We view but small pieces of the universal
frame, and want phenomena to make entire and secure hypotheses. But
if that whereby we know other things, know not itself; if our souls
are strangers to things within them, which they have far greater
advantages of being acquainted with than matters of external nature;
I think then this first instance will be a fair one, for the
extorting a confession of that ignorance I would have acknowledged.

     (1) I take notice then that the learned world hath been at an
infinite uncertainty about the speculation of the soul's nature. In
which every man almost held a distinct opinion. Plato called it,
only in the general, a self-moving substance. Aristotle an
entilechie, or, an hee-knew-not-what. Hesiod and Anaximander
compounded it of earth and water. Heraclides made it light. Zeno the
quintessence of the four elements. Xenocrates and the Egyptians a
moving number. The Chaldeans a virtue without form. Parmenides
composed it of earth and fire. Empedocles of blood. Galen held it an
hot complexion. Hippocrates a spirit diffused through the body. 
Varro supposed it an heated and dispersed air. Thales a nature
without rest. And Crates and Decearchus, nothing. Thus have the
greatest sages differed in the first theory of human nature; which
yet perhaps is not so desperate an inquiry, as some others that are
apprehended less difficult. And possibly most have been deceived in
this speculation, by seeking to grasp the soul in their
imaginations; to which gross faculty, that purer essence is
unpalpable and we might as well expect to taste the sunbeams. Such
therefore are to be minded, that the soul is seen, like other
things, in the mirror of its effects and attributes: but if like
children, they'll run behind the glass to catch it, their
expectations will meet with nothing but vacuity and emptiness. And
though a pure intellectual eye may have a sight of it in reflex
discoveries; yet if we affect a grosser touch, like Ixion we shall
embrace a cloud.

     (2) It hath been no less a trouble to determine the soul's
origin, than nature. Some thought it was from the beginning of the
world, and one of the first things created. Others, that 'tis an
extract from the universal soul of all things. Some believe it came
from the moon, others from the stars, or vast spaces of the Æther
above the planets; some that 'tis made by God, some by angels, and
some by the Generant. Whether it be immediately created or traduced,
hath been the great ball of contention to the later ages. And yet,
after all the bandying attempts of resolution; 'tis as much a
question as ever; and it may be will be so till it be concluded by
immortality. The patrons of traduction accuse their adversaries of
affronting the attributes of God; and the assertors of creation
impeach them of violence to the nature of things. Either of the
opinions strongly opposeth the other; but very feebly defends
itself. Which occasion some to think, that both are right, and both
mistaken; right in what they say against each other; but mistaken in
what they plead for their respective selves. But I shall not stir in
the waters which have been already mudded by so many contentious
inquiries. The great St. Austin, and others of the grey heads of
reverend antiquity, have been content to sit down here in a
professed neutrality: and I'll not industriously endeavour to urge
men to a confession of what they freely acknowledge; but shall note
difficulties which are not so usually observed, though as
unaccountable as these.

     §.1. It is the saying of divine Plato, that man is nature's
horizon; dividing betwixt the upper hemisphere of immaterial
intellects, and this lower of corporeity: and that we are a compound
of beings distant in extremes, is as clear as noon. But how the
purer spirit is united to this clod, is a knot too hard for our
degraded intellects to untie. What cement should unite heaven and
earth, light and darkness, natures of so divers a make, of such
disagreeing attributes, which have almost nothing, but Being, in
common; this is a riddle, which must be left to the coming of Elias.
How should a thought be united to a marble-statue, or a sunbeam to a
lump of clay? The freezing of the words in the air in the northern
climes, is as conceivable, as this strange union. That this active
spark, this s?µf?t?? p?e?µa [Greek: symphuton pneuma] (as the stoics
call it) should be confined to a prison it can so easily pervade, is
of less facile apprehension, than that the light should be pent up
in a box of crystal, and kept from accompanying its source to the
lower world: and to hang weights on the wings of the wind seems far
more intelligible.

     In the unions, which we understand, the extremes are reconciled
by interceding participations of natures, which have somewhat of
either. But body and spirit stand at such a distance in their
essential compositions, that to suppose an uniter of a middle
constitution, that should partake of some of the qualities of both,
is unwarranted by any of our faculties, yea most absonous to our
reasons; since there is not any the least affinity betwixt length,
breadth and thickness; and apprehension, judgement and discourse:
the former of which are the most immediate results (if not
essentials) of matter, the latter of spirit.

     §. 2. Secondly, we can as little give an account, how the soul
moves the body. That, that should give motion to an unwieldy bulk,
which itself hath neither bulk nor motion; is of as difficil an
apprehension, as any mystery in nature. For though conceiving it
under some fancied appearance, and pinning on it material
affections, the doubt both not so sensibly touch us; since under
such conceptions we have the advantage of our senses to befriend us
with parallels; and gross apprehenders may not think it any more
strange, than that a bullet should be moved by the rarified fire, or
the clouds carried before the invisible winds: yet if we defecate
the notion from materiality, and abstract quantity, place, and all
kind of corporeity from it, and represent it to our thoughts either
under the notion of the ingenious Sir K. Digby; as, a pure mind and
knowledge; or, as the admired Descartes expresses it, Une chose qui
pense, as, a thinking substance; it will be as hard to apprehend, as
that an empty wish should remove mountains: a supposition which if
realized, would relieve Sisyphus. Nor yet doth the ingenious
hypothesis of the most excellent Cantabrigian philosopher, of the
soul's being an extended penetrable substance, relieve us; since,
how that which penetrates all bodies without the least jog or
obstruction, should impress a motion on any, is by his own
confession alike inconceivable. Neither will its moving the body by
a vehicle of spirits, avail us; since they are bodies too, though of
a purer mould.

     And to credit the unintelligibility both of this union and
motion, we need no more than to consider that when we would conceive
anything which is not obvious to our senses, we have recourse to our 
memories, the storehouse of past observations: and turning over the
treasure that is there, seek for something of like kind, which hath
formerly come within the notice of our outward or inward senses. So
that we cannot conceive anything, that comes not within the verge of
some of these; but either by like experiments which we have made, or
at least by some remoter hints which we receive from them. And where
such are wanting, I cannot apprehend how the thing can be conceived.
If any think otherwise, let them carefully peruse their perceptions:
and, if they find a determinate intellection of the modes of being,
which were never in the least hinted to them by their external or
internal senses; I'll believe that such can realize chimeras. But
now in the cases before us there are not the least footsteps, either
of such an union, or motion, in the whole circumference of sensible
nature: and we cannot apprehend anything beyond the evidence of our
faculties.

     §. 3. Thirdly, how the soul directs the spirits for the motion
of the body according to the several animal exigents; is as perplex
in the theory, as either of the former. For the meatus, or passages,
through which those subtle emissaries are conveyed to the respective
members, being so almost infinite, and each of them drawn through so
many meanders, cross turnings, and divers roads, wherein other
spirits are continually a-journeying; it is wonderful, that they
should exactly perform their regular destinations without losing
their way in such a wilderness: neither can the wit of man tell how
they are directed. For that they are carried by the manuduction of a
Rule, is evident from the constant steadiness and regularity of
their motion into the parts, where their supplies are expected: but,
what that regulating efficiency should be, and how managed; is not
easily determined. That it is performed by mere Mechanism, constant
experience confutes; which assureth us, that our spontaneous motions
are under the Imperium of our will. At least the first determination
of the spirits into such or such passages, is from the soul, what
ever we hold of the after conveyances; of which likewise I think,
that all the philosophy in the world cannot make it out to be purely
mechanical. But yet though we gain this, that the soul is the
principle of direction, the difficulty is as formidable as ever. For
unless we allow it a kind of inward sight of the anatomical frame of
its own body of every vein, muscle, and artery; of the exact site,
and position of them, with the several windings, and secret chanels:
it is as unconceivable how it should be the directrix of such
intricate motions, as that a blind man should manage a game at
chess, or marshal an army. But this is a kind of knowledge, that we
are not in the least aware of: yea many times we are so far from an
attention to the inward direction of the spirits, that our employed
minds observe not any method in the outward performance; even when
'tis managed by variety of interchangeable motions, in which a
steady direction is difficult, and a miscarriage easy. Thus an
artist will play a lesson on an instrument without minding a stroke;
and our tongues will run divisions in a tune not missing a note,
even when our thoughts are totally engaged elsewhere: which effects
are to be attributed to some secret art of the soul, which to us is
utterly occult, and without the ken of our intellects.



Chap. V. 
(4) we can give no account of the manner of Sensation.

     §. 4.But besides the difficulties that lie more deep, and are
of a more mysterious alloy; we are at a loss for a scientifical
account even of our senses, the most knowable of our faculties. Our
eyes, that see other things, see not themselves: and the foundations
of knowledge are themselves unknown. That the soul is the sole
percipient, which alone hath animadversion and sense properly so
called, and that the body is only the receiver and conveyer of
corporeal impressions, is as certain, as philosophy can make it.
Aristotle himsels teaceth so much in that maxim of his ???? ??a, ?a?
???? a???e? [Greek: Nous ora, kai nous akouei]. And Plato credits
this position with his suffrage; affirming, that 'tis the soul that
hath life and sense, but the body neither. But this is so largely
prosecuted by the great Descartes, and is a truth that shines so
clear in the eyes of all considering men; that to go about
industriously to prove it, were to light a candle to seek the sun:
we'll therefore suppose it, as that which needs not arrest our
motion; but yet, what are the instruments of sensible perceptions
and particular conveyers of outward motions to the seat of sense, is
difficult: and how the pure mind can receive information from that,
which is not in the least like itself, and but little resembling
what it represents; I think inexplicable. Whether sensation be made
by corporal emissions and material ???O?? [Greek: EIDOLA], or by
notions impressed on the Æthereal matter, and carried by the
continuity thereof to the common sense; I'll not revive into a
dispute: the ingenuity of the latter hath already given it almost an
absolute victory over its rival. But suppose which we will, there
are doubts not to be solved by either. For how the soul by mutation
made in matter a substance of another kind, should be excited to
action; and how bodily alterations and motions should concern that
which is subject to neither; is a difficulty, which confidence may
sooner triumph on, than conquer. For body cannot act on anything but
by motion; motion cannot be received but by quantity and matter; the
soul is a stranger to such gross substantiality, and owns nothing of
these, but that it is clothed with by our deceived fancies; and
therefore how can we conceive it subject to material impressions?
And yet the importunity of pain, and unavoidableness of sensations
strongly persuade, that we are so.

     Besides, how is it, and by what art doth it read that such an
image or stroke in matter (whether that of her vehicle, or of the
brain, the case is the same) signifies such an object, did we learn
an alphabet in our embryo-state? And how comes it to pass, that we
are not aware of any such congenite apprehensions? We know what we
know; but do we know any more? That by diversity of motions we
should spell out figures, distances, magnitudes, colours, things not
resembled by them; we must attribute to some secret deduction. But
what this deduction should be, or by what mediums this knowledge is
advanced; is as dark, as ignorance. One, that hath not the knowledge
of letters, may see the figures; but comprehends not the meaning
included in them: an infant may hear the sounds, and see the motion
of the lips; but hath no conception conveyed by them, no knowing
what they are intended to signify. So our souls, though they might
have perceived the motions and images themselves by simile sense;
yet without some implicit inference it seems inconceivable, how by
that means they should apprehend their archetypes.

     Moreover, images and motions are in the brain in a very
inconsiderable latitude of space, and yet they represent the
greatest magnitudes. The image of an hemisphere of the upper globe
cannot be of a wider circumference, than a walnut: and how can such
petty impressions notify such vastly expanded objects, but through
some kind of scientifical method, and geometry in the principle?
Without this it is not conceivable how distances should be
perceived, but all objects would appear in a cluster, and lie in as
narrow a room as their images take up in our scanter craniums. Nor
will the philosophy of the most ingenious Descartes help us out:
for, the striking of divers filaments of the brain, cannot well be
supposed to represent distances, except some such kind of inference
be allotted us in our faculties: the concession of which will only
steed us as a refuge for ignorance: where we shall meet, what we
would seem to shun.



Chap. VI.
The nature of the memory unaccountable. 'Tis considered particularly
according to the Aristotelian, Cartesian, Digbean and Hobbian
hypothesis.

     §. 5. The memory also is a faculty whose nature is as obscure,
and hath as much of riddle in it as any of the Former: it seems to
be an organical power, because bodily distempers often mar its
ideas, and cause a total oblivion: but what instruments the soul
useth in her review of past impressions, is a question which may
drive enquiry to despair. There are four principal hypotheses by
which a resolution hath been attempted.

     The Peripatetic, the Cartesian, the Digbean, and the Hobbian.
We'll examine these accounts of the Magnale. And I begin with that
which will needs have itself believed the most venerable for
antiquity and worth.

     (i) then according to Aristotle and his Peripatum, objects are
conserved in the memory by certain intentional species, beings,
which have nothing of matter in their essential constitution, but
yet have a necessary subjective dependence on it, whence they are
called material. To this briefly.

     Besides that these species are made a medium between body and
spirit, and therefore partake of no more of being, than what the
charity of our imaginations affords them; and that the supposition
infers a creative energy in the object their producent, which
philosophy allows not to creature-efficients; I say, beside these,
it is quite against their nature to subsist, but in the presence and
under the actual influence of their cause; as being produced by an
emanative causality, the effects whereof die in the removal of their
origin. But this superannuated conceit deserves no more of our
remembrance, than it contributes to the apprehension of it. And
theresore I pass on to the Cartesian which speaks thus:

     The glandula pinealis, in this philosophy made the seat of
common sense, doth by its motion impel the spirits into divers parts
of the brain; till it find those wherein are some tracks of the
object we would remember; which consists in this, viz. That the
pores of the brain, through which the spirits before took their
course, are more easily opened to the spirits which demand re-
entrance; so that finding those pores, they make their way through
them sooner than through others: whence there ariseth a special
motion in the glandula, which signifies this to be the object we
would remember.

     But I fear there is no security neither in this hypothesis; for
if memory be made by the easy motion of the spirits through the
opened passages, according to what hath been noted from Descartes;
whence have we a distinct remembrance of such diversity of objects,
whose images without doubt pass through the same apertures? And how
should we recal the distances of bodies which lie in a line? Or, is
it not likely, that the impelled spirits might light upon other
pores accommodated to their purpose, by the motion of other bodies
through them? Yea, in such a pervious substance as the brain, they
might find an easy either entrance, or exit, almost everywhere; and
therefore to shake every grain of corn through the same holes of a
sieve in repeated winnowings, is as easy to be performed, as this to
be perceived. Besides, it's difficult to apprehend, but that these
avenues should in a short time be stopped up by the pressure of
other parts of the matter, through its natural gravity, or other
alterations made in the brain: and the opening of other vicine
passages might quickly obliterate any tracks of these; as the making
of one hole in the yielding mud, defaces the print of another near
it; at least the accession of enlargement, which was derived from
such transitions, would be as soon lost, as made.

     We are still to seek then for an Oedipus for the riddle;
wherefore we turn our eyes to the Digbean account, of which this is
the sum; that things are reserved in the memory by some corporeal
exuviae and material images; which having impinged on the common
sense, rebound thence into some vacant cells of the brain, where
they keep their ranks and postures in the same order that they
entred, till they are again stirred up; and then they slide through
the fancy, as when they were first presented.

     But, how is it imaginable, that those active particles which
have no cement to unite them, nothing to keep them in the order they
were set, yea, which are ever and anon jostled by the occursion of
other bodies, whereof there is an infinite store in this repository,
should so orderly keep their cells without any alteration of their
site or posture, which at first was allotted them? And how is it
conceivable, but that carelesly turning over the ideas of our mind
to recover something we would remember, we should put all the other
images into a disorderly floating, and so raise a little chaos of
confusion, where nature requires the exactest order. According to
this account, I cannot see, but that our memories would be more
confused than our midnight compositions: for is it likely, that the
divided atomes which presented themselves together, should keep the
same ranks in such a variety of tumultuary agitations, as happen in 
that liquid medium? An heap of ants on an hillock will more easily
be kept to an uniformity in motion; and the little bodies which are
incessantly playing up and down the air in their careless postures,
are as capable of regularity as these.

     The last account of the faculty we are inquiring of is the
Hobbian, according to which hypothesis; memory is nothing else but
the knowledge of decaying sense, made by the reaction of one body
against another; or as the author expresses it in his Human Nature,
a missing of parts in an object. The foundation of which principle
(as of many of its fellows) is totally reversed by the most
ingenious commentator upon immaterial beings, Dr. H. More in his
book Of Immortality. I shall therefore leave that cause in the hands
of that most learned undertaker, and only observe two things to my
present purpose. (i) neither the brain, nor spirits, nor any other
material substance within the head can for any considerable space of
time conserve motion. The former is of such a clammy consistency,
that it can no more retain it than a quagmire: and the spirits for
their liquidity are more uncapable than the fluid medium, which is
the conveyer of sounds, to persevere in the continued repetition of
vocal airs. And if there were any other substance within us, as
fitly tempered to preserve motion, as the author of the opinion
could desire: yet (2) which will equally press against either of the
former, this motion would be quickly deadened by counter-motions;
and we should not remember anything, but till the next impression.
Much less can this principle give an account, how such an abundance
of motions should orderly succeed one another, as things do in our
memories: and to remember a song or tune, it will be required, that
our souls be an harmony more than in a metaphor, continually running
over in a silent whisper those musical accents which our retentive
faculty is preserver of. Which could we suppose in a single
instance; yet a multitude of musical consonancies would be as
impossible, as to play a thousand tunes on a lute at once. One
motion would cross and destroy another; all would be clashing and
discord: and the musician's soul would be the most disharmonious:
for, according to the tenor of this opinion, our memories will be
stored with infinite variety of divers, yea contrary motions, which
must needs interfere, thwart, and obstruct one another: and there
would be nothing within us, but ataxy and disorder.

     §. 6. Much snore might be added of the difficulties, which
occur concerning the understanding, pliancy, will, and affections.
But the controversies hereabout, are so hotly managed by the divided
schools, and so voluminously everywhere handled; that it will be
thought better to say nothing of them, than a little. The sole
difficulties about the will, its nature, and sequency to the
understanding, &c. have almost quite baffled inquiry, and shown us
little else, but that our understandings are as blind as it is. And
the grand question depending hereon, ???e? t? ?a???[Greek: Pothen to
kakon]; I think will not be ended, but by the final abolition of its
object. They, that would lose their knowledge here, let them
diligently inquire after it. Search will discover that ignorance,
which is as invincible, as its cause. These controversies, like some
rivers, the further they run, the more they are hid. And it may be a
poorer account is given to them now, than some centuries past, when
they were a subject of debate to the pious fathers.



Chap. VII. 
How our bodies are formed unexplicable. The plastic signifies
nothing: the formation of plants, and animals unknown, in their
principle. Mechanism solves it not. A new way profounded, which also
fails of satisfaction. (2.) No account is yet given how the parts of
matter are united. Some consideration on Descartes his hy pothesis,
it fails of solution. (3.) The question is unanswerable, whether
matter be compounded of divisibles, or indivisibles.

     But from these I pass to the second general, the consideration
of bodies, our own and others. For our own, though we see, and feel,
and continually converse with them; yet their constitution, and
inward frame is an america, a yet undiscovered region. And the
saying of the kingly prophet, I am wonderfully made, may well be
understood of that admiration, which is the daughter of ignorance.
Three things I'll subjoin concerning this sensible matter, the other
part of our composition.

     §. 1. That our bodies are made according to the most curious
artifice, and orderly contrivance, cannot be denied even by them,
who are least beholden to nature. The elegance of this composure,
Saved Galen from atheism. And I cannot think that the branded
Epicurus, Lucretius, and their fellows were in earnest, when they
resolved this composition into a fortuitous range of atoms. To
suppose a watch, or any other the most curious automaton by the
blind hits of chance, to perform diversity of orderly motions, to
show the hour, day of the month, tides, age of the moon, and the
like, with an unparalleled exactness, and all without the regulation
of art; this were the more pardonable absurdity. And that this
admirable engine of our bodies, whose functions are carried on by
such a multitude of parts, and motions, which neither interfere, nor
impede one another in their operarations; but by an harmonious
sympathy promote the perfection and good of the whole: that this
should be an undesigned effect, is an assertion, that is more than
Melancholies Hyperbole. I say therefore, that if we do but consider
this fabric with free and unpossessed minds; we shall easily grant,
that it was some skilful archeus who delineated those comely
proportions, and hath expressed such exactly geometrical elegancies
in its compositions. But what this hidden architect should be, and
by what instruments and art this frame is erected; is as unknown to
us, as the thoughts of our cradles. The plastic faculty is a fine
word, and will do well in the mouth of a puzled empiric: but what it
is, how it works, and whose it is, we cannot learn; no, not by a
return into the womb; neither will the Platonic principles unriddle
the doubt: for though the soul be supposed to be the body's maker,
and the builder of its own house; yet by what kind of knowledge,
method, or means, is unknown: and that we should have a knowledge
which we know not of, is an assertion which hath no commission from
our faculties. The great Descartes will allow it to be no better,
than a downright absurdity. But yet should we suppose it, it would
be evidence enough of what we aim at.

     §. 2. Nor is the composition of our own bodies the only wonder:
we are as much nonplussed by the most contemptible worm, and plant,
we tread on. How is a drop of dew organized into an insect? Or, a
lump of clay into a more perfect animal? how are the glories of the
field spun, and by what pencil are they limned in their unaffected
bravery? By whose direction is the nutriment so regularly
distributed unto the respective parts, and how are they kept to
their specific uniformities? If we attempt mechanical solutions, we
shall never give an account, why the woodcock doth not sometimes
borrow colours of the magpie; why the lily doth not exchange with
the daysie; or why it is not sometime painted with a blush of the
rose? Can unguided matter keep itself to such exact conformities, as
not in the least spot to vary from the species? That divers limners
at a distance without either copy or design should draw the same
picture to an undistinguishable exactness, both in form, colour, and
features; is more conceivable, than that matter, which is so
diversified both in quantity, quality, motion, site, and infinite
other circumstances, should frame itself so unerringly according to
the idea of its kind. And though the fury of that Apelles, who threw
his pencil in rage upon the picture he had essayed to draw, once
casually effected those lively representations, which his art could
not describe; yet 'tis not likely, that one of a thousand such
precipitancies should be crowned with so an unexpected an issue. For
though blind matter might reach some elegancies in individual
effects; yet specific conformities can be no unadvised productions,
but in greatest likelihood, are regulated by the immediate
efficiency of some knowing agent: which whether it be seminal forms,
according to the Platonical principles, or whatever else we please
to suppose; the manner of its working is to us unknown: or if these
effects are merely mechanical; yet to learn the method of such
operations may, and hath indeed been, ingeniously attempted; but I
think cannot be performed to the satisfaction of severer
examination.

     That all bodies both animal, vegetable and inanimate, are
formed out of such particles of matter, which by reason of their
figures, will not cohere or lie together, but in such an order as is
necessary to such a specifical formation, and that therein they
naturally of themselves concur, and reside, is a pretty conceit, and
there are experiments that credit it. If after a decoction of herbs
in a winter night, we expose the liquor to the frigid air; we may
observe in the morning under a crust of ice, the perfect appearance
both in figure, and colour, of the plants that were taken from it.
But if we break the aqueous crystal, those pretty images disappear
and are presently dissolved.

     Now these airy vegetables are presumed to have been made, by
the reliques of these plantal emissions whose avolation was
prevented by the condensed inclosure. And therefore playing up and
down for a while within their liquid prison, they at last settle
together in their natural order, and the atom of each part finding
out their proper place, at length rest in their methodical
situation; till by breaking the ice they are disturbed, and those
counterfeit compositions are scattered into their first
indivisibles.

     This hypothesis may yet seem to receive further confirmation,
from the artificial resurrection of plants from their ashes, which
chemists are so well acquainted with: and besides, that salt
disolved upon fixation, returns to its affected cubes, the regular
figures of minerals, as the hexagonal of crystal, the hemi-spherical
of the fairy-stone, the stellar figure of the stone asteria, and
such like, seem to look with probability upon this way of formation.
And I must needs say 'tis handsomly conjectured. But yet what those
figures are, that should be thus mechanically adapted, to fall so
unerringly into regular compositions, is beyond our faculties to
conceive or determine. And now those heterogenous atoms (for such
their figures are supposed) should by themselves hit so exactly into
their proper residence in the midst of such tumultuary motions,
cross thwartings, and arietations of other particles, especially
when for one way of hitting right, there are thousands of missing;
there's no hypothesis yet extant can resolve us. And yet had heaven
afforded that miracle of men, the illustrious Descartes a longer day
on Earth, we might have expected the utmost of what ingenuity could
perform herein: but his immature fate hath unhappily disappointed
us; and prevented the most desirable complement of his not to be
equalled philosophy.

     §. 3.(2) It's no less difficult to give an account, how the
parts of matter and bodies are united: for though superficial
enquirers may easily satisfy themselves by answering, that it is
done by muscles, nerves, and other like strings, and ligaments,
which nature hath destined to that office; yet, if we seek for an
account how the parts of these do cohere, we shall find ourselves
lost in the enquiry. Nothing with any show of success hath yet
appeared on the philosophic stage, but the opinion of Descartes;
that the parts of matter are united by rest. Neither can I conceive,
how anything can be substituted in its room, more congruous to
reason; since rest is most opposite to motion, the immediate cause
of disunion. But yet I cannot see, how this can account for the
almost indissolvible coherence of some bodies, and the fragility and
solubility of others: for if the union of the parts consist only in
rest; it would seem, that a bag of dust would be of as firm a
consistence as that of marble or adamant: a bar of iron will be as
easily broken as a tobacco-pipe; and Bajazet's cage had been but a
sorry prison. The Egyptian pyramids would have been sooner lost,
than the names of them that built them; and as easily blown away, as
those inversed ones of smoke. Nor can it be pretended for a
difference, that the parts of solid bodies are held together by
hooks, and angulous involutions; since the coherence of the parts of
these will be of as difficult a conception, as the former: and we
must either suppose an infinite of them holding together on one
another; or at last come to parts, that are united by a mere
juxtaposition: yea, could we suppose the former, yet the coherence
of these, would be like the hanging together of an infinite such of
dust: which hypothesis would spoil the proverb, and a rope of sand,
should be no more a phrase for labour in vain: for unless there be
something, upon which all the rest may depend for their cohesion;
the hanging of one by another, will signify no more than the mutual
dependence of causes and effects in an infinite series, without a
first: the admission of which, atheism would applaud. But yet to do
the master of mechanics right; somewhat of more validity in the
behalf of this hypothesis may be assigned: which is, that the
closeness and compactness of the parts resting together, doth much
confer to the strength of the union: for every thing continues in
the condition, wherein it is, except something more powerful alter
it: and therefore the parts, that rest close together, must continue
in the same relation to each other, till some other body by motion
disjoin them. Now then, the more parts, there are pent together, the
more able they will be for resistence; and what hath less
compactness, and by consequence fewer parts, according to the laws
of motion will not be able to effect any alteration in it. According
to what is here presented, what is most dense, and least porous,
will be most coherent, and least discerpible. And if this help not,
I cannot apprehend what can give an account of the former instances.
And yet even this is confuted by experience; since the most porous
spangle bodies are oft-times the most tough in consistence. 'Tis
easier to break a tube of glass or crystal, than of elm or ash: and
yet as the parts of the former are more, so they are more at rest;
sin( The liquid juice, which is diffused through the parts of the
wood, is in a continual agitation, which in Descartes his philosophy
is the cause of fluidity; and a proportioned humidity confers much
to union (Sir K. Digby makes it the cement itself); a dry stick will
be easily broken, when a green one will maintain a strong
resistence: and yet in the moist substance there is less rest, than
in what is dryer and more fragile. Much more might be added: but
I'll content myself with what's mentioned; and, notwithstanding what
hath been said, I judge this account of that miraculous wit to be
the most ingenious and rational, that hath or (it may be) can be
given. I shall not therefore conclude it false; though I think the
emergent difficulties, which are its attendants, unanswerable; proof
enough of the weakness of our now reasons, which are driven to such
straits and puzzles even in things which are most obvious, and have
so much the advantage of our faculties.

     § 4.(3.) The composition of bodies, whether it be of divisibles
or indivisibles, is a question which must be ranked with the
indissolvibles: for though it hath been attempted by the most
illustrious wit of all philosophic ages; yet they have done little
else, but shown their own divisions to be almost as infinite, as
some suppose those of their subject. And notwithstanding all their
shifts, subtleties, newly invented words and modes, sly subterfuges,
and studied evasions; yet the product of all their endeavours, is
but as the birth of the labouring mountains, wind, and emptiness. Do
what they can; actual infinite extension everywhere, equality of all
bodies, impossibility of motion, and a world more of the most
palpable absurdities will press the assertors of infinite
divisibility. Neither can it be avoided, but that all motions would
be equal in velocity; the lines drawn from side to side in a
pyramid, may have more parts than the basis, all bodies would be
swallowed up in a point, and endless more inconsistences, will be as
necessarily consequential to the opinion of indivisibles. But
intending only to instance in difficulties, which are not so much
taken notice of; I shall refer the reader, that would see more of
this, to Oviedo, Pontius, Ariaga, Carelton, and other Jesuits: whose
management of this subject with equal force on either side, is a
strong presumption of what we drive at.



Chap. VII.
Difficulties about the motion of a wheel, which admit of no
solution.

     Besides the already mentioned difficulties, even the most
ordinary trivial occurrents, if we contemplate them in the theory,
wisl as much puzzle.us, as any of the former. Under this head I'll
add three things concerning the motion of a wheel, and conclude this
branch of my subject.

     §. I. First then in the abstract consideration, it seems
impossible that a wheel should move: I mean not the progressive, but
that motion which is merely on its own centre. And were it not for
the information of experience, it's most likely that philosophy had
long ago concluded it impossible: for let's suppose the wheel to be
divided according to the alphabet. In motion then there is a change
of place, and in the motion of a wheel there is a succession of one
part to another in the same place; so that it seems unconceivable
that A. should move until B. hath left his place: for A. cannot
move, but it must acquire some place or other. It can acquire none
but what was B's, which we suppose to be most immediate to it. The
same space cannot contain them both. And therefore B. must leave its
place, before A. can have it; yea, and the nature of succession
requires it. but now B. cannot move, but into the place of C.; and
C. must be out, before B. can come in.: so that the motion of C.
will be prerequired likewise to the motion of A.; and so onward till
it comes to Z. Upon the same accounts Z. will not be able to move,
till A. Moves, being the part next to it: neither will A. be able to
move (as hath been shown) till Z. hath. And so the motion of every
part will be pre-required to itself. Neither can one evade, by
saying, that all the parts move at once. For (1.) We cannot conceive
in a succession but that something should be first, and that motion
should begin somewhere. (2.) If the parts may all change places with
one another at the same time without any respect of priority and
posteriority to each others motion: why then may not a company of
bullets closely crowded together in a box, as well move together by
a like mutual and simultaneous exchange? Doubtless the reason of
this ineptitude to motion in this position is, that they cannot give
way one to another, and motion can nowhere begin because of the
plenitude. The case is just the same in the instance before us; and
therefore we need go no further for an evidence of its
inconceivableness. But yet to give it one ouch more according to the
Peripiatetic niceness, which says, that one part enters in the same
instant that the other goes out; I'll add this in brief: in the
instant that B. leaves its place, it's in it, or not: if so; then A.
cannot be in it in the same instant without a penetration. If not;
then it cannot be said to leave it in that instant, but to have left
it before. These difficulties, which pinch so in this obvious
experiment, stand in their full force against all motion on the
hypothesis of absolute plenitude. Nor yet have the defenders hereof
need to take notice of them, because they equally press a most
sensible truth. Neither is it fair, that the opposite opinion of
interspersed vacuities should be rejected as absurd upon the account
of some inextricable perplexities which attend it. Therefore let
them both have fair play; and whichsoever doth with most ease and
congruity solve the phenomena, that shall have my vote for the most
philosophic hypiothesis.
§. 2. It's a difficulty no less desperatethan the former, that the
parts vicine to the centre, which it may be pass not over the
hundredth part of space which those do of the extreme circumference,
should describe their narrower circle but in equal time with those
other, that trace so great a round if they move but in the same
degree of velocity; here is then an equality in time and motion, and
yet a vast inequality in the acquired space. A thing which seems
flatly impossible: for is it conceivable, that of two bodies setting
forth together, and continuing their motion in the same swiftness,
the one should so far out-go its fellow, as to move ten mile an
hour, while the other moves but a furlong? If so, 'twill be no
wonder, that the race is not to the swift, and the furthest way
about may well be the nearest way home. There is but one way that
can be attempted to untie this knot; which is, by saying, that the
remoter and more out-side parts move more swiftly than the central
ones. But this likewise is as unconceivable as what it would avoid:
for suppose a right line drawn from the centre to the circumference,
and it cannot be apprehended, but that the line should be inflected,
if some parts of it move faster than others. I say if we do
abstractedly from experience contemplate it in the theory, it is
hard to conceive, but that one part moving, while the other rests,
or at least moves slower (which is as rest to a swifter motion)
should change its distance from it, and the respect, which it had to
it; which one would think should cause an incurvation in the line.

     §. 3. Let there be two wheels fixed on the same axle in
diameter ten inches apiece. Between them let there be a little
wheel, of two inches diameter, fixed on the same axle. Let them be
moved together on a plane, the great ones on the ground suppose, and
the little one on a table (for because of its parvitude it cannot
reach to the same floor with them) and you'll find that the little
wheel will move over the same space in equal time, with equal
arculations, with the great ones, and describe as long a line. Now
this seems big of repugnancies, though sense itself suffragate to
its truth: for since every part of the greater wheels make a
proportionable part of the line, as do the parts of the little one,
and the parts of those so much exceeding in multitude the parts of
this: it will seem necessary that the line made by the greater
wheels should have as many parts more than the line made by the
less, as the wheels themselves have in circumference, and so the
line would be as much longer as the wheels are bigger: so that one
of these absurdities seems unavoidable, either that more parts of
the greater wheels go to the making one part of their lines, which
will infer a penetration of dimensions; or that the little wheel
hath as many parts as the great ones, though five times in diameter
exceeded by them, since the lines they describe are of equal length;
or the less wheel's line will have fewer parts than the others,
though of equal extent with them, since it can have no more parts
than the less circle, nor they fewer than the greater. What offers
have been made towards the resolving this difficulty, by the
ingenious Tacquett and others, and with what success; will be
considered in the appendix; to which, that I may pursue other
matters, I remit the inquisitive reader.

     Should I have enlarged on this subject to the taking in of all
things that claim a share in't, it may be few things would have been
left unspoken to, but the Creed. Philosophy would not have engrossed
our pen, but we must have been forced to anger the intelligences of
higher orbs. But intending only a glance at this rugged theme, I
shall forbear to insist more on it, though the consideration of the 
mysteries of motion, gravity, light, colours, vision, sound, and
infinite such like (things obvious, yet unknown) might have been
plentiful subject. I come now to trace some of the causes of our
ignorance and intellectual weakness: and among so many it's almost
as great a wonder as any of the former; that we can say, we know.



Chap. IX.
Men's backwardness to acknowledge their own ignorance and error,
though ready to find them in others. The (i) cause of the shortness
of our knowledge, viz. The depth of verity discoursed of, as of its
admixtion in mens opinions with falsehood, and the connexion of
truths, and their mutual dependence: a second reason of the
shortness of our knowledge, viz. Because we can perceive nothing but
by proportion to our senses.

     The disease of our intellectuals is too great, not to be its
own evidence: and they that feel it not, are not less sick, but
stupidly so. The weakness of human understanding, all will confess:
yet the confidence of most in their own reasonings, practically
disowns it: and 'tis easier to persuade them it from others lapses
than their own; so that while all complain of our ignorance and
error, every one exempts himself. It is acknowledged by all, while
every one denies it. If the foregoing part of this discourse have
not universally concluded our weakness I have one item more of mine.
If knowledge can be found in the particulars mentioned; I must lose
that, which I thought I had, that there is none. But however, though
some should pick a quarrel with the instances I alleged; yet the
conclusion must be owned in others. And therefore beside the general
reaton I gave of our intellectual disabilities, the fall; it will be
worth our labour to descend to a more particular account: since it
is a good degree of knowledge to be acquainted with the causes of
our ignorance. And what we have to say under this head, will equally
concern our misapprehensions and errors. And the particulars I
intend are causes and evidences of both.

     §. I. (1) Then we owe much of our ignorance to the depth of
knowledge; which is not the acquist of superficials and supine
enquirers. Democritus his well hath a ?a??? [Greek; Bathos], and
truth floats not. The useless froth swims on the surface; but the
pearl lies covered with a mass of waters. Verisimilitude and opinion
are an easy purchase: But true Knowledge is dear and difficult. Like
a point or line, it requires an acuteness and intention to its
discovery ; while verisimility, like the expanded superficies, is an
obvious sensible, and affords a large and easie field for loose
inquiry. And 'tis the more difficult to find out Truth, because it
is in such inconsiderable proportions scattered in a mass of 
opinionative uncertainties; like the Silver in Hiero's Crown of Gold
: And it is no easie piece of Chemistry to reduce these minutes to
their unmixed selves. The Elements are nowhere pure in these lower
Regions ; and if there is any free from the admixtion of another,
sure 'tis above the concave of the Moon: Neither can any boast a
knowledge depurate from the defilement of a contrary, within this
atmosphere of flesh ; it dwels nowhere in unblended proportions, on
this side the Empyreum. All Opinions have their Truth, and all have
what is not so; and to say all are true and none, is no absurdity.
So that to crown ourselves with sparks, which are almost lost in
such a world of heterogeneous natures, is as difficult as desirable.
Besides, Truth is never single; to know one will require the
knowledge of many. They hang together in a chain of mutual
dependence; you cannot draw one link without attracting others. Such
an harmony cannot commence from a single string; diversity of
strokes makes it. The beauty of a face is not known by the eye, or
nose; it consists in a symmetry, and 'tis the comparative faculty
which votes it: thus is truth relative, and little considerable can
be obtained by catches. The painter cannot transcribe a face upon a
transient view; it requires the information of a fixed and observant
eye: and before we can reach an exact sight of truth's uniform
perfections, this fleeting transitory our life, is gone. So that we
see the face of truth, but as we do one another's, when we walk the
streets, in a careless pass-by; and the most diligent observers,
view but the back-side o' th' hangings; the right one is on the
other side the grave: and our knowledge is but like those broken
ends; at best a most confused adumbration. Nature, that was veiled
to Aristotle, hath not yet uncovered, in almost two thousand years.
What he sought on the other side of Euripus, we must not look for on
this side immortality. In easy disquisitions we are often left to
the uncerainty of a guess: yea after we have triumphed in a supposed
?????a [Greek: Eureka]; a new-sprung difficulty mars our ovations,
and exposeth us to the torment of a disappointment: so that even the
great master of dogmatists himself concludes the scene with an
Anxius vixi, dubius morior.

     §.2 Another reason of our ignorance and the narrowness of our
apprehensions is; that we cannot perceive the manner of any of
nature's operations, but by proportion to our senses, and return to 
material phantasms. A blind man conceives not colours, but under the
notion of some other sensible; and more perfect apprehenders as
grosly misconceive immaterials our imaginations painting souls and
angels in as little agreeing a resemblace. And had there not been
any night, shadow, or opacity; we should never have had any
determinate conceit of darkness; that would have been as
inconceivable to us, as its contrary is to him that never saw it.

     But now our senses being scant and limited, and natures
operations subtle and various; they must needs transcend, and out-
run our faculties. They are only natures grosser ways of working,
which are sensible;

     Her finer threads are out of the reach of our dull percipient.
Yea questionless she hath many hidden energies, no ways imitated in
her obvious pieces: and therefore it is no wonder that we are so
often at a loss; an infirmity beyond prevention, except we could
step by step follow the tracks and methods of infinite wisdom, which
cannot be done but by him that owns it.



Chap. X.
A third reason of our ignorance and error, viz. The impostures and
deceits of our senses. The way to rectify these misinformations
propounded. Descartes his method the only way to science. The
difficulty of exact performance.

     §. 3. Another reason is the imposture and fallacy of our
senses, which impose not only on common heads, who scarce at all
live to the higher principle; but even more refined Mercuries, who
have the advantages of an improved reason to disabuse them, are yet
frequently captivated to these deceiving prepossessions: appealing
to a judicature both uncommissioned and unjust; and when the
clearest truth is to be tried by such judges, its innocence will not
secure it from the condemning award of that unintelligent tribunal:
for since we live the life of brutes, before we grow into man; and
our understandings in this their nonage, being almost merely passive
to sensible impressions, receiving all things in an uncontroverted
and promiscuous admission: it cannot be, that our knowledge should
be other, than an heap of misconception and error, and conceits as
impertinent as the toys we delight in. All this while we have no
more reason, than the ???O??? ????S [Greek: EIDOLON PSYCHES](as
Plotinus calls it) amounts to. And besides this our easy submission
to sophistications of sense, and inability to prevent the
miscariages of our junior reasons; and that which strikes the great
stroke toward our after-deceptions, is the pertinacious adherence of
many of these first impressions, to our advanced understandings.
That which is early received, if in any considerable strength of
imfiress, as it were grows into our tender natures, and is therefore
of difficult remove. Thus a fright in minority, or an antipathy then
contracted, is not worn out but with its subject. And it may be more
than a story, that Nero derived much of his cruelty from the nurse
that suckled him. Now though our coming judgements do in part
undeceive us, and rectify the grosser errors which our unwary
sensitive hath engaged us in; yet others are so fleshed in us, that
they maintain their interest upon the deceptibility of our decayed
natures, and are cherished there, as the legitimate issues of our
reasonable faculties.

     Indeed sense itself detects its more palpable deceits, by a
counter-evidence; and the more ordinary impostures seldom outlive
the first experiments. If our sight represent a staff as crooked in
the water; the same faculty rectifies both it, and us, in the
thinner element. And if a square tower seem round at a distance; the
eye, which mistook in the circumstance of its figure, at that
remove, corrects the mistake in a due approach: yea, and befriends
those who have learned to make the advantage of its informations, in
more remote and difficil discoveries. And though his sense occasion
the careless rustic to judge the sun no bigger than a cheese-fat;
yet sense too by a frugal improvement of its evidence, grounds the
astronomers knowledge, that it's bigger than this globe of earth and
water. Which it doth not only by the advantageous assistance of a
tube, but by less industrious experiments, showing in what degrees
distance minorates the object. But yet in infinite other cases,
wherein sense can afford none, or but very little help to
disintangle us; our first deceptions lose no ground, but rather
improve in our riper years: so that we are not weaned from our
childhood, till we return to our second infancy; and even our grey
heads outgrow not those errors, which we have learned before the
alphabet.

     Thus our reasons being inoculated on sense, will retain a
relish of the stock they grew on: and if we would endeavour after an
unmixed knowledge; we must unlive our former lives, and (inverting
the practice of Penelope) undo in the day of our more advanced
understandings, what we had spun in the night of our infant-
ignorance. He that would rebuild a decayed structure, must first
pluck down the former ruins. A fabric, though high and beautiful, if
founded on rubbish, is easily made the triumph of the winds: and the
most pompous seeming knowledge, that's built on the unexamined
prejudices of sense, stands not, but till the storm ariseth; the
next strong encounter discovers its weakness, in a shameful over-
throw. Since then, a great part of our scientifical treasure is most
likely to be adulterate, though all bears the image and
superscription of truth; the only way to know what is sophisticate,
and what is not so, is to bring all to the examen of the touchstone:
for the prepossessions of sense having (as is showen) so mingled
themselves with our genuine truths, and being as plausible to
appearance as they, we cannot gain a true assurance of any, but by
suspending our assent from all, till the deserts of each, discovered
by a strict enquiry, claim it. Upon this account I think the method
of the most excellent Descartes not unworthy its author; and (since
dogmatical ignorance will call it so) a skepticism, that's the only
way to science. But yet this is so difficult in the impartial and
exact performance, that it may be well reckoned among the bare
possibilities, which never commence into a futurity: it requiring
such a free, sedate, and intent minde, as it may be is nowhere found
but among the Platonical ideas. Do what we can, prejudices will
creep in, and hinder our intellectual perfection: and though by this
means we may get some comfortable allay to our distempers; yet can
it not perfectly cure us of a disease, that sticks as close to us as
our natures.



Chap. XI.
Two instances of sensitive decefition. (1) of the quiescence of the
Earth. Sense is the great inducement to its belief; its testimony
deserves no credit in this case, though it do move, sense would
present it as immoveable. The sun to sense is as much devoid of
motion as the Earth. The cases wherein motion is insensible, applied
to the Earth's motion. The unwieldiness of its bulk is no argument
of its immobility.

     To illustrate the particular I am discoursing of, I'll
endeavour to detect the unlucky influence of sensitive prejudice by
a double instance; the free debate of which I conceive to be of
importance, though hitherto for the most part obstructed, by the
peremptory conclusion of a faculty which I shall make appear to have
no suffrage in the case of either: and the pleasantness and
concernment of the theories, if it be one, I hope will attone the
digression.

     §. 2. First, it is generally opinioned that the Earth rests as
the world's centre, while the heavens are the subject of the
universal motions; and, as immoveable as the Earth, is grown into
the credit of being proverbial. So that for a man to go about to
counter-argue this belief, is as fruitless as to whistle against the
winds. I shall not undertake to maintain the paradox, that confronts
this almost Catholic opinion. Its assertion would be entertained
with the hoot of the rabble: the very mention of it as possible, is
among The most ridiculous; and they are likely most severely to
judge it, who least understand what it is they censure. But yet The
patronage of as great wits, as it may be e're saw the sun, such as
Pythagoras, Descartes, Copernicus, galileo, More, Kepler, and
generally the vertuosi of the awakened world, hath gained it a more
favourable censure with learned mankind; and advanced it far above
either vain, or contemptible. And if it be a mistake, it's only so:
there's no heresy in such an harmless aberration; at the worst, with
the ingenuous, the probability of it will render it a lapse of easy
pardon.

     Now whether the Earth move or rest, I undertake not to
determine. My work is to prove, that the common inducement to the
belief of its quiescence, the testimony of sense, is weak and
frivolous: to the end, that if upon an unprejudiced trial, it be
found more consonant to the astronomical phenomena; its motion may
be admitted, notwithstanding the seeming contrary evidence of
unconcerned senses. And I think what follows will evince, that this
is no so absurd an hypothesis, as vulgar philosophers acount it; but
that, though it move, its motion must needs be as insensible, as if
it were quiescent; and the assertion of it would than be as uncouth
and harsh to the sons of sense, that is, to the generality of
mankind, as now it is.

     That there is a motion, which makes the vicissitudes of day and
night, and constitutes the successive seasons of the year; sense may
assure us; or at least the comparative judgment of an higher
faculty, made upon its immediate evidence: but whether the sun, or
Earth, be the common movent, cannot be determined but by a further
appeal. If we will take the literal evidence of our eyes, the
ethereal coal moves no more than this inferior clod doth: for
whereever in the firmament we see it, it's represented to us, as
fixed in that part of the enlightened hemisphere. And though an
after account discover, that he hath changed its site and respect to
this our globe; yet whether that were caused by its translation from
us, or ours from it, sense leaves us in an ignoramus: so that if we
are resolved to stand to its verdict, it must be by as great a
miracle if the sun ever move, as it was that it once rested, or what
ever else was the subject of that supernal change. And if upon a
mere sensible account we will deny motion to the Earth; upon the
same inducement we must deny it the sun; and the heavens will lose
their first moveable. But to draw up closer to our main design, we
may the better conceive that, though the Earth move, yet its motion
must needs be insensible; if we consider that in these cases
relating to our purpose, motion strikes not the sense.

     (1.) Then if the motion be very slow, we perceive it not. We
have no sense of the accretive motion of plants or animals; and the
sly shadow steals away upon the dial; and the quickest eye, can
discover no more but that 'tis gone. Which insensibility of slow
motions I think may thus be accounted for; motion cannot be
perceived without the perception of its terms, viz. The parts of
space which it immediately left, and those which it next acquires.
Now the space left and acquired in every sensible moment in such
slow progressions, is so inconsiderable, that it cannot possibly
move the sense; (which by reason either of its constitutional
dulness, or the importunity of stronger impressions, cannot take
notice of such parvitudes) and therefore neither can the motion
depending thereon, be any more observable, than we find it.

     2. If the sentient be carried passibus equis with the body,
whose motion it would observe; (supposing that it be regular and
steady) in this case the remove is insensible, at least in its
proper subject. We perceive not a ship to move, while we are in it;
but our sense transfers its motion to the neighbouring shores, as
the poet, littis campiq; recedunt. And I question not, but if any
were born and bred under deck, and had no other information but what
his sense affords; he would without the least doubt or scruple,
opinion, that the house he dwelt in, was as stable and fixed as
ours. To express the reason according to the philosophy of
Descartes, I suppose it thus: motion is not perceived, but by the
successive strikings of the object upon divers filaments of the
brain; which diversify the representation of its site and distance.
But now when the motion of the object is common with it, to
ourselves; it retains the same relation to our sense, as if we both
rested: For striking still on the same strings of the brain, it
varies not its site or distance from us; and therefore we cannot
possibly perceive its motion: nor yet upon the same account our own;
least of all, when we are carried without any conamen and endeavour
of ours, which in our particular progressions betrayes them to our 
notice.

     Now then, the Earth's motion (if we suppose it to have any)
hath the concurrence of both, to render it insensible; and therefore
we need no more proof to conclude the necessity of its being so.

     For though the first seems not to belong to the present case,
since the supposed motion will be near a thousand miles an hour
under the equinoctional line; yet it will seem to have no velocity
to the sense any more than the received motion of the sun and for
the same reason. Because the distant points in the celestial expanse
(from a various and successive respect to which the length, and
consequently the swiftness of this motion must be calculated) appear
to the eye in so small a degree of elongation from one another, as
bears no proportion to what is real. For since the margin of the
visible horizon in the heavenly globe is parallel with that in the
earthly, accounted. But 120 miles diameter; sense must needs measure
the azimuths, or pertical circles, by triplication of the same
dianteter of 120. So that there will be no more proportion betwixt
the sensible and real celerity of the terrestrial motion, than there
is between the visible and rational dimension of the celestial
hemisphere, which is none at all.

     But if sensitive prejudice wili yet confidently maintain the
impossibility of the hypothesis, from the supposed unwieldiness of
its massy bulk, grounded on our experience of the ineptitude of
great and heavy bodies to motion: I say this is a mere imposture of
our senses, the fallacy of which we may avoid, by considering; that
the Earth may as easily move, notwithstanding this pretended
indisposition of its magnitude, as those much vaster orbs of sun and
stars. He that made it, could as well give motion to the whole, as
to the parts; the constant agitation of which is discovered in
natural productions: and to both, as well as rest to either: neither
will it need the assistance of an intelligence to perpetuate the
begun rotation: since according to the indispensible law of nature
(that every thing should continue in the state wherein it is, except
something more powerful hinder it) it must persevere in motion,
unless obstructed by a miracle. Neither can gravity, which makes
great bodies hard of remove, be any hindrance to the earths motion:
since even the Peripatetic maxime, nihil gravitat in suo loco, will
exempt it from the indisposition of that quality; which is nothing
but the tendency of its parts, which are ravished from it, to their
desired centre.

     And the French philosophy will inform us, that the Earth as
well as other bodies is indifferent in itself to rest, or its
contrary.



Chap. XII. 
Another instance of the deceptions of our senses: which is of
translating the idea of our passions to things without us. Properly
and formally heat is not in the fire, but is an expression of our
sentiment. Yet in propriety of speech the senses themselves are
never deceived, but only administer an occasion of deceit to the
understanding: proved by reason, and the authority of St. Austin.

     Secondly the best philosphy (the deserved title of the
Cartesian) derives all sensitive perception from motion, and
corporal impress; some account of which we have above given. Not
that the formality of it consists in material reaction, as Master
Hobbes affirms, totally excluding any immaterial concurrence: but
that the representations of objects to the soul, the only
animadversive principle, are conveyed by motions made upon the
immediate instruments of sense. So that the diversity of our
sensations ariseth from the diversity of the motion or figure of the
object; which in a different manner affect the brain, whence the
soul hath its immediate intelligence of the quality of what is
presented. Thus the different effects, which fire and water, have on
us, which we call heat and cold, result from the so differing
configuration and agitation of their particles; and not from, I know
not what chimerical beings, supposed to inhere in the objects, their
cause, and thence to be propagated by many petty imaginary
productions to the seat of sense. So that what we term heat and
cold, and other qualities, are not properly according to
philosophical rigour in the bodies, their efficients: but are rather
names expressing our passions; and therefore not strictly
attributable to anything without us, but by extrinsic denominations,
as vision to the wall.

     This I conceive to be an hypothesis, well worthy a rational
belief: and yet is it so abhorrent from the vulgar, that they would
as soon believe Anaxagoras, that snow is black, as him that should
affirm, it is not white; and if any should in earnest assert, that
the fire is not formally hot, it would be thought that the heat of
his brain had fitted him for Anticyra, and that his head were so to
madness: for it is conceived to be as certain, as our faculties can
make it, that the same qualities, which we resent within us, are in
the object, their source. And yet this confidence is grounded on no
better foundation, than a delusory prejudice, and the vote of
misapplied sensations, which have no warrant to determine either one
or other. I may indeed conclude, that I am formally hot or cold; I
feel it. But whether these qualities are formally, or only eminently
in their producent; is beyond the knowledge of the sensitive. Even
the Peripatetic philosophy will teach us, that heat is not in the
body of the sun, but only virtually, and as in its cause; though it
be the fountain and great distributor of warmth to the neather
creation: and yet none urge the evidence of sense to disprove it:
neither can it with any more justice be alleged against this
hypothesis. For if it be so as Descartes would have it; yet sense
would constantly present it to us, as now. We should feel heat as
constantly from fire; it would increase in the same degrees, in our
approach, and we should find the same excess within the flame: which
yet I think to be the chief inducements to the adverse belief: for
fire (I retain the instance, which yet may be applied to other
cases) being constant in its specifical motions in those smaller
derivations of it, which are its instruments of action, and
therefore in the same manner striking the sentient, though gradually
varying according to the proportions of more or less quantity or
agitation, &c. will not fail to produce the same effect in us, which
we call heat, when ever we are within the orb of its activity. So
that the heat must needs be augmented by proximity, and most of all
within the Flame, because of the more violent motion of the
particles there, which therefore begets in us a stronger sentiment.
Now if this motive energy, the instrument of this active element,
must be called heat; let it be so, I contend not. I know not how
otherwise to call it: to impose names is part of the People's
Charter, and I fight not with words, only I would not that the idea
of our passions should be applied to anything without us, when it
hath its subject nowhere but in ourselves. This is the grand deceit,
which my design is to detect, and if possible, to rectify.

     We have seen then two notorious instances of sensitive
deception, which justify the charge of Petron. Arbiter.

Fallunt nos oculi, vagiq; sensus
oppressa ratione mentiuntur.

     And yet to speak properly, and to do our senses right, simply
they are not deceived, but only administer an occasion to our
forward understandings to deceive themselves: and so though they are
some way accessory to our delusion; yet the more principal faculties
are the capital offenders. If the senses represent the Earth as art
and immoveable; they give us the truth of their sentiments. To
sense, it is so, and it would be deceit to present it otherwise. For
(as we have shown) though it do move in itself; it rests to us, who
are carried with it. And it must needs be to sense unalterably
quiescent, in that our own rotation prevents the variety of
successive impress; which only renders motion sensible. And so if we
erroneously attribute our particular incommnunicable sensations to
things, which do no more resemble them than the effect doth its
equivocal cause; our senses are not in fault, but our precipitate
judgments. We feel such, or such a sentiment within us, and herein
is no cheat or misprision: 'tis truly so, and our sense concludes
nothing of its rise or origin. But if hence our understandings
falsly deduct, that there is the same quality in the external
impressor; 'tis it is criminal, our sense is innocent. When the ear
tingles, we really hear a sound: if we judge it without us, it's the
fallacy of our judgments. The apparitions of our frighted fancies
are real sensibles: but if we translate them without the compass of
our brains, and apprehend them as external objects; it's the unwary
rashness of our understanding deludes us. And if our disaffected
palates resent nought but bitterness from our choicest viands, we
truly taste the unpleasing quality, though falsly conceive it in
that, which is no more than the occasion of its production. If any
find fault with the novelty of the notion; the learned St. Austin
stands ready to confute the charge: and they who revere antiquity,
will derive satisfaction from so venerable a suffrage. He tells us,
si quis remum frangi in aqua opinatur, &, cum aufertur, integrari;
non malum habet internuncium, sed malus est judex. And onward to
this purpose, the sense could not otherwise perceive it in the
water, neither ought it: for since the water is one thing, and the
air another; 'tis requisite and necessary, that the sense should be
as different as the medium: wherefore the eye sees aright; if there
be a mistake; 'tis the judgment's the deceiver. Elsewhere he saith,
that our eyes misinform us not, but faithfully transmit their
resentment to the mind. And against the Sceptics, that it's a piece
of injustice to complain of our senses, and to exact from them an
account, which is beyond the sphere of their notice: and resolutely
determines, quicquid possunt videre oculi, verum vident. So that
what we have said of the senses' deceptions, is rigidly to be
charged only on our careless understandings, misleading us through
the ill management of sensible informations. But because such are
commonly known by the name of the senses deceits (somewhat the more
justifiably in that they administer the occasion) I have thought
good to retain the usual way of speaking, though somewhat varying
from the manner of apprehending.



Chap. XIII. 
A fourth reason of our ignorance and error, viz. The fallacy of our
imaginations; an account of the nature of that faculty; instances of
its deceptions; spirits are not in a place; intellection, volition,
decrees, &c. cannot properly be ascribed to God. It is not reason
that opposeth faith, but fancy: the interest which imagination hath
in many of our opinions, in that it impresses a persuasion without
evidence.

     Fourthly, we err and come short of science, because we are so
frequently mislead by the evil conduct of our imaginations; whose
irregular strength and importunity doth almost perpetually abuse us.
Now to make a full and clear discovery of our fancy's deceptions;
'twill be requisite to look into the nature of that mysterious
faculty. In which survey we must trace the soul in the ways of her
intellectual actions; whereby we may come to the distinct knowledge
of what is meant by imagination, in contradistinction to some other
powers. But first premising, that the soul's nature (at least as far
as concerns our inquiry) consists in intelligibility: and secondly,
that when we speak of powers and faculties of the soul, we intend
not to assert with the schools, their real distinction from it, or
each other, but only a modal diversity. Therefore I shall distribute
intellectual operations according to the known triple division,
though with some difference of representation.

     The first is simple apprehension, which denotes no more, than
the soul's naked intellection of an object, without either
composition or deduction. The foundation of this act, as to
materials, is sensitive preception. Now our simple apprehension of
corporal objects, if present, we call sense; if absent, we properly
name it imagination. When we would conceive a material object, our
fancies present us with its idea. But in our notion of spirituals,
we, as much as we can, strip them of all material phantasmes; and
thus they become the object of our intellects, properly so calledi
all this while the soul is, as it were, silent; and in a more
passive way of reception.

     But the second act advanceth propositions from simple
intellections: and hereby we have the knowledge of the distinctions
or identities of objects. Now here, as in the former, where they are
purely material; the judgment is made by the imagination: if
otherwise, we refer it to the understanding.

     The third act, is that which connects propositions and deduceth
conclusions from them: and this the schools call discourse; and we
shall not miscall it, if we name it, reason. This as it supposeth
the two former, so is it grounded on certain congenite propositions;
which I conceive to be the very essentials of rationality. Such are,
quodlibet est, vel non est; impossibile est idem esse, non esse; non
entis nulla sunt predicata, and such like. Not that every one hath
naturally a formal and explicit notion of these principles: for the
vulgar use them, without knowledge of them, under any such express
consideration; but yet there was never any born to reason without
them. Now when the conclusion is deduced from the unerring dictates
of our faculties; we say the inference is rational: but when from
misapprehended, or ill-compounded phantasms; we ascribe it to the
imagination. So we see, there is a triple operation of the fancy as
well as intellect; and these powers are only circumstantially
different. In this method we intend a distinct, though short
account, how the imagination deceives us.

     First then, the imagination, which is of simple perception,
doth never of itself and directly mislead us; as is at large
declared in our former discourse of sense. Yet is it the almost
fatal means of our deception, through the unwarrantable
compositions, divisions, and applications, which it occasions the
second act to make of the simple images. Hence we may derive the
visions, voices, revelations of the enthusiast: the strong idea's of
which, being conjured up into the imagination by the heat of the
melancholized brain, are judged exterior realities; when as they are
but motions within the cranium. Hence story is full of the wonders,
it works upon hypochondriacal imaginants; to whom the grossest
absurdities are infallible certainties, and free reason an impostor.
That groom, that conceited himself an emperor, thought all as
irrational as disloyal, that did not acknowledge him: and he, that
supposed himself made of glass, thought them all mad, that
disbelieved him. But we pity, or laugh at those fatuous
extravagants; while yet ourselves have a considerable dose of what
makes them so: and more sober heads have a set of misconceits, which
are as absurd to an unpassionated reason, as those to our unabused
senses. And as the greatest counter-evidence to those distempered
fancies is none: so in the more ordinary deceits, in which our
imaginations insensibly engage us, we give but little credit to the
uncorrupted suggestions of the faculty, that should disabuse us.

     That the soul and angels are devoid of quantity and dimension,
hath the suffrage of the most; and that they have nothing to do with
grosser locality, is as generally opinioned: but who is it, that
retains not a great part of the imposture, by allowing them a
definitive Ubi, which is still but imagination? He that said, a
thousand might dance on the point of a needle, spake but grossly;
and we may as well suppose them to have wings, as a proper Ubi. We
say, spirits are where they operate: but strictly to be in a place,
or Ubi, it may be is a material attribute, and incompatible with so
pure a nature. We ask not, in what place a thought is, nor are we
solicitous for the Ubi of virtue, or any other immaterial accidents.
Relations, ubications, duration, the vulgar philosophy admits to be
something; and yet to enquire in what place they are, were gross and
incongruous. So that, if to be, and to be in a place be not
reciprocal; I know not why spirits may not be exempted, having as
much to plead from the purity of their essence, as anything in
nature. And yet imagination stands so strongly against the notion,
that it cannot look for the favour of a very diffusive
entertainment.

     But we are more dangerously deceived, when judging the infinite
essence by our narrow selves; we ascribe intellections, volitions,
decrees, purposes, and such like immanent actions to that nature,
which hath nothing in common with us, as being infinitely above us.
Now to use these as hypotheses, as himself in his word, is pleased
to low himself to our capacities, is allowable: but a strict and
rigorous imputation is derogatory to him, and arrogant in us. To
say, that God doth eminently contain all those effects in His
glorious simple essence, that the creature can produce or act by
such a faculty, power, or affection; is to affirm him to be what He
is, infinite. Thus, to conceive that He can do all those things in
the most perfect manner, which we do upon understanding, willing,
and decreeing; is an apprehension suteable to His idea: but to fix
on Him the formality of faculties, or affections; is the imposture
of our fancies, and contradictory to His divinity. 'Tis this
deception misleads the contending world; and is the author of most
of that darkness and confusion, that is upon the face of the
controversies of dart. We being then thus obnoxious to fallacy in
our apprehensions and judgments, and so often imposed upon by these
deceptions; our inferences and deductions must needs be as
unwarrantable, as our simple and compound thoughts are deceitful. So
that the reason of the far greatest part of mankind, is but an
aggregate of mistaken phantasms; and in things not sensible, a
constant delusion. Yea the highest and most improved spirits, are
frequently caught in the entanglements of a tenacious imagination;
and submit to its obstinate, but delusory suggestions. Thus we are
involved in inextricable perplexities about the divine nature, and
attributes; and in our reasonings about those sublimities are puzled
with contradictions, which are but the toyings of our fancies, no
absurdities to our more defecate faculties. What work do our
imaginations make with eternity and immensity? And how are we
gravelled by their cutting dilemmas? I'm confident many have thus
imagined themselves out of their religion; and run a ground on that
more desperate absurdity, atheism. To say, reason opposeth faith, is
to scandalize both: 'tis imagination is the rebel; reason
contradicts its impious suggestions. Nor is our reason any more
accountable for the errours of our opinions; than our holiness for
the immoralities of our lives: and we may as well say, that the sun
is the cause of the shadow, which is the effect of the intercepting
opacity, as either. Reasom and faith are at perfect unisons: the
disharmony is in the fancy. ?? ??????? est? ?e??? [Greek: To logikon
esti theion],  is a saying of Plato's; and well worthy a Christian
subscription, reason being the image of the creator's wisdom copied
out in the creature. Though indeed, as 'tis now in the subject, 'tis
but an amassment of imaginary conceptions, prejudices, ungrounded
opinions, and infinite impostures; and 'tis no wonder, if these are
at odds with the principles of our belief: but all this is but apish
sophistry, and to give it a name so divine and excellent, is abusive
and unjust.

     There is yet another as deplorable a deceit of our
imaginations, as any: which is, its impressing a strong persuasion
of the truth of an opinion, where there is no evidence to support
it. And if it be such, as we never heard questioned or contradicted,
'tis then unsuspected. The most of mankind is led by opinionative
impulse, and imagination is predominant. An ungrounded credulity is
cried up for faith; and the more vigorous impressions of pliancy,
for the spirit's motions. These are the grand delusions of our age,
and the highest evidence of the imaginations deceptions. This is the
spirit, that works in the children of fancy; and we need not seek to
remoter resolutions. But the excellent Dr. H. More hath followed
enthusiastic effects to their proper origin, and prevented our
endeavours of attempting it. His discourse of enthusiasm completely
makes good the title; and 'tis as well a victory, as a triumph.



Chap. XIV. A fifth reason, the precipitancy of our understandings;
the reason of it. The most close engagement of our minds requisite
to the finding of truth; the difficulties of the performance of it.
Two instances of our precipitating; as the concluding things
impossible, which to nature are not so; and the joining causes with
irrelative effects.

     §. 5. Again, another account of the shortness of our reasons
and easiness of deception, is, the forwardness of our
understanding's assent, to slightly examined conclusions,
contracting many times a firm and obstinate belief from weak
inducements; and that not only in such things, as immediately
concern the sense, but in almost every thing that falls within the
scope of our enquiry. For the declarement of this, we are to
observe, that every being uncessantly aspires to its own perfection,
and is restless till it obtain it; as is the trembling needle, till
it find its beloved North. Now the perfection of a faculty is union
with its object, to which its respective actions are directed, as
the scope and term of its endeavours. Thus our understanding being
prefected by truth, with all the impatience, which accompanies
strong desire, breaths after its enjoyment. But now the good and
perfection of being, which every thing reacheth at, must be known,
and that in the particular instances thereof; or else 'tis not
attained: and if it be mistaken, that being courts deceit and its
own delusion. This knowledge of their good, was at first as natural
to all things, as the desire on't: otherwise this innate propension
would have been as much a torment and misery to those things that
are capable of it, as a needless impertinency to all others. But
nature shoots not at rovers. Even inanimates, though they know not
their perfection themselves, yet are they not carried on by a blind
unguided impetus: but that which directs them, knows it.

     The next orders of being have some sight of it themselves: and
man most perfectly had it, before his unhappy defection. So then
beside this general propensity to truth, the understanding must know
what is so, before it can assent. The former we possess (it may be)
as entirely as when nature gave it us: but of the latter, little but
the capacity: so that herein have we made ourselves of all creatures
the most miserable. And now, such an infinite of uncertain opinions,
bare probabilities, specious falsehoods, spreading themselves before
us, and soliciting our belief, and we being thus greedy of truth,
and yet so unable to discern it: it cannot be, that we should reach
it any otherwise, than by the most close meditation and engagement
of our minds; by which we must endeavour to estrange our assent from
every thing, which is not clearly and distinctly evidenced to our
faculties. But this is so difficult; and as hath been intimated, so
almost infeasable; that it may well drive modesty to despair of
science. For though possibly assiduity in the most fixed cogitation
be no trouble or pain to immaterialized spirits; yet is it more,
than our embodied souls can bear without lassitude or distemper. For
in this terrestrial state there are few things transacted, even in
our intellectual part, but through the help and furtherance of
corporal instruments; which by more than ordinary usage lose their
edge and fitness for action, and so grow inept for their respective
destinations. Upon this account our senses are dulled and spent by
any extraordinary intention; and our very eyes will ache, if long
fixed upon any difficultly discerned object. Now though meditation
be to be reckoned among the most abstracted operations of our minds;
yet can it not be performed without a considerable proportion of
spirits to assist the action, though indeed such as are furnished
out of the body's purer store. Which I think to be clear from hence,
in that fixed seriousness herein, heats the brain in some to
distraction, causeth an aching and diziness in sounder heads,
hinders the works of nature in its lower and animal functions, takes
away or lessens pain in distempered parts, and seldom leaves any but
under a wearisome dulness, and inactivity: arguments of sufficient
validity to justify our assent to this, that the spirits are
employed in our most intense cogitations, yea in such, whose objects
are least material. Now the managing and carrying on of this work by
the spirit's instrumental co-efficiency requires, that they be kept
together without distraction or dissipation; that so they may be
ready to receive and execute the orders and commissions of the
commanding faculty. If either of these happen, all miscarries: as do
the works of nature, when they want that heat, which is requisite
for their intended perfection. And therefore, for the prevention of
such inconveniences in meditation, we choose recess and solitude.

     But now if we consider the volatile nature of those officious
assistants, and the several causes which occur continually, even
from the mere mechanism of our bodies to scatter and disorder them,
besides the excursions of our roving fancies (which cannot be kept
to a close attendance); it will be found very hard to retain them in
any long service, but do what we can, they'll get loose from the
mind's regimen. So that it's no easy matter to bring the body to be
what it was intended for, the soul's servant; and to confine the
imagination, of as facile a performance, as the Gotham's design of
hedging in the cuckoo. And though some constitutions are genially
disposited to this mental seriousness; yet they can scarce say, nos
numeri sumus: yea in the most advantaged tempers, this disposition
is but comparative; when as the most of men labour under
disadvantages, which nothing can rid them of, but that which loosens
them from this mass of flesh. Thus the boiling blood of youth,
fiercely agitating the fluid air, hinders that serenity and fixed
staidness, which is necessary to so severe an intentness: and the
frigidity of decrepit age is as much its enemy, not only through
penury of spirits, but by reason of its dulling moisture. And even
in the temperate zone of our life, there are few bodies at such an
equipoise of humours; but that the prevalency of some one
indisposeth the spirits for a work so difficult and serious: for
temperamentum ad pondus, may well be reckoned among the
philosophical unattainables. Besides, the bustle of business, the
avocations of our senses, and external pleasures, and the noise and
din of a clamorous world, are impediments not to be mastered by
feeble endeavours. And to speak the full of my sentiments, I think
never man could boast it, without the precincts of Paradise; but He,
that came to gain us a better Eden than we lost.

     So then, to direct all this to our end, the mind of man being
thus naturally amorous of, and impatient for truth, and yet averse
to, and almost incapacitated for that diligent and painful search,
which is necessary to its discovery; it must needs take up short, of
what is really so, and please itself in the possession of imaginary
appearances, which offering themselves to its embraces in the
borrowed attire of that, which the enamoured intellect is in pursuit
of, our impatient minds entertain these counterfeits, without the
least suspicion of their cousenage. For as the will, having lost its
true and substantial good, now courts the shadow, and greedily
catches at the vain spews of superficial bliss: so our no less
degenerate understandings having suffered as sad a divorce from
their dearest object, are as forward to defile themselves with every
meretricious semblance, that the variety of opinion presents them
with. Thus we see the inconsiderate vulgar, prostrating their assent
to every shallow appearance: and those, who are beholden to
Prometheus for a finer mould, are not furnished with so much truth
as otherwise they might be owners of, did not this precipitancy of
concluding prevent them: as 'tis said of the industrious chemist,
that by catching at it too soon, he lost the long expected treasure
of the philosophical elixir. Now this precipitancy of our
understandings is an occasion of a double error, very injurious to
the encrease of knowledge. To instance,

     (1.) Hence we conclude many things impossibilities, which yet
are easy feasables. For by an unadvised transiliency leaping from
the effect to its remotest cause, we observe not the connexion
through the interposal of more immediate causalities; which yet at
last bring the extremes together without a miracle. And hereupon we
hastily conclude that impossible, which we see not in the proximate
capacity of its efficient. That a single hair should root up an oak
(which the mathematics teach us to be possible) by common heads will
be thought an absurd and extravagant expectation. And the relation
of Archimedes's lifting up the ships of Marcellus, among many finds
but little more credit, than that of the giants shouldering
mountains: and yet mathematicians know, that by multiplying of
mechanical advantages, any power may conquer any resistance, and the
great Syracusian wit wanteth but tools, and a place to stand on, to
remove the Earth. So that the brag of the Ottoman, [that he would
throw Malta into the sea] might be performed at an easier rate, than
by the shovels of his Janissaries.

     And (2.) From this last noted head, ariseth that other of
joining causes with irrelative effects, which either refer not at
all unto them, or in a remoter capacity. Hence the Indian conceived
so grossly of the letter, that discovered his theft; and that other,
who thought the watch an animal. From hence grew the impostures of
charms, and amulets, and other insignificant ceremonies; which to
this day impose upon common belief, as they did of old upon the
barbarism of the incultivate heathen. Thus effects unusual, whose
causes run under ground, and are more remote from ordinary
discernment, are noted in the book of vulgar opinion, with digitus
dei, or demonis; though they owe no other dependence to the first,
than what is common to the whole syntax of beings, nor yet any more
to the second, than what is given it by the imagination of those
unqualified judges. Thus every unwonted meteor is portentous; and
the appearance of any unobserved star, some divine prognostick.
Antiquity thought thunder the immediate voice of Jupiter, and
impleaded them of impiety, that referred it to natural causalities.
Neither can there happen a storm, at this remove from antique
ignorance, but the multitude will have the devil in't.



Chap. XV. 
The sixth reason discoursed of, viz. the interest which our
affections have in our dijudications. The cause why our affections
mislead us: several branches of this mentioned; and the first, viz.
constitutional inclination largely insisted on.

     Again (6.) We owe much of our errour and ntellectual scarcity
to the interest in, and power which our affections have over our so
easy seducible understandings. And 'tis a truth well worthy the pen,
from which it dropt; periit judicium, ubi res transiit in affectum.
That Jove himself cannot be wise and in love; may be understood in a
larger sense, than antiquity meant it. Affection bribes the
judgement to the most notorious inequality; and we cannot expect an
equitable award, where the judge is made a party: so that, that
understanding only is capable of giving a just decision, which is,
as Aristotle saith of the law, ???? a?e? ??e?e??[Greek: Noys aney
orecheos]: but where the will, or passion hath the casting voice,
the case of truth is desperate. And yet this is the miserable
disorder, into which we are lapsed: the lower powers are gotten
uppermost; and we see like men on our heads, as Plato observed of
old, that on the right hand, which indeed is on the left. The woman
in us, still prosecutes a deceit, like that begun in the garden: and
our understandings are wedded to an Eve, as fatal as the mother of
our miseries. And while all things are judged according to their
suitableness, or disagreement to the gusto of the fond feminine; we
shall be as far from the tree of knowledge, as from that which is
guarded by the cherubin. The deceiver soon found this soft place of
Adam's; and innocency itself did not secure him from this way of
seduction. The first deception entered in at this postern, and hath
ever since kept it open for the entry of Legion: so that we scarce
see anything now but through our passions, the most blind, and
sophisticate things about us. The monsters which story relates to
have their eyes in their breasts, are pictures of us in our
invisible selves. Our love of one opinion induceth us to embrace it;
and our hate of another, doth more than fit us, for its rejection:
and, that love is blind, is extensible beyond the object of poetry.
When once the affections are engaged, there's but a short step to
the understanding: and, facile credimus quod volumus, is a truth,
that needs not plead authority to credit it.

     The reason, I conceive, is this: love as it were uniting the
object to the soul, gives it a kind of identity with us; so that the
beloved idea is but ourselves in another name: and when self is at
the bar, the sentence is not like to be impartial: for every man is
naturally a Narcissus, and each passion in us, no other but self-
love sweetned by milder epithets. We can love nothing, but what we
find agreeable to ourselves; and our desire of what is so, hath its
first inducement from within us: yea, we love nothing but what
resembleth us; and whatever we applaud as good or excellent, is but
self in a transcript, and e contra. Thus to reach the highest of our
amours, and to speak all at once: we love our friends, because they
are our image; and we love our God, because we are his. So then, the
beloved opinion being thus wedded to the intellect; the case of our
espoused self becomes our own: and when we weigh ourselves, justice
doth not use to hold the balance.

     Besides, all things being double-handed, and having the
appearances both of truth, and falsehood; where our affections have
engaged us, we attend only to the former, which we see through a
magnifying medium: while looking on the latter, through the wrong
end of the perspective, which scants their dimensions, we neglect
and contemn them. Yea, and as in corrupt judicial proceedings, the
fore-stalled understanding passes a peremptory sentence upon the
single hearing of one party; and so though it may chance to be right
in the conclusion; is yet unjust and mistaken in the method of
inference.

     But to give a more particular account of this imposture; our
affections engage us either,

(1.) By our love to ourselves: or,
(2.) By our love to others.

     The former, in the instances of,
(1.) Natural disposition.
(2.) Custom and education.
(3.) Interest. And
(4.) Love of our own productions.

     The latter, in the homage which is paid to antiquity, and
authority.

     These are causes of our mistakes, and arguments that we can
scarce do otherwise. And therefore I speak to them in their order.

     1. Congruity of opinions, whether true or false, to our natural
constitution, is one great incentive to their reception; for in a
sense the completion of the mind, as well as manners, follows the
temperament of the body. On this account some men are genially
disposed to some opinions, and naturally as averse to others. And we
love and hate without a known cause of either. Some faces both of
persons and things, we admire and dote on: others, in our impartial
apprehensions no less deserving our esteem, we can not behold
without resentment; yea it may be with an invincible disregard. And
I question not, but intellectual representations are received by us,
with as unequal a fate upon a bare temperamental relish or disgust:
the understanding also hath its idiosyncrasies, as well as other
faculties. So that the great stirs of the disputing world, are but
the conflicts of the humours. Superstition, atheism, and enthusiasm,
are tempers; not mere infusions of education, and opinion. Indeed
the dull and unactive spirits that concern not themselves in theory,
follow the swinge of the common belief in which they were first
instructed: but the more vigorous and stirring will fall into that
of their particular crasis. And when the humour is awakened, all the
bonds of custom and education cannot hold them. The opinions which
are suited to their respective tempers will make way to their
assent, in spite of accidental preengagements. Thus opinions have
their climes and national diversities: and as some regions have
their proper vices, not so generally found in others; so have they
their mental depravities, which are drawn in with the air of their
country. And perhaps this is a considerable cause of the diversity
of lawes, customs, religions, natural and moral doctrines, which is
to be found in the divided regions of the inhabited Earth. Wherefore
I wonder not at the idolatry of the Jews of old, or of the several
parts of the world to this day, at the sensual expectation of the
Musselmen, the circumstantial follies of the Papists, or the antic
devotions of the barbarous Indians; since that the most senseless
conceits and fooleries cannot miss of harbour, where affection grown
upon the stock of a depraved constitution, hath endeared them.

     And if we do but more nearly look into our faculties, beginning
our survey from the lowest dregs of sense, even those which have a
nearer commerce with matter, and so by steps ascend to our more
spiritualized selves: we shall throughly discover how constitutional
partiality sways us. To begin then at the senses; that to one palate
is sweet, and delicious, which to another, is odious and distastful;
or more compendiously in the proverb, one man's meat, is another's
poison. What to one is a most grateful odour, to another is noxious
and displeasant; and 'twere a misery to some to lie stretched on a
bed of roses: that's a welcome touch to one, which is disagreeing to
another; the same aires which some entertain with most delightful
transports, to others are importune; and the objects which this man
can't see without an extasy, that is no more moved at than a statue.
If we pass further, the fancies of men are so immediately
diversisied by the individual crasis, that every man is in this a
phoenix; and owns something wherein none are like him: and these are
as many, as human nature hath singulars. Now the fancies of the
most, like the index of a clock, are moved but by the inward springs
and wheels of the corporal machine; which even on the most sublimed
intellectuals is dangerously influential. And yet this sits at the
helm of the world's belief; and vulgar reason is no better than a
more refined imagination. So then the senses, fancy, and what we
call reason itself, being thus influenced by the body's temperament,
and little better than indications of it; it cannot be otherwise,
but that this love of ourselves should strongly incline us in our
most abstracted dijudications.



Chap. XVI.
A second thing whereby our affections in-gage us in error; is the
prejudice of custom and education. A third, interest. The fourth,
love to our own productions.

     2. Another branch of this selfish fondness, by reason of which
we miscarry of science, is the almost insuperable prejudice of
custom, and education: by which our minds are encumbered, and the
most are held in a fatal ignorance. Yea could a man be composed to
such an advantage of constitution, that it should not at all
adulterate the images of his mind; yet this second nature would
aLter the crasis of the understanding, and render it as obnoxious to
aberrances, as now. And though in the former regard, the soul were a
pure a??af?? ??aµµate???[Greek: agraphon grammateion]; yet custom
and education would scrible into an incapacity of new impressions.
Thus we judge all things by our anticipations; and condemn or
applaud them, as they agree or differ from our first receptions. One
country laughs at the laws, customs, and opinions of another, as
absurd and ridiculous; and the other is as charitable to them, in
its conceit of theirs. This confirms the most sottish idolaters in
their accustomed adorations, beyond the conviction of anything but
doomsday. The impressions of a barbarous education are stronger in
them, than nature; when in their cruel worships they lance
themselves with knifes, and expose their harmless infants to the
flames as a sacrifice to their idols. And 'tis on this account, that
there's no religion so irrational, but can boast its martyrs. This
is it, which befriends the Talmud and Alcoran; and did they not owe
their credit more to customary and preengaged assent, than to any
rational inducement, we might expect their ashes: whereas education
hath so rooted these misbelievers in their ungrounded faith, that
they may as soon be plucked from themselves, as from their obstinate
adherencies; and to convert a Turk, or Jew, may be well a phrase for
an attempt impossible. We look for it only from him, to whom our
impossibles are none. And 'tis to be feared that Christianity itself
by most, that have espoused it, is not held by any better tenure.
The best account that many can give of their belief, is, that they
were bred in it; and the most are driven to their religion by custom
and education, as the Indians are to baptism; that is, like a drove
of cattle to the water. So that had providence determined our
nativities among the enemies of the cross, and theirs under a
Christian horoscope; in all likelihood we should have exchanged the
scene of our belief with that of our abode and breeding. There is
nothing so absurd, to which education cannot form our ductile
minority; it can lick us into shapes beyond the monstrosities of
Africa. And as King James would say of parliaments, it can do
anything but make a man a woman. For our initial age is like the
melted wax to the prepared seal, capable of any impression from the
documents of our teachers. The half-moon or cross, are indifferent
to its reception; and we may with equal facility write on this rasa
tabula, Turk, or Christian. To determine this indifferency, our
first task is to learn the creed of our country; and our next to
maintain it, we seldom examine our receptions more than children do
their catechisms; but by a careless greediness swallow all at a
venture. For implicit faith is a virtue, where orthodoxy is the
object. Some will not be at the trouble of a trial: others are
scared from attempting it. If we do, 'tis not by a sun-beam or ray
of universal light; but by a flame that's kindled by our affections,
and fed by the fuel of our anticipations. And thus like the hermit,
we think the sun shines nowhere, but in our cell; and all the world
to be darkness but ourselves. We judge truth to be circumscribed by
the confines of our belief, and the doctrines we were brought up in:
and with as ill manners, as those of China, repute all the rest of
the world monoculous. So that what some astrologers say of our
fortunes and the passages of our lives; may by the allowance of a
metaphor be said of our opinions: that they are written in our
stars, being to the most as fatal as those involuntary occurrences,
and as little in their power as the placets of destiny. We are bound
to our country's opinions, as to its laws: and an accustomed assent
is tantamount to an infallible conclusion. He that offers to
dissent, shall be an outlaw in reputation: and the fears of guilty
Cain, shall be fulfilled on him, who ever meets him shall slay him.
Thus custom and education have sealed the canon; and he that adds or
takes away from the book of orthodox belief; shall be more than in
danger of an anathema: and the Inquisition is not confined to the
jurisdiction of the Triple-crown. The rankest follies are sacred, if
customary; and the fashion is handsome, and agreeable, though never
so uncouth to an unconcerned beholder. Their antic deckings with
feathers is as comely in the account of those barbarous nations,
which use them; as the ornaments of lace, and riband, are in ours.
And the plucking off the shoe is to the Japonians as decent a
salutation, as the uncovering of the head is to us, and their
abhorred neighbours. And as we are fond of every thing with which
custom hath acquainted us; so on the other hand we start and boggle
at every unusual appearance, and cannot endure the sight of the
bugbear, novelty. On this account very innocent truths are often
affixed with the reproach of heresie; and made terrible things in
the imaginations of their misinformed and frighted enemies; who like
children scared in the dark, fly the monsters of their fancies, and
dare not stay to take a true account of the object of their fears.
So that there is scarce any truth, but its adversaries have made it
an ugly vizard; by which it's exposed to the hate and disesteem of
superficial examiners: for an opprobrious title with vulgar
believers is as good as an argument. And 'tis but writing the name
that customary receptions have discredited, under the opinions we
dislike; and all other refutation is superfluous. Thus shallow
apprehenders are frighted from many sober verities; like the King of
Arabs, who ran away from the smoking mince-pie, apprehending some
dangerous plot in the harmless steam.

     So then, while we thus mistake the infusions of education, for
the principles of universal nature; we must needs fail of a
scientifical theory. And therefore the two nations differing about
the antiquity of their language, made appeal to an undecisive
experiment; when they agreed upon the trial of a child brought up
among the wild inhabitants of the desert. The language it spake, had
no reason to be accounted the most ancient and natural: and the
lucky determination for the Phrygians by its pronouncing the word
beck, which signified bread in the dialect of that country, they
owed not to nature, but the goat-herd; from which the exposed
infant, by accompanying that sort of animals, had learnt it.

     Again (3.) Interest is another thing, by the magnetism of which
our affections are almost irresistibly attracted. It is the pole, to
which we turn, and our sympathizing judgements seldom decline from
the direction of this impregnant. Where interest hath engaged men; 
they'll find a way to truth, or make one. Anything is good and true,
to one whose interest it is, to have it so. And therefore self-
designers are seldom disappointed, for want of the speciousness of a
cause to warrant them; in the belief of which, they do oft as really
impose upon themselves, as they industriously endeavour it upon
others. With what an infinite of lawsuits, controversies, and
litigious cases doth the world abound? And yet every man is
confident of the truth and goodness of his own. And it may be as
Master Hobbes observes, one reason that mathematical demonstrations
are uncontroverted, is, because interest hath no place in those
unquestionable verities: when as, did the advantage of any stand
against them, perhaps Euclid's elements would not pass with so
universal a suffrage. Sir H. Blunt tells us, that temporal
expectations bring in droves to the Mahometan faith; and we know the
same holds thousands in the Romish. The eagles will be, where the
carcase is; and that shall have the faith of most, which is best
able to pay them for't. An advantageous cause never wanted
proselytes. I confess, I cannot believe all the learned Romanists
profess against their conscience; but rather, that their interest
brings their consciences to their profession: and self-advantage can
as easily incline some, to believe a falsehood, as profess it. A
good will, helped by a good wit, can find truth any where: and, what
the chemists brag of their elixir, it can translate any metal into
gold, in the hand of a skilful artificer, in spite of the adage, ex
quolibet ligno Mercurius. Though yet I think, that every religion
hath its bare nominals: and that pope was one with a witness, whose
saying it was, quantum nobis lucri peperit illa fabula de Christo!

     4. Besides, fourthly, self-love engageth us for anything, that
is a Minerva of our own. And thereby detains us in the snares of
ignorance and folly. We love the issues of our brains, no less than
those of our bodies: and fondness of our own begotten notions,
though illegitimate, obligeth us to maintain them. We hug
intellectual deformities, if they bear our names; and will hardly be
persuaded they are so, when ourselves are their authors. If their
dam may be judge, the young apes are the most beautiful things in
nature; and if we might determine it, our proper conceptions would
be all voted axioms. Thus then the female rules, and our affections
wear the breeches: while our understandings govern, as the story
saith Themistocles did Athens. So that to give the sum of all, most
of the contests of the litigious world pretending for truth, are but
the bandyings of one man's affections against another's: in which,
though their reasons may be foiled, yet their passions lose no
ground, but rather improve by the antiperistasis of an opposition.



Chap. XVII.
5. Our affections are enaged by our reverence to antiquity and
authority. This hath been a great hinderer of theorical
improvements, and it hath been an advantage to the mathematics, and
mechanic's arts, that it hath no place in them. Our mistake of
antiquity. The unreasonableness of that kind of pedantic adoration.
Hence the vanity of affecting impertinent quotations. The pedantry
on't is derided; the little improvement of science through its
successive derivations, end whence that hath happened.

     Another thing, that engageth our affections to unwarrantable
conclusions, and is therefore fatal to.science; is our doting on
antiquity, and the opinion of our fathers. We look with a
superstitious reverence upon the accounts of preterlapsed ages: and
with a supercilious severity, on the more deserving products of our
own. A vanity, which hath possessed all times as well as ours; and
the golden age was never present. For as in static experiment, an
inconsiderable weight by virtue of its distance from the centre of
the balance, will preponderate much greater magnitudes; so the most
slight and chaffy opinion, if at a greater remove from the present
age, contracts such an esteem and veneration, that it outweighs what
is infinitely more ponderous and rational, of a modern date. And
thus, in another sense, we realize what Archimedes had only in
hypothesis; weighing a single grain against the globe of Earth. We
reverence gray-headed doctrines; though feeble, decrepit, and within
a step of dust: and on this account maintain opinions, which have
nothing but our charity to uphold them. While the beauty of a truth,
as of a picture is not acknowledged but at a distance; and that
wisdom is nothing worth, which is not fetched from afar: wherein yet
we oft deceive ourselves, as did that mariner, who mistaking them
for precious stones, brought home his ship fraught with common
pebbles from the remotest Indies. Thus our eyes, like the
preposterous animals, are behind us; and our intellectual motions
retrograde. We adhere to the determinations of our fathers, as if
their opinions were entailed on us as their lands; or (as some
conceive) part of the parent's soul were portioned out to his
offspring, and the conceptions of our minds were ex traduce. The
sages of old live again in us; and in opinions there is a
metempsychosis. We are our reanimated ancestors, and antedate their
resurrection.

     And thus, while every age is but another show of the former;
'tis no wonder, that science hath not outgrown the dwarfishness of
its pristine stature, and that the intellectual world is such a
microcosm. For while we account of some admired authors, as the
Seth's Pillars, on which all knowledge is engraven; and spend that
time and study in defence of their placets, which with more
advantage to science might have been employed upon the books of the
more ancient, and universal author: 'tis not to be admired, that
knowledge hath received so little improvement from the endeavours of
many pretending promoters, through the continued series of so many
successive ages. For while we are slaves to the dictates of our
progenitors; our discoveries, like water, will not run higher than
the fountains, from which they own their derivation. And while we
think it so piaculous, to go beyond the ancients; we must
necessarily come short of genuine antiquity, truth; unless we
suppose them to have reached perfection of knowledge in spite of
their own acknowledgements of ignorance.

     Now if we enquire the reason, why the mathematics, and mechanic
arts, have so much got the start in growth of other sciences: we
shall find it probably resolved into this, as one considerable
cause: that their progress hath not been retarded by that
reverential awe of former discoveries, which hath been so great an
hindrance to theorical improvements. 'Twas never an heresy to out-
limn Apelles; nor criminal to out-work the obelisks. Galileus
without a crime out-saw all antiquity, and was not afraid to believe
his eyes, in spite of the optics of Ptolemy and Aristotle. 'Tis no
discredit to the telescope that antiquity ne'er saw in't: nor are we
shy of assent to those celestial informations, because they were hid
from ages. We believe the verticity of the needle, without a
certificate from the days of old: and confine not ourselves to the
sole conduct of the stars, for fear of being wiser than our fathers.
Had authority prevailed here, the Earth's fourth part had to us been
none, and Hercules his pillars had still been the worlds non ultra:
Seneca's prophesy had been an unfulfilled prediction, and one moiety
of our globes, an empty hemisphere.

     In a sense, ?a a??a?a ??ate?t? [Greek: Ta archaia krateito], is
a wholesome instruction; and becoming the vote of a synod: but yet,
in common acceptation, it's an enemy to verity, which can plead the
antiquity of above six thousand; and bears date from before the
chaos. For, as the noble Lord Verulam hath noted, we have a mistaken
apprehension of antiquity; calling that so, which in truth is the
world's nonage. Antiquitas seculi est juventus mundi. So that in
such appeals, we fetch our knowledge from the cradle; which though
it be nearest to innocence, it is so too to the fatal ruins which
followed it. Upon a true account, the present age is the worlds
grandevity; and if we must to antiquity, let multitude of days
speak. Now for us to supersede further disquisition, upon the
immature acquirements of those juvenile endeavours, is foolishly to
neglect the nobler advantages we are owners of, and in a sense to
disappoint the expectations of Him that gave them. Yet thus hath the
world prevented itself of science. And aged knowledge, is still an
infant. We superstitiously sit down in the acquisitions of our
fathers; and are discouraged from attempting further than they have
gone before us. So that, but for the undertakings of some glorious
persons, who now and then shine upon the world, Plato's year might
have found us, where the days of Aristotle left us. For my part, I
think it no such arrogance, as some are pleased to account it, that
almost two thousand years elapsed since, should weigh with the sixty
three of the Stagirite. If we owe it to him, that we know so much;
'tis perhaps long of his fond adorers that we know so little more. I
can see no ground, why his reason should be textuary to ours; or
that God, or nature, ever intended him an universal headship. 'Twas
this vain idolizing of authors, which gave birth to that silly
vanity of impertinent citations; and inducing authority in things
neither requiring, nor deserving it. That saying was much more
observable, that men have beards, and women none; because quoted
from Beza: and that other, pax res bona est; because brought in with
a, "said St. Augustine." But these ridiculous fooleries, signify
nothing to the more generous discerners, but the pedantry of the
affected sciolist. 'Tis an inglorious acquist to have our heads or
volumes laden, as were cardinal Campeius his mules, with old and
useless luggage: and yet the magnificence of many high pretenders to
science, if laid open by a true discovery, would amount to no more
than the old boots and shooes, of that proud, and exposed
ambassador. Methinks 'tis a pitiful piece of knowledge, that can be
learnt from an Index; and a poor ambition to be rich in the
inventory of another's treasure. To boast a memory (the most that
these pedants can aim at) is but an humble ostentation. And of all
the faculties, in which some brutes out-vie us, I least envy them an
excellence in that; desiring rather to be a fountain than an
hogshead. 'Tis better to own a judgment, though but with a curta
supellex of coherent notions; than a memory, like a sepulchre,
furnished with a load of broken and discarnate bones. Authorities
alone with me make no number, unless evidence of reason stand before
them: for all the cyphers of arithmetic, are no better than a single
nothing. And yet this rank folly of affecting such impertinencies,
hath overgrown our times; and those that are candidates for the
repute of scholars, take this way to compass it. When as
multiplicity of reading, the best it can signify, doth but speak
them to have taken pains for it: and this alone is but the dry and
barren part of knowledge, and hath little reason to denominate. A
number of receipts at the best can but make an empiric, but again,
to what is more perpendicular to our discourse, if we impartially
look into the remains of antique ages; we shall find but little to
justify so groundless a tyranny, as antiquity hath imposed on the
enslaved world. For if we take an account of the state of science,
beginning as high as history can carry us; we shall find it still to
have lain under such unhappy disadvantages, as have hindered its
advance in any considerable degrees of improvement. And though it
hath oft changed its channel, by its remove from one nation to
another; yet hath it been little more altered, than a river in its
passage through differing regions, viz, in name and method. For the
succeeding times still subscribing to, and copying out those, who
went before them, with little more than verbal diversity; science
hath still been the same pitiful thing, though in a various livery.
The Grecian learning was but a transcript of the Chaldean and
Egyptian; and the Roman of the Grecian. And though those former days
have not wanted brave wits, that have gallantly attempted, and made
essays worthy immortality; yet by reason either of the unqualified
capacities of the multitude, (who dote on things slight and trivial;
neglecting what is more rare and excellent) or the clamorous
assaults of envious and more popular opposers, they have submitted
to fate, and are almost lost in oblivion. And therefore, as that
great man, the Lord Bacon hath observed, time as a river, hath
brought down to us what is more light and superficial; while things
more solid and substantial have been immersed. Thus the Aristotelian
philosophy hath prevailed; while the more excellent and more ancient
atomical hypothesis hath long lain buried in neglect and darkness;
and for ought I know, might have slept for ever, had not the
ingenuity of the present age, recalled it from its urn and silence.
But it is somewhat collateral to my scope, as well as
disproportioned to my abilities, to fall upon particular instances
of the defects and errors of the philosophy of the ancients. The
forementioned noble advancer of learning, whose name and parts might
give credit to any undertaking; hath handsomely performed it, in his
ingenious Novum Organum. And yet, because it may confer towards the
discovery of how little our adherence to antiquity befriends truth,
and the encrease of knowledge; as also how groundless are the
dogmatists high pretensions to science: I shall adventure some
considerations on the Peripatetic philosophy; which hath had the
luck to survive all others, and to build a fame on their ruines.



Chap. XVIII.
REFLECTIONS ON THE PERIPATETIC PHOLOSOPHY
The generality of its reception, no argument of its deserts; the
first charge against that philosophy; that it is merely verbal.
Materia prima in that philisophy signifies nothing. A parallel drawn
between it and imaginary space: this latter pleads more for its
reality. Their form also is a mere word, and potentia Materiae
insignificant. Privation no principle. An essay to detect
Peripatetic verbosity, by translating some definitions.

     How Aristotle's philosophy came so universally to obtain in
these later ages, to the silencing the Zoroastrian, Pythagorean,
Platonical, and Epicurean learning, is not my business here to
inquire. Worth is nor to be judged by success, and retinue; only we
may take notice, that the generality of its reception is with many
the persuading argument of its superlative desert. And common judges
measure excellency by name and numbers. But Seneca's determination,
argumentum pessimi turba est, is more deserving our credit: and the
fewest, that is the wisest, have always stood contradictory to that
ground of belief; vulgar applause by severer wisdom being held a
scandal. If the numerousness of a train must carry it; virtue may go
follow Astrea, and vice only will be worth the courting. The
philosopher deservedly suspected himself of vanity, when cried up by
the multitude: and discreet apprehenders will not think the better
of that philosophy, which hath the common cry to vouch it. He that
writ counter to the astrologer in his almanac, did with more truth
foretell the weather: and he that shall write foul, in the place of
the vulgars' fair; passes the juster censure. Those in the fable,
who were wet with the shower of folly, hooted at the wise men that
escaped it, and pointed at their actions as ridiculous; because
unlike their own, that were truly so. If the major vote may cast it,
wisdom and folly must exchange names; and the way to the one will be
by the other. Nor is it the rabble only, which are such perverse
discerners; we are now a sphere above them: I mean the t? p???
[Greek: to poly] of pretended philosophers, who judge as oddly in
their way, as the rascality in theirs; and many a professed retainer
to philosophy, is but an ignoramus in a suit of second notions. 'Tis
such, that most revere the reliques of the adored Sophy; and, as
Artemesia did those of Mausolus, passionately drink his ashes.
Whether the remains of the Stagirite deserve such veneration, we'll
make a brief enquiry.

     In the conduct of which design, 6 things I offer against that
philosophy, viz. (1.) That 'tis merely verbal, and (2.) Litigious.
That (3.) It gives no account of the phenomena. Nor (4.) Doth it
make any discoveries for the use of common life. That (5.) 'Tis
inconsistent with divinity, and (6.) With itself. Which charges how
just they are, I think will appear in the sequel.

     To the first then. That the Aristotelian philosophy is an
huddle of words and terms insignificant, hath been the censure of
the wisest: and that both its basis and superstructure are
chimerical; cannot be unobserved by them, that know it, and are free
to judge it. To detect the verbal emptiness of this philosophy, I'll
begin at the foundation of the hypothesis. For I intend but few, and
those shall be signal instances.

     (1.) Therefore the Materia prima of this philosophy, shall be
that of my reflections. In the consideration of which I shall need
no more than the notion wherein Aristotle himself hath dressed it;
for evidence of what I aim at; for, nec quid, nec quale, nec
quantum, is as opposite a definition of nothing, as can be. So that
if we would conceive this imaginary matter, we must deny all things
of it, that we can conceive; and what remains is the thing we look
for. And allowing all which its assertors assign it, viz. quantity
interminate; 'tis still but an empty extended capacity, and
therefore at the best, but like that space, which we imagine was
before the beginning of time, and will be after it. 'Tis easy to
draw a parallelism between that ancient, and this more modern,
nothing; and in all things to make good its resemblance to that
commentitious inanity. The Peripatetic matter is a pure unactuated
power: and this conceited vacuum a mere receptibility. Matter is
supposed indeterminate: and space is so, the pretended first matter
is capable of all forms: and the imaginary space is receptive of any
body. Matter cannot naturally subsist uninformed: and nature avoids
vacuity in space. The matter is ingenerate, and beyond corruption:
and the space was before, and will be after either. The matter in
all things is but one: and the space most uniform. Thus the
foundation-principle of Peripateticism is exactly parallel to an
acknowledged nothing: and their agreement in essential characters
makes rather an identity than a parity; but that imaginary space
hath more to plead for its reality, than the matter hath, and in
this consists the greatest dissimilitude. For that hath no
dependence on the bodies which possess it; but was before them, and
will survive them: whereas this essentially relies on the form and
cannot subsist without it. Which yet, methinks, is little better
than an absurdity: that the cause should be an eleemosynary for its
subsistence to its effect, and a nature posterior to, and dependent
on itself. This dependentia a posteriori, though in a diverse way of
causality, my reason could never away with: yea, a sectator of this
philosophy, Oviedo a Spanish Jesuit, hath effectually impugned it.
So then there's nothing real, answering this imaginary Proteus; and
Materia prima hath as much of being, as Mons aureus.

     (2.) The Peripatetic forms are as obnoxious, and on the same
account liable to our reflections as the former principle. I'll not
spend time in an industrious confutation of what the votaries of
that philosophy themselves can scarce tell what to make of: and the
subject being dry and less suitable to those more mercurial tempers
for whom I intend these papers: I'll only pass a reflection on it,
and proceed to what may be less importunate.

     The form then, according to this hypothesis, is a new substance
produced in all generations to actuate the matter and passive
principle; out of whose power 'tis said to be educed. And were it
supposed to contain anything of the form pre-existing in it, as the
seed of the being to be produced; 'twere then sense to say, it was
educed from it; but by educing, the affirmers only mean a producing
in it, with a subjective dependence on its recipient: a worthy
signification of eduction; which answers not the question whence
'tis derived, but into what it is received. The question is of the
terminus a quo, and the answer of the subject. So that all that can
be made of this power of the matter, is merely a receptive capacity:
and we may as well affirm that the world was educed out of the power
of the imaginary space; and give that as a sufficient account of its
original. And in this language, to grow rich were to educe money out
of the power of the pocket. Wherefore, notwithstanding this
imaginary eduction out of the power of the matter; we are still to
seek whether these forms be produced out of something, or nothing; 
either of which supposed, bids defiance to the hypothesis. For
according to the first, all possible forms will be actually latent
in the matter; which is contrary to the stream of the Peripatetic
doctors. And the latter as opposite to their master's ex nihilo
nihil, and he acknowledged no creation.

     (3.) The third principle of bodies according to the
Aristotelian philosophy is privation; concerning which, I'll add
nothing but the words of the excellent Lord Montaigne, qu'est il
plus vain que de faire l'inanité mesme, cause de la production des
choses? La privation c'est une negative: de quel humeur en a-il peu
faire la cause & origine des choses qui sont?

     But yet further, to give an hint more of the verbosities of
this philosophy, a short view of a definition or two will be
sufficient evidence; which, though in Greek or Latin they amuse us;
yet a translation unmasks them. And if we make them speak English,
the cheat is transparent.

     Light is ????G?? ??? ???F???? [Greek:ENERGIA TOY DIAPHANOY]
saith that philosophy: in English, the act of a perspicuous body.
Sure Aristotle here transgressed his own topics, and if this
definition be clearer and more known than the thing defined,
midnight may vie for conspicuity with noon. Is not light more known
than this insignificant energy? And what's a diaphanous body, but
the light's medium the air? So that light is the act of the air. And
if Lux be Umbra Dei, this definition is Umbra Lucis. Thus is light
darkened by an illustration, and the symbol of evidence, clothed in
the livery of midnight: as if light were best seen by darkness, as
light inaccessible is best known by ignorance.

     Again (2.) That motion is ????????? ??? ????S ?? ???????
[Greek: ENTELECHIA TOY ONTOS TOY DYNAMEI] &c. Is a definition of
Aristotle's, and as culpable as the former. For, by the most
favourable interpretation of that unintelligible entelechy: it is
but, an act of a-being in power, as it is in power; the construing
of which into palpable sense or meaning would pose a critic. Sure
that definition is not very conspicuous, whose genus puzzled the
Devil. The philosopher that proved motion by walking, did in that
action better define it: and that puzzled candidate, who being asked
what a circle was, described it by the rotation of his hand; gave an
account more satisfying. In some things we must indeed give an
allowance for words of art: but in defining obvious appearances, we
are to use what is most plain and easy; that the mind be not misled
by amphibologies, or ill conceived notions, into fallacious
deductions: which whether it be not the method of Peripatetic
philosophy let the indifferent determine. To give an account of all
the insignificancies, and verbal nothings of this philosophy, would
be almost to transcribe it. 'Tis a philosophy, that makes most
accurate inspections into the creatures of the brain; and gives the
exactest topography of the extramundane spaces. Like our late
polititians, it makes discoveries, and their objects too; and deals
in beings, that owe nothing to the primitive fiat. The same
undivided essence, from the several circumstances of its being and
operations, is here multiplied into legion, and emproved to a number
of smaller entities; and these again into as many modes and
insignificant formalities. What a number of words here have nothing
answering them? And as many are imposed at random. To wrest names
from their known meaning to senses most alien, and to darken speech
by words without knowledge; are none of the most inconsiderable
faults of this philosophy: to reckon them in their particular
instances, would puzzle Archimedes. Now hence the genuine ideas of
the mind are adulterate: and the things themselves lost in a crowd
of names, and intentional nothings. Besides, these verbosities
emasculate the understanding; and render it slight and frivolous, as
its objects.

     Methinks, the late voluminous Jesuits, those Laplanders of
Peripateticism, do but subtly trifle, and their philosophic
understandings are much like his, who spent his time in darting
cummin-seed through the eye of a needle. One would think they were
impregnated, as are the mares in Cappadocia; they are big of words:
their tedious volumes have the tympany, and bring forth nought but
wind, and vapour. To me, a cursus philosophicus, is but an
impertinency in folio; and the studying them a laborious idleness.
'Tis here, that things are crumbled into notional atoms; and the
substance evaporated into an imaginary Ether. The intellect that can
feed on this air, is a chameleon; and a mere inflated skin. From
this stock grew school-divinity, which is but Peripateticism in a
theological livery. A school-man is the ghost of the Stagirite, in a
body of condensed air: and Thomas but Aristotle sainted.



Chap. XIX. 
2. Peripatetic philosophy is litigious; it hath no setled constant
signification of words; the inconveniences hereof. Aristotle
intended the cherishing controversies; proved by his own double
testimony. Some of his impertinent arguings instanced in. Disputes
retard, and are injurious to knowledge. Peripatetics are most
exercised in the controversal parts of philosophy, and know little
of the practical and experimental. A touch at school-divinity.

     But (2.) This philosophy is litigious, the very spawn of
disputations and controversies as undecisive as needless. This is
the natural result of the former: storms are the products of
vapours. For where words are imposed arbitrariously, having no
stated real meaning; or else distorted from their common use, and
known significations; the mind must needs be led into confusion and
misprision; and so things plain and easy in their naked natures,
made full of intricacy and disputable uncertainty. For we cannot
conclude with assurance, but from clearly apprehended premises; and
these cannot be so conceived, but by a distinct comprehension of the
words out of which they are elemented. So that, where these are
unfixed or ambiguous; our propositions must be so, and our
deductions can be no better. One reason therefore of the
uncontroverted certainty of mathematical science is; because 'tis
built upon clear and settled significations of names, which admit of
no ambiguity or insignificant obscurity. But in the Aristotelian
philosophy it's quite otherwise: words being here carelesly and
abusively admitted, and as inconstantly retained; it must needs come
to pass, that they will be diversly apprehended by contenders, and
so made the subject of controversies, that are endless both for use
and number. And thus being at their first step out of the way to
science, by mistaking in simple terms; in the progress of their
enquiries they must needs lose both themselves, and the truth, in a
verbal labyrinth. And now the entangled disputants, as master Hobbes
ingeniously observeth, like birds that came down the chimney; betake
them to the false light, seldom suspecting the way they entered: but
attempting by vain, impertinent, and coincident distinctions, to
escape the absurdity that pursues them; do but weary themselves with
as little success, as the silly bird attempts the window. The mis-
stated words are the original mistake; and every other essay is a
new one.

     Now these canting contests, the usual entertainment of the
Peripatum, are not only the accidental vitiosities of the
philosophers; but the genuine issues of the philosophy itself. And
Aristotle seems purposely to intend the cherishing of controversal
digladiations, by his own affectation of an intricate obscurity.
Himself acknowledged, when he said; his physics were published, and
not so: and by that double advice in his topics 'tis as clear as
light. In one place, he adviseth his sectators in disputations to be
ambiguous: and in another, to bring forth anything that occurs,
rather than give way to their adversary: counsel very well becoming
an enquirer into truth and nature. Nor did he here advise them to
anything, but what he followeth himself, and exactly copies out in
his practice: the multitudes of the lame, abrupt, equivocal, self-
contradicting expressions, will evidence it as to the first part:
which who considers, may be satisfied in this; that if Aristotle
found nature's face under covert of a veil, he hath not removed the
old, but made her a new one. And for the latter, his frequent
slightness in arguing doth abundantly make it good. To instance:

     He proves the world to be perfect, because it consists of
bodies; and that bodies are so, because they consist of a triple
dimension; and that a triple dimension is perfect, because three are
all; and that three are all, because when 'tis but one or two, we
can't say all, but when 'tis three, we may: is not this an absolute
demonstration? We can say all at the number three: therefore the
world is perfect. Tobit went forth and his dog followed him;
therefore there's a world in the Moon, were an argument as
apodictical. In another place (2.) He proves the world to be but
one: for were there another, our Earth would fall unto it. Which is
but a pitiful deduction, from the mere prejudice of sense; and not
unlike theirs, who thought, if there were antipodes, they must needs
(as it's said of Erasmus) in coelum descendere. As if, were there
more worlds, each of them would not have its proper centre.
Elsewhere (3.) Showing, why the heavens move this way rather than
another, he gives this for a reason: because they move to the more
honourable; and before is more honourable than after. This is like
the gallant, who sent his man to buy an hat, that would turn up
behind. As if, had the heavens moved the other way; that term had
not been then before, which is now the contrary. This inference is
founded upon a very weak supposition, viz. That those alterable
respects are realities in nature; which will never be admitted by a
considerate discerner. Thus Aristotle acted his own instructions;
and his obsequious sectators have supererogated in observance. They
have so disguised his philosophy by obscuring comments, that his
revived self would not own it: and were he to act another part with
mortals, heed be but a pitiful Peripatetic; every sophister would
out-talk him.

     Now the disputing way of enquiry is so far from advancing
science; that 'tis no inconsiderable retarder: for in scientifical
discoveries many things must be considered, which the hurry of a
dispute indisposeth for; and there is no way to truth, but by the
most clear comprehension of simple notions, and as wary an accuracy
in deductions. If the fountain be disturbed, there's no seeing to
the bottom; and here's an exception to the proverb, 'tis no good
fishing for verity in troubled waters. One mistake of either simple
apprehension, or connection, makes an erroneous conclusion. So that
the precipitancy of disputation, and the stir and noise of passions,
that usually attend it, must needs be prejudicial to verity: its
calm insinuations can no more be heard in such a bustle, than a
whisper among a crowd of sailors in a storm. Nor do the eager
clamours of contending disputants, yield any more relief to eclipsed
truth; than did the sounding brass of old to the labouring moon.
When it's under question, 'twere as good slip cross and pile, as to
dispute for't: and to play a game at chess for an opinion in
philosophy (as myself and an ingenious friend have sometimes
sported) is as likely a way to determine. Thus the Peripatetic
procedure is inept for philosophical solutions: the lot were as
equitable a decision, as their empty loquacities.

     'Tis these ungracious disputations that have been the great
hindrance to the more improvable parts of learning: and the modern
retainers to the Stagirite have spent their sweat and pains upon the
most litigious parts of his philosophy; while those, that find less
play for the contending genius, are incultivate. Thus logic,
physics, and metaphysics, are the burden of volumes, and the daily
entertainment of the disputing schools: while the more profitable
doctrines of the heavens, meteors, minerals, animals; as also the
more practical ones of politics, and economics, are scarce so much
as glanced at. And the indisputable mathematics, the only science
heaven hath yet vouchsafed humanity, have but few votaries among the
slaves of the Stagirite. What, the late promoters of the
Aristotelian philosophy, have writ on all these so fertile subjects,
can scarce compare with the single disputes about Materia prima.

     Nor hath human science monopolized the damage, that hath sprung
from this root of evils: theology hath been as deep a sharer. The
volumes of the schoolmen, are deplorable evidence of Peripatetic
depravations: and Luther's censure of that divinity, quam primum
apparuit theologia scholastica, evanuit theologia crucis, is neither
uncharitable, nor unjust. This hath mudded the fountain of certainty
with notional and ethnic admixtions, and plaited the head of
evangelical truth, as the Jews did its author's, with a crown of
thorns: here, the most obvious verity is subtleized into niceties,
and spun into a thread indiscernible by common optics, but through
the spectacles of the adored heathen. This hath robbed the Christian
world of its unity and peace, and made the church, the stage of
everlasting contentions: and while Aristotle is made the center of
truth, and unity, what hope of reconciling? And yet most of these
scholastic controversies are ultimately resolved into the subtleties
of his philosophy: whereas methinks an athenian should not be the
best guide to the T?S ?G?OS?OS[Greek: THEOS AGNOSTOS]; nor an
idolater to that God he neither knew nor owned. When I read the
eager contests of those notional theologues, about things that are
not; I cannot but think of that pair of wise ones, that fought for
the middle: and methinks many of their controversies are such, as if 
we and our antipodes, should strive who were uppermost; their title
to truth is equal. He that divided his text into one part; did but
imitate the schoolmen in their coincident distinctions: and the best
of their curiosities are but like paint on glass, which intercepts
and dyes the light the more desirable splendor. I cannot look upon
their elaborate trifles, but with a sad reflexion on the degenerate
state of our lapsed intellects; and as deep a resentment, of the
mischiefs of this school-philosophy.



Chap. XX. 
3. It gives no account of the phenomena; those that are remoter, it
attempts not. It speaks nothing pertinent in the most ordinary: its
circular, and general way of solution. It resolves all things into
occult qualities. The absurdity of the Aristotelian hypothesis of
the heavens. The galaxy is no meteor: the heavens are corruptible.
Comets are above the moon. The sphere of fire derided. Aristotle
convicted of several other false assertions.

     3. The Aristotelian hypotheses give a very dry and jejune
account of nature's phenomena.

     For (1.) As to its more mysterious reserves, Peripatetic
enquiry hath left them unattempted; and the most forward notional
dictators sit down here in a contented ignorance: and as if nothing
more were knowable than is already discovered, they put stop to als
endeavours of their solution. Qualities, that were occult to
Aristotle, must be so to us; and we must not philosophize beyond
sympathy and antipathy: whereas indeed the rarities of nature are in
these recesses, and its most excellent operations cryptic to common
discernment. Modern ingenuity expects wonders from magnetic
discoveries: and while we know but its more sensible ways of
working; we are but vulgar philosophers, and not likely to help the
world to any considerable theories. Till the fountains of the great
deeps are broken up, knowledge is not likely to cover the earth as
the waters the sea.

     Nor (2.) Is the Aristotelian philosophy guilty of this sloth
and philosophic penury, only in remoter abstrusities: but in solving
the most ordinary causalities, it is as defective and unsatisfying.
Even the most common productions are here resolved into celestial
influences, elemental combinations, active and passive principles,
and such generalities; while the particular manner of them is as
hidden as sympathies. And if we follow manifest qualities beyond the
empty signification of their names; we shall find them as occult, as
those which are professedly so. That heavy bodies descend by
gravity, is no better an account than we might expect from a
rustick: and again, that gravity is a quality whereby an heavy body
descends, is an impertinet circle, and teacheth nothing. The feigned
central alliciency is but a word, and the manner of it still occult.
That the fire burns by a quality called heat; is an empty dry return
to the question, and leaves us still ignorant of the immediate way
of igneous solutions. The accounts that this philosophy gives by
other qualities, are of the same gender with these: so that to say
the loadstone draws iron by magnetic attraction, and that the sea
moves by flux and reflux; were as satisfying as these hypotheses,
and the solution were as pertinent. In the qualities, this
philosophy calls manifest, nothing is so but the effects. For the
heat, we feel, is but the effect of the fire; and the pressure, we
are sensible of; but the eject of the descending body. And effects,
whose causes are confessedly occult, are as much within the sphere
of our senses; and our eyes will inform us of the motion of the
steel to its attrahent. Thus Peripatetic philosophy resolves all
things into occult qualities; and the dogmatists are the only
skeptics. Even to them, that pretend so much to science, the world
is circumscribed with a Gyges his ring; and is intellectually
invisible: and, ?? ??????????O [Greek: OY KATALAMBANO], is a fit
motto for the Peripatum. For by their way of disquisition there can
no more be truly comprehended, than what's known by every common
ignorant. And ingenious inquiry will not be contented with such
vulgar frigidities.

     But further, (3.) If we look into the Aristotelian comments on
the largest volumes of the universe: the works of the fourth day are
there as confused and disorderly, as the chaos of the first: and
more like that, which was before the light, than the completely
finished, and gloriously disposed frame. What a romance is the story
of those impossible concamerations, intersections, involutions, and
feigned rotations of solid orbs? All substituted to salve the credit
of a broken ill-contrived system. The belief of such disorders
above, were an advantage to the oblique atheism of Epicurus: and
such irregularities in the celestial motions, would lend an argument
to the apotheiosis of fortune. Had the world been coagmented from
that supposed fortuitous jumble; this hypothesis had been tolerable.
But to entitle such abrupt, confused motions to almighty wisdom, is
to degrade it below the size of human forecast and contrivance. And
could the doctrine of solid orbs, be accommodated to astronomical
phenomena; yet to ascribe each sphere an intelligence to circumvolve
it, were an unphilosophical desperate refuge: and to confine the
blessed genii to a province, which was the Hell of Ixion, were to
rob them of their felicities. That the galaxy is a meteor, was the
account of Aristotle: but the telescope hath autoptically confuted
it: and he, who is not Pyrrhonian to the disbelief of his senses,
may see, that it's no exhalation from the earth, but an heap of
smaller luminaries. That the heavens are void of corruption, is
Aristotle's supposal: but the tube hath betrayed their impurity; and
neoteric astronomy hath found spots in the sun. The discoveries made
in Venus, and the moon, disprove the antique quintessence; and
evidence them of as course materials, as the globe we belong to. The
perspicil, as well as the needle, hath enlarged the habitable world;
and that the moon is an earth, is no improbable conjecture. The
inequality of its surface, mountanous protuberance, the nature of
its maculae, and infinite other circumstances (for which the world's
beholding to Galileo) are items not contemptible: Hevelius hath
graphically described it: that comets are of nature terrestrial, is
allowable: but that they are materialed of vapours, and never flamed
beyond the moon; were a concession unpardonable. That in Cassiopea
was in the firmanent, and another in our age above the sun. Nor was
there ever any as low as the highest point of the circumference, the
Stagyrite allows them. So that we need not be appalled at blazing
stars, and a comet is no more ground for astrological presages than
a flaming chimney. The unparalleled Descartes hath unriddled their
dark physiology, and to wonder solved their motions. His philosophy
gives them transcursions beyond the vortex we breathe in; and leads
them through others, which are only known in an hypothesis.
Aristotle would have fainted before he had flown half so far, as
that eagle-wit; and have lighted on a hard name, or occult quality,
to rest him. That there is a sphere of fire under the concave of the
moon, is a dream: and this, may be, was the reason some imagined
hell there, thinking those flames the ignis rota. According to this
hypothesis, the whole lunar world is a torrid zone; and on a better
account, than Aristotle thought ours was, may be supposed
inhabitable, except they are salamanders which dwell in those fiery
regions. That the reflexion of the solar rays, is terminated in the
clouds; was the opinion of the Grecian sage: but lunar observations
have convicted it of falsehood; and that planet receives the dusky
light, we discern in its sextile aspect, from the Earth's benignity.
That the rainbow never describes more than a semicircle, is no
credible assertion; since experimental observations have confuted
it. Gassendus saw one at sun-setting, whose supreme arch almost
reached our zenith, while the horns stood in the oriental tropics.
And that noble wit reprehends the school-idol, for assigning fifty
years at least between every lunar iris. That Caucasus enjoys the
sunbeams three parts of the nights vigils; that Danubius ariseth
from the Pyrenean hills: that the Earth is higher towards the north:
are opinions truly charged on Aristotle by the restorer of Epicurus;
and all easily confutable falsities. To reckon all the Aristotelian
aberrances, and to give a full account of the lameness of his
hypotheses, would swell this digression into a volume. The mentioned
shall suffice us.



Chap. XXI.
4. Aristotle's philosophy inept for new discoveries; it hath been
the author of no one invention: it's founded on vulgarities, and
therefore makes nothing known beyond them. The knowledge of natures
outside confers not to practical improvements. Better hopes from the
new philosophy. The directing all this to the design of the
discourse. A caution, viz, that nothing is here intended in favour
of novelty in divinity; the reason why we may embrace what is new in
philosophy, while we reject them in theology.

     4. The Aristotelian philosophy is inept for new discoveries;
and therefore of no accommodation to the use of life. That all arts,
and professions are capable of mature improvements; cannot be
doubted by those, who know the least of any. And that there is an
America of secrets, and unknown Peru of nature, whose discovery
would richly advance them, is more than conjecture. Now while we
either sail by the land of gross and vulgar doctrines, or direct our
enquiries by the cynosure of mere abstract notions; we are not
likely to reach the treasures on the other side the Atlantic: the
directing of the world the way to which, is the noble end of true
philosophy. That the Aristotelian physiology cannot boast itself the
proper author of any one invention; is pregnant evidence of its
infecundous deficiency: and 'twould puzzle the Schools to point at
any consideable discovery, made by the direct, sole manuduction of
Peripatetic principles. Most of our rarities have been found out by
casual emergency; and have been the works of time, and chance,
rather than of philosophy. What Aristotle hath of experimental
knowledge in his books of animals, or elsewhere; is not much
transcending vulgar observation: and yet what he hath of this, was
never learnt from his hypotheses; but forcibly fetched in to
suffrage to them. And 'tis the observation of the noble St. Alban;
that that philosophy is built on a few vulgar experiments: and if
upon further enquiry, any were found to refragate, they were to be
discharged by a distinction. Now what is founded on, and made up but
of vulgarities, cannot make known anything beyond them. For nature
is set a going by the most subtle and hidden instruments; which it
may be have nothing obvious which resembles them. Hence judging by
visible appearances, we are discouraged by supposed impossibilities
which to nature are none, but within her sphere of action. And
therefore what spews only the outside, and sensible structure of
nature; is not likely to help us in finding out the magnalia. 'Twere
next to impossible for one, who never saw the inward wheels and
motions, to make a watch upon the bare view of the circle of hours,
and index: and 'tis as difficult to trace natural operations to any
practical advantage, by the sight of the cortex of sensible
appearances. He were a poor physician, that had no more anatomy,
than were to be gathered from the physnomy. Yea, the most common
phenomena can be neither known, nor improved, without insight into
the more hidden frame. For nature works by an invisible hand in all
things: and till Peripateticism can shew us further, than those
gross solutions of qualifies and elements; 'twill never make us
benefactors to the world, nor considerable discoverers. But its
experienced sterility through so many hundred years, drives hope to
desperation.

     We expect greater things from neoteric endeavours. The
Cartesian philosophy in this regard hath shown the world the way to
be happy. And methinks this age seems resolved to bequeath posterity
somewhat to remember it: the glorious undertakers, wherewith heaven
hath blest our days, will leave the world better provided than they
sound it. And whereas in former times such generous free-spirited
worthies were as the rare newly observed stars, a single one the
wonder of an age: in ours they are like the lights of the greater
size that twinkle in the starry firmament: and this last century can
glory in numerous constellations. Should those heroes go on, as they
have happily begun, they'll fill the world with wonders. And I doubt
not but posterity will find many things, that are now but rumors,
verified into practical realities. It may he some ages hence, a
voyage to the southern unknown tracts, yea possibly the moon, will
not be more strange than one to America. To them, that come after
us, it may be as ordinary to buy a pair of wings to fly into
remotest regions; as now a pair of boots to ride a journey. And to
confer at the distance of the Indies by sympathetic conveyances, may
be as usual to future times, as to us in a literary correspondence.
The restoration of gray hairs to juvenility, and renewing the
exhausted marrow, may at length be effected without a miracle: and
the turning of the now comparative desert world into a paradise, may
not improbably be expected from late agriculture.

     Now those, that judge by the narrowness of former principles
and successes, will smile at these paradoxical expectations: but
questionless those great inventions, that have in these later ages
altered the face of all things; in their naked proposals, and mere
suppositions, were to former times as ridiculous. To have talked of
a new Earth to have been discovered, had been a romance to
antiquity: and to sail without sight of stars or shores by the
guidance of a mineral, a story more absurd than the flight of
Dedalus. That men should speak after their tongues were ashes, or
communicate with each other in differing hemispheres, before the 
invention of letters; could not but have been thought a fiction.
Antiquity would not have believed the almost incredible force of our
cannons; and would as coldly have entertained the wonders of the
telescope. In these we all condemn antique incredulity; and 'tis
likely posterity will have as much cause to pity ours. But yet
notwithstanding this straightness of shallow observers, there are a
set of enlarged souls that are more judiciously credulous: and
those, who are acquainted with the fecundity of Cartesian
principles, and the diligent and ingenious endeavours of so many
true philosophers; will despair of nothing.



Chap. XXII. 
(5.) The Aristotelian philosophy inconsistent with divinity; and
(6.) With itself. The conclusion of the reflections.

     But again (5.) The Aristotelian philosophy is in some things
impious, and inconsistent with divinity. That the resurrection is
impossible: that God understands not all things: that the world was
from eternity: that there's no substantial form, but moves some orb:
that the first mover moves by an eternal, immutable necessity: that,
if the world and motion were not from eternity, than God was idle:
were all the assertions of Aristotle, and such as theology
pronounceth impieties. Which yet we need not strange at from one, of
whom a father saith, nec deum coluit nec curavit: especially, if it
be as Philoponus affirms, that he philosophized by command from the
Oracle. But besides those I have mentioned, I might present to view
a larger catalogue of Aristotle's impious opinions; of which take a
few:

     He makes one God the first mover, but 56 others, movers of the
orbs. He calls God an animal: and affirms, that he knows not
particulars. He denies that God made anything, or can do anything
but move the heavens. He affirms, that 'tis not God but nature,
chance, and fortune that rule the world. That he is tied to the
first orb; and preserves not the world, but only moves the heavens;
and yet elsewhere, that the world and heavens have infinite power to
move themselves. He affirms, the soul cannot be separated from the
body, because 'tis its form. That prayers are to no purpose, because
God understands not particulars. That God hears no prayers, nor
loves any man. That the soul perisheth with the body: and that there
is neither state, nor place of happiness after this life is ended.
All which dogmata, how contrary they are to the fundamental
principles of reason and religion, is easily determined and perhaps,
never did any worse drop from the pens of the most vile contemners
of the deity. So that the great and most learned Origen, was not
unjust in prxferring Epicurus before the adored Stagyrite. And
possibly there have been few men in the world have deserved less of
religion, and those that profess it. How it is come about then, that
the assertor of such impieties, should be such an oracle among
divines and Christians; is I confess to me, matter of some astonish-
ment. And how Epicurus became so in-famous, when Aristotle who spake
as ill, and did worse, hath been so sacred, may well be wondred at.

     Again (6.) The Peripatetic philosophy is repugnant to itself;
as also it was contrary to the more ancient wisdom. And Therefore
the learned Patritius saith of Aristotle, ob eam rem multos e
patribus habuit opfiugnatores, celebratorem neminem. And within the
same period of sense affirms, Ipse sibi ipsi non constat; immo
saepissime, immo semper secum pugnat. Of the Aristotelian
contradictions, Gassendus hath presented us with a catalogue: we'll
instance in a few of them. In one place He saith, the planets'
scintillation is not seen, because of their propinquity; but that of
the rising and setting sun is, because of its distance: and yet in
another place he makes the sun nearer us, than they are. He saith,
that the elements are not eternal, and seeks to prove it; and yet he
makes the world so, and the elements its parts. In his meteors he
saith, no dew is produced in the wind; and yet afterwards admits it
under the south, and none under the north. In one place he defines a
vapour humid and cold; and in another humid and hot. He saith, the
faculty of speaking is a sense; And yet before he allowed but five.
In one place, that nature doth all things best; and in another, that
it makes more evil than good. And somewhere he contradicts himself
within a line; saying, that an immoveable mover hath no principle of
motion. 'Twould be tedious to mention more; and the quality of a
digression will not allow it.

     Thus we have, as briefly as the subject would bear,
animadverted on the so much admired philosophy of Aristotle. The
nobler spirits of the age, are disengaged from those detected
vanities: and the now adorers of that philosophy are few, but such
as know no other: or if any of them look beyond the leaves of their
master, yet they try other principles by a jury of his, and scan
Descartes by genus and species. From the former sort I may hope,
they'll pardon this attempt; since nothing but the authors weakness
kindred his obliging them. And for the latter, I value not their
censure.

     We may conclude upon the whole then, that the stamp of
authority can make leather as current as gold; and that there's
nothing so contemptible, but antiquity can render it august, and
excellent. But, because the fooleries of some affected novelists
have discredited new discoveries, and rendered the very mention
suspected of vanity at least; and in points divine, of heresy: it
will be necessary to add, that I intend not the former discourse, in
favour of any new-broached conceit in divinity: for I own no opinion
there, which cannot plead the prescription of above sixteen hundred. 
There's nothing I have more sadly resented, than the crazy whimsies
with which our age abounds, and therefore am not likely to patron
them. In theology, I put as great a difference between our new
lights, and ancient truths, as between the sun, and an unconcocted
evanid meteor. Though I confess, that in philosophy I'm a seeker;
yet cannot believe that a skeptic in philosophy must be one in
divinity. Gospel-light began in its zenith; and, as some say the
sun, was created in its meridian strength and lustre. But the
beginnings of philosophy were in a crepusculous obscurity; and it's
not yet scarce past the dawn. Divine truths were most pure in their
source; and time could not perfect what eternity began: our
divinity, like the grand-father of humanity, was born in the fulness
of time, and in the strength of its manly vigour: but philosophy and
arts commenced embryos, and are by times gradual accomplishments.
And therefore, what I cannot find in the leaves of former
inquisitors: I seek in the modern attempts of nearer authors. I
cannot receive Aristotle's ??S??????? ??????? [Greek:PISTOTATOI
PALAIOI], in so extensive an interpretation, as some would enlarge
it to and that discouraging maxim, nil dictum quod non dictum prius, 
hath little room in my estimation. Nor can I tie up my belief to the
letter of Solomon: except Copernicus be in the right, there hath
been something new under the sun; I'm sure, later times have seen
novelties in the heavens above it. I do not think, that all science
is tautology: the last ages have shown us, what antiquity never saw;
no not in a dream.



Chap. XXIII. 
It's queried whether there be any science in the sense of the
dogmatists: (1.) We cannot know anything to be the cause of another,
but from its attending it; and this way is not infallible; declared
by instances, especially from the philosophy of Descartes. All
things are mixed; and 'tis difficult to assign each cause its
distinct effects. (2.) There's no demonstration but where the
contrary is impossible. And we can scarce conclude so of any thing.

     Confidence of science is one great reason, we miss it: for on
this account presuming we have it everywhere, we seek it not where
it is; and therefore fall short of the object of our enquiry. Now to
give further check to dogmatical pretensions, and to discover the
vanity of assuming ignorance; we'll make a short enquiry, whether
there be any such thing as science in the sense of its assertors. In
their notion then, it is the knowledge of things in their true,
immediate, necessary causes: upon which I'll advance the following
observations.

     1. All knowledge of causes is deductive: for we know none by
simple intuition; but through the mediation of their effects. So
that we cannot conclude, anything to be the cause of another; but
from its continual accompanying it: for the causality itself is
insensible. But now to argue from a concomitancy to a causality, is
not infallibly conclusive: yea in this way lies notorious delusion.
For suppose, for instance, we had never seen more sun, than in a
cloudy day; and that the lesser lights had ne'er appeared: let us
suppose the day had alway broke with a wind, and had proportionably
varyed, as that did: had not he been a notorious skeptic, that
should question the causality? But we need not be beholding to so
remote a supposition: the French philosophy furnishes us with a
better instance. For, according to the principles of the illustrious
Descartes, there would be light, though the sun and stars gave none;
and a great part of what we now enjoy, is independent on their
beams. Now if this seemingly prodigious paradox, can be reconciled
to the least probability of conjecture, or may it be made but a
tolerable supposal; I presume, it may then win those that are of
most difficult belief, readily to yield, that causes in our account
the most palpable, may possibly be but uninfluential attendants;
since that there is not an instance can be given, wherein we opinion
a more certain efficiency. So then, according to the tenor of that
concinnous hypothesis, light being caused by the conamen of the
matter of the vortex, to recede from the centre of its motion: it is
an easy inference, that were there none of that fluid Ether, which
makes the body of the sun in the centre of our world, or should it
cease from action; yet the conatus of the circling matter would not
he considerably less, but according to the indispensable laws of
motion, must press the organs of sense as now; though it may be, not
with so smart an impulse. Thus we see, how there might be light
before the luminaries; and evening and morning before there was a
sun. So then we cannot infallibly assure ourselves of the truth of
the causes, that most obviously occur; and therefore the foundation
of scientifical procedure, is too weak for so magnificent a
superstructure.

     Besides, that the world's a mass of heterogeneous
subsistencies, and every part thereof a coalition of distinguishable
varieties; we need not go far for evidence: and that all things are
mixed, and causes blended by mutual involutions; I presume, to the
intelligent will be no difficult concession. Now to profound to the
bottom of these diversities, to assign each cause its distinct
effects, and to limit them by their just and true proportions; are
necessary requisites of science: and he that hath compast them, may
boast he hath out-done humanity. But for us to talk of knowledge,
from those few indistinct representations, which are made to our
grosser faculties, is flatulent vanity.

     2. We hold no demonstration in the notion of the dogmatist, but
where the contrary is impossible: for necessary is that, which
cannot be otherwise. Now, whether the acquisitions of any on this
side perfection, can make good the pretensions to so high strained
an infallibility, will be worth a reflection. And methinks, did we
but compare the miserable scantness of our capacities, with the vast
profoundity of things; both truth and modesty would teach us a more
wary and becoming language. Can nothing be otherwise, which we
conceive impossible to be so? Is our knowledge, so adequately
commensurate with the nature of things, as to justify such an
affirmation, that that cannot be, which we comprehend not? Our
demonstrations are levied upon principles of our own, not universal
nature: and, as my Lord Bacon notes, we judge from the analogy of
ourselves, not the universe. Now are not many things certain by one
man's principles, which are impossibie to the apprehensions of
another? Some things our juvenile reasons tenaciously adhere to;
which yet our maturer judgements disallow of: and that to mere
sensible discerners is impossible, which to the enlarged principles
of more advanced intellects is an easy variety: yea, that's absurd
in one philosophy, which is a worthy truth in another; and that is a
demonstration to Aristotle, which is none to Descartes. That every
fixed star is a sun; and that they are as distant from each other,
as we from some of them: that the sun, which lights us, is in the
centre of our world, and our Earth a planet that wheels about it:
that this globe is a star, only crusted over with the grosser
element, and that its centre is of the same nature with the sun:
that it may recover its light again, and shine amidst the other
luminaries: that our sun may be swallowed up of another, and become
a planet: all these, if we judge by common principles, or the rules
of vulgar philosophy, are prodig,ious impossibilities, and their
contradictories, as good as demonstrable: but yet to a reason
informed by Cartesianism, these have their probability. Thus, it may
be, the grossest absurdities to the philosophies of Europe, may be
justifiable assertions to that of China: and tis not unlikely, but
what's impossible to all humanity, may be possible in the
metaphysics, and physiology of angels. For the best principses,
excepting divine, and mathematical, are but hypotheses; within the
circle of which, we may indeed conclude many things, with security
from error but yet the greatest certainty, advanced from supposal,
is still but hypothetical. So that we may affirm, that things are
thus and thus, according to the principles we have espoused: but we
strangely forget ourselves, when we plead a necessity of their being
so in nature, and an impossibility of their being otherwise.



Chap. XXIV. 
Three instances of reputed impossibilities, which likely are not so,
as (1.) Of the power of imagination. (2.) Secret conveyance. (3.)
Sympathetic cures.

     Now to show how rashly we use to conclude things impossible;
I'll instance in some reputed impossibilities, which are only
strange and difficult performances. And the instances are three:
(1.) The power of one man's imagination upon another's. (2.)
Momentous conveyance at almost any distance. (3.) Sympathetic cures.

     (1 ) That the fancy of one man should bind the thoughts of
another, and determine them to their particular objects, will be
thought impossible: which yet, if we look deeply into the matter,
wants not its probability. By the power of advanced imagination it
may very probably be effected; and history abounds with instances.
I'll trouble the reader but with one; and the hands from which I had
it, make me secure of the truth on't. There was very lately a lad in
the University of Oxford, who being of very pregnant and ready
parts, and yet wanting the encouragement of preferment; was by his
poverty forced to leave his studies there, and to cast himself upon
the wide world for a livelihood. Now, his necessities growing daily
on him, and wanting the help of friends to relieve him; he was at
last forced to join himself to a company of vagabond Gypsies, whom
occasionally he met with, and to follow their trade for a
maintenance. Among these extravagant people, and by the insinuating
subtlety of his carriage, he quickly got so much of their love, and
esteem; as that they discovered to him their mystery: in the
practice of which, by the pregnancy of his wit and parts he soon
grew so good a proficient, as to be able to out-do his instructors.

     After he had been a pretty while exercised in the trade; there
chanced to ride by a couple of scholars who had formerly been of his
acquaintance. The Scholars had quickly spied out their old friend,
among the Gypsies; and their amazement to see him among such
society, had well-nigh discovered him: but by a sign he prevented
their owning him before that Crew: and taking one of them aside
privately, desired him with his friend to go to an Inn, not far
distant thence, promising there to come to them. They accordingly
went thither, and he follows: after their first salutations, his
friends enquire how he came to lead so odd a life as that was, and
to join himself with such a cheating beggarly company. The Scholar-
Gypsy having given them an account of the necessity, which drove him
to that kind of life; told them, that the people he went with were
not such impostors as they were taken for, but that they had a
traditional kind of learning among them, and could do wonders by the
power of imagination, and that himself had learnt much of their art,
and improved in further than themselves could. And to evince the
truth of what he told them, he said, he'd remove into another room,
leaving them to discourse together; and upon his return tell them
the sum of what they had talked of: which accordingly he performed,
giving them a full acount of what had passed between them in his
absence. The Scholars being amazed at so unexpected a discovery,
ernestly desired him to unriddle the mystery. In which he gave them
satisfaction, by telling them, that what he did was by the power of
imagination, his fancy binding theirs; and that himself had dictated
to them the discourse, they held together, while he was from them:
That there were warrantable ways of heightening the imagination to
that pitch, as to bind another's; and that when he had compassed the
whole secret, some parts of which he said he was yet ignorant of, he
intended to give the world an account of what he had learned.

     The judicious naturalist my Lord Bacon, speaks not unfavourably
of this way of secret influence: and that the spirit of one man hath
sometimes a power over that of another, I think is well attested by
experience. For some presences daunt and discourage us, when others
raise us to a brisk assurance. And I believe there are few but find
that some companies benumb and cramp them, so that in them they can
neither speak nor do anything that is handsome: whereas among more
congruous and suitable tempers they find themselves very lucky and
fortunate both in speech and action. Which things seem to me pretty
considerable evidence of immaterial intercourses between our
spirits. And that this kind of secret influence may be advanced to
so strange an operation in the imagination of one upon another, as
to fix and determine it.

     Now that this strange power of the imagination is no
impossibility; the wonderful signatures in the foetus caused by the
imagination of the mother, is no contemptible item. The sympathies
of laughing and gaping together, are resolved into this principle:
and I see not why the fancy of one man may not determine the
cogitation of another rightly qualified, as easily as his bodily
motion. Nor doth this influence seem more unreasonable, than that of
one string of a lute upon another, when a stroke on it causeth a
proportionable motion in the sympathizing consort, which is distant
from it and not sensibly touched. And if there be truth in this
notion; 'twill yield us a good account how angels inject thoughts
into our minds, and know our cogitations: and here we may see the
source of some kinds of fascination.

     Now, though in our inquiry after the reason of this operation,
we can receive no assistance from the common philosophy; yet the
Platonical hypothesis of a mundane soul will handsomely relieve us.
Or if any would rather have a mechanical account; I think it may
probably be made out some such way as follows. Imagination is inward 
sense; to sense is required a motion of certain filaments of the
brain; and consequently in imagination there's the like: they only
differing in this, that the motion of the one proceeds immediately
from external objects; but that of the other hath its immediate rise
within ourselves. Now then, when any part of the brain is strongly
agitated; that which is next and most capable to receive the motive
impress, must in like manner be moved. And we cannot conceive
anything more capable of motion, than the fluid matter, that's
interspersed among all bodies, and contiguous to them. So then, the
agitated pars of the brain begetting a motion in the proxime Ether;
it is propagated through the liquid medium; as we see the motion is
which is caused by a stone thrown into the water. And when the thus
moved matter meets with anything like that, from which it received
its primary impress; it will in like manner move it; as it is in
musical strings tuned unisons. And thus the motion being conveyed,
from the brain of one man to the fancy of another; it is there
received from the instrument of conveyance, the subtle matter; and
the same kind of strings being moved, and much what after the same
manner as in the first imaginant; the soul is awakened to the same
apprehensions, as were they that caused them. I pretend not to any
exactness or infallibility in this account, foreseeing many scruples
that must be removed to make it perfect: 'tis only an hint of the
possibility of mechanically solving the phenomenon; though very
likely it may require many other circumstances completely to make it
out. But 'tis not my business here to follow it: I leave it
therefore to receive accomplishment from maturer inventions.

     But (2.) To advance another instance. That men should confer at
very distant removes by an extemporary intercourse, is another
reputed impssibility; but yet there are some hints in natural
operations, that give us probability that it is feasible, and may be
compast without unwarrantable correspondence with the people of the
air. That a couple of needles equally touched by the same magnet,
being set in two dials exactly proportioned to each other, and
circumscribed by the letters of the alphabet, may effect this
magnale, hath considerable authorities to avouch it. The manner of
it is thus represented. Let the friends that would communicate, take
each a dial: and having appointed a time for their sympathetic
conference, let one move his impregnate needle to any letter in the
alphabet, and its affected fellow will precisely respect the same.
So that would I know what my friend would acquaint me with; 'tis but
observing the letters that are pointed at by my needle, and in their
order transcribing them from their sympathizing index, as its motion
direct's: and I may be assured that my friend described the same
with his: and that the words on my paper, are of his indicting. Now
though there will be some ill contrivance in a circumstance of this
invention, in that the thus impregnate needles will not move to, but
avert from each other (as ingenious Dr. Browne in his Pseudodoxia
Epidemica hath observed:) yet this cannot prejudice the main design
of this way of secret conveyance: since 'tis but reading counter to
the magnetic informer; and noting the letter which is most distant
in the abecedarian circle from that which the needle turns to, and
the case is not altered. Now though this pretty contrivance possibly
may not yet answer the expectation of inquisitive experiment; yet
'tis no despicable item, that by some other such way of magnetic
efficiency, it may hereafter with success be attempted, when magical
history shall be enlarged by riper inspections: and 'tis not
unlikely, but that present discoveries might be improved to the
performance.

     Besides this there is another way of secret conveyance that's
whispered about the world, the truth of which I vouch not, but the
possibility: it is conference at distance by sympathized hands. For
say the relators of this strange secret: the hands of two friends
being allied by the transferring of flesh from one into another, and
the place of the letters mutually agreed on; the least prick in the
hand of one, the other will be sensible of, and that in the same
part of his own. And thus the distant friend, by a new kind of
chiromancy, may read in his own hand what his correspondent had set
down in his. For instance, would I in London acquaint my intimate in
Paris, that I am well: I would then prick that part where I had
appointed the letter [I] and doing so in another place to signify
that word was done, proceed to [A] thence to [M] and so on, till I
had finished what I intended to make known.

     Now if these seemingly prodigious fancies of secret conveyances
prove to be but possible, they will be warrantable presumption of
the verity of the former instance: since 'tis as easily conceivable,
that there should be communications between the fancies of men, as
either the impregnate needles, or sympathized hands.

     And there is an instance still behind, which is more credible
than either, and gives probability to them all.

     (3.) Then there is a magnetic way of curing wounds by anointing
the weapon, and that the wound is affected in like manner as is the
extravenate blood by the sympathetic medicine, as to matter of fact
is with circumstances of good evidence asserted by the noble Sir K.
Digby in his ingenious discourse on the subject. The reason of this
magnale he attempts by mechanism, and endeavours to make it out by
atomical aporrheas, which passing from the cruentate cloth or weapon
to the wound, and being incorporated with the particles of the salve
carry them in their embraces to the affected part: where the
medicinal atoms entering together with the effluviums of the blood,
do by their subtle insinuation better effect the cure, than can be
done by any grosser application. The particular way of their
conveyance, and their regular direction is handsomely explicated by
that learned knight, and recommended to the ingenious by most witty
and becoming illustrations. It is out of my way here to enquire
whether the anima mundi be not a better account, than any mechanical
solutions. The former is more desperate; the latter perhaps hath
more of ingenuity, than good ground of satisfaction. It is enough
for me that de facto there is such an intercourse between the
magnetic unguent and the vulnerated body, and I need not be
solicitous of the cause. These theories I presume will not be
importunate to the ingenious: and therefore I have taken the liberty
(which the quality of a essay will well enough allow of) to touch
upon them, though seemingly collateral to my scope. And yet I think,
they are but seemingly so, since they do pertinently illustrate my
design, viz. That what seems impossible to us, may not be so in
nature; and therefore the dogmatist wants this to complete his
demonstration, that 'tis impossible to be otherwise.

     Now I intend not anything here to invalidate the certainty of
truths either mathematical or divine. These are superstructed on
principles that cannot fail us, except our faculties do constantly
abuse us. Our religious foundations are fastened at the pillars of
the intellectual world, and the grand articles of our belief as
demonstrable as geometry. Nor will ever either the subtle attempts
of the resolved atheist, or the passionate hurricanes of the wild 
enthusiast, any more be able to prevail against the reason our faith
is built on, than the blustering winds to blow out the sun. And for
mathematical sciences, he that doubts their certainty, hath need of
a dose of hellebore. Nor yet can the dogmatist make much of these
concessions in favour of his pretended science; for our discourse
comes not within the circle of the former: and for the later, the
knowledge we have of the mathematics, hath no reason to elate us;
since by them we know but numbers, and figures, creatures of our
own, and are yet ignorant of our maker's.



Chap. XXV. 
(3.) We cannot know anything in nature without knowing the first
springs of natural motions; and these we are ignorant of. (4.)
Causes are so connected that we cannot know any without knowing all;
declared by instances.

     But (3.) We cannot know anything of nature but by an analysis
of it to its true initial causes: and till we know the first springs
of natural motions, we are still but ignorants. These are the
alphabet of science, and nature cannot be read without them. Now who
dares pretend to have seen the prime motive causes, or to have had a
view of nature, while she lay in her simple originals? We know
nothing but effects, and those but by our senses. Nor can we judge
of their causes, but by proportion to palpable causalities,
conceiving them like those within the sensible horizon. Now 'tis no
doubt with the considerate, but that the rudiments of nature are
very unlike the grosser appearances. Thus in things obvious, there's
but little resemblance between the mucous sperm, and the completeed
animal. The egg is not like the oviparous production: nor the
corrupted muck like the creature that creeps from it. There's but
little similitude betwixt a terreous humidity, and plantal
germinations; nor do vegetable derivations ordinarily resemble their
simple seminalities. So then, since there's so much dissimilitude
between cause and effect in the more palpable phenomena, we can
expect no less between them, and their invisible efficients. Now had
our senses never presented us with those obvious seminal principles
of apparent generations, we should never have suspected that a plant
or animal could have proceeded from such unlikely materials: much
less, can we conceive or determine the uncompounded initials of
natural productions, in the total silence of our senses. And though
the grand secretary of nature, the miraculous Descartes hath here
infinitely out-done all the philosophers that went before him, in
giving a particular and analytical account of the universal fabric:
yet he intends his principles but for hypotheses, and never pretends
that things are really or necessarily, as he hath supposed them: but
that they may be admitted pertinently to solve the phenomena, and
are convenient supposals for the use of life. Nor can any further
account be expected from humanity, but how things possibly may have
been made consonantly to sensible nature: but infallibly to
determine how they truly were effected, is proper to him only that
saw them in the chaos, and fashioned them out of that confused mass.
For to say, the principles of nature must needs be such as our
philosophy makes them, is to set bounds to omnipotence, and to
confine infinite power and wisdom to our shallow models.

     (4.) According to the notion of the dogmatist, we know nothing;
except we knew all things; and he that pretends to science affects
an omniscience. For all things being linked together by an
uninterrupted chain of causes; and every single motion owning
dependence on such a syndrome of prerequired motors: we can have no
true knowledge of any, except we comprehend all, and could
distinctly pry into the whole ntethod of causal concatenations. Thus
we cannot know the cause of any one motion in a watch, unless we
were acquainted with all its motive dependences, and had a
distinctive comprehension of the whole mechanical frame. And would
we know but the most contemptible plant that grows, almost all
things that have a being, must contribute to our knowledge: for,
that to the perfect science of anything it's necessary to know all
its causes; is both reasonable in itsself, and the sense of the
dogmatist. So that, to the knowledge of the poorest simple, we must
first know its efficient, the manner, and method of its efformation,
and the nature of the plastic. To the comprehending of which, we
must have a full prospect into the whole archidoxis of nature's
secrets, and the immense profundities of occuit philosophy: in which
we know nothing till we completely ken all magnetic, and sympathetic
energies, and their most hidden causes. And (2.) If we contemplate a
vegetable in its material principle, and look on it as made of
earth; we must have the true theory of the nature of that element,
or we miserably fail of our scientifical aspirings, and while we can
only say, 'tis cold and dry, we are pitiful knowers. But now, to
profound into the physics of this heterogeneous mass, to discern the
principles of its constitution, and to discover the reason of its
diversities, are absolute requisites of the science we aim at. Nor
can we tolerably pretend to have those without the knowledge of
minerals, the causes and manner of their concretions, and among the
rest, the magnet, with its amazing properties. This directs us to
the pole, and thence our disquisition is led to the whole system of
the heavens: to the knowledge of which, we must know their motions,
and the causes, and manner of their rotations, as also the reasons
of all the planetary phenomena, and of the comets, their nature, and
the causes of all their irregular appearings. To these, the
knowledge of the intricate doctrine of motion, the powers,
proportions, and laws thereof, is requisite. And thus we are engaged
in the objects of geometry and arithmetic; yea the whole
mathematics, must be contributary, and to them all nature pays a
subsidy. Besides, piants are partly materialed of water, with which
they are furnisht either from subterranean fountains, or the clouds.
Now to have the true theory of the former, we must trace the nature
of the sea, its origin; and hereto its remarkable motions of flux
and reflux. This again directs us to the moon, and the rest of the
celestial phaseis. The moisture that comes from the clouds is drawn
up in vapours: to the scientifical discernment of which, we must
know the nature and manner of that action, their suspense in the
middle region, the qualities of that place, and the causes and
manner of their precipitating thence again: and so the reason of the
spherical figure of the drops; the causes of windes, hail, snow,
thunder, lightning, with all other igneous appearances, with the
whole physiology of meteors must be enquired into. And again (3.) In
our disquisition into the formal causes, the knowledge of the nature
of colours, is necessary to complete the science. To be informed of
this, we must know what light is; and light being effected by a
motion on the organs of sense, 'twill be a necessary requisite, to
understand the nature of our sensitive faculties, and to them the
essence of the soul, and other spiritual subsistences. The manner
how it is materially united, and how it is aware of corporeal
motion. The seat of sense, and the place where 'tis principally
affected: which cannot be known but by the anatomy of our parts, and
the knowledge of their mechanical structure. And if further (4.) we
contemplate the end of the effect we instanced in, its principal
final cause, being the glory of its maker, leads us into divinity;
and for its subordinate, as 'tis designed for alimental sustenance
to living creatures, and medicinal uses to man, we are conducted
into zoography, and the whole body of physic. Thus then, to the
knowledge of the most contemptible effect in nature, 'tis necessary
to know the whole syntax of causes, and their particular
circumstances, and modes of action. Nay, we know nothing, till we
know ourselves, which are the summary of all the world without us,
and the index of the creation. Nor can we know ourselves without the
physiology of corporeal nature, and the metaphysics of souls and
angels. So then, every science borrows from all the rest; and we
cannot attain any single one, without the encyclopedia. I have been
the more diffuse and particular upon this head, because it affords a
catalogue of the instances of our ignorance; and therefore though it
may seem too largely spoken to in relation to the particular I am
treating of, yet 'tis not improper in a more general reference to
the subject.



Chap. XXVI. 
All our science comes in at our senses. Their infallibility inquired
into. The authors design in this last particular.

     The knowledge we have comes from our senses, and the dogmatist
can go no higher for the original of his certainty. Now let the
sciolist tell me, why things must needs be so, as his individual
senses represent them. Is he sure, that objects are not otherwise
sensed by others, than they are by him? And why must his sense be
the infallible criterion? it may be, what is white to us, is black
to Negroes, and our angels to them are fiends. Diversity of
constitution, or other circumstances varies the sensation, and to
them of Java, pepper is cold. And though we agree in a common name,
yet it may be, I have the same representation from yellow, that
another hath from green. Thus two look upon an alabaster statue; he
calls it white, and I assent to the appellation: but how can I
discover, that his inward sense on't is the same that mine is? It
may be alabaster is represented to him, as jet is to me, and yet it
is white to us both. We accord in the name: but it's beyond our
knowledge, whether we do so in the conception answering it. Yea, the
contrary is not without its probability. For though the images,
motions, or whatever else is the cause of sense, may be alike as
from the object; yet may the representations be varied according to
the nature and quality of the recipient. That's one thing to us
looking through a tube, which is another to our naked eyes. The same
things seem otherwise through a green glass, than they do through a
red. Thus objects have a different appearance, when the eye is
violently any way distorted, from that they have, when our organs
are in their proper site and figure, and some extraordinary
alterations in the brain duplicate that which is but a single object
to our undistempered sentient. Thus, that's of one colour to us
standing in one place, which hath a contrary aspect in another: as
in those versatile representations in the neck of a dove, and folds
of scarlet. And as great diversity might have been exemplified in
the other senses, but for brevity I omit them. Now then, since so
many various circumstances concur to every individual constitution,
and every man's senses, differing as much from others in its figure,
colour, site, and infinite other particularities in the
organization, as any one man's can from itself, through divers
accidental variations: it cannot well be supposed otherwise, but
that the conceptions conveyed by them must be as diverse. Thus, one
man's eyes are more protuberant, and swelling out; another's more
sunk and depressed. One man's bright, and sparkling, and as it were
swimming in a subtle, lucid moisture; another's more dull and heavy,
and destitute of that spirituous humidity. The colour of men's eyes
is various, nor is there less diversity in their bigness. And if we
look further into the more inward constitution, there's more variety
in the internal configurations, than in the visible outside. For let
us consider the different qualities of the optic nerves, humours,
tumours and spirits; the diverse figurings of the brain; the
strings, or filaments thereof; their difference in tenuity and
aptness for motion: and as many other circumstances, as there are
individuals in human nature; all these are diversified according to
the difference of each crasis, and are as unlike, as our faces. From
these diversities in all likelihood will arise as much difference in
the manner of the reception of the images, and consequently as
various sensations. So then, how objects are represented to myself,
I cannot be ignorant, being conscious to mine own cogitations; but
in what manner they are received, and what impresses they make upon
the so differing organs of another, he only knows, that feels them.

     There is an obvious, an easy objection, which I have
sufficiently caveated against; and with the considerate it will
signify no more than the inadvertency of the objectors. 'Twill be
thought by sight discerners a ridiculous paradox, that all men
should not conceive of the objects of sense alike; since their
agreement in the appellation seems so strong an argument of the
identity of the sentiment. All, for instance, say, that snow is
white, and that jet is black, is doubted by none. But yet 'tis more
than any man can determine, whether his conceit of what he calls
white, be the same with another's; or whether, the notion he hath of
one colour be not the same another hath of a very diverse one. So
then, to direct all against the knowing ignorant, what he hath of
sensible evidence, the very ground work of his demonstration, is but
the knowledge of his own resentment: but how the same things appear
to others, they only know, that are conscious to them; and how they
are in themselves only he that made them.

     Thus have I in this last particular played with the dogmatist
in a personated skepticism: and would not have the design of the
whole discourse measured by the seeming tendency of this part on't.
The sciolist may here see, that what he counts of all things most
absurd and irrational, hath yet considerable show of probability to
plead its cause, and it may be more than some of his presumed
demonstrations. 'Tis irreprehensible in physicians to cure their
patient of one disease by casting him into another, less desperate.
And I hope, I shall not deserve the frown of the ingenuous for my
innocent intentions; having in this only imitated the practice of
bending a crooked stick as much the other way, to straighten it. And
if by this verge to the other extreme, I can bring the opinionative
confident but half the way, viz, that discreet modest equipoise of
judgment, that becomes the sons of Adam; I have compassed what I aim 
at.



Chap. XXVII. 
Considerations against dogmatizing. (1.) 'Tis the effect of
ignorance. (2.) It inhabits with untamed passions, and an ungoverned
spirit. (3.) It is the great disturber of the world. (4.) It is ill
manners, and immodesty. (5.) It holds men captive in error. (6.) It
betrays a narrowness of spirit.

     I expect but little success of all this upon the dogmatist; his
opinioned assurance is paramount to argument, and 'tis almost as
easy to reason him out of a fever, as out of this disease of the
mind. I hope for better fruit from the more generous vertuosi, to
such I appeal against dogmatizing, in the following considerations.
That's well spent upon impartial ingenuity, which is lost upon
resolved prejudice.

     (1.) Opinionative confidence is the effect of ignorance, and
were the sciolist persuaded so, I might spare my further reasons
against it: 'tis affectation of knowledge, that makes him confident
he hath it; and his confidence is counter-evidence to his
pretensions to knowledge. He is the greatest ignorant, that knows
not that he is so: for 'tis a good degree of science, to be sensible
that we want it. He that knows most of himself, knows least of his
knowledge, and the exercised understanding is conscious of its
disability. Now he that is so, will not lean too assuredly on that,
which hath so frequently deceived him, nor build the castle of his
intellectual security, in the air of opinions. But for the shallow
passive intellects, that were never engaged in a thorough search of
verity, 'tis such are the confidents that engage their irrepealable
assents to every slight appearance. Thus mere sensible conceivers
make every thing they hold a sacrament, and the silly vulgar are
sure of all things. There was no theorem in the mathematics more
certain to Archimedes, than the Earth's immovable quiescence seems
to the multitude: nor than did the impossibility of antipodes, to
antique ages. And if great philosophers doubt of many things, which
popular dijudicants hold as certain as their creeds, I suppose
ignorance itself will not say, it is because they are more ignorant.
Superficial pedants will swear their controversal uncertainties,
while wiser heads stand in bivio. Opinions are the rattles of
immature intellects, but the advanced reasons have outgrown them.
True knowledge is modest and wary; 'tis ignorance that is so bold,
and presuming. Thus those that never travailed beyond one horizon,
will not be persuaded that the world hath any country better than
their own: while they that have had a view of other regions, are not
so confidently persuaded of the precedency of that they were bred
in, but speak more indifferently of the laws, manners, commodities,
and customs of their native soil: so they that never peeped beyond
the common belief in which their easy understandings were at first
indoctrinated, are strongly assured of the truth, and comparative
excellency of their receptions while the larger souls, that have
travelled the divers climates of opinions, are more cautious in
their resolves, and more sparing to determine. And let the most
confirmed dogmatist profound far into his endeared opinions, and
I'll warrant him 'twill be an effectual cure of confidence.

     (2.) Confidence in opinions evermore dwells with untamed
passions, and is maintained upon the depraved obstinacy of an
ungoverned spirit. He's but a novice in the art of autocracy, that
cannot castigate his passions in reference to those presumptions,
and will come as far short of wisdom as science: for the judgement
being the leading power, and director of action, if it be swayed by
the over-bearings of passion, and stored with lubricous opinions
instead of clearly conceived truths, and be peremptorily resolved in
them, the practice will be as irregular, as the conceptions
erroneous. Opinions hold the stirrup, while vice mounts into the
saddle.

     (3.) Dogmatizing is the great disturber both of ourselves and
the world without us: for while we wed an opinion, we resolvedly
engage against every one that opposeth it. Thus every man, being in
some of his opinionative apprehensions singular, must be at variance
with all men. Now every opposition of our espoused opinions furrows
the sea within us, and discomposeth the mind's serenity. And what
happiness is there in a storm of passions? On this account the
skeptics affected an indifferent a quipondious neutrality as the
only means to their ataraxia, and freedom from passionate
disturbances. Nor were they altogether mistaken in the way, to their
designed felicity, but came short on't, by going beyond it: for if
there be a repose naturally attainable this side the stars, there is
no way we can more hopefully seek it in. We can never be at rest,
while our quiet can be taken from us by every thwarting our
opinions: nor is that content an happiness, which every one can rob
us of. There is no felicity, but in a fixed stability. Nor can
genuine constancy be built upon rowling foundations. 'Tis true
staidness of mind, to look with an equal regard on all things; and
this unmoved apathy in opinionative uncertainties, is a warrantable
piece of stoicism.

     Besides, this immodest obstinacy in opinions, hath made the
world a Babel; and given birth to disorders, like those of the
chaos. The primitive fight of elements doth fitly emblem that of
opinions, and those proverbial contrarieties may be reconciled, as
soon as peremptory contenders. That hence grow schisms, heresies,
and anomalies beyond arithmetic, I could wish were more difficult to
be proved. 'Twere happy for a distempered church, if evidence were
not so near us. 'Tis zeal for opinions that hath filled our
hemisphere with smoke and darkness, and by a dear experience we know
the fury of those flames it hath kindled. 'Tis lamentable that homo
homini daemon, should be a proverb among the professors of the
cross; and yet I fear it is as verifiable among them, as of those
without the pale of visible Christianity. I doubt we have lost St.
John's sign of regeneration: "By this we know that we are passed
from death to life, that we love one another," is I fear, to few a
sign of their spiritual resurrection. If our returning Lord, shall
scarce find faith on earth, where will he look for charity? It is a
stranger this side the region of love, and blessedness; bitter zeal
for opinions hath consumed it. Mutual agreement and endearments was
the badge of primitive believers, but we may be known by the
contrary criterion. The union of a sect within itself, is a pitiful
charity: it's no concord of Christians, but a conspiracy against
Christ; and they that love one another, for their opinionative
concurrencies, love for their own sakes, not their Lord's: not
because they have his image, but because they bear one another's.
What a stir is there for mint, anise, and cummin controversies,
while the great practical fundamentals are unstudied, unobserved?
What eagerness in the prosecution of disciplinarian uncertainties,
when the love of God and our neighbour, those evangelical
unquestionables, are neglected? 'Tis this hath consumed the
nutriment of the great and more necessary verities, and bred
differences that are past any accommodation, but that of the last
days decisions. The sight of that day will resolve us, and make us
ashamed of our petty quarrels.

     Thus opinions have rent the world asunder, and divided it
almost into indivisibles. Had Heraclitus lived now, he had wept
himself into marble, and Democritus would have broke his spleen. Who
can speak of such fooleries without a satire, to see aged infants so
quarrel at putpin, and the doting world grown child again? How fond
are men of a bundle of opinions, which are no better than a bag of
cherrystones? How do they scramble for their nuts, and apples, and
how zealous for their petty victories? Methinks those grave
contenders about opinionative trifles, look like aged Socrates upon
his boy's hobbyhorse, or like something more ludicrous: since they
make things their seria, which are scarce tolerable in their
sportful intervals.

     (4.) To be confident in opinions is ill manners and immodesty;
and while we are peremptory in our persuasions, we accuse all of
ignorance and error, that subscribe not our assertions. The
dogmatist gives the lie to all dissenting apprehenders, and
proclaims his judgement fittest, to be the intellectual standard.
This is that spirit of immorality, that saith unto dissenters, stand
off, I am more orthodox than thou art: a vanity more capital than
error. And he that affirms that things must needs be as he
apprehends them, implies that none can be right till they submit to
his opinions, and take him for their director.

     (5.) Obstinacy in opinions holds the dogmatist in the chains of
error, without hope of emancipation. While we are confident of all
things, we are fatally deceived in most. He that assures himself he
never errs, will always err; and his presumptions will render all
attempts to inform him, ineffective. We use not to seek further for
what we think we are possessed of; and when falsehood is without
suspicion embraced in the stead of truth, and with confidence
retained, verity will be rejected as a supposed error, and
irreconcilably be hated, because it opposeth what is truly so.

     (6.) It betrays a poverty and narrowness of spirit, in the
dogmatical assertors. There are a set of pedants that are born to
slavery. But the more generous spirit preserves the liberty of his
judgement, and will not pen it up in an opinionative dungeon; with
an equal respect he examines all things, and judgeth as impartially
as Rhadamanth: when as the pedant can hear nothing but in favour of
the conceits he is amorous of; and cannot see, but out of the grates
of his prison; the determinations of the nobler mind, are but
temporary, and he holds them, but till better evidence repeal his
former apprehensions. He won't defile his assent by prostituting it
to every conjecture, or stuff his belief; with the luggage of
uncertainties. The modesty of his expression renders him infallible;
and while he only saith, he thinks so, he cannot be deceived, or
ever assert a falsehood. But the wise Monsieur Charron hath fully
discoursed of this universal liberty, and saved me the labour of
enlarging. Upon the review of my former considerations, I cannot
quarrel with his motto: in a sense je ne sais, is a justifiable
skepticism, and not misbecoming a candidate of wisdom. Socrates in
the judgement of the oracle knew more than all men, who in his own
knew the least of all.



An Apology For Philosophy.

     It is the glory of philosophy, that ignorance and frenzy are
its enemies; and it may seem less needful to defend it against
stupid and enthusiastic ignorants. However, least my discourse
should be an advantage in the hands of fancy and folly; or, which is
the greater mischief, lest it should discourage any of the more
enlarged spirits from modest enquiries into nature; I'll subjoin
this brief apology.

     If philosophy be uncertain, the former will considently
conclude it vain; and the later may he in danger of pronouncing the
same on their pains, who seek it; if after all their labour they
must reap the wind, mere opinion and conjecture.

     But there's a part of philosophy, that owes no answer to the
charge. The skeptics' ????? ?S??? ????S??[Greek:PANTA ESTIN
AORISTA], must have the qualification of an exception; and at least
the mathematics must be privileged from the indictment. Neither are
we yet at so deplorable a loss, in the other parts of what we call
science; but that we may meet with what will content ingenuity, at
this distance from perfection, though all things will not completely
satisfy strict and rigid enquiry. Philosophy indeed cannot
immortalize us, or free us from the inseparable attendants on this
state, ignorance, and error. But shall we malign it, because it
entitles us not to an omniscience? Is it just to condemn the
physician, because Hephestion died? Complete knowledge is reserved
to gratify our glorified faculties. We are ignorant of some things
from our specifical incapacity; of more from our contracted
depravities: and 'tis no fault in the spectacles, that the blind man
sees not. Shall we, like sullen children, because we have not what
we would; contemn what the benignty of heaven offers us? Do what we
can, we shall be imperfect in all our attainments; and shall we
scornfully neglect what we may reach, because some things are denied
us? 'Tis madness, to refuse the largesses of divine bounty on earth,
because there is not an heaven in them. Shall we not rejoice at the
gladsome approach of day, because it's overcast with a cloud and
followed by the obscurity of night? All sublunary vouchsafements
have their alloy of a contrary; and uncertainty, in another kind, is
the annex of all things this side the Sun. Even crowns and diadems,
the most splendid parts of terrene attains, are akin to that, which
to day is in the field, and to morrow is cut down, and withered: he
that enjoyed them, and knew their worth, excepted them not out of
the charge of universal vanity. And yet the politician thinks they
deserve his pains; and is not discouraged at the inconstancy of
human affairs, and the lubricity of his subject.

     He that looks for perfection, must seek it above the empyreum;
it is reserved for glory. It's that alone, which needs not the
advantage of a foil: defects seem as necessary to our now happiness,
as their opposites. The most refulgent colours are the result of
light and shadows: Venus was never the less beautiful for her mole.
And 'tis for the majesty of nature, like the Persian kings,
sometimes to cover, and not alway to prostrate her beauties to the
naked view: yea, they contract a kind of splendour from the
seemingly obscuring veil; which adds to the enravishments of her
transported admirers. He alone sees all things with an unshadowed
comprehensive vision, who eminently is all: only the God of nature
perfectly knows her: and light without darkness is the
incommunicable claim of him, that dwells in lig ht inaccessible.
'Tis no disparagement to philosophy, that it cannot deify us, or
make good the impossible promise of the primitive deceiver. It is
that, which she owns. above her, that must perfectly remake us after
the image of our maker.

     And yet those raised contemplations of God and nature,
wherewith philosophy doth acquaint us; enlarge and ennoble the
spirit, and infinitely advance it above an ordinary level. The soul
is alway like the objects of its delight and converse. A prince is
as much above a peasant in spirit, as condition: and man as far
transcends the beasts in largeness of desire, as dignity of nature
and employment. While we only converse with earth, we are like it;
that is, unlike ourselves: but when engaged in more refined and
intellectual entertainments; we are somewhat more, than this narrow
circumference of flesh speaks us. And, methinks, those generous
vertuosi, who dwell in an higher region than other mortals, should
make a middle species between the Platonical T???[Greek:THEOI], and
common humanity. Even our age in variety of glorious examples, can
confute the conceit, that souls are equal: and the only instance of
that constellation of illustrious worthies, which compose the The
ROYAL SOCIETY, is enough to strike dead the opinion of the world's
decay, an conclude it in its prime. Reflecting upon which great
persons, methinks I could easily believe, that men may differ from
one another, as much as angels do from unbodied souls. And perhaps
more can be pleaded for such a metaphysical innovation, than can for
a specifical diversity among the beasts. Such as these, being in
good part freed from the entanglements of sense and body, are
employed iike the spirits above; in contemplating the divine
artifice and wisdom in the works of nature; a kind of anticipation
of the ethereal happiness and employment. This is one part of the
life of souls.

     While we indulge to the sensitive or plantal life, our delights
are common to us with the creatures beam us: and 'tis likely, they
exceed us as much in them as in the senses their subjects; and
that's a poor happiness for man to aim at, in which beasts are his
superiors. But those Mercurial spirits which were only lent the
earth to show men their folly in admiring it; possess delights of a
nobler make and nature, which as it were antedate immortality; and
at an humble distance, resemble the joys of the world of light and
glory. The sun and stars, are not the worlds eyes, but these: the
celestial Argus cannot glory in such an universal view. These out-
travel theirs, and their monarch's beams: passing into vortexes
beyond their light and influence; and with an easy twinkle of an
intellectual eye look into the centre, which is obscured from the
upper luminaries. This is somewhat like the image of omnipresence:
and what the hermetical philosophy saith of God, is in a sense
verifiable of the thus ennobled soul, that its centre is everywhere,
but its circumference nowhere. This is the ???T???S ??T?O??S [Greek:
ALETHINOS ANTHROPOS]; and what Plotinus calls so, the divine life,
is somewhat more. Those that live but to the lower concupiscible,
and relish no delights but sensual; it's by the favour of a
metaphor, that we call them men. As Aristotle saith of brutes, they
Have but the ??µ?µata a????p???? ???? [Greek: Minemata anthropines
zoes], only some shown and apish imitations of human; and have
little more to justify their title to rationality, than those mimick
animals, the supposed posterity of Cham: who, had they retained the
privilege of speech, which some of the fathers say they owned before
the fall; it may be they would plead their cause with them, and have
laid strong claim to a parity. Such, as these, are philosophy's
maligners, who computing the usefulness of all things, by what they
bring to their barns, and treasures; stick not to pronounce the most
generous contemplations, needless unprofitable subtleties: and they
might with as good reason say, that the light of their eyes was a
superfluous provision of nature, because it fills not their bellies.

     Thus the greatest part of miserable humanity is lost in earth:
and, if man be an inversed.plant; these are inversed men; who
forgetting that sursum, which nature writ in their foreheads, take
their roots in this sordid element. But the philosophical soul is an
inverted pyramid; earth hath but a point of this ethereal cone.
Aquila non captat muscas, the royal eagle flies not but at noble
game; and a young Alexander will not play but with monarchs. He that
hath been cradled in majesty, and used to crowns and sceptres; will
not leave the throne to play with beggars at put-pin, or be fond of
tops and cherrystones: neither will a spirit that dwells with stars,
dabble in this impurer mud; or stoop to be a play-fellow and co-
partner in delights with the creatures that have nought but animal.
And though it be necessitated by its relation to flesh to a
terrestrial converse; yet 'tis like the sun, without contaminating
its beams. For, though the body by a kind of magnetism be drawn down
to this sediment of universal dregs; yet the thus impregnate spirit
contracts a verticity to objects above the pole: and, like as in a
falling torch, though the grosser materials hasten to their element;
yet the flame aspires, and, could it master the dulness of its load,
would carry it off from the stupid earth it tends to. Thus do those
enobled souls justify Aristotle's ???? ???a?e? ?a? ?e??? µ????
[Greek: Noys thyrathen kai theois monon]; and in alloyed sense that
title, which the stoics give it, of ap??pa?µa ?e?? [Greek:apospasma
theoy]. If we say, they are not in their bodies, but their bodies in
them; we have the authority of the divine Plato to vouch us: and by
the favour of an easy simile we may affirm them to be to the body,
as the light of a candle to the gross, and feculent snuff; which, as
it is not pent up in it, so neither doth it partake of its stench
and impurity. Thus, as the roman orator elegantly descants,
erigimur, & latiores fieri videmur; humana despicimus,
contemplantesq; supera & coelestia, hec nostra, ut exigua, & minima,
contemnimus.

     And yet there's an higher degree, to which philosophy sublimes
us. For, as it teacheth a generous contempt of what the grovelling
desires of creeping mortals idolize and dote on; so it raiseth us to
love and admire an object, that is as much above terrestrial as
infinite can make it. If Plutarch may have credit, the observation
of natures harmony in the celestial motions was one of the first
inducements to the belief of a God: and a greater than he affirms,
that the visible things of the creation declare him, that made them.
What knowledge we have of them we have in a sense of their author.
His face cannot be beheld by creature-optics, without the allay of a
reflexion; and nature is one of those mirrors, that represents him
to us. And now the more we know of him, the more we love him, the
more we are like him, the more we admire him. 'Tis here, that
knowledge wonders; and there's an admiration, that's not the
daughter of ignorance. This indeed stupidly gazeth at the unwonted
effect: but the philosophic passion truly admires and adores the
supreme efficient. The wonders of the almighty are not seen, but by
those that go down into the deep. The heavens declare their maker's
glory; and philosophy theirs, which by a grateful rebound returns to
its original source. The twinkling spangles, the ornaments of the
upper world, lose their beauty and magnificence, while they are but
the objects of our narrowed senses: by them the half is not told us;
and vulgar spectators see them, but as a confused huddle of petty
illuminants. But philosophy doth right to those immense spheres, and
advantageously represents their glories, both in the vastness of
their proportions, and regularity of their motions. If we would see
the wonders of the globe we dwell in; philosophy must rear us above
it. The works of God speak forth his mighty praise: a speech not
understood, but by those that know them.

     The most artful melody receives but little tribute of honour
from the gazing beasts; it requires skill to relish it. The most
delicate musical accents of the Indians, to us are but inarticulate
hummings; as questionless are ours to their otherwise tuned organs.
Ignorance of the notes and proportions, renders all harmony
unaffecting. A gay puppet pleaseth children more, than the exactest
piece of unaffected art: it requires some degrees of perfection, to
admire what is truly perfect, as it's said to be an advance in
oratory to relish Cicero. Indeed the unobservant multitude, may have
some general confused apprehensions of a kind of beauty, that gilds
the outside frame of the universe: but they are natures coarser
wares, that lie on the stall, exposed to the transient view of every
common eye; her choicer riches are locked up only for the sight of
them, that will buy at the expence of sweat and oil. Yea, and the
visible creation is far otherwise apprehended by the philosophical
inquirer, than the unintelligent vulgar. Thus the physician looks
with another eye on the medicinal herb, than the grazing ox, which
swoops it in with the common grass: and the swine may see the pearl,
which yet he values but with the ordinary muck; it's otherwise
prized by the skilful jeweller.

     And from this last article, I think, I may conclude the charge,
which hot-brained folly layes in against philosophy; that it leads
to irreligion, frivolous and vain. I dare say, next after the divine
word, it's one of the best friends to piety. Neither is it any more
justly accountable for the impious irregularities of some, that have
paid an homage to its shrine; than religion itself for the
extravagances both opinionative and practic of high pretenders to
it. It is a vulgar conceit, that philosophy holds a confederacy with
atheism itself, but most injurious: for nothing can better antidote
us against it: and they may as well say, that physicians are the
only murderers. A philosophic atheist, is as good sense as a divine
one: and I dare say the proverb, ubi tres medici, duo athei, is a
scandal. I think the original of this conceit might be, that the
students of nature, conscious to her more cryptic ways of working,
resolve many strange effects into the nearer efficiency of second
causes; which common ignorance and superstition attribute to the
immediate causality of the first: thinking it to derogate from the
divine power, that anything which is above their apprehensions,
should not be reckoned above nature's activity; though it be but His
instrument, and works nothing but as empowered from Him. Hence they
violently declaim against all, that will not acknowledge a miracle
in every extraordinary effect, as setting nature in the throne of
God; and so it's an easy step to say, they deny Him. When as indeed,
nature is but the chain of second causes; and to suppose second
causes without a first, is beneath the logic of Gotham. Neither can
they (who, to make their reproach of philosophy more authentic
allege the authority of an apostle to conclude it vain) upon any
whit more reasonable terms make good their charge; since this
allegation stands in force but against its abuse, corrupt sophistry,
or traditionary impositions, which lurked under the mask of so
serious a name: at the worst, the text will never warrant an
universal conclusion any more; than that other, where the apostle
speaks of silly women, (who yet are the most rigid urgers of this)
can justly blot the sex with an unexceptionable note of infamy.

     Now, what I have said here in this short apology for
philosophy, is not so strictly verifiable of any that I know, as the
Cartesian. The entertainment of which among truly ingenuous
unpossessed spirits, renders an after-commendation superfluous and
impertinent. It would require a wit like its authors, to do it right
in an encomium. The strict rationality of the hypothesis in the
main, and the critical coherence of its parts, I doubt not but will
bear it down to posterity with a glory, that shall know no term, but
the universal ruins. Neither can the pedantry, or prejudice of the
present age, any more obstruct its motion in that supreme sphere,
wherein its desert hath placed it; than can the howling wolves pluck
cynthia from her orb; who regardless of their noise, securely glides
through the undisturbed ether. Censure here will disparage itself,
not it. He that accuseth the sun of darkness, shames his own blind
eyes; not its light. The barking of cynics at that hero's chariot-
wheels, will not sully the glory of his triumphs. But I shall
supersede this endless attempt: sunbeams best commend themselves.

FINIS





