




THE NEWGATE CALENDAR


Edited by Donal Ó Danachair

Volume 3








Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2009
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain






 

A View Of New Newgate Prison



CONTENTS


HENRY COOK  Notorious Horse-Stealer and Highwayman, executed at Tyburn, 
16th of December, 1741	9
JONATHAN BRADFORD  Executed at Oxford for a Murder he had contemplated 
but did not commit	13
JOHN BODKIN, DOMINICK BODKIN AND OTHERS  Executed in Ireland on 
26th of March, 1742, for the Murder of Eleven Persons	15
THOMAS LYELL AND LAWRENCE SYDNEY  Swindlers, who cheated with 
Loaded Dice and were pilloried for Fraud, 2nd of June, 1742	16
ROBERT RAMSEY  Highwayman, and a singular Cheat. Executed at Tyburn on the 
13th of June, 1742	18
JOHN JENNINGS Executed at York, in the year 1742, on a charge of robbery, of 
which he was innocent.	21
ROBERT FULLER  Convicted of shooting Mr Bailey, June Sessions, 1743, and 
pardoned because he was wrongly identified	22
WILLIAM CHETWYND  A Curious Case of a Schoolboy who killed another Boy 
during a Quarrel about a Cake, and was convicted of Manslaughter, October, 1743	24
LYDIA ADLER  Burned in the Hand for killing her Husband, who had four Wives.	27
PATRICK BOURKE AND GEORGE ELLIS  Executed at Tyburn, 20th of February, 
1745, for Sheep-Stealing	28
MARTHA TRACY  Executed for a Street Robbery	30
MATTHEW HENDERSON  Executed in Oxford Street, 25th of February, 1746, for 
murdering his Mistress, Lady Dalrymple, who was angry because he trod on her Toe.
	33
MARY HAMILTON  A Woman who was imprisoned and whipped for marrying 
Fourteen Women, 1746	35
THE SECOND REBELLION OF THE PRETENDER TO THE BRITISH THRONE 
in the year 1745.	36
CHARLES RATCLIFFE Who assumed the title of Earl of Derwentwater	60
THOMAS CAPPOCK The rebel bishop of Carlisle.	63
THE ESCAPE OF THE PRETENDER After the Battle of Culloden	66
LORD LOVAT Beheaded for High Treason, at the age of Eighty, on 9th of April, 
1747	70
FRANCIS TOWNLEY, JEMMY DAWSON AND OTHERS Lesser rebels against 
his Majesty	74
JOSEPH RAWLINS, alias GREAT JOE A daring and notorious Smuggler, executed 
at Winchester, October 10, 1748 for burglary.	81
GEORGE LANCASTER Executed at Tyburn, 16th of November, 1747, for forging a 
Seaman's Will, in order to rob his Wife and Child	84
HOSEA YOUELL Executed at Tyburn, Nov. 16, 1747, for murder.	86
HENRY SIMMS The Extraordinary Career of a Youth, who was executed at Tyburn, 
16th of November, 1747, after returning from Transportation, for Highway Robbery
	88
SERJEANT SMITH An English Deserter to the French, shot in the Park on the 11th 
day of December, 1747.	92
WILLIAM WHURRIER Executed at Tyburn for murder, March 7, 1748, and his 
body hung in chains on Finchley common. (A Hard Case.)	94
WILLIAM YORK  "The Boy Murderer," convicted of the Murder of another Child in 
the Poorhouse of Eyke, in Suffolk, May, 1748	96
GEORGE COCK A most Plausible Scoundrel, executed at Tyburn, 13th of June, 
1748, for privately stealing	98
THOMAS THOMPSON Executed at Tyburn, Oct. 24, 1748, for horse-stealing.	100
JOHN WHITMORE AND JEREMIAH DAWES  of the University of Oxford. 
Convicted and punished for Sedition, 28th of November, 1748	102
THE THIEF, THE PRIESTS, AND THE GREAT KING OF PRUSSIA An Anecdotal 
Fact, and a touch at Superstition.	104
JOHN YOUNG  Executed for Forgery, at Edinburgh, 19th December, 1748	105
BENJAMIN TAPNER, JOHN COBBY, JOHN HAMMOND, RICHARD MILLS, 
RICHARD MILLS THE YOUNGER, AND OTHERS Revengeful Smugglers, who 
were executed for a Diabolical Murder, 18th of January, 1749	108
USHER GAHAGAN AND TERENCE CONNER Erudite Men, who were executed 
for High Treason, in diminishing the Current Coin of the Realm, 28th of February , 
1749	114
BRIAN SEYMOUR Executed for murder, 2nd March, 1749	116
JOHN COLLINGTON A Man of extraordinary Violence and Inhumanity. Executed at 
Canterbury with his Accomplice, John Stone, for setting fire to a Barn	118
RICHARD COLEMAN Who was executed on Kennington Common, in Surrey, 12th 
of April, 1749, for a Murder he did not commit.	122
THOMAS KINGSMILL, FAIRALL AND PERIN Three of the thirty Smugglers who 
broke open the Custom-House at Poole, and were executed at Tyburn, 26th of April, 
1749	125
SAMUEL COUCHMAN AND JOHN MORGAN, LIEUTENANTS OF MARINES, 
THOMAS KNIGHT, CARPENTER, AND OTHERS Part of the Crew of His 
Majesty's Ship Chesterfield, shot at Portsmouth, for mutiny, July 14, 1749.	127
JOHN MILLS  His Father and Brother were hanged, and he suffered a similar Fate 
on Slendon Common, Sussex, 12th of August, 1749	130
THOMAS NEALE and WILLIAM BOWEN Highwaymen; (The former a most 
hardened Sinner, who died cursing the Spectators of his Execution, August 12, 1749.)
	133
BENJAMIN NEALE Executed at Surrey, August 12, 1749, for burglary.	136
HUGH DAWSON and JOHN GAMMELL Executed on Kennington-common, August 
22, 1749.	139
ROBERT COX  Late Captain's Clerk of the Royal George Man-of-War. Executed at 
Winchester, 1st of September, 1749, for Forging Seamen's Tickets	141
ANN FLYNN A Sad Case with a Humorous Sequel	142
BOSAVERN PENLEZ  Executed for rioting, 18th October, 1749	143
CAPTAIN CLARKE, R.N. Convicted and condemned to be hanged for the Murder of 
Captain Innis, in a Duel, and pardoned, 12th of June, 1750	145
MARGARET HARVEY  Executed for Privately Stealing	147
JAMES COOPER  Executed for murder, August 26th, 1750	149
JAMES MACLANE Called "The Gentleman Highwayman." Executed at Tyburn, 3rd 
of October, 1750, for Highway Robbery	154
WILLIAM SMITH A Captain's Clerk in the Royal Navy, Forger of Seamen's Tickets; 
Executed at Tyburn, October 3, 1750.	157
AMY HUTCHINSON  Executed at Ely, 7th of November, 1750, for Petit Treason, in 
the Murder of her Husband	161
JOHN VICARS  Executed at Ely, 7th of November, 1750, for the Murder of his Wife, 
after first witnessing the Strangling of a Woman for murdering her Husband	163
JOHN CARR  The Victim of Swindlers himself, he became a Pirate and Smuggler, 
and was executed at Tyburn, 16th of November, 1750, for Forgery	166
GEORGE ANDERSON ALIAS JOHN EVERETT  Who picked Pockets at Newgate, 
became a Highwayman, and was executed for stealing Ribbons, 31st December, 1750
	169
WILLIAM RILEY  A young Soldier, whose Zeal for Sport led to a Murder, for which 
he was executed at Tyburn in 1750	171
THOMAS REYNOLDS Executed at Tyburn, for enlisting soldiers for the service of 
the king of France.	172
NORMAN ROSS A footman, executed at Edinburgh, January 8, 1751, for murdering 
his mistress	174
RICHARD BUTLER Executed at Tyburn, February 10, 1751, for forgery.	177
WILLIAM PARSONS, ESQ. Eldest Son of a Baronet, who became a Swindler and 
Highway Robber, and was executed for returning from Transportation, 11th of 
February, 1751	179
JOHN CAULFIELD Murder foretold by a Dream, in consequence of which the 
Murderer was apprehended, convicted, and executed at Waterford in 1751	189
THOMAS COLLEY Executed 24th of April, 1751, for the Murder of People who 
were reputed to be possessed of Witchcraft	191
THOMAS QUIN, JOSEPH DOWDELL, AND THOMAS TALBOT A Gang of 
Notorious Thieves, executed at Tyburn, June 17, 1751, for robbery.	194
WILLIAM DELLICOT Convicted of Petty Larceny, in July, 1751, and his Estate 
forfeited for stealing a Penny	199
THE QUIBBLING THIEF. Who stole a goose, and saved himself by a pun	200
WILLIAM CHANDLER A singularly artful villain, transported in the year 1751, for. 
perjury.	201
JAMES WELCH AND THOMAS JONES Executed on Kennington Common, 6th of 
September, 1751, for Murder.	206
MATHIAS KEYS Executed on Kennington Common, 6th of September, 1751, for 
Highway Robbery	208
WILLIAM BAKER A City Merchant, executed at Tyburn, 31st of December, 1751, 
for forging an East India Warrant in order to avoid Bankruptcy	209
WILLIAM STROUD A Notorious Impostor, who was Six Times whipped through the 
Streets of Westminster, in the Month of March, 1752	210
ELIZABETH JEFFRIES AND JOHN SWAN Deprived of her Uncle's valuable 
Estate, the Woman and an Accomplice shot him dead after paying another Man to 
commit the Crime.	212
MARY BLANDY Executed 6th of April, 1752, for murdering her Father at the 
Request of her Lover	214
JOHN CATHER, PATRICK KANE, AND DANIEL ALEXANDER Pilloried for 
extortion, 1751.	223
ANTHONY DE ROSA Hanged at Tyburn for robbery and murder, 23rd March, 1752
	225
NICHOLAS MOONEY and JOHN JONES Executed at Bristol, May 24, 1752, for 
highway robbery.	228
JOHN M'CANNELLY AND LUKE MORGAN A Daring Burglary committed in the 
House of Mr Porter, of the Raike Farmhouse, near Chester, by M'Cannelly, Morgan, 
Stanley, Boyd and Neill, Irish Haymakers, for which the first two were executed on the 
25th of May, 1752	230
THOMAS WILFORD A Cripple, who murdered his Wife in a Fit of Jealousy, and 
was executed at Tyburn on the 22nd of June, 1752	232
MOSES MORAVIA AND JOHN MANOURY Convicted at the Old Bailey, 27th of 
June, 1752, for sinking a Ship and swindling Insurers	234
ANN WHALE AND SARAH PLEDGE Ann Whale, strangled and then burned, for 
the Murder of her Husband; and Sarah Pledge, hanged for being her Accomplice.	235
WILLIAM MONTGOMERY Executed at Tyburn, December 2, 1752, for defrauding 
his creditors	237
CAPTAIN PETER DE LA FONTAINE Convicted of Forgery	241
DR. A. CAMERON Executed at Tyburn, 7une 7, 1753 (greatly lamented) for High 
Treason.	246
CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON AND JOHN STOCKDALE Executed at Tyburn, 3rd of 
July, 1753, and their Bodies hanged in Chains, for Murder	250
WILLIAM SMITH Executed at York, 14th Of August, 1753, for poisoning Thomas 
Harper, his Stepfather, and his two Children, William and Anne Harper	252
MARY SQUIRES and ELIZABETH CANNING The first was convicted of robbery, 
and pardoned; the second was convicted of, and transported for, Perjury, in swearing 
to that robbery.	253
JOHN HAMBLETON A Soldier of the Guards, executed at Tyburn, 10th of 
December, 1753, for the Murder of Mr Crouch	257
NICHOL BROWN Executed for the murder of his wife, August 14th, 1754	258
CAPTAIN JOHN LANCEY Executed at Execution Dock, 7th of June, 1754, for 
burning a Ship at the Instigation of a Member of Parliament	261
PAUL TIERNEY A Traitor, executed August 30, 1754, for enlisting Englishmen to 
serve the enemy.	264
DAVIS, THE MAIL-ROBBER Executed and hung in chains near the place where he 
committed the robbery	265
ROBERT ALSOP, A MIDSHIPMAN, AND SIX SEAMEN Convicted in 1755 for 
committing a Riot in the City of London, and impressing a Citizen thereof, but treated 
leniently in order that they might fight against France	266
HENRY SAMUEL A Jew, punished for breaking the Christian Sabbath.	267
JOHN GRIERSON Transported for marrying without Banns, or License, December, 
1755.	268
BLI GONZALEZ ALIAS JOHN SYMMONDS ALIAS SPANISH JACK After a 
varied Criminal Career he was finally executed at Maidstone, 18th of April, 1756, for 
stealing a Silver Tankard	275
CHARLES FREDERICK WYSENTHALL Transported in the year 1756, for 
subornation of perjury.	277
LIEUTENANT JOHN LANDER Executed on Pennenden Heath, in Kent, 16th of 
August, 1756, for Murder	278
WILLIAM CANNICOTT Executed at Tyburn, 20th of September, 1756, for the 
Murder of his Wife	279
JOHN BERRY, STEPHEN M'DANIEL, JAMES EGAN, JAMES SALMON AND – 
BLEE A new Species of Murderers, who conspired against the Lives of many Innocent 
Men	282
JOSHUA KIDDEN A Victim of the horrid Conspirators, whose crimes and 
punishments are described above	285
CHRISTOPHER WOODLAND Another Victim of the horrid gang of Thief-takers	287
ADMIRAL BYNG Shot to death on board the Monarque, at Spithead, for 
Misbehaviour before the French Fleet in the Mediterranean	288
EDWARD MORGAN Executed and hung in Chains at Glamorgan, 6th of April, 
1757, for murdering a Family and burning down their House	292
JOHN YOUNG Convicted of Crimping, or Kidnapping, young Men for the Service of 
the East India Company, 27th of April, 1757	294
WILLIAM ADAMS A Custom-House Officer in London, executed at Tyburn on 18th 
of May, 1757, for Forgery	295
RICHARD HUGHES Executed at Tyburn, May 18, 1757, for forgery.	296
WILLIAM PAGE A Gentleman of the Road who drove in a Phaeton and Pair, and 
after many Adventures was executed for Highway Robbery on 6th of April, 1758	298
JAMES WHITE AND WALTER WHITE Brothers who were executed at Kennington 
Common, 19th of April, 1758, for Robbery with Violence	304
DOCTOR FLORENCE HENSEY Convicted of High Treason, and sentenced to 
Death on the 12th of June, 1758; respited, and then reprieved, by King George the 
Second; but who received a free Pardon from King George the Third.	305
JOSEPH HALSEY Ship's mate, hanged for beating two of his men to death	309
MARY EDMONDSON Strongly protesting her Innocence, she was executed on 
Kennington Common, 2nd of April, 1759, for the Murder of her Aunt	311
JOHN STEVENSON Convicted of the Manslaughter of Francis Elcock, an Attorney-
at-Law, who had issued a Writ against him	313
JOHN AYLIFFE, ESQ. Commissary of Musters in the War Office. Executed at 
Tyburn, 7th of November, 1759, for Forgery	325
WILLIAM ANDREW HORNE, ESQ. Executed at Nottingham, 11th of December, 
1759, in the Seventy-fifth Year of his Age, for Murder, concealed Twenty-five Years
	328
THE REVEREND MR WHEATLEY Sentenced to do Public Penance for Adultery
	331
ROBERT TILLING Executed at Tyburn, 28th of April, 1760 for robbing his Master
	333
FRANCIS DAVID STIRN Convicted of Murder, but poisoned himself in Newgate, 
12th of September, 1760, after a Hunger Strike	342
PATRICK M'CARTY Executed at the bottom of Bow Street, Covent Garden, 
Westminster, 24th of October, 1760, for Murder	345
THEODORE GARDELLE An Artist, who was executed in the Haymarket, 4th of 
April, 1761, for murdering a Woman	346
THOMAS ANDREWS Convicted of an unnatural crime	354
THOMAS DANIELS. Condemned for the supposed Murder of his wife but 
subsequently pardoned, 1761	356
PETER PATTISON Executed at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 5th of October, 1761, for 
being concerned in a Riot at Hexham	363
JOHN PERROTT A Bankrupt, who refused to make Full Disclosures of his Effects, 
and was executed in Smithfield, 11th of November, 1761	364
ROBERT GREENSTREET Executed at Tyburn, 14th of December, 1761, for the 
Murder of his Master, from whom he demanded an Increase of Wages	369
JOHN M'NAUGHTON, ESQ. Who was twice executed in Ireland, 15th of December, 
1761, for the Murder of Miss Knox, whom he pretended to marry	370
CAPTAIN JAMES LOWRY Executed at Execution Dock, March 25, 1762, for 
murdering one of his Crew	377
JOHN PLACKETT Executed on the City Road, London, 28th of July, 1762, for 
robbing a Danish Gentleman, whom he treated with great Barbarity	381
PETER ANNET Convicted and pilloried for Blaspheming, in Michaelmas Term, 1762
	383
AMES FARR, WILLIAM SPARRY AND WILLIAM BIDDLE Executed at Tyburn, 
10th November, 1762 for forging a Will	384
DANIEL BLAKE Executed for the Murder of John Murcott, Butler to Lord Dacre, 
28th of February, 1763	385
WILLIAM HARROW The Flying Highwayman, executed at Hertford, 28th of March, 
1763	387
ANN BEDDINGFIELD AND RICHARD RINGE The Woman burned for the Murder 
of her Husband, and the Man hanged for being her Accomplice, near Ipswich, 8th of 
April, 1763	389
JOHN RICE A City Stockbroker, executed at Tyburn, 4th of May, 1763, for Forgery
	392
PAUL LEWIS An Officer of the Royal Navy, who became a Highwayman, and was 
executed at Tyburn, 4th of May, 1763	395
HANNAH DAGOE Sentenced to Death for robbing a Poor Woman. She struggled 
violently with the Executioner on the Scaffold, 4th Of May, 1763	397



HENRY COOK  
Notorious Horse-Stealer and Highwayman, executed at Tyburn, 16th of 
December, 1741
	HENRY COOK committed more robberies, singly, than Wild, Turpin or 
Hawke, and was long the terror of travellers on different roads, but particularly in 
Essex. The story of his career makes a long narrative of curious and daring exploits, 
with hairbreadth escapes, before he was taken. Cook was the son of creditable parents 
in Houndsditch, who, having given him a decent education, apprenticed him to a 
leather cutter, with whom he served his time, and then his father took the shop of a 
shoemaker at Stratford, in Essex, in which he placed his son. Having some knowledge 
of the shoemaking business, he was soon well established, and married a young 
woman at Stratford, by whom he had three children, before he commenced as 
highwayman. However, it was not long after his marriage before the associating with 
bad company and the neglect of his business involved him so far in debt that he was 
obliged to quit his house in apprehension of the bailiffs. He was afterwards obliged 
wholly to decline business, and having taken up goods in the name of his father he 
was ashamed to make application to him for relief in his distress.
	Among the idle acquaintances that Cook had made at Stratford was an 
apothecary, named Young, who was concerned with him in robbing gardens and 
fishponds, and in stealing poultry. The persons robbed offered a reward for 
apprehending the offenders, and Cook having been known to sell fowls at Leadenhall 
Market a warrant was granted to take him into custody; but, having notice of it, he 
concealed himself two months at the house of a relation at Grays, in Essex. During 
this retreat it was determined not to execute the warrant; but Cook, learning that a 
bailiff at Stratford had vowed to arrest him if he could be found, sent the officer a 
letter, advising him to consult his own safety, for he would blow his brains out if he 
should meet him. This threat effectually intimidated the bailiff; and Cook, having 
dissipated all his cash, went to Stratford, where he found a man so intimate with his 
wife that he became enraged in the highest degree, and taking several articles of 
furniture with him went to London and sold them. This being done, he went to the 
house of a relation in Shoreditch, where he was treated with civility while his money 
lasted; but when that was nearly gone there was no further appearance of friendship; 
and, being now driven to extremity, he went to Moorfields, where he purchased a pair 
of pistols, and having procured powder and ball went towards Newington, on his way 
to which he robbed a man of fifteen shillings, and returned to London.
	Thus embarked on the highroad to destruction, he determined to continue his 
dangerous trade; and on the following day went to Finchley Common, where he 
stopped a gentleman, the bridle of whose horse he seized, and ordered him to 
dismount on pain of death. The rider, complying, was robbed both of his money and 
horse; but he offered the highwayman three guineas if he would send the horse to an 
inn at St Albans, which he promised to do; but afterwards finding that he had a 
valuable acquisition in the beast he failed to restore him.
	This robbery being committed, he crossed the country to Enfield Chase, and 
going to a public-house where he was known said that he wished to hide himself lest 
he should be arrested. Having continued here two days, he proceeded to Tottenham, 
where he robbed a gentleman of about six pounds, and leaving his horse at an inn in 
Bishopsgate Street he went to his kinsman's in Shoreditch, where he was interrogated 
respecting his possessing so much money; but he would give no satisfactory answer. 
On the following day he went on the St Albans Road, and having robbed the 
passengers of a stage-coach of eight pounds he went to Enfield Chase, to the house he 
had frequented before; but while he was there he read an advertisement in which his 
horse was so exactly described that he determined to abscond; on which he went to 
Hadley Common, near Barnet, where he robbed a gentleman, and taking his horse, 
gave the gentleman his own.
	Soon after this he went to an inn at Mims, where he saw a gentleman whom he 
had formerly robbed, and was so terrified by the sight of the injured party that he ran 
to the stable, took his horse and galloped off with the utmost expedition. On the road 
between Mims and Barnet he was met by eight men on horseback, one of whom 
challenged the horse he rode, saying that a highwayman had stolen it from a 
gentleman of his acquaintance.
	Our adventurer replied that he had bought the horse at the Bell, in Edmonton, 
of which he could give convincing proofs; on which the whole company determined 
to attend him to that place. But when he came near Edmonton he galloped up a lane, 
where he was followed by all the other parties; and finding himself in danger of being 
apprehended he faced his pursuers and, presenting a pistol, swore he would fire unless 
they retreated. Some countrymen coming up at this juncture, he must have been made 
prisoner, but, night advancing, he quitted his horse and took shelter in a wood.
	When he thought he might safely leave his lurking-place he hastened to 
London, going to the house of his relation in Shoreditch, where he was challenged 
with having committed robberies on the highway; but nothing could be learned from 
the answers he gave. Having dissipated his present money, he went again upon 
Finchley Common. His late narrow escape, however, made such an impression on his 
mind that he suffered several persons to pass unattacked, but at length robbed an old 
man of his horse and five pounds, though not till after it was dark. Soon afterwards he 
met a gentleman, whom he obliged to change horses with him; but in a few minutes 
the gentleman was stopped by the owner of the stolen horse, who said a highwayman 
had just robbed him of it. Enraged at this, the gentleman swore the place was infested 
with thieves; however, he delivered the horse and walked to London.
	Cook, riding to his old place of resort, near the Chase, remained there three 
days; but, seeing the horse he had last stolen advertised, he rode off in fear of 
discovery, and had not proceeded far before he was seized by the owner of the horse, 
assisted by three other persons, who conducted him to Newgate. At the next Old 
Bailey sessions he was indicted for stealing this horse; but acquitted, because the 
owner would not swear to his person.
	Soon after his discharge he returned to his former practices, but, his affairs 
with his creditors having been by this time adjusted by his friends, he lived at 
Stratford with his wife, and committed his depredations chiefly in Epping Forest. 
Having acquired a booty of thirty pounds, he showed it to a journeyman he kept, 
named Taylor, and asked him how he might employ it to the best advantage in buying 
leather; but Taylor, guessing how it had been obtained, offered to go partners with his 
master in committing robberies on the highway; and the base contract was instantly 
made. They now stopped a great number of coaches on the borders of the Forest; but 
acted with such an uncommon degree of caution that they were for a long time 
unsuspected. The neighbours being at length terrified by such repeated outrages on the 
public peace, a Captain Mawley took a place in the basket of the Colchester coach to 
make discoveries; and, Cook and Taylor coming up to demand the money of the 
passengers, Taylor was shot through the head; on which Cook ran to the Captain and 
robbed him of his money, on threats of instant death. The carriage driving on, Cook 
began to search his deceased companion for his money; but on some of the 
neighbours coming up he retired behind a hedge to listen to their conversation; and 
having found that some of them knew the deceased, and intimated that he had been 
accompanied by Cook, he crossed the fields to London.
	Having spent three days in riot and dissipation, he went to his relation in 
Shoreditch, whom he requested to go to Stratford to inquire the situation of affairs 
there. When his relation returned, he told him there were several warrants issued 
against him, and advised him to go to sea. This he promised to do, but instead thereof 
he bought a horse and rode to Brentwood, in Essex, where he heard little conversation 
but of Cook, the famous highwayman of Stratford; and on the next day he followed a 
coach from the inn where he had put up, and took about thirty pounds from the 
passengers.
	Cook now connected himself with a gang of desperate highwaymen in 
London, in conjunction with whom he stopped a coach near Bow, in which were some 
young gentlemen from a boarding-school. A Mr Cruikshanks riding up at this instant, 
one of the gang demanded his money; but as he hesitated to deliver it, another of them 
knocked him down and killed him on the spot; after which the robbers went to a 
public-house near Hackney Marsh, and divided the spoils of the evening.
	Oppressed in mind by contemplation of his crimes, and particularly by 
reflecting on the murder of Mr Cruikshanks, Cook went to St Albans, where he 
assumed a new name, and worked as a journeyman shoemaker for about three weeks, 
when, a highwayman being pursued through the town, the terrors of his conscience on 
the occasion were such, that he hastily left the shop and ran across the country 
towards Woburn, in Bedfordshire. On his way to Woburn he robbed a farmer of fifty 
pounds and his horse, and bade him sue the county. The farmer soon raised the hue-
and-cry; but Cook escaped, and, riding as far as Birmingham, took lodgings at a 
public-house, and disposed of his horse. Cook had now taken the name of Stevens, 
and the landlord of the house where he lodged telling him that there was a shop to let, 
he took it, and entered into business as a shoemaker. He now hired one Mrs Barrett as 
his housekeeper, but she soon became his more intimate companion; and 
accompanying him to horse-races, and other places of public diversion, his little 
money was soon dissipated. Thus situated, he told his housekeeper that he had an aunt 
in Hertfordshire, who allowed him a hundred per annum, which he received in 
quarterly payments; and that he would go to her for his money. Under this pretence he 
left her, and went to Northampton, and from thence to Dunstable, near which place he 
robbed a farmer of his horse and sixteen pounds, and then rode to Daventry.
	At this last place he met with a Manchester dealer going home from London, 
and, having spent the evening together, they travelled in company next day and dined 
at Coventry. Cook, having an intention of robbing his fellow-traveller, intimated that 
it would be proper to conceal their money, as they had a dangerous road to travel; and, 
putting his own money into his boot, the other put a purse of gold into his side-pocket. 
Prosecuting their journey till they came to a cross-road, Cook demanded his 
companion's money, on pain of immediate death; and having robbed him of thirty-five 
guineas he travelled immediately to Birmingham; so Mrs Barrett imagined he had 
been supplied by his aunt, agreeable to the story he had told her.
	He now carried on trade as usual; but as often as he was distressed for cash he 
used to have recourse to the road, and recruited his pockets by robbing the stages. At 
length, a London trader, coming to Birmingham, asked Cook how long he had lived 
there, which terrified him so that he quitted the place, and travelled towards London, 
and near Highgate robbed a gentleman, named Zachary, of his horse and money. On 
his stolen horse he rode to Epping Forest on the following day; and, having robbed a 
gentleman, returned to London by the way of Stratford, at which place he spoke to a 
number of his old acquaintances, but was not imprudent enough to quit his horse.
	Going to a house he had frequented at Newington Green, he sent for his 
relation who lived near Shoreditch, who advised him to make his escape, or he would 
certainly be taken into custody. On this he went to Mims; and on his relation visiting 
him Cook begged he would sell five watches for him; but the other declined it, 
recommending him to dispose of them himself in London. On the following evening, 
when it was almost dark, he rode towards town, and observing a chaise behind him 
permitted it to pass, and followed it to the descent of the hill towards Holloway. There 
were two gentlemen in the chaise, whose money Cook demanded; but instead of 
complying they drove on the faster; on which he fired and wounded one of them in 
the arm; but the report of the pistol bringing some people towards the spot he galloped 
off, and went to Mims, his old place of retreat. Coming to London next day to sell his 
watches, he was seen in Cheapside by a woman who knew him, and followed him to 
Norton Folgate, where, observing him to go into a public-house, she went and 
procured a constable, who took him into custody, and found on him five watches and 
about nine pounds in money.
	On his examination before a magistrate, Mr Zachary, whom he had robbed 
near Highgate, swearing to the identity of his person, he was committed to Newgate; 
but not before he had offered to become evidence against some accomplices he 
pretended to have had; but this offer was rejected. He now formed a scheme to murder 
the keepers and to make his escape; but, being detected, he was confined to the cells, 
and, being brought to his trial at the Old Bailey, was capitally convicted.
	After sentence of death he for some time affected a gaiety of behaviour; but 
when the warrant for his execution arrived he was so struck with the idea of his 
approaching fate that it occasioned convulsive fits, and he never afterwards recovered 
his health.


JONATHAN BRADFORD  
Executed at Oxford for a Murder he had contemplated but did not commit

  
Bradford discovers his intended victim already murdered

	JONATHAN BRADFORD kept an inn at the city of Oxford. A gentleman (Mr 
Hayes), attended by a man-servant, one evening put up at Bradford's house, and in the 
night the former was found murdered in his bed, and the landlord was apprehended on 
suspicion of having committed the crime.
	The evidence given against him was to the following effect. Two gentlemen 
who had supped with Mr Hayes, and who retired at the same time to their respective 
chambers, being alarmed in the night with a noise in his room, and soon hearing 
groans as of a wounded man, got up in order to discover the cause, and found their 
landlord, with a dark lantern and a knife in his hand, in a state of astonishment and 
horror, over his dying guest, who almost instantly expired.
	On this evidence the jury convicted Bradford, and he was executed; but the 
fate of this man may serve as an additional lesson to jurymen to be extremely guarded 
in receiving circumstantial evidence. At a trial at Nisi Prius, and between personal 
right and wrong, the jury are often directed by the judge to take into consideration 
presumptive evidence where positive proof is wanting; but in criminal charges, it 
seldom should, unsupported by some oral testimony, or ocular demonstration, be 
sufficient to find a verdict against the accused.
	The facts attending this dreadful tragedy were not fully brought to light until 
the deathbed confession of the real murderer, a time when we must all endeavour to 
make our peace with God.
	Mr Hayes was a man of considerable property, and greatly respected. He had 
about him, when his sad destiny led him under the roof of Bradford, a considerable 
sum of money. The landlord, knowing this, determined to murder and rob him. For 
this horrid purpose he proceeded with a dark lantern and a carving-knife, intending to 
cut the throat of his guest, while yet sleeping; but what must have been his 
astonishment and confusion to find his victim already murdered by a servant!
	The wicked and unworthy servant had also contemplated murdering his 
master, and had just committed the bloody deed, and secured his treasure, a moment 
before the landlord entered for the same purpose!


JOHN BODKIN, DOMINICK BODKIN AND OTHERS  
Executed in Ireland on 26th of March, 1742, for the Murder of Eleven 
Persons

	OLIVER BODKIN, Esq., was a gentleman who possessed a good estate near 
Tuam, in Ireland. He had two sons, by two wives. The elder son, named John, to 
whom this narrative chiefly relates, was sent to Dublin to study the law; and the 
younger, who was about seven years of age, remained at home with his parents. The 
young student lived in a very dissipated manner at Dublin, and, soon quitting his 
studies, came and resided near his father's place of abode. The father allowed him a 
certain annual sum for his support; but, as he lived beyond his allowance, he 
demanded further assistance. The father, however, refusing to accede to his wishes, he 
determined upon a horrible revenge, and included his stepmother in his proposed 
scheme of vengeance, as he imagined that she had induced his father to refuse him 
any further aid.
	Having engaged his cousin, Dominick Bodkin, his father's shepherd, John 
Hogan, and another ruffian of the name of Burke, to assist him in the intended 
murders, they went to the house of Mr Bodkin, senior, whose household consisted of 
four men and three women servants, exclusive of Mrs Bodkin and the younger son, 
and a gentleman named Lynch, who was at that time on a visit there. They found all 
the members of the family at supper on their arrival, and, having murdered them, they 
went into the kitchen, where they killed three servant-maids; and, finding the men in 
different parts of the house, they also sacrificed them to their brutal and unprovoked 
rage. The murder of eleven persons being thus perpetrated, they quitted the fatal spot; 
and when some persons from Tuam came the next morning to speak with Mr Bodkin 
on business they found the house open, and beheld the dead body of Mr Lynch, near 
which lay that of Mrs Bodkin, hacked and mangled in a shocking manner; and, at a 
small distance, her husband, with his throat cut, and the child lying dead across his 
breast. The throats of the maid-servants in the kitchen were all cut; and the men-
servants in another room were also found murdered. The assassins had even been so 
wanton in their cruelties as to kill all the dogs and cats in the house. The neighbours 
being alarmed by such a singular instance of barbarity, a suspicion fell on John 
Bodkin; who, being taken into custody, confessed all the tragical circumstances above 
mentioned, and impeached his accomplices: on which the other offenders were taken 
into custody, and all of them were committed to the jail of Tuam.
	When they were brought to trial John Bodkin (the parricide), Dominick 
Bodkin and John Hogan pleaded guilty, and they were all condemned and executed at 
Tuam, on the 26th of March, 1742. The head of the shepherd was fixed on Tuam 
market-house, and the bodies of the others gibbeted within sight of the house where 
the murders had been committed.


THOMAS LYELL AND LAWRENCE SYDNEY  
Swindlers, who cheated with Loaded Dice and were pilloried for Fraud, 2nd 
of June, 1742

	IN April, 1740, these pests to society were committed to Newgate, charged on 
the oaths of several gentlemen of distinction, with cheating and defrauding them with 
false and loaded dice at the masquerade, on Thursday morning, about three o'clock, to 
the amount of four hundred pounds.
	It also appeared, on their examination, which lasted from six o'clock in the 
morning till three in the afternoon, that they had cheated a number of other gentlemen 
of upward of four thousand pounds more. Nine pairs of dice were found upon the 
sharpers, and on being cut asunder they were all, except one, loaded --that is, to 
introduce a piece of lead in a direction into the die which, when thrown, will generally 
turn a number suited to the owner's game.
	They were brought to the bar of the Old Bailey for these infamous practices, 
and after a long trial, in which such scenes of iniquity were discovered to have been 
committed by sharpers of this description as astonished the Court and jury, Lyell and 
Sydney were found guilty, and sentenced to be imprisoned one year, and during that 
time to be pilloried.
	On the 12th of June, 1742, above two years after, Thomas Lyell and Lawrence 
Sydney, the principals of the gang, were brought out of Newgate and carried to the 
Haymarket, where a pillory had been erected to receive them, facing the Opera 
House—the scene of their depredation—amid the scoffs and taunts of an enraged 
populace.
	The following evidence given in the Court of King's Bench, the 29th of 
November, 1796, will discover some of the tricks of this description of swindlers.
	A cause came on before Lord Chief Justice Kenyon, on the statute against 
gaming, and one John Shepherd being called as a witness for the injured party, he 
swore that he saw hazard played at the gaming-house of the defendant in Leicester 
Street. Every person who was three times successful, paid the defendant a silver 
medal, which he purchased from him, on entering the house, at eight for a guinea, and 
he received six or seven of these in the course of an hour for the Box Hands, as it was 
called. The people who frequented this house always played for a considerable sum. 
Sometimes twenty or thirty pounds depended on a single throw of the dice. The 
witness remembered being once at the defendant's gaming-house, about three or four 
o'clock in the morning, when a gentleman came in very much in liquor. He seemed to 
have a great deal of money about him. The defendant said he had not intended to play, 
but now he would set to with this fellow. He then scraped a little wax with his finger 
off one of the candles, and put the dice together, so that they came seven every way. 
After doing this, he dropped them into the box and threw them out, and afterwards 
drew all the money away, saying he had won it. Seven was the main and he could not 
throw anything but seven. The young gentleman said he had not given him time to 
bar. A dispute arose between the defendant and him; it was referred to two or three 
persons round the table, and they gave it in favour of the defendant. The gentleman 
said be had lost upward of seventy pounds. The defendant said: "We have cleared 
him." The witness had seen a man pawn his watch and ring, in several instances, and 
once he saw a man pawn his coat and go away without it.
	After the gaming-table was broken by the Bow Street officers, the defendant 
said it was too good a thing to be given up, and instantly got another table, large 
enough for twenty or thirty people. The frequenters of this house used to play till 
daylight, and on one or two occasions they played all the next day. This is what the 
defendant called "sticking to it rarely." The guests were furnished with wine and 
suppers gratis, from the funds of the partnership, in abundance. Sunday was a grand 
day. The witness had seen more than forty people there at a time. The table not being 
sufficient for the whole, half-a-crown used on such occasions to be given for a seat, 
and those behind looked over the backs of the others and betted.
	The person above mentioned (whose name was Smith) who pawned his coat 
corroborated the above evidence; and added that he had seen a person, after he had 
lost all his money, throw off his coat, and go away, losing it also.



ROBERT RAMSEY  
Highwayman, and a singular Cheat. Executed at Tyburn on the 13th of 
June, 1742
	THIS offender was born near Grosvenor Square, and apprenticed to an 
apothecary, after being liberally educated at Westminster School. His master's 
circumstances becoming embarrassed, Ramsey left him and went into the service of 
another gentleman of the same profession.
	He then became a professed gamester. The billiard and hazard tables 
engrossed his time, and his skill being great he often stripped his companions; yet the 
money he thus obtained he dissipated in the most extravagant manner.
	Having made an acquaintance with one Carr, they singled out a clergyman 
who frequented the coffee-house they used as a proper object to impose upon; and 
having ingratiated themselves into his good opinion, Ramsey took the opportunity of 
Carr's absence to tell the clergyman that he had a secret of the utmost consequence to 
impart; and the clergyman having promised secrecy, the other said that Carr was in 
love with a young widow, who was very rich and inclined to marry him, but that the 
match was opposed by her relations.
	He added that the lady herself was averse to being married at the Fleet, even if 
she could escape the vigilance of her relations so far as to reach that place. The 
clergyman listening to the story, Ramsey offered him twenty guineas to marry the 
young couple, and it was agreed that the parties should meet at a tavern near the Royal 
Exchange on the following day.
	Ramsey, having told Carr what had passed, went to the clergyman the next 
morning, and, observing that if the lady took her own footman he might be known, 
said he would disguise himself in livery and attend the priest. This being done, a 
hackney-coach was called for the clergyman, and, Ramsey getting up behind it, they 
drove to the tavern, where rich wines were called for, of which Ramsey urged the 
clergyman to drink so freely that he fell asleep, when Ramsey picked his pocket of his 
keys.
	The gentleman, awaking, inquired for the couple that were to be married, on 
which Ramsey, calling for more wine, said he would go in search of them; but 
immediately calling a coach he went to the clergyman's lodgings and, producing the 
keys, said he had been sent by the gentleman for some papers in his cabinet. The 
landlady of the house, seeing the keys, permitted him to search for what he wanted; on 
which he stole a diamond ring, of the value of forty pounds, and about a hundred 
pounds in money, and carried off some papers.
	This being done he returned to the clergyman, said that the young couple 
would attend in a short time, and desired him to order a genteel dinner; but this last 
injunction was unnecessary, for the parson had taken previous care of it; and while he 
was at dinner Ramsey said he would go and order a diamond and a plain ring, and 
would return immediately.
	He had not been long absent when a jeweller brought the rings, which he said 
were for a baronet and his lady, who were coming to be married. The clergyman 
asked him to drink the healths of the young couple; and just at this juncture Ramsey 
came in and told the jeweller that he was instantly wanted at home, but that he must 
return without loss of time, as his master's arrival was immediately expected.
	The jeweller was no sooner gone than Ramsey, taking up the diamond ring, 
said that he had brought a wrong one, and he would go back and rectify the mistake. 
In the interim the jeweller, finding that he had not been wanted at home, began to 
suspect that some undue artifice had been used; on which he hurried to the tavern, and 
thought himself happy to find that the parson had not decamped.
	Having privately directed the waiter to procure a constable he charged the 
clergyman with defrauding him of the rings. The other was naturally astonished at 
such a charge; but the jeweller insisted on taking him before a magistrate, where he 
related a tale that, some days before, those rings had been ordered by a man whom he 
supposed to be an accomplice of the person now charged. But the clergyman, being a 
man of fair character, sent for some reputable people to bail him; while the jeweller 
returned home, cursing his ill fortune for the trick that had been put on him.
	London being an unsafe place for Ramsey longer to reside in, he went to 
Chester, where he assumed the name of Johnson, dressed himself as a physician, and 
printed and dispersed handbills, giving an account of many patients whose disorders 
had yielded to his skill. By promising to cure the poor without expense, no person 
doubted either the character or abilities of Dr Johnson.
	A young lady who was troubled with an asthma became one of his patients; 
and Ramsey, presuming that she possessed a good fortune, insinuated himself so far 
into her good graces that she would have married him, but that her uncle, in whose 
hands her money was, happened to come to Chester at that juncture.
	During this situation of affairs, while Ramsey was walking without the city, he 
happened to see the clergyman whom he had so much injured in London; on which he 
hastily retired to a public-house in Chester, and sent a person to Park Gate, to inquire 
when any ship would sail for Ireland: and the answer brought was that a vessel would 
sail that very night.
	On receiving this intelligence, Ramsey went and drank tea with the young 
lady; and taking the opportunity of her absence from the room he opened a drawer, 
whence he took a diamond ring and fifty guineas out of eighty which were in a bag.
	He then went to Dublin, and later came to the metropolis, where he found his 
younger brother, who had likewise supported himself by acts of dishonesty; and the 
two brothers agreed to act in concert. Having taken a previous survey of Mr Glyn's 
house, at the corner of Hatton Garden, the brothers broke into it in the night, and 
carried off a quantity of plate; but, handbills being immediately circulated, they were 
taken into custody while offering the plate for sale to a Jew in Duke's Place. The Lord 
Mayor, on examining the prisoners, admitted the younger brother an evidence against 
the elder.
	At the next sessions at the Old Bailey it was an affecting scene to behold the 
one brother giving evidence against the other, who was capitally convicted and 
received sentence of death. At the place of execution Ramsey made an affecting 
address to the surrounding multitude; entreating the younger part of the audience to 
avoid gaming, as what would infallibly lead to destruction.
	After the customary devotions on such melancholy occasions he was turned 
off, and the body, having hung the usual time, was conveyed in a hearse to Giltspur 
Street, and decently interred by his friends.


JOHN JENNINGS 
Executed at York, in the year 1742, on a charge of robbery, of 
which he was innocent.
	THIS unfortunate man was the victim of his master, in order to screen himself 
from the vengeance of the law. He was a waiter at the Bell Inn, near Hull, in 
Yorkshire, kept by a villain of the name of James Brunel.
	A robbery, had lately been committed on the highway, on an old man, a 
reputed miser; and who, for greater safety, generally carried a bag of gold about him. 
The old man, soon after being robbed, casually went into the Bell; and going up to the 
bar, saw Brunel, the landlord, with one of his guineas in his hand, and some shillings, 
which he was, paying away to a carrier, which were all marked, so that he could 
identify them. He consequently suspected that the landlord was the robber, and related 
the circumstance to some other persons in the house.
	Brunel overheard the conversation, and to secure himself, instantly formed and 
executed a design to impute the robbery to his waiter, Jennings, who had gone early to 
sleep, in a state of intoxication. To this wicked end, he went to his bed, and put the 
purse, taken from the old man, with the greater part of its contents, in the unfortunate 
man's pocket, without waking him; and then coming down to the company, told them, 
that he believed he had found the thief. "I have," continued the villain, "long 
suspected Jennings, one of my waiters, and about five hours ago I gave him a guinea 
to get changed; he same back in liquor, and returned me a guinea, which I am sure is 
not the same which I gave him." He then produced the guinea, which being marked, 
was claimed by the old man. It was now proposed that Jennings should be searched, 
which was done, and the purse being found upon him, he was committed, tried, 
condemned, and executed.
	Brunel, being convicted of another, robbery, confessed these facts.


ROBERT FULLER  
Convicted of shooting Mr Bailey, June Sessions, 1743, and pardoned 
because he was wrongly identified

	AT the sessions held at the Old Bailey in the month of May, 1743, Robert 
Fuller, of Harefield, in Middlesex, was indicted for shooting at Francis Bailey, with a 
gun loaded with powder and small stones, and demanding his money, with intent to 
rob him.
	Mr Bailey deposed that, as he was returning from Uxbridge Market, he saw a 
man near Harefield sitting on a stile, having a gun in his hand; that he jumped off the 
stile, seized the horse's bridle, clapped the gun to Mr Bailey's body, and threatened to 
shoot him. Mr Bailey said: "That will do you no good, nor me neither." He then put 
his hand repeatedly into Bailey's pocket; but the latter would not submit to be robbed, 
and rode off. Immediately on which, Fuller shot at him, and wounded him in the right 
arm, so as to break the bone in splinters; and many stones, and bits of the bone, were 
afterwards taken out of the arm: nor did the prosecutor recover of the wound till after 
languishing nearly twenty weeks. The prisoner, however, had not an opportunity of 
robbing Mr Bailey, as his horse took fright and ran away at the report of the gun.
	The substance of Mr Bailey's further deposition was, that this happened about 
seven o'clock in the evening, on the 24th of February; but that, as it was a clear 
starlight night, he had a full view of the prisoner, whom he had known before.
	Bailey was now asked if he had ever been examined before any Justice of the 
Peace in relation to the fact; to which he answered in the negative. He was then asked 
if he had never charged the crime on any other person except the prisoner, which he 
steadily denied having done.
	In contradiction to which, a commitment was produced, in which Thomas 
Bowry was charged with assaulting Francis Bailey, with an intent to rob, and this 
Bowry was continued in custody, on the affidavit of Mr Mellish, a surgeon, that Mr 
Bailey was so ill of the wounds he had received that he could not come to London 
without danger of his life, but Bowry was discharged at the jail delivery at the end of 
the sessions for June, 1743.
	The copy of Bowry's commitment was now read, and authenticated by Richard 
Akerman, clerk of the papers to his father, and then keeper of Newgate.
	On this contradictory evidence the characters of both parties were inquired 
into, when that of the prosecutor appeared to be very fair, that of the prisoner rather 
doubtful.
	Upon considering the whole matter, the jury gave a verdict that he was guilty, 
but on account of the circumstance above mentioned, relating to the commitment of 
Bowry for the same offence, on Bailey's oath, they recommended the prisoner in the 
court as a proper object of the Royal clemency, and he was accordingly pardoned.
	This affair is one ot that intricate nature, which must remain involved in 
mystery. It is impossible for us to say whether the prosecutor was, or was not, 
mistaken in the man against whom he swore; but we see that he had sworn the same 
fact, with equal positiveness, against Bowry: and this circumstance evinces the great 
propriety of the jury recommending the convict to mercy, where there is even but a 
bare probability remaining of his innocence. In doubtful cases we should always 
incline to the side of mercy; and it ought to be remembered, to the credit of the court 
at the Old Bailey, that this rule is constantly attended to; and it is a known fact, that 
persons charged with capital offences have been frequently heard to declare, that they 
would rather take their trials at the Old Bailey, than in any other court in the kingdom.
	On this occasion it may not be improper to make a remark on the immense 
power that is lodged in the breasts of our judges who go the circuits. A great deal of 
this power is discretionary: it remains with then to reprieve the convict, or to leave 
him for execution: an awful trust which makes the possessor of it accountable to God 
and his own conscience. We have no idea but that all the present judges exert their 
power in the mildest manner: but times have been, when magistrates have wantonly 
sported with their authority, to the destruction of the innocent, and the eternal disgrace 
of themselves.
	This circumstance should hold forth a lesson of caution, never to trust the 
authority of a judge but with a man distinguished equally by his knowledge, integrity, 
and humanity.



WILLIAM CHETWYND  
A Curious Case of a Schoolboy who killed another Boy during a Quarrel 
about a Cake, and was convicted of Manslaughter, October, 1743

	THIS unfortunate young gentleman was placed at the academy in Soho 
Square, and at the same school was a youth named Thomas Rickets, then in the 
nineteenth year of his age.
	At the sessions held in the Old Bailey in October, 1743, the above-named 
William Chetwynd, who was fifteen years of age, was indicted for the murder of 
Thomas Rickets, and was likewise indicted on the statute of stabbing.
	Mr Chetwynd being in possession of a piece of cake, Rickets asked him for 
some of it, on which he gave him a small piece; but refusing to give him a second, 
which he desired, he cut off a piece for himself, and laid it on a bureau, while he went 
to lock up the chief part of the cake for his own use. In the interim Rickets took the 
cake which had been left on the bureau, and when Chetwynd returned and demanded 
it he refused to deliver it; on which a dispute arose, and Chetwynd, having still in his 
hand the knife with which he had cut the cake, wounded the other in the left side of 
the belly.
	Hannah Humphreys, a servant in the house, coming at that time into the room, 
Rickets said that he was stabbed, and complained much of the pain that he felt from 
the wound. On which Humphreys said to Chetwynd: "You have done very well"; to 
which the latter replied: "If I have hurt him, I am very sorry for it."
	The wounded youth, being carried to bed, languished three days under the 
hands of the surgeons, and then expired. In the interim Chetwynd, terrified at what 
had happened, quitted the school; but as soon as he heard of the death of Rickets he 
went to a magistrate, to abide the equitable decision of a verdict of his countrymen; 
and he was brought to his trial at the time and place above mentioned.
	The counsel on behalf of the prisoner acknowledged the great candour of the 
gentlemen who were concerned for the prosecution, in their not endeavouring to 
aggravate the circumstances attending the offence. They also confessed the truth of all 
that had been sworn by the witnesses; but they insisted, on behalf of the accused 
party, that though his hand might have made an unhappy blow, his heart was innocent.
	The following is the substance of their arguments on the case: They said that 
the fact could not amount to murder at common law, which Lord Coke defines to be 
"an unlawful killing another man aforethought," either expressed by the party, or 
implied by the law. They said, that in this case, there was not the least malice, as the 
young gentlemen were friends, not only at the time, but to the close of Ricket's life, 
when he declared that he forgave the other.
	They said, that it being proved that there was a friendship subsisting, it would 
be talking against the sense of mankind to say the law could imply any thing contrary 
to what was plainly proved. That deliberation and cruelty of disposition, make the 
essential difference between manslaughter and murder; and they quoted several legal 
authorities in support of this doctrine.
	One of their arguments was urged in the following words:
	"Shall the young boy at the bar, who was doing a lawful act, be said to be 
guilty of murder? He was rescuing what was his own: the witnesses have told you, 
that after he had given Rickets a piece of cake, Rickets went to him for more; he 
denied to give it him, he had a right to keep his cake, and the other had no right to 
take it: and he had a right to retake it." There are cases in the books which make a 
difference between murder and manslaughter. If a man takes up a bar of iron, and 
throws it at another, it is murder: and the difference in the crime lies between the 
person's taking it up, and having it in his hand. Chetwynd had the knife in his hand, 
and upon that a provocation ensues, for he did not take the knife up; if he had, that 
would have shown an intention to do mischief. It may be doubted, whether or no 
when he had this knife in his hand for a lawful purpose, and in an instant struck the 
other, he considered he had the knife in his hand; for if in his passion he intended to 
strike with his hand, it is not a striking with the knife.
	"At the beginning of the fray, Rickets had a knife in his hand; and it was one 
continued act. And another question is, whether there was not a struggle; here was the 
cake taken, and in endeavouring to get it again, this accident happens; at the first 
taking of the cake, it is in evidence, that Chetwynd was not forced to extend his arms, 
unless the other was coming to take it from him, and then a struggle is a blow.
	"The counsel for the crown, submitted it to the court, whether (since the only 
points insisted on by way of defence for the prisoner, were questions at law, in which 
the jury were to be guided by their opinion,) the facts proved and admitted did not 
clearly, in the first place, amount to murder at common law; and in the second place, 
whether there could be the least doubt in point of law, but that the case was within the 
statute of 1 James I.
	"Upon the first it was admitted, that to constitute murder there must be malice.
	"But it was argued, that malice was of two kinds, either expressed and in fact, 
or implied by law.
	"But when one person kills another without provocation, it is murder, because 
the law presumes and implies malice from the act done. And therefore, whenever any 
person kills another it is murder, unless some sufficient provocation appear. But it is 
not every provocation that extenuates the killing of a man from murder into 
manslaughter. A slight or trivial provocation is the same as none, and is not allowed in 
law to be any justification or excuse for the death of another. And therefore no words 
of reproach or infamy, whatever provoking circumstances they may be attended with; 
no affronting gestures, or deriding postures, however insolent or malicious, are 
allowed to be put in balance with the life of a man, and to extenuate the offence from 
murder to manslaughter.
	"Applying the rules of law to the present case, it was plain, that the violent act 
done, bore no proportion to the provocation. All the provocation given was taking up 
a piece of cake, which is not such an offence, as can justify the prisoner's attacking the 
person who took it up, with an instrument, that apparently endangered his life, or 
rather carried certain death along with it.
	"Mr Rickets was stabbed, having then no weapon drawn in his hand, and not 
having before struck the person who stabbed him. It is plainly within the intention; 
which is declared in the preamble to have been in order to punish stabbing or killing 
upon the sudden, committed in rage, or any other passion of the mind, &c. and 
therefore it was submitted to the court, whether upon the facts proved and not denied, 
the consequence of the law was not clear that the prisoner was guilty within both 
indictments."
	Mr Baron Reynolds and Mr Recorder, before whom the prisoner was tried, 
taking notice of the points of law that had arisen, the learned arguments of the 
counsel, and the many cases cited upon this occasion, were of opinion that it would be 
proper to have the facts found specially.
	A special verdict was accordingly agreed on by all parties, and drawn up in the 
usual manner—viz. by giving a true state of the facts as they appeared in evidence, 
and concluding thus: "We find that the deceased was about the age of nineteen, and 
Mr Chetwynd about the age of fifteen; and that of this wound the deceased died on the 
29th of the said September; but whether, upon the whole, the prisoner is guilty of all 
or any of the said indictment, the jurors submit to the judgment of the Court."
	In consequence of this special verdict the case was argued before the twelve 
judges, who deemed Chetwynd to have been guilty of manslaughter only; whereupon 
he was set at liberty, after being burned in the hand.


LYDIA ADLER  
Burned in the Hand for killing her Husband, who had four Wives.

	THIS woman was tried at the Old Bailey, at the sessions held in June, 1744, 
for the wilful murder of her husband, John Adler, by throwing him on the ground, 
kicking and stamping on his groin, and giving him thereby a mortal bruise, of which 
he languished in St Bartholomew's Hospital from the 11th till the 23rd of May, and 
then died; and she was again indicted on the coroner's inquest for manslaughter.
	Hannah Adler, daughter of the deceased, swore that he told her that his wife 
had given him the wounds which afterwards occasioned his death.
	Benjamin Barton deposed that the deceased came to him, on the 11th of May, 
with a bloody handkerchief about his head, and asked him for a spare bed, saying: 
"This infernal fiend [meaning his wife] will be the death of me." But Barton, knowing 
the woman to be of a very turbulent disposition, refused to lodge the man. After this 
he visited him every other day during his illness, and he very often said: "I wish, Mr 
Barton, you would be so good as to get a warrant to secure this woman, for she will be 
the death of me"; and two hours before he died he inquired if such a warrant was 
procured; and desired that Barton would see her brought to justice, which he promised 
he would, if it lay in his power.
	Hannah Adler, being further questioned, said that her father died between 
twelve and one o'clock; that about two hours and a half before he said: "I am a dead 
man, and this lady [the prisoner] has killed me." That after this he repeatedly declared 
that his wife was the person that had murdered him, and begged that she might be 
brought to justice. His last declaration was made only about ten minutes before he 
died.
	Mr Godman, a surgeon, deposed that the husband died of a mortification, 
occasioned by a blow; but acknowledged that the deceased had a rupture, and that 
such a blow as he had received would not have hurt a person in sound health.
	The prisoner in her defence said that her husband had two wives besides her; 
and that a quarrel happening between her and one of the wives, the husband 
endeavoured to part them, and in so doing fell down, and the other woman fell on 
him; but that she herself never lifted hand or foot against him.
	Joseph Steel deposed that the deceased had had four wives; that he was kind to 
them all at the first, but afterwards used to beat them severely; and that he had seen 
the prisoner and her husband frequently fight together.
	The jury gave a verdict of manslaughter; in consequence of which she was 
burned in the hand.


PATRICK BOURKE AND GEORGE ELLIS  
Executed at Tyburn, 20th of February, 1745, for Sheep-Stealing
	BY an Act of Parliament passed in the fourteenth year of the reign of King 
George II., for the security of farmers and graziers, it is thus enacted:
	"If any person or persons, after the first day of May, 1741, shall feloniously 
drive away or in any manner feloniously steal any sheep, or shall wilfully kill one or 
more sheep, with intent to steal the whole or any part of the carcasses, the person or 
persons so offending shall suffer death, without benefit of clergy."
	This law denounces the punishment of death to any person offending against 
it, and though the crime is frequently committed, few are executed for sheep-stealing, 
as the law is seldom put in force owing to the humanity of the judges or the 
prosecutors, who probably consider that the offence is committed in consequence of 
the calls of hunger, and dread of starving. The offence of these men were not however 
of that description, as they destroyed whole flocks, in order to get possession of the 
fat, and deserved as severe a punishment as any other robbers.
	Patrick Bourke and George Ellis were indicted at the sessions held at the Old 
Bailey in December, 1744, for killing fifteen ewe sheep, the property of John 
Messenger, of Kensington, with intention to steal part of the carcasses—to wit, the fat 
near the kidneys.
	Mr Messenger deposed that he had lost fifteen ewes; that their throats were 
cut, their bellies ripped open, and the fat taken out; and likewise said that he had lost 
twenty-seven lambs, which were taken out of those ewes; and he deposed that the 
prisoners both confessed the crime before Sir Thomas Devil on the Tuesday 
following; and that Bourke acknowledged they sold the fat to a tallow-chandler, for 
forty-one shillings and twopence-halfpenny.
	Richard Twyford proved the finding the sheep ripped open, and the fat taken 
out; and that the lambs were dragging by the sides of them: and swore that the 
prisoners had owned the taking the gates from the farm to pen the sheep up.
	Joseph Agnew, a constable, swore that Ellis came to him; and after having told 
him of a quarrel between him and Bourke, who had given him two black eyes, he 
acknowledged that he had been concerned with him in the commission of the crime 
above-mentioned. Hereupon the constable took with him three watchmen, and going 
to Bourke's lodgings, seized him in bed, and found a clasp-knife, laying on the ground 
near the feet of the bed, on which was some fat, which likewise remained when the 
knife was produced in court on the trial.
	Bourke, in his defence, said that he was kept drunk by the constable in order to 
induce him to make a confession, but this not being credited by the jury, and there 
being other proofs of the fact having been acknowledged, they were capitally 
convicted, and received sentence of death. They were hanged at Tyburn, on 20th of 
February, 1745.
	At the summer assizes in 1757, for the county of Lincoln, a deaf and dumb 
man, called Matthew Pullen, was indicted for sheep-stealing. The court ordered a jury 
to be impanelled, not to try him for larceny, but to inquire whether he stood mute by 
the act of Providence, or through obstinacy. It was proved by his father-in-law, and 
some neighbours, that from his infancy he was deaf and dumb, and the jury therefore 
brought in their verdict, 'that he stood mute by the act of God,' and he was discharged 
in gaol delivery.
	There being no punishment for the deaf and dumb, any more than for those 
that are proved non compos mentis, the actions of both ought to be kept under 
restraint. This deaf and dumb sheep-stealer, must certainly have been conscious that 
he was doing wrong when he stole his neighbour's sheep, and it seems unreasonable 
that he should escape without some punishment, as such a precedent may prove very 
injurious in its consequences, for it implies that any person who is deaf and dumb is at 
liberty to steal sheep with impunity.


MARTHA TRACY  
Executed for a Street Robbery

  
Martha Tracy robbing Mr Humphries

	THE melancholy fate of this unfortunate woman is another instance of the 
misery occasioned by that licentiousness, which is of all vices the most destructive of 
the happiness of females, and so disgraceful to the British metropolis.
	This much injured woman was a native of Bristol, and descended from poor 
parents, who educated her in the best manner in their power. Getting a place in the 
service of a merchant when she was sixteen years of age, she lived with him three 
years, and then came to London.
	Having procured a place in a house where lodgings were let to single 
gentlemen, and being a girl of an elegant appearance, and fond of dress, she was liable 
to a variety of temptations.
	Her vanity being even more than equal to her beauty, she at length conceived 
that she had made a conquest of one of the gentlemen-lodgers, and was foolish 
enough to think he would marry her.
	With a view of keeping alive the passion she thought she had inspired, she 
sought every pretence of going into his chamber; and he, having some designs against 
her virtue, purchased her some new clothes, in which she went to church on the 
following Sunday, where she was observed by her mistress.
	On their return from church, the mistress strictly inquired how she came to be 
possessed of such fine clothes; and, having learnt the real state of the case, she was 
discharged from her service on the Monday morning.
	As she still thought the gentleman intended marriage, she wrote to him, 
desiring he would meet her at a public-house; and, on his attending, she wept 
incessantly, and complained of the treatment she had met with from her mistress, 
which she attributed to the presents she had received from him.
	The seducer advised her to calm her spirits, and go into lodgings, which he 
would immediately provide for her, and here he could securely visit her till the 
marriage should take place.
	Deluded by this artifice, she went that day to lodge at a house in the Strand, 
which he said was kept by a lady who was related to him. In this place he visited her 
on the following, and several successive days; attending her to public places, and 
making her presents of elegant clothes, which effectually flattered her vanity, and 
lulled asleep the small remains of her virtue.
	It is needless to say that her ruin followed. After a connexion of a few months, 
she found him less frequent in his visits; and, informing him that she was with child, 
demanded that he would make good his promise of marriage: on which he declared 
that he had never intended to marry her, and that he would not maintain her any 
longer; and hinted that she should seek another lodging.
	On the following day the mistress of the house told her she must not remain 
there any longer, unless she would pay for her lodgings in advance, which being 
unable to do, or, perhaps, unwilling to remain in a house where she had been so 
unworthily treated, she packed up her effects, and removed to another lodging.
	When she was brought to bed, the father took away the infant, and left the 
wretched mother in a very distressed situation. Having subsisted for some time by 
pawning her clothes, she was at length so reduced as to listen to the advice of a 
woman of the town, who persuaded her to procure a subsistence by the casual wages 
of prostitution.
	Having embarked in the horrid course of life, she soon became a common 
street-walker, and experienced all those calamities incident to so deplorable a 
situation. Being sometimes tempted to pick pockets for a subsistence, she became an 
occasional visitor at Bridewell, where her mind grew only the more corrupt by the 
conversation of the abandoned wretches confined in that place.
	We now come to speak of the fact, the commission of which forfeited her life 
to the violated laws of her country.
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey, in the month of January, 1745, she was 
indicted for robbing William Humphreys of a guinea on the king's highway.
	The fact was, that being passing, at midnight, near Northumberland House, in 
the Strand, she accosted Mr Humphreys, who declining to hold any correspondence 
with her, two fellows with whom she was connected came up, and one of them 
knocking him down, they both ran away; when she robbed him of a guinea, which she 
concealed in her mouth; but Mr Humphreys seizing her, and two persons coming up, 
she was conducted to the watch-house, where the guinea was found in her mouth, as 
above mentioned, by the constable of the night.
	At her trial it was proved that she had called the men, one of whom knocked 
down the prosecutor; so that there could be no doubt of her being an accomplice with 
them; whereupon the jury brought her in guilty.
	After conviction she appeared to have a proper idea of her former guilt, and 
the horrors of her present situation. In fact she was a sincere penitent, and lamented 
that pride of heart which had first seduced her to destruction.
	Martha Tracy was hanged at Tyburn, on the 16th of February, 1745, behaving 
with the greatest decency and propriety to the last moment of her life.
	The fate of this woman affords a striking lesson to girls against the taking 
pride in those personal charms which, the more brilliant they are, will be only the 
more likely to lead them to destruction. The idea she had formed of making a 
conquest of a man in a rank of life superior to her own served only to assist towards 
her ruin; but we cannot help thinking that he who could be base enough to seduce her 
under solemn promises of marriage was still more guilty than herself, and in some 
degree an accessory to all the crimes she afterwards committed.
	It seems strangely unnatural that the father should take away the child, and 
leave the mother to perish, or to subsist only in a most infamous manner, for which 
she had been qualified by the gratification of his passions!
	In the gay hours of festivity men may triumph in the advantages they have 
gained over women in their unguarded moments; but surely reflection must come, 
with all her attendant train of horrors. Conscience will assert her rights; and the 
misery the wicked seducer suffers in this life he ought to consider only as a prelude to 
the more aggravated torments he has to expect in the next.
	If any one of the readers of this narrative has been guilty of the enormous 
crime we are now reprobating, it will become him to think seriously of the great work 
of reformation; and to repent, in the most unfeigned manner, while Providence yet 
permits him the opportunity of repentance. It ought to be remembered by offenders of 
every class, that the God of mercy is also a God of justice.


MATTHEW HENDERSON  
Executed in Oxford Street, 25th of February, 1746, for murdering his 
Mistress, Lady Dalrymple, who was angry because he trod on her Toe.

	THIS offender was born at North Berwick, in Scotland, where he was 
educated in the liberal manner customary in that country.
	Sir Hugh Dalrymple, being a Member of the British Parliament, took 
Henderson into his service when fourteen years of age, and brought him to London. 
Before he was nineteen years old he married one of his master's maids; but Sir Hugh, 
who had a great regard for him, did not dismiss him, though he was greatly chagrined 
at this circumstance.
	Some few days before the commission of the murder, Sir Hugh, having 
occasion to go out of town for a month, summoned Henderson to assist in dressing 
him; and, while he was thus employed, Sir Hugh's lady going into the room, the 
servant casually trod on her toe. She said not a word on the occasion, but looked at 
him with a degree of rage that made him extremely uneasy.
	When Sir Hugh had taken his leave she demanded of Henderson why he had 
trod on her toe; in answer to which he made many apologies, and ascribed the 
circumstance to mere accident; but she gave him a blow on the ear, and declared that 
she would dismiss him from her service.
	Henderson said it would be unnecessary to turn him away, for he would go 
without compulsion; but, reflecting that her passion would soon subside, he continued 
in his place, and was used with as much kindness as if the accident had not taken 
place.
	Offended by the insult that had been offered him, Henderson began to consider 
how he should be revenged and at length came to the fatal resolution of murdering his 
mistress.
	For the particulars of this barbarous deed we refer to his confession in 
Newgate, taken in writing by the ordinary, the day before his execution.
	He said his mother had been dead several years, which he mentioned with 
satisfaction because, as she loved him tenderly, he believed this affair would certainly 
have broken her heart.
	He had lived with his master five years—about three years in Scotland and 
two years in London—and declared no servant could be better used than he was, and 
that he never had the least dislike to the deceased, for that she was a lady of great 
humanity, and greatly respected by all her servants; and his master a most worthy 
gentleman. One night Mary Platt, the maid-servant, told him she would go and see her 
husband, and he said she might do as she pleased. She went, and took the key to let 
herself in again. He shut the door after her, and went and cleaned some plate in the 
kitchen. From thence he went up into the back-parlour, where he used to lie, and let 
down his bed, in order to go to sleep. He pulled off his shoes, and tied up his hair with 
his garter, and that moment the thought came into his head to kill his lady. He went 
downstairs into the kitchen, took a small iron cleaver, and went up to the first landing-
place on the stairs, and after tarrying a minute or two came down, shocked at the 
crime he was about to perpetrate. He went up again as far as the first window, and the 
watchman was going—"past twelve o'clock." After the watchman had passed the 
door, he entered the room a second time, went to the bedside, undrew the curtains, and 
found she was fast asleep. He went twice from the bed to the door in great perplexity 
of mind, the deceased being still asleep. He continued in great agonies, but soon felt 
where she lay, and made twelve or fourteen motions with the cleaver before he struck 
her. He repeated his blows, and in struggling she fell out of bed next the window, and 
then he thought it was time to put her out of her misery, and struck her with all his 
might as she lay on the floor.
	He then went into his bedchamber again, and sat down on his bed for about ten 
minutes, when it came into his head to rob the house. He again went into the 
deceased's bed-chamber, and took her pockets as they were hanging on the chair, and 
took a gold watch and two diamond rings out of the drawers, with several other 
things.
	He was executed in Oxford Street, on 25th February, 1746.


MARY HAMILTON  
A Woman who was imprisoned and whipped for marrying Fourteen Women, 
1746

	POLYGAMY, or a man marrying two or more wives—and, vice versa, a 
woman marrying two or more husbands—is a crime frequently committed; but a 
woman marrying a woman according to the rites of the Established Church is 
something strange and unnatural. Yet did this woman, under the outward garb of a 
man, marry fourteen of her own sex!
	At the Quarter Sessions held at Taunton, in Somersetshire, this woman was 
brought before the Court; but under what specific charge, or upon what penal statute 
she was indicted, we can neither trace by the mention of the circumstance, nor could 
we frame an indictment to meet the gross offence, because the law never 
contemplated a marriage among women. She was, however, tried, whether or not her 
case might have been cognisable, and Mary Price, the fourteenth wife, appeared in 
evidence (in such a case as this we must be pardoned for ambiguity) against her 
female husband.
	She swore that she was lawfully married to the prisoner, and that they bedded 
and lived together as man and wife for more than a quarter of a year; during all which 
time, so well did the impostor assume the character of man, she still actually believed 
she had married a fellow-creature of the right and proper sex.
	The learned quorum of justices thus delivered their verdict: "That the he or she 
prisoner at the bar is an uncommon, notorious cheat, and we, the Court, do sentence 
her, or him, whichever he or she may be, to be imprisoned six months, and during that 
time to be whipped in the towns of Taunton, Glastonbury, Wells and Shepton Mallet, 
and to find security for good behaviour as long as they, the learned justices aforesaid, 
shall or may, in their wisdom and judgment, require." And Mary, the monopoliser of 
her own sex, was imprisoned and whipped accordingly, in the severity of the winter of 
the year 1746.


THE SECOND REBELLION OF THE PRETENDER TO 
THE BRITISH THRONE 
in the year 1745.

"Whatever private views and passions plead, 
NO cause can justify so black a deed;
These, when the angry 'tempest clouds the soul, 
May darken reason, and her course controul; 
But when the prospect clears, her startled eye 
Must, from the treacherous gulph, with horror fly, 
On whose wide wave, by stormy passions tost, 
So many hapless wretches have been lost.  
Then be this truth the star by which we steer, 
Above ourselves, our COUNTRY should be dear." 
—THOMSON.
	THE same pretext used to foment a discontent to the reigning family, and to 
set up the standard of the House of Stuart, again burst forth at this period of time, with 
a much more serious aspect than the rebellion of 171 5. Having already given an 
account of the rise and quelling of that public revolt, to which we again refer our 
reader, we shall proceed to a more ample history of that, now before us—the most 
remarkable circumstance that had happened for some centuries.
	When England was now attacked, by the disaffected Scotchmen, she was 
involved in an expensive war with her ancient enemy, France. Her armies were 
fighting under the Duke of Cumberland, in Germany, and her fleets sufficiently 
employed in watching the motions of their enemy. King George, tho' then seated on 
the English throne, in one part of this war, in person commanded his army, and won 
the celebrated battle of Dettington, where he evinced much personal courage. When 
the rebellion broke out in Scotland, the King was on a visit to his dominions in 
Hanover.
	The French, being at war, with Britain, thought the time favourable to wound 
its internal peace, by espousing the cause of the Pretender. Not that they cared about 
him or his pretence to the crown, but he appeared an excellent instrument for that 
purpose. The very same policy they adopted when Britain was at war with her 
rebellious colonies in America. The French assisted them, not from affection, but 
through them to wound the crown, under which they had been fostered for so many 
years.
	That government was not apprised of the preparations making to assist the 
Pretender, is evident from the King's speech on the 2d of May, 1745, the very time, 
they were going on, wherein he informs his parliament, "that the posture of affairs 
abroad had received a very considerable alteration, to the advantage of the common 
cause, and that thereby the influence of France was much weakened and diminished, 
and a way opened to restore that strength and power to our ancient and natural allies, 
which would tend greatly to the re-establishment and security of the balance of 
Europe." On the 10th, the King, having placed the government of the nation in the 
hands of John, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and nineteen other Privy Counsellors, 
he embarked at Harwich, on a visit to Hanover.
	The first notice which the British public had of the, proceedings of the, 
Pretender, was from a paragraph in the General Evening Post, which said, "The 
Pretender's eldest son put to sea, July 14, from France, in an armed ship of sixty guns, 
provided with a large quantity of war-like stores, together with a frigate of thirty guns, 
and a number of smaller armed vessels, in order to land in Scotland, where he 
expected to find twenty thousand men in arms, to make good his, pretensions to the 
crown of Great Britain. He was to be joined by five ships of the line from Brest, and 
4,500 Spaniards were embarking at Ferrol."
	Through different channels this news was confirmed, and the nation thrown 
into the utmost alarm. King George II. on being apprised of it, instantly prepared to 
return, and arrived in London on the 31st of August, amid the acclamations of his 
loyal subjects, and a discharge of artillery. The Park and Tower guns had fired only a 
week before, on the taking of Cape Breton.
	The Pretender, followed by about fifty Scotch and Irish adventurers, came 
incog. through Normandy, and on the 18th of July embarked on board a ship of war of 
18 guns, which was joined off Belleisle by the Elizabeth and other ships. They 
intended to have sailed north about, and land in Scotland. On the 20th they came up 
with an English fleet of merchant vessels, under convoy of the Lion man of war, of 58 
guns, commanded by Captain Brett, who immediately bore down upon the French 
line-of-battle ship, which he engaged within pistol shot five hours, and was constantly 
annoyed by the smaller ships of the enemy. The rigging of the Lion was cut to pieces; 
her mizen-mast, mizen-top-mast, main-yard, and foretop-sail, were shot away; all her 
lower-masts and top-masts shot through in many places, so that she lay muzzled in the 
sea, and could do nothing with her sails. Thus situated, the French ships sheered off, 
and the Lion could make no effort to follow them. Captain Brett had forty-five men 
killed; himself, all his lieutenants, the master, several midshipmen, and one hundred 
and seven foremast men wounded. His principal antagonist, the Elizabeth; with 
difficulty got back to Brest, quite disabled, and had sixty-four men killed, one 
hundred and thirty-nine dangerously wounded, and a number more slightly. She had 
on board 400,000l. sterling, and arms and ammunition for several thousand men.
	The French court, the expedition thus miscarrying, pretended ignorance of the 
circumstance.
	Meanwhile, the Camerons, the Macdonalds, and many other clans, were in 
arms, in expectation of their friends from France. They came down into. the low-lands 
in parties, and carried off, by force, many men to fill their ranks, and committed 
various disorders.
	The Pretender having embarked in another ship, again sailed from France, and 
eluded the English cruisers, so as to give him an opportunity of landing, which he 
effected with his followers, on the Isle of Sky, opposite to Lochaber, in the county of 
Inverness, about the end of. the, month of July, and took up his residence at the house 
of a Papist priest, with whom he remained three weeks, while his emissaries were 
raising men for his service. At length at the head of about two thousand he began his, 
march-under a standard, on which was the motto "TANDEM TRIUMPHANS."—"At 
length triumphant."
	The rebels now marched towards Fort William, where the Pretender published 
a manifesto, which his father had signed at Rome; containing abundant promises to 
such as would adhere to his cause; two of which were a dissolution of the union 
between the two kingdoms, and a payment of the national debt.
	This circumstance induced many of the ignorant country people to flock to his 
standard, till at length his undisciplined rabble began to assume the appearance of an 
army, which struck terror to the well-affected wherever it came.
	These transactions, however, had not passed so secretly, but that the governor 
of Fort William informed the Lord Justice Clerk of Edinburgh of all he could learn of 
the. affair; on which the latter dispatched an express to the north, ordering the 
assistance of all officers, civil and military; and this express arrived about the time the 
Pretender erected his standard.
	The Governor of Fort William having received these orders, dispatched two 
companies of St. Clair's and Murray's regiments of foot, to oppose the rebels. They 
were attacked by a far superior number of Highlanders, which they contended against, 
until they fired away all their ammunition; after which they were attacked in front, 
flank, and rear, and near half their number killed, before they surrendered. Captain 
Scott, their brave commander, was wounded; but the rebels gave him and his 
remaining officers their parole of honour; the private soldiers were sent to prison.
	In the interim the Lord Justice Clerk ordered Sir John Cope, commander in 
chief of the forces in the South Scotland, to march against the rebels; but in making 
the circuit of the immense mountains of Argyleshire, the two armies failed to meet; on 
which Sir John went to Inverness, to refresh his troops after the fatigue of the March.
	The armies having thus casually missed each other, the rebels proceeded to 
Perth, and having taken possession of that place, the Pretender issued his orders for all 
persons who were in possession of public money, to pay it into the hands of his 
secretary, whose receipts should be a full acquittal for the same.
	The rebel numbers had now greatly increased, and in September the Pretender 
issued a proclamation. The provost and magistrates left the city, and others were 
immediately appointed in their room. Here the rebels were joined by the Duke of 
Perth, Lord George Murray, Lord Nairn, the Hon. William Murray, Messrs. Oliphant, 
father and son, of Gask, George Kelly, Esq. who, with the late bishop of Rochester, 
was committed to the Tower, and thence escaped, and several other Scotch gentlemen 
of influence, with their followers, making a formidable army.
	The official papers distributed began thus: "Charles, Prince of Wales, and 
Regent of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland, and of the Dominions thereto 
belonging."
	In the mean time general Cope sent from Inverness an express to Aberdeen, 
for the transport Vessels in that harbour to be ready to receive his troops; and 
embarking on the 18th of September, he disembarked them at Dunbar.
	During these transactions General Quest, who commanded the castle of 
Edinburgh, gave the magistrates of that city several pieces of cannon for the defence 
of the place; and Colonel James Gardiner repaired from Stirling to Edinburgh, with 
two regiments of dragoons; but learning that General Cope had landed at Dunbar, 
which is twenty-seven Miles east of Edinburgh, he proceeded lo effect a junction with 
that general.
	On the 7th another party of rebels took possession of the town of Dundee, 
proclaimed the Pretender, searched for arms, and levied money on the inhabitants, 
giving receipts for the same. They seized a ship, and steered her to Perth, supposing 
there was gunpowder on board. On the 11th they left Perth, and marched that day to 
Dunblaine, twenty miles; the next day only two, to Down. They crossed the Forth at 
the fords of Frews, on the 13th, General Blakeney having destroyed the bridge; and 
directed their march towards Glasgow; but the next day they turned to the eastward, 
and marched by Falkirk to Cullington, four miles from Edinburgh.
EDINBURGH TAKEN BY SURPRISE.
	The following day the Pretender proceeded through the royal park, and took 
possession of Holyrood-House. The money in the bank of Edinburgh, and the records 
in the public offices, were now removed to the castle for security, and the gates of the 
city were kept fast during the whole day; but five hundred of the rebels having 
concealed themselves in the suburbs, took an opportunity, at four o'clock the next 
morning, to follow a coach which was going in and seizing the gate called the 
Netherbow, they maintained their ground while, the body reached the centre of the 
city, and formed themselves in the Parliament Close.
	Thus possessed of the capital, they seized two thousand stand of arms, and, on 
the following day, marched to oppose the Royal army, under the command of General 
Cope; and the two armies being within sight of each other, near Preston Pans, on the 
evening of the 20th, Colonel Gardiner earnestly recommended it to the general to 
attack them during the night; but deaf to this advice he kept the men under arms, till 
morning, though they were already greatly harassed.
	At five in the morning the rebels made a furious attack on the royal army, and 
threw them into unspeakable confusion, by two regiments of dragoons falling back on 
the foot. Colonel Gardiner, with 400 foot, behaved with uncommon valour, and 
covered the retreat of those who fled, but the colonel receiving a mortal wound, the 
rebels made prisoners of the rest of the King's troops.
	The following account of this disaster was issued. from Whitehall, London:
	"By an express arrived this morning, we are informed that Sir John Cope, with 
the troops under his command, were attacked by the rebels on the 21st instant, at day 
break, at Preston, near Seaton, seven miles from Edinburgh; that the King's troops 
were defeated, and that Sir John Cope, with about four hundred and fifty dragoons, 
had retired to Lauder; Brigadier Fawkes and Colonel Lascelles, had got to Lauder. 
The Earls of Loudon and Hume were at Dundee, with Sir John Cope."
	The loss sustained by the King's troops was,
Killed
300
Wounded
450
Taken prisoners
520
Total
1270
The rebels did not lose more than fifty men.
	Flushed with this partial victory, the rebels returned in high spirits to 
Edinburgh. They now sent foraging parties through the country, with orders to seize 
all the horses and waggons they could find: and, in the interim, a party of the 
insurgents attempted to throw up an intrenchment on the castle-hill. Hereupon the 
governor, necessitated to oppose the assailants, yet anxious for the safety of the 
inhabitants, sent a messenger in the night, to intimate to those who lived near the 
castle-hill, that they would do well to remove out of danger.
	As soon as it was day-light, the battery of the rebels was destroyed by a 
discharge of the great cannon from the half-moon, and thirty of them killed, with three 
of the inhabitants, who had rashly ventured near the spot.
	The governor being greatly deficient in provisions, a gentleman ordered above 
50 fine bullocks to be driven into the city on a pretence that they were for the use of 
the rebels; and the person who drove them leaving them on the castle-hill, the 
governor and five hundred men sallied forth and drove them in at the gate, while the 
rebels played their artillery with unremitting fury.
	While the rebels continued in Edinburgh, which was about seven weeks, some 
noblemen and their adherents joined them; so that their army amounted to almost ten 
thousand men, They now levied large contributions; not only in Edinburgh, but 
through the adjacent country; and those who furnished them received receipts, signed,
	"CHARLES, Prince Regent."
	The officers taken at the battle of Preston, were admitted to their parole, but 
the privates were ill treated. Their allowance-was only three-halfpence each per day, 
and their prison filthy, and destitute of accommodations. This was practised in order 
to cause them to enlist under the banner of the Pretender and they were tampered 
with, promised the best treatment, new clothing, and five guineas per man, on their 
"taking St. James's Palace." One hundred and twenty, oppressed by hunger, and 
tempted by allurement, were not able to withstand either the calls or the temptation, 
and turned rebels and papists: thus forfeiting their honour and their lives. It is curious 
to remark, that not a man of these apostate traitors survived their newly adopted 
cause, for such as were not killed in the various engagements which took place before 
the rebellion could be quelled, fell into the hands of their injured countrymen, who 
hanged them all on the gallows; and thus let every traitor perish!
	About this time some ships from France arrived in the Forth, laden with 
ammunition; and a person who attended the Pretender was dignified with the title of 
ambassador from his most Christian Majesty.
	General Wade had now the command of some forces which had reached 
Yorkshire; and some Dutch troops being sent to augment his forces, he marched to 
Newcastle, with a view to deter the rebels from entering the southern part of the 
kingdom.
	That celebrated prelate, the late Dr. Herring, archbishop of York, distinguished 
himself gloriously on this interesting occasion. Joining with the high sheriff to 
assemble the freeholders, the archbishop preached an animated sermon to them; and 
then the several parties agreed to assist each other in support of their civil and 
religious rights. Many people in Yorkshire were prevented from engaging in the 
rebellion by this spirited and well-timed conduct.
	The Lord President Forbes, and the Earl of Loudon, acted in a manner equally 
zealous in Scotland. Having collected a number of the loyal Highlanders into a body, 
many others who would have joined the rebels were thereby deterred; and this 
proceeding proved of the most essential service towards the suppression of the 
rebellion.
	The rebels quitted Edinburgh in the beginning of November, marched to 
Dalkeith where they encamped; and a report was circulated that they proposed to 
make an attack on Lerwick; but this was only a contrivance to conceal their real 
designs.
	In the mean time more than a thousand of the rebels deserted, in consequence 
of General Wade's publishing a pardon to such as would return to their duty as good 
subjects, within a limited time. Still, however, they had above eight thousand men 
able to bear arms; yet General Wade would have marched to attack them, but that his 
soldiers were ill of the flux, owing to the severity of the season, and the fatigues they 
had undergone.
THE CITY OF CARLISLE BESIEGED AND TAKEN.
	Emboldened by success, and their force increased, the rebels now determined 
to penetrate into England. On Saturday, the 9th of October, about three o'clock in the 
afternoon, the inhabitants of that ancient city were thrown into the greatest alarm, at 
seeing a body of them on Stanwix-bank, within a quarter of a mile of them; and it 
being market-day there, they mixed with the country people returning home, so that it 
was not possible for the garrison to fire upon their for some time, without risque of 
injuring their neighbours along with their enemies; but in less than half an hour the 
country people dispersed themselves, and then the garrison of the castle fired a ten-
gun battery upon them, which, it is believed, killed several; then, night coming on, 
they retreated to a greater distance from the city and the garrison stood all the night 
under arms.. At two in the morning a thick fog came on, which remained till twelve 
that day, when it cleared up for about an hour, and. then the garrison discovered the 
rebels approaching to attack the city in three several ways, one at Stanwix-bank, 
commanded by the Duke of Perth; another at Shading-gate-lane, commanded by the 
Marquis of Tullibardine, who also had the artillery; and the third in Blackwell-fields, 
where the Pretender commanded the rest of their body facing the English-gate. Upon 
discovering these three parties approaching so near to the city, the garrison fired upon 
them, viz. the four-gun battery upon the Marquis of Tullibardine; who was heard to 
say, "Gentlemen, we have not meta! for them, retreat;" which they immediately did; 
and disappeared. The turret guns and the citadel guns were: fired upon the Pretender's 
division, where the white flag was displayed, which was seen to fall; about the same 
time the ten-gun battery was fired upon the Duke of Perth's division, who also retired. 
Then the thick fog struck in again, and all the inhabitants of the city expected nothing 
but that a general assault would be made by the rebels, against which the walls were 
well lined with men; and Sir John.Pennington; Dr. Waugh, Chancellor Humphry 
Senhouse, Joseph Daire Ralston; of Acron-bank, esquires, with several other 
gentlemen of note; were all night under arms, to encourage and assist them. The 
militia was also drawn up at the foot of Castle-street, to be ready in case of a forcible 
attack, to relieve and reinforce the men upon the walls. On Monday Morning, the fog 
still continuing thick, the garrison could not observe the situation of the rebels, but 
heard their pipers playing not far from the English-gate. About ten o'clock a man was 
let down from the city walls, to reconnoitre the enemy; and he found they were 
retiring towards Warwick bridge. In the afternoon other spies were likewise detached 
to observe their motions, and discovered a great number remaining about Warwick-
bridge; but the Pretender, with his guard and attendants, were advanced to Brampton; 
where they lodged themselves that night; and on Tuesday they lay idle from all action, 
except feats of rapine and plunder; for they spent the day in hunting and destroying 
the sheep of Lord Carlisle's tenants, and bearing off the country people's geese, and 
other poultry, They also seized upon all the horses they could lay hands on, without 
any question relating to value or property notwithstanding they declared the design of 
their expedition was to redress grievances, and correct abuses. Tuesday night the 
rebels slept quietly. On Wednesday morning about ten o'clock they displayed the 
white flag at Warwick-bridge-end, to which they were about three hours in repairing. 
About one o'clock the young Pretender, attended by Lord George Murray, the Duke of 
Perth, and several others, besides those called his guard, came to them; upon which 
they formed themselves, and. began to march again to Carlisle, in the following order, 
first, two (named Hussars) in Highland dresses, and high rough red caps, like 
pioneers: next, about half a dozen of the chief leaders, followed by a kettle-drum; then 
the. Pretender's son, at the head of about 110 horse, called his guards, two and two a-
breast; after these a confused multitude of all sorts of mean people to the number, as 
was supposed, of about six thousand.. In this order they advanced to the height of 
Warwick-moor; where they halted about half an hour, and took an attentive view of 
the city; from thence the foot took the lead, and so marched to Carlisle about three in 
the afternoon, when they began a fresh assault, and the city renewed their fire. On 
Thursday it was discovered that the rebels had thrown up a trench, which intimidated 
the town, and in a consultation it was resolved to capitulate, a deputation was sent to 
the Pretender, at Brampton, and the town and castle were delivered up on Friday 
morning.
	During this progress and success of the rebels, the English government were 
not waiting the event of a battle, without making every effort to entirely quell the 
rebellion. The city of London addressed the king, in terms of great loyalty, and 
offered contributions for that purpose. The example of the metropolis was followed by 
almost every corporate body in the kingdom. The flower of the English army, as we 
have already observed, was in Germany; had they, instead of the new levies then 
engaged, fought at Preston, the issue of that battle would most likely have terminated 
the rebellion.
	The King now thought fit to send for his son the Duke of Cumberland, to 
command against the rebels; and with him eight battalions and nine squadrons 
returned, from fighting foreign foes, to quell a civil war at home. On his arrival he 
immediately took the command; and soon followed his veteran troops towards the 
north. He arrived in Staffordshire, at the time when the rebels had penetrated as far as 
the town of Derby.
	Both houses of parliament now assembled, a bill was passed for suspending 
the habeas corpus act for six months: by which the King was, for that period, 
empowered to seize all suspected persons, and commit them to prison, without 
specifying the reason of such Commitment. [Note: The right of the writ of habeas 
corpus is one of the most valuable privileges of an Englishman. By virtue of it the 
body cannot be detained without shewing cause to the Court of King's Bench. It 
guards us from oppressions, and is productive of many advantages in the security of 
our rights and liberties. Hence its suspension is not trusted to the King himself, except 
upon the most urgent necessity, such as an invasion, rebellion, or insurrection.]
	The effects of this act were the apprehension and commitment of many 
suspected persons in both kingdoms; but it did not appear to stop the progress of the 
rebellion.
	The duke now expected a junction of the forces under General Wade, who had 
marched from Newcastle to Darlington, and taking a westward course, had stationed 
his troops near Wetherby. The rebels having advice of this motion, it was proposed by 
some of them to march into North Wales; but others opposed this on the presumption, 
that they should then be surrounded by the royal army, and compelled to surrender 
themselves prisoners at discretion, as they would have no opportunity of retreating 
into Scotland. They therefore determined to push their cause to the very utmost; and 
for this purpose advanced by more rapid Marches to the southward; than the king's 
troops could have endured, until they actually penetrated into the very heart and 
centre of England.
	Liverpool was not behind London in spirit and loyalty. The inhabitants 
contributed largely in assisting the royal army at this inclement season, with warm 
clothing, and raised several companies of armed men, which were called the Royal 
Liverpool Blues. Some of the advanced parties of rebels having appeared in sight of 
the town, every, preparation was made to resist them. Finding at length that the 
pretender bent his march by another route for Manchester, the Liverpool Blues 
marched in order to destroy the brides, and thereby impede their progress, This 
service they effected, breaking them down at Warrington, over the river Mersey, as 
far as Stockport. They seized two of the rebels, whom they handcuffed and, sent to 
Chester Gaol.
	Notwithstanding these impediments, the rebels crossed the Mersey, at different 
fords, through which the Pretender waded breast high in water. Their numbers could 
not be accurately ascertained, their march being straggling and unequal, but about 
9000 appeared the aggregate. Their train of artillery, consisted of sixteen field-pieces 
of three and four-pound shot, two carriages of gunpowder, a number of covered 
waggons, and about 109 horses laden with ammunition. Their vanguard consisted of 
about 200 cavalry, badly mounted, the horses appearing poor and jaded.
	On entering the town of Macclesfield, they ordered the usual bellman to go 
round and, give notice, that billets must forthwith be ready for 5,000 men, their first 
division, on pain of military execution. The Pretender himself constantly marched on 
foot, at the head of two regiments, one of which was appropriated as his body-guard. 
His dress was a light plaid, belted about with a sash of blue silk; he wore a grey wig, 
with a blue bonnet and a white rose in it. He appeared very dejected at this time. His 
followers were ordinary, except the two regiments mentioned, which appeared to have 
been, picked, out of the whole, to form them. The arms of the others were very 
indifferent. Some had guns, others only pistols, the remainder broad swords and 
targets. They committed various depredations in their progress, seizing all the horses, 
and plundering the houses and the farm-yards.
	In this manner they proceeded to Derby. At Manchester, where they raised a 
regiment, it was apprehended, and not without reason, that they might have reached 
the Metropolis, the duke not being fully prepared, or by their retrograde motions 
might have missed them, as happened in the outset with Sir John Cope in the 
mountains of Arglyeshire. Though we cannot consistently with the plan of our work, 
occupy many more pages, yet, on a subject like this, so highly important at the time it 
occurred, and new to a great portion of our readers, a description of the behaviour of 
this rebellious faction in Manchester and Derby, with the panic which seized them, 
and their flight back to Scotland, cannot be unacceptable.
	On the 28th of November, an advanced party of rebels entered Manchester, 
immediately beat up for volunteers, and enlisted several papists and nonjurors, to 
whom they promised five guineas each, but gave them little more than white 
cockades, and what they called enlisting money. They then ordered quarters to be 
prepared for 10,000 men. Upon the arrival of the main body, a detachment examined 
the best houses, fixed on one for the Pretender, and others for the principal officers. 
They ordered the bellman to go round the town, and give notice to all persons 
belonging to the excise, innkeepers, &c. forthwith to appear, and bring their 
acquittances and rolls, and all the ready cash they had in their hands, belonging to 
government, on pain of military execution.
	The Pretender was then proclaimed king Of England, and the terrified 
inhabitants were ordered to illuminate their houses.
	In order to deceive the Duke of Cumberland, whose army was augmenting in 
Staffordshire, sometimes they gave out that their route was for Chester; then to 
Knutsford, Middlewich, and Nantwich; at other times they pretended they were going. 
into Wales. The Duke, however, took those measures which could not fail checking 
their progress, should they push for London, which now was greatly apprehended; and 
in short, the whole nation was in the utmost consternation. He concentrated the troops 
near Northampton, a position which the rebels could not pass by the direct road, 
without risking a battle. It was still apprehended that by forced marches, and by 
advancing with great rapidity, they meant to avoid the Duke by a circuitous route 
through Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. Fortunately they trifled away much time in 
raising the regiments, a proposition of a Mr. Townley, who was appointed the colonel, 
and afterwards taken prisoner at Carlisle, for which, among many others he was 
hanged, as we shall hereafter describe.
	These daring traitors had despoiled the country as far as Derby, before they 
were aware of the danger they incurred to themselves. Here they found that the duke 
was waiting their further progress, advantageously posted, and in force, which they 
appeared unwilling to engage with. They had actually left Derby, and taken the road 
to London, when, it was evident, a panic overcame them; for they had barely 
measured a mile when they halted; held a consultation, wheeled round, and retraced 
their steps to Derby. On their second visit to this already oppressed town, they levied 
contributions to a large amount, and threatened destruction to, it, unless instantly 
complied with. They took what was hastily brought them, meanly plundered whatever 
fell in their way, and departed sullen and dejected.
	From this moment they sought to regain Scotland, and by forced marches the 
duke pursued them. However oppressive their conduct in advancing, they committed 
murder and wanton mischief, and seized whatever they could carry off in their retreat. 
The rebels in arms in Scotland had, before this, been joined by some French troops, 
the commander of which declared, that he invaded the British dominions in the name 
of, and for, his master Louis XV.
	It is high time in our summary of this very remarkable epoch of the British 
history, which might fill an interesting volume, to take a view of. the proceedings of 
the gallant Duke of Cumberland. On the 6th he was at Coventry; with horse, and the 
infantry encamped upon Meriden Common where they received the warm clothing 
subscribed for in London, Liverpool, and other towns. On the 9th he pushed on at the 
head of the cavalry, and a thousand fresh, volunteers, mounted in pursuit of the rebels, 
with a view to skirmish with, them until the foot came up, but they fled at their utmost 
speed, through Ashbourn, Leek, Macclesfield, Manchester, Leigh, Wigan, and 
Preston.
	In order to enable the duke, to continue his pursuit, the gentlemen of 
Staffordshire provided horses to carry the foot soldiers. The flourishing town of 
Birmingham followed this laudable example, and Sir Lister Holt of Aston Hall, near 
thereto, furnished 450, sending even his coach-horses on this service; for which be 
received the public and. private thanks of the English commander in chief
	Field-marshal Wade with his detachment of the British army, was at this time 
at Wakefield. It had been resolved, in a council of war held on the 8th, at Ferrybridge, 
to march with all expedition into Lancashire, to cut off the retreat of the rebels to 
Scotland: but finding they, had proceeded too far in their flight to effect this, he 
dispatched General Oglethorpe with the cavalry to hang upon, and harass their rear.
	The French force which landed in favour of the rebels, brought with them a 
train of artillery of such heavy metal as to require about a dozen of their horses to 
draw an eighteen-pounder. With this train they advanced from Montrose to Perth, by 
Brechin. They had every difficulty to encounter; the season rendered the roads 
extremely bad, and the country people annoyed them in all directions.
	At Preston, the rebels wearied with incessant marches for the last three or four 
days, were compelled to halt a day. This being made known to the Duke of 
Cumberland, he redoubled his efforts to overtake them with his cavalry. He had seen 
recently joined by General Oglethorpe, whose squadrons had moved. from Doncaster 
without a halt; and in three days he gained a hundred miles over snow and ice. By 
pushing the horses to the extremity, the duke entered Preston only four hours after the 
rear of the rebels had left it but in turn he was now compelled to halt and refresh.
	On the 14th General Oglethorpe was at Garstang, and took his post at 
Elhilmoor, about three miles from Lancaster. The Liverpool companies arrived at 
Preston on the 16th, and that town sent a deputation of four of the principal 
inhabitants to his royal highness, with, offers to supply his troops with whatever they 
might stand in need of.
	At Lancaster the rebels were thrown into the utmost dread on the approach of 
General Oglethorpe, with the horse, who actually entered the town at one end, as they 
retreated out of the other. While the horses were feeding in the street, and the soldiers 
refreshing and preparing for the attack on overtaking the fugitives, the general was 
called back by an express announcing the invasion of the French. This intelligence 
proving to have had no foundation, the horse were again ordered to push on, but the 
rebels had got by that time so much the start, as not to be overtaken.
	At Kendal the country rose upon the retreating rebels; they took three of their 
men, two women, and several horses; in doing which three of the people were killed. 
The Pretender halted at Shap that night; and fearing to be treated in like manner at 
Penryth, he endeavoured to avoid that town, in which attempt he was met by an 
incredible number of incensed inhabitants on Lazenby Moor, on which they turned off 
to Temple Sowerby, but were hunted and galled the whole day, and at length driven 
into Orton. Here they could wait only to feed their horses in the street, and then set 
forward, having pressed a guide, but were pursued by the loyal people of Appleby and 
Brough, who took the Duke of Perth's mistress and another gentlewoman, whose 
carriage had broke down. As a retaliation for this interruption, the rebels committed 
great spoliations as they passed, plundering houses and shops, destroying goods, and 
stripping men of their shoes, stockings, breeches—nay, often stripping them 
altogether.
	After several forced marches, the Duke of Cumberland at length came up with 
the rebels at Lowther Hall, which they had taken possession of, but abandoned it on 
his approach, and threw themselves into the village of Clifton, three miles from 
Penryth. The dragoons immediately dismounted, and made so vigorous an attack, that 
in about an hour's time the rebels were driven back, though in a strong and defensible 
post. It became dark before the assault was over, and thus it was rendered impossible 
to calculate their loss, or to pursue them. Of the King's forces, forty were killed and 
wounded; and among the latter were Colonel Honeywood, Captain East, and the 
cornets Owen and Hamilton. These officers declared that when fallen, the rebels 
struck at them with their broadswords crying, "No quarter, kill them." They then, 
carried off their wounded and fled to Carlisle, which city they held possession of since 
its disgraceful capitulation; and which the English made immediate preparation to 
invest.
	A fresh detachment from Marshal Wade having joined. the duke, with a train 
of battering cannon from Whitehaven, he began his line of march for Carlisle, and 
gave orders for raising the posse comitatus, (the whole body of the people.) Upon his 
near approach, he found the main body of the rebels had abandoned the city for 
Scotland, leaving behind a garrison. He however invested it in all quarters, and the 
besieged fired their cannon with great fury, but little execution.
	During these operations, the Seahorse frigate captured a large French ship, a 
part of a small fleet; full of troops and warlike stores, destined for Scotland, and: 
brought her into Dover. On board were twenty-two officers, all of whom were Scotch 
and Irish, provided with corn, missions from the King of France, and, a proportional 
number of soldiers.
	To return to Carlisle: the Duke of Cumberland threw up batteries to bombard 
it, while the rebels burnt part of the suburbs, and hanged three of the inhabitants. The 
batteries, which took up several days in constructing, being complete were opened 
upon the city, but towards evening, ammunition being expended, they ceased, waiting 
for a supply, which, however, fortunately arrived next day, and the cannonade was 
resumed, which caused the rebels to hoist the white flag, upon which, it again ceased. 
In about two bows a f1ag of truce advanced with a rebel officer, who brought a letter 
signed 'John Hamilton, Governor of Carlisle.' This letter proposed hostages to be 
given and exchanged, in order to prepare for a capitulation. To this the Duke of 
Cumberland returned for answer, "That he would make no exchange of hostages with 
rebels." Another flag arrived from the rebel governor, desiring to know what terms the 
duke would grant him and his garrison. To this was answered, that the utmost terms 
he would grant, were, "not to put them to the sword, but to reserve them for His 
Majesty's pleasure;" whereupon he surrendered the city, praying the duke to intercede 
for his Majesty's royal clemency, and that the officers' clothes and baggage, might be 
safe; and at three in the afternoon of the 30th of December, the King's troops once 
more took possession of the devoted city of Carlisle.
	The rebel garrison consisted of the remains of the regiment they raised at 
Manchester, viz. Towney, their colonel, five captains, six lieutenants, seven ensigns, 
and an adjutant, who had been a barber, with ninety-three non-commissioned officers, 
drummers, and private men, chiefly Roman Catholics. The other part of the garrison 
of Scotch, were the governor, six captains,. seven lieutenants, three ensigns, and one 
surgeon; and 456 non-commissioned officers and private men. Last, though not least 
rebellious, was found James Cappock, the Pretender's bishop of the diocese. The 
French part of this contemptible garrison, as they styled themselves, was Sir Francis 
Geogean, of Thoulouse, in France, captain in Count Lally's regiment, Colonel 
Strictland, and Sir John Arbuthnot, captains in the rebel Lord George Drummond's 
regiment; but the real Frenchmen were, one sergeant and four private soldiers.
	These victories, however, by no means put an end to this very formidable 
rebellion. We must therefore, long as our account already is, follow the contending 
parties to Scotland, and when our readers recollect, that for this crime, very 
considerable numbers, as we shall hereafter shew, forfeited their lives, we cannot 
persuade ourselves, that herein we make even a digression from our avowed object. 
The main body of the rebels, we have observed, left Carlisle, and in haste moved 
forward to Scotland, having no impediment to encounter, we pass over their 
destructive march, until we find the Pretender at Glasgow, the second city of that part 
of great Britain. On his arrival at Glasgow, the Pretender sent for the Provost (the 
principal officer of the city) and demanded the names of all those who had subscribed 
for raising troops against him, threatening to hang him on his refusal. To this the 
Provost replied, "I will not give up the name of any one person in the city, but myself 
subscribed more than any other. I thought it my duty, and I am not afraid to die in 
such a cause." Here they levied a contribution for horses, and promised payment for 
what they consumed, then ordered the land-tax to be paid: but upon departure said, 
their expenses should be discharged out of the pretended forfeited rents of Kilsyth. 
They then marched for Stirling, in possession of the English, commanded by the 
gallant General Blakeney. The gates could not be defended; they therefore marched 
in, and summoned the garrison to surrender; but the veteran commander answered, 
that "he would perish in its ruins, rather than make terms with rebels." In the river of 
the town were two English men of war, and the rebels, in order to prevent their going 
further up, erected a battery, which the ships soon destroyed, and caused them to 
retreat a mile, where they erected another, which did little execution. They now 
prepared. for a vigorous attack upon the castle, got some heavy pieces of ordnance 
across the Forth, erected a battery against it, and called in all their forces. General 
Blakeney fired upon them, and repeatedly drove them from their works.
	General Hawley, at the head of such troops as he could form in order of battle, 
marched to attempt to raise the siege, but the rebels made a desperate attack, at the 
commencement of which his artillery horses, terrified, broke their traces, and ran 
away. Some of the dragoons seeing this, also gave way, and in short, the rebels had 
the advantage. At the beginning of the battle, a violent storm of wind and rain arose, 
which blew and beat in the faces of the English. General Hawley retreated to 
Linlithgow. His powder was found spoiled by the excessive rains of that and the 
preceding day; not a musket in five went off, and the drivers of his waggons, running 
off with the impressed horses, he was compelled to burn his tents and other stores, and 
to abandon nearly the whole of his artillery.
	Edinburgh being again in the possession of the English, and fears entertained 
that the rebels meant to abandon the siege of Stirling, and proceed thither, General 
Hawley was ordered to post himself between those places. The rebels, abandoning 
Stirling,. laid siege to Fort William, but after a long attack, in which they fired hot 
bars, in hopes of setting it on fire, they, also gave up that design.
	Various were the skirmishes in different parts of Scotland, and frequently to 
the advantage of the rebels, which we shall pass over in order to bring our history to a 
close, by presenting the two armies in order of battle, at Culloden; the result of which 
crushed this rebellion. It is certain, that the rebels entertained the most sanguine hopes 
of success, from their broadswords, which had already borne them too long in their 
career: but, when opposed to the English bayonet of veteran troops, they, were as a 
feather before the wind, nor can the horse make any impression on that formidable 
weapon, in the hands of a determined infantry. This may be called a pitched battle, for 
the contending armies having taken the field, determined to abide the issue of the day. 
They were respectively commanded by the Duke and the Pretender, in their proper 
persons: and the following, taken from the London Gazette, is the conqueror's account 
of the battle:
	"On Tuesday the 15th the rebels burnt Fort Augustus, which convinced us of 
their resolution to stand an engagement with the King's troops. We gave our men a 
day's halt at Nairn, and, on the 16th marched from thence between four and five in, 
four columns. The three lines of foot (reckoning the reserve for one) were broken into 
three from the right, which made the three columns equal, and each of five battalions. 
The artillery and baggage followed the first column upon the right, and the cavalry 
made the fourth column on the left.
	"After we had marched about eight miles, our advanced guard composed of 
about 40 of Kingston's, and the highlanders, led by the quarter-master-general, 
perceived the rebels at some distance making a motion towards us; upon which we 
immediately formed; but finding the rebels were still a good way from us, and that the 
whole body did not come forward, we put ourselves again upon our march in our 
former posture, and continued it to within a mile of them, where we again formed in 
the same order as before. After reconnoitering their situation, we found them posted 
behind some old walls and huts, in a line with Culloden House. As we thought our 
right entirely secure, Gen. Hawley and Gen. Bland went to the left with two regiments 
of dragoons, to endeavour to fall upon the right flank of the rebels, and Kingston's 
horse was ordered to the reserve. The ten pieces of cannon were disposed, two in each 
of the intervals of the first line, and all our Highlanders (except about 140, which were 
upon the left with Gen. Hawley, and who behaved extremely well) were left to guard 
the baggage.
	"When we were advanced within 500 yards of the rebels, we found the morass 
upon our right was ended, which left our right flank quite uncovered to them; his 
Royal Highness thereupon immediately ordered Kingston's horse from the reserve, 
and a little squadron of about 60 of Cobham's which had been patrolling, to cover our 
flank; and Pulteney's regiment was ordered from the reserve to the right of the Royals.
	"We spent above half an hour after that, trying which should gain the flank of 
the other; and his Royal Highness having sent Lord Bury forward within a hundred 
yards of the rebels, to reconnoitre somewhat that appeared like a battery to us, they 
there upon began firing their cannon, which was extremely ill-served and ill-pointed: 
ours immediately answered them, which began their confusion. They then came 
running on in their wild Manner: and upon the right where his Royal Highness placed 
himself, imagining the greater push would be there, they came down three several 
times within a hundred yards of our men, firing their pistols and brandishing their 
swords: but the Royals and Pulteney's hardly took their firelocks from their shoulders, 
so that after those faint attempts they made off, and the little squadrons on our right 
were sent to pursue them. Gen. Hawley had, by the help of our Highlanders, beat 
down the little stone walls, and came in upon the right flank of their second line.
	"As their whole first line came down to attack at once, their right somewhat 
out-flanked Barrel's regiment, which was our left, and the greatest part of the little 
loss we sustained, was there; but Bligh's and Sempil's giving a fire upon those who 
had out-flanked Barrel's soon repulsed them, and Barrel's regiment and the left of 
Monro's fairly beat them with their bayonets. There was scarce a soldier or officer of 
Barrel's, and of that part of Monro's which engaged, who did not kill one or two men 
each with their bayonets and spontoons. [Note: Spontoons: The officers' half-pikes]
	The cavalry, which had charged from the right and left, met in the centre, 
except two squadrons of dragoons, which we missed, and they were gone in pursuit of 
the runaways: Lord Ancram was order to pursue with the horse as far as he could; and 
did it with so good effect that a very considerable number was killed in the pursuit.
	"As we were in our march to Inverness, and were nearly arrived there, Major 
Gen. Bland sent the annexed papers, which he received from the French officers and 
soldiers, surrendering themselves prisoners to his Royal Highness. Major Gen. Bland 
had also made great slaughter, and took about 50 French officers and soldiers 
prisoners in his pursuit.
	"By the best calculation that can be made, it is thought the rebels lost 2000 
men upon the field of battle, and in the pursuit. We have here 222 French, and 326 
rebel prisoners. Lieut. Col. Howard killed an officer, who appeared to be Lord 
Strathallan, by the seal, and different commissions from the Pretender, found in his 
pocket.
	"It is said Lord Perth, Lord Nairn, Lochiel, Keppock, and Appin Stuart, are 
also killed. All their artillery and ammunition, were taken, as well as the Pretender's 
and all their baggage. There were also. twelve colours taken.
	"All the generals, officers, and soldiers, did their utmost duty in his Majesty's 
service, and shewed the greatest zeal and bravery on this occasion.
	"The Pretender's son, it is said, lay at Lord Lovat's house at Aird, the night 
after the action. Brig. Mordaunt is detached with 900 volunteers this morning into the 
Frazier country, to attack all the rebels he may find there. Lord Sutherland's and Lady 
Reay's people continue to exert themselves, and have taken upwards of 100 rebels, 
who are sent for; and there is great reason to believe Lord Cromartie and his son are 
also taken. The Monroes have killed 50 of the rebels in their flight. As it is not known 
where the greatest bodies of them are, or which way they have taken in their flight, his 
Royal Highness has not yet determined which way to march. On the 17th, as his 
Royal Highness as at dinner, three officers, and about sixteen of Fitz-James's 
regiment, who were mounted, came and surrendered themselves prisoners.
	"The killed, wounded, and missing, of the King's troops, amount to above 300.
	"The French officers will be all sent to Carlisle, till his Majesty's pleasure shall 
be known.
	"The rebels, by their own accounts, make their loss greater by 2000 men than 
we have stated it. Four of their principal ladies are in custody, viz. Lady Ogilvie, Lady 
Kinloch, Lady Gordon, and the Laird of McIntosh's wife. Major Grant, the Governor 
of Inverness, is retaken, and the Generals, Hawley, Lord Albemarle, Huske, and 
Bland, have orders to inquire into the reasons for his surrendering of Fort George.
	"Lord Cromartie, Lord M‘Leod his son, with other prisoners, are just brought 
in from Sutherland, by the Hound sloop, which his Royal Highness had sent for them, 
and they are just now landing."
"To wield the broadsword, and assume the plad, 
Avails but little where the cause is bad."


THE EARL OF KILMARNOCK, THE EARL OF CROMARTIE, THE 
LORD BALMERINO 
Three of the principal rebel chiefs
"These men were once the glory of their age, 
"Disinterested, just, with ev'ry Virtue 
"Of civil life adorn'd, at arms excelling, 
"Their only blot was this; that much inovok'd 
"They rais'd their vengeful arms against their country; 
"And lo! the righteous gods have now chastis'd them." 
THOMPSON.

  
The Earl of Kilmarnock

	THESE noblemen possessed great influence, and were much respected, 
previous to, the unhappy rebellion in 1745. Having already given a correct, though 
abridged account, of the transactions in which they took conspicuous part; we 
proceed, without farther comment, to their trials, defence, speeches, and execution.
	On Monday, the 28th of July, 1746, about eight o clock in the morning, the 
three rebel lords, prisoners in the Tower, were carried from thence in three coaches, 
the Earl of Kilmarnock, with Governor Williamson, and another gentleman, captain of 
the guard, in the first, the Earl of Cromartie; attended by Captain Marshall, in the 
second: and Lord Balmerino, attended by Mr. Fowler, gentleman gaoler, who had the 
axe covered by him, in the third, under a strong guard of foot-soldiers to Westminster 
Hall, where the Lord High Steward and the peers having taken their seats, 
proclamation was made for the Lieutenant of the Tower of London to return the 
precept to him directed, with the bodies of the prisoners: which done, the Gentleman 
Gaoler of the Tower brought his prisoners to the bar; and the proclamation was made 
for the King's evidence to come forth, the King's counsel, by his Grace's direction, 
opened the indictment, then his Grace moved the house that he might advance 
forwards for the better hearing of the evidence, (which being done, William Earl of 
Kilmarnock was brought to the bar) and his bill of indictment for high treason read, to 
which his lordship, pleaded Guilty, and desired to be recommended to his Majesty for 
mercy. Then George Earl of Cromartie was brought to the bar, &c, who also pleaded 
Guilty and prayed for mercy, After which Arthur Lord Balmerino was brought to the 
bar, &c. who pleaded Not Guilty, alleging that he was not at Carlisle at the time 
specified in the indictment, whereupon six witnesses for the crown were called in and 
examined, whose evidence was distinctly repeated by the reading-clerk, proving that 
his Lordship entered Carlisle (though not the same day) sword in hand, at the head of 
a regiment called by his name, Elphinston's horse. To this he made an exception, 
which was overruled. The Lord High Steward then asked him if he had any witness, 
or any thing further to offer in his defence. To which he replied, he was sorry he had 
given their lordships so much trouble, and had nothing more to say. Hereupon their 
lordships retired out of Westminster Hall to the House of Peers, where the opinion of 
the judges was asked, touching the overt act, which they declaring to be not material, 
as other facts were proved beyond contradiction, their lordships returned, and his 
Grace putting the question to the youngest baron, "Whether Arthur Lord Balmerino 
was guilty or not guilty, &c." he clapt his right hand to his left breast, and said, 
"Guilty, upon my honour, my Lord," as did all the rest of the peers. And the prisoners 
being again called to the bar, the Lord High Steward declared their resolutions: and 
they were ordered to be brought up on the 30th. at 11 o'clock in the morning to 
receive sentence.
	Written notice was given them to bring what they might have to offer in arrest 
of judgment.-- There were 136 peers present.
	On the 30th the Lord High Steward went to Westminster Hall, attended as 
before: and the prisoners being brought again before their peers, the Earl of 
Kilmarnock made a very elegant, and pathetic speech which was much admired, to 
move their lordships to intercede for him with his Majesty. The Earl of Cromartie 
spoke also to the same effect; but Lord Balmerino, pleaded, in arrest of judgment, that 
his indictment was found in the county of Surrey, and, this being a point of law, 
desired that he might be allowed counsel to argue it, upon which the lords adjourned 
to their chamber, to consider of it, and soon after returned; ordered his plea to be 
argued on Friday next, and appointed Messrs. Wilbrake and Forrester for his counsel. 
[Note: This point was that the bill of indictment was found on an act of parliament 
passed in March last, by which prisoners, charged with high treason, were to be tried 
in such county as his Majesty should appoint; but, as the treason with which his 
lordship was charged, is said to be committed at Carlisle, in the December before, he 
ought to have been indicted there, and not in Surrey, because the treason alleged to be 
committed was before the passing of the act, and therefore he could not be affected by 
it, and consequently the whole superstructure built thereon must fall to the ground. 
This objection, it is said, was suggested to all the lords, in a letter sent to each in the 
Tower, by an officious person; but the very title of the act includes "such persons as 
HAVE levied, or shall levy war, against his Majesty."]
	On the 1st of August the Lord High Steward, and the peers being come to 
Westminster Hall, the three rebel lords were brought to the bar, with the axe carried 
before them. Then the E. of Kilmarnock and E. of Cromartie were separately asked if 
they had any thing to propose why judgment should not be passed upon them; to 
which they answered in the negative. Then his Grace informed Lord Balmerino, that, 
having started an objection, desired counsel, and had their assistance, he was now to 
make use of it, if he thought fit, to argue that point. His Lordship answered, he was 
sorry for the trouble he had given his Grace and the peers; that he would not have 
taken that step, if he had not been persuaded there was some ground for the objection; 
but that his counsel having satisfied him there was nothing in it that could tend to his 
service, he declined having them heard, submitted to the court, and was resolved to 
rely upon his Majesty's mercy.
	His Grace then made a speech to the prisoners, almost to the same effect as 
that pronounced by Earl Cowper. But as the present rebellion was opposed with more 
unanimity and zeal than the last, his Grace took occasion to observe to their lordships, 
that the beginnings of the rebellion "were so weak and unpromising, as to be capable 
of seducing none but the most infected and willing minds to join in so desperate an 
enterprise. -- That it was impossible, even for the party of the rebels to be so 
inconsiderate or vain as to imagine, that the body of this free people, blest in the 
enjoyment of all their rights, both civil and religious, under his Majesty's protection; 
secure in the prospect of transmitting them safe to their posterity, under the Protestant 
succession in his royal house, would not rise up, as one man, to oppose and crush so 
flagitious, so destructive, and so unprovoked an attempt. -- Accordingly the rebels 
soon saw his Majesty's faithful subjects, conscious both of their duty and interest, 
contending to outdo one another in demonstrations of their zeal and vigour in his 
service. -- Men of property, of all ranks and orders, crowded in with liberal 
subscriptions, of their own motion, beyond the examples of former times, and 
uncompelled by any law: and yet in the most legal and warrantable manner, 
notwithstanding what has been ignorantly and presumptuously suggested to the 
contrary. -- His lordship concluded thus: It has been his Majesty's justice to bring your 
lordships to legal trial and it has been his wisdom to shew, that, as a small part of his 
national forces was sufficient to subdue the rebel army in the field, so the ordinary 
course of his laws, is strong enough to bring even their chiefs to justice."
	Then, after a short pause, his Grace pronounced sentence as in cases of high 
treason. Afterwards breaking his staff, put an end to the commission.
	At six o'clock a troop of life-guards, one of horse-grenadiers, and 1000 of the 
foot guards, (being fifteen men out of each company,) marched from the parade in St. 
James's park through the city to Tower-hill, to attend the execution of the Earl of 
Kilmarnock and the Lord Balmerino, and being arrived there, were posted in lines 
from the Tower to the scaffold, and all round it. About eight o'clock the sheriffs of 
London, with their under-sheriffs, and their officers, viz. six serjeants at mace, six 
yeomen, and the executioner, met at the Mitre tavern in Fenchurch-street, where they 
breakfasted, and went from thence to the house lately the Transport-office on Tower-
hill, near Catherine-court, hired by them for the reception of the said lords, before 
they should be conducted to the scaffold, fold, which was erected about thirty yards 
from the said house. At ten o'clock the block was fixed on the stage, and covered with 
black cloth, and several sacks of sawdust were brought up to strew on it; soon after 
their coffins were brought, covered with black cloth, ornamented with gilt nails, &c. 
On the Earl of Kilmarnock's was a plate with this inscription, "Gulielmus. Comes. de 
Kilmarnock decollatus, 18 Augusti, 1746, Ætat. suæ 42," with an earl's coronet over 
it, and 6 coronets over the six handles; and on lord Balmerino's was a plate with this 
inscription, "Arthurus Dominus de Balmerino decollatus, 18 Augusti, 1746, Ætat. Suæ 
58," with a baronet's coronet over it, and six others over the six handles. At a quarter 
after ten the sheriffs went in procession to the outward gate of the Tower, and, after 
knocking at it some time, a warder within asked, "Who's there?" The officer without 
answered, "The Sheriffs of London and Middlesex." The warder then asked, "What do 
they want?" The officer answered, "The bodies of Earl of Kilmarnock, and Arthur, 
Lord Balmerino.", Upon which the warder said, "I will go and inform the Lieutenant 
of the Tower," and in about ten minutes the Lieutenant of the Tower, with the Earl of 
Kilmarnock, and Major White with Lord Balmerino, guarded by several of. the 
warders, came to the gate; the prisoners were there delivered to the Sheriffs, who gave 
proper receipts for their bodies to the Lieutenant, who, as is usual, said, "God bless 
King George;" to which the Earl of Kilmarnock assented by a bow, and the Lord 
Balmerino said, "God bless King James." [Note: At the foot of the first stairs, the Earl 
of Kilmarnock met and embraced Lord Balmerino, who greatly (as Mr. Foster 
observes) said to him, " My Lord, I am heartily sorry to have your company in this 
expedition."] Soon after, the procession, moving in a slow and solemn manner, 
appeared in the following order: 1. The Constable of the Tower-hamlets. 2. The 
Knight-Marshal's men and Tip-staves. 3. The Sheriffs' officers. 4. The Sheriffs, the 
Prisoners, and their Chaplains; Mr. Sheriff Blachford walking with the Earl of 
Kilmarnock, and Mr. Sheriff Cockayne with the Lord Balmerino. 5. The Tower 
Warders. 6. A guard of Musqueteers. 7. The two hearses and a mourning coach. When 
the procession had passed through the lines into the area of the circle formed by the 
guards, the passage was closed, and the troops of horse, who were in the rear of the 
foot on the lines, wheeled off, and drew up five deep behind the foot on the south side 
of the hill, facing the scaffold.
	The Lords were conducted into separate apartments in the house facing the 
steps of the scaffold; their friends being admitted to see them. The Earl of Kilmarnock 
was attended by the Rev. Mr. Foster, a dissenting minister, and the Rev. Mr. Hume, a 
near relation of the Earl of Hume; and the. Chaplain of the Tower, and another 
clergyman of the church of England, accompanied the Lord Balmerino; who, on 
entering the door of the house, hearing several of the spectators ask eagerly, "Which is 
Lord Balmerino?" answered, smiling, "I am Lord Balmerino, gentlemen, at your 
service." The parlour and passage of the house, the rails enclosing the way from 
thence to the scaffold, and the rails about it, were all hung with black at the Sheriff's 
expense.
	The Lord Kilmarnock, in the apartment allotted to him, spent about an hour in 
his devotions with Mr. Foster, who assisted him with prayer and exhortation. After 
which Lord Balmerino, pursuant to his request, being admitted to confer with the earl, 
first thanked him for the favour, and then asked, If his lordship knew of any order 
signed by the Prince (meaning the Pretender's son) to give no quarter at the battle of 
Culloden. And the; earl answering, 'No,' Lord Balmerino added, 'Nor I neither, and 
therefore it seems to be an invention to justify their own murders.' The earl replied, 'he 
did not think this a fair inference, because he was informed, after he was prisoner at 
Inverness, by several officers, that such an order, signed George Murray, was in the 
duke's custody.' -- 'George Murray,' said Lord Balmerino, 'then they should not charge 
it on the Prince.' Then he took his leave, embracing Lord Kilmarnock, with the same 
kind of noble and generous compliments, as he had used before, 'My dear Lord 
Kilmarnock, I am only sorry that I cannot pay this reckoning alone; once more, 
farewell for ever,' and returned to his own room.
	The earl then, with the company kneeling down joined in a prayer delivered by 
Mr. Foster: after which, having sat a few moments, and taken a second refreshment of 
a bit of bread and a glass of wine, he expressed a desire that Lord Balmerino might go 
first to the scaffold; but being informed that this could not be, as his lordship was 
named first in the warrant, he appeared satisfied, saluted his friends, saying he should 
make no speech on the scaffold, but desired the ministers to assist him in his last 
moments, and they accordingly, with other friends, proceeded there with him. The 
multitude, who had been long expecting to see him on such an awful occasion, on his 
first appearing on the scaffold, dressed in black, with a countenance and demeanour, 
testifying great contrition, shewed the deepest signs of commiseration and pity; and 
his lordship, at the same time, being struck with such, a variety of dreadful objects at 
once, the multitudes, the block, his coffin, the executioner, the instrument of death, 
turned about to Mr. Hume, and said, "Hume! this is terrible;" though without 
changing his voice or countenance. [Note: His person was tall and graceful, his 
countenance mild, and his complexion pale; and more so, as he had been indisposed.]
	After putting up a short prayer, concluding with a petition for his Majesty 
King George and the royal family, in verification of his declaration his speech, his 
lordship embraced, and took his last leave of his friend. The executioner, who before 
had something administered to keep him from fainting, was so affected with his 
lordship's distress, and the awfulness of the scene, that on asking him forgiveness, he 
burst into tears. My lord bid him take courage, giving him at the same time, a purse 
with five guineas, and telling him that he would drop his handkerchief as a signal for 
the stroke. He proceeded, with the help of his gentleman, to make ready for the block, 
by taking off his coat, and the bag from his hair, which was then tucked up under a 
napkin cap, but this being made up so wide as not to keep up his long hair, the making 
it less occasioned a little delay; his neck being laid bare, tucking down the collar of 
his shirt, and waistcoat, he kneeled down on a. black cushion at the block, and drew 
his cap over his eyes, in doing which, as well as in putting up his hair, his hands were 
observed. to shake; but, either to support or for a more convenient posture of 
devotion, he happened to lay both his hands, upon the block, which the executioner 
observing, prayed his lordship to let them fall, lest they should be mangled or break 
the blow. He was then told, that the neck of his waistcoat was in the way, upon which 
he rose, and with the help of a friend took it off, and the neck being made bare to the 
shoulders, he kneeled down as before: in the mean time, when all things were ready 
for the execution, and the black baize which hung over the rails of the scaffold, 
having, by direction of the colonel of the guards or the sheriffs, been turned up that, 
the people might see all the circumstances of the execution; in about two minutes (the 
time he before fixed) after he kneeled down, his lordship dropping his handkerchief, 
the executioner at once severed his head from his body,. except only a small part of 
the skin, which was immediately divided by a gentle stroke; the head was received in 
a piece of red baize, and with the body immediately put into the coffin. The scaffold, 
was then cleared from the blood, fresh sawdust strewed, and, that no appearance of a 
former execution might remain, the executioner changed such of his clothes as 
appeared bloody.
	In the account said to be published by the authority of the sheriffs, it is 
asserted the Lord Kilmarnock requested his head might not be held up as usual, and 
declared to be the head of a traitor; and that, for this reason that part of the ceremony 
was omitted, as the sentence and law did not require it; but we are assured, in Mr. 
Foster's account, that his lordship made no such request; and further, that when he was 
informed that his head would be held up, and such, proclamation made, it did, not 
affect him and he spoke of it as a matter of no moment. All that he wished or desired 
was, 1. That the executioner might not be, as represented to his lordship, "a good, sort 
of man," thinking "a rough temper would be fitter for the purpose." 2. That his coffin, 
instead of remaining in the hearse, might be set upon the stage: and, 3. That four 
persons might be appointed. to receive the head, that it might not roll about the stage, 
but be speedily, with his body, put into the coffin.
	While this was doing, the Lord Balmerino, after having solemnly 
recommended himself to the mercy of the Almighty, conversed cheerfully with his 
friends, refreshed himself twice with a bit of bread and a glass of wine, and desired 
the company to drink to ain degrae to haiven, acquainting them that he had prepared a 
speech which he should read on the scaffold, and therefore should there say nothing of 
its contents. The Under-sheriff coming into his lordship's apartment to let him know 
the stage was ready, he prevented him by immediately asking if the affair was over 
with the Lord Kilmarnock, and being answered "It is," he inquired how the 
executioner performed his office, and upon receiving the account, said it was well 
done; then addressing himself to the company, said, "Gentlemen, I shall detain you no 
longer," and with an easy unaffected cheerfulness he saluted his friends, and hastened 
to the scaffold, which he mounted with so easy an air as astonished the spectators; his 
lordship was dressed in his regimentals, a blue coat turned up with red, trimmed with 
brass buttons, (and a tie-wig,) the same which he wore at the battle of Culloden; no 
circumstance in his whole deportment shewed the least sign of fear or regret, and he 
frequently reproved his friends for discovering either upon his account. He walked 
several times round the scaffold, bowed to the people; went to his coffin, read the 
inscription, and with a nod, said, it is right; he then examined the block, which he 
called his pillow of rest. His lordship putting on his spectacles, and taking a paper out 
of his pocket, read it with an audible voice, which, so far from being filled with 
passionate invective, mentioned his majesty as a prince of the greatest magnanimity 
and mercy, at the same time that, through erroneous political principles, it denied him 
a right to the allegiance of his people: having delivered this paper to the sheriff, he 
called for the executioner, who appearing, and being about to ask his lordship's 
pardon, he said, "Friend, you need not ask me forgiveness, the execution of your duty 
is commendable;" upon which, his lordship gave, him three guineas, saying, "Friend, I 
never was rich, this is all the money I have now, I wish it was more, and I am sorry I 
can add nothing, to it but my coat and waistcoat, which he then took off, together with 
his neck-cloth, and threw them on his coffin; putting on a flannel waistcoat, which 
had been provided for the purpose, and then taking a plaid cap out of his pocket, he 
put it on his head, saying he died a Scotchman; after kneeling down at the block to 
adjust his posture, and shew the executioner the signal for the stroke, which was 
dropping his arms, he once more turned to his friends, and took his last farewell, and, 
looking round, on the crowd, said, "Perhaps some may think my behaviour too bold, 
but remember, Sir, (said he to a gentleman who, stood near him) that I now declare it 
is the effect of confidence in God, and a good conscience, and I should dissemble if I 
should shew any signs of fear."
	Observing, the axe in the executioner's hand as he passed him, he took it from 
him, felt the, edge, and returning it, clapped the executioner on the shoulder to 
encourage him; he tucked down the collar of his shirt and waistcoat, and shewed him 
where to strike, desiring him to do it resolutely, for in that, says his lordship, will 
consist your kindness.
	He went to the side of the stage, and called up the warder, to whom he gave 
some money, asked which was his hearse, and ordered the man to drive near. 
Immediately, without trembling or changing countenance, he again knelt down at the 
block, and having with his arms stretched out, said, "O Lord, reward my friends, 
forgive my enemies, and receive my soul," he gave the signal by letting them fall. But 
his uncommon firmness and intrepidity, and the unexpected suddenness of the signal 
so surprised the executioner, that though he struck the part directed, the blow was not 
given with strength enough to wound him very deep; on which it seemed as if he 
made an effort to turn his, head towards the executioner, and the under jaw fell, and 
returned very quick, like anger and gnashing the teeth; but it could not be otherwise, 
the part being convulsed. A second blow immediately succeeding the first, rendered 
him, however, quite insensible, and a third finished the work.
	[Note: If we were to draw his character, abstracted from the consideration of 
his being an enemy to the present happy government, we should call him a blunt, 
resolute man, who would, if his principles had not been tainted with Jacobitism, have 
appeared honest in the eyes of those who love sincerity; but he was not so happy as to 
be loyal. His person was very plain, his shape clumsy, but his make strong, and had 
no marks about him of the polite gentleman, though his seeming sincerity 
recompensed all those defects. He was illiterate in respect of his birth, but rather from 
a total want of application to letters, than want of ability: several quaint stories related 
of him, which seem to be the growth of wanton and fertile imagination, which is not 
at all to be wondered at ,in times that afford so much matter for invention. He left a 
lady behind him, whom he called his Peggy; to whom, at his request, His Majesty 
allowed 50l., a year: whether any Children, we are not able to say.]
	His head was received in a piece of red baize, and with his body put into the 
coffin, which, at his particular request, was placed on that of the late Marquis of 
Tullibardines's, in St. Peter's church in the Tower, all three lords lying in one grave.
	During the whole course of the solemnity, although the hill, the scaffoldings, 
and houses, were crowded full of spectators, all persons attended with uncommon 
decency, and evenness of temper; which evinces how much the people entered into 
the rectitude of the execution, though too humane to rejoice in the catastrophe.
	Lord Balmerino had but a small estate, though ground-landlord and lord of the 
manor of Colcon, a long street in the suburbs of Edinburgh, leading to Leith, and had 
also some other small possessions in the shire of Fife. His lady came to London soon 
after him, and frequently attended him during his confinement in the Tower, and had 
lodgings in East Smithfield. She was at dinner with him when the warrant came for 
his execution the Monday following, and being very much surprised, he desired her 
not to be concerned at it; "If the king had given me mercy," said he, "I should have 
been glad of it; but since it is otherwise, I am very easy; for it is what I have expected, 
and therefore it does not at all surprise me." His lady seemed very disconsolate and 
rose immediately from table; on which he started from his chair, and said," Pray, my 
lady, sit down for it shall not spoil my dinner;" upon which her ladyship sat down 
again, but could not eat.
	Several more of his sayings were related as remarkable, among others, that 
being advised to take care of his person, he replied, "It would be thought very 
imprudent in a man to repair an old house, when the lease of it was so near expiring."

CHARACTER of ARTHUR LORD BALMERINO

Quique metus omnes, & inexorabile Fatum 
Subjecitit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari. VIRG.
	The abhorrence of pain is a principle implanted in all animals as the means of: 
their preservation. To this in Men is added the fear of death; and that is still 
heightened, by apprehensions of what may happen afterwards. Yet pain is often 
unavoidable; and death, with its consequences, some time or other absolutely 
necessary. Hence arises the merit of courage, which consists in facing intrepidly and 
suffering cheerfully these evils, when they become either inevitable or declinable only 
on unworthy terms. Great then are undoubtedly the obligations of mankind for those 
who, on such occasions, treat these terrors with the contempt they really deserve, and 
give us an useful lesson and example how to behave in an emergency which we ought 
every day to expect, and which we must one day certainly experience. The Greeks and 
Romans, therefore, looked even on suicide in amiable light. It was with them the 
consummation of a perfect character; and the extenuation of the most faulty. Nor were 
they in this altogether impolitic; hence flowed that appetite for danger; that 
prodigality of life, which they knew so skilfully to direct to the publics emoluments. 
But heaven-instructed Christians have unlearnt this Pagan doctrine; and yet, amongst 
the primitives what was accounted more meritorious than a courageous, calm 
submission to civil punishment, appears the constant aim of the martyrs, and had the 
happiest effects, as to the promulgation of their precepts.
	There has been lately seen among us a noble instance of the superiority of a 
great mind to fear, which, when passion and prejudice have subsided, will reflect 
honour on our times, and even be advantageous to former, as it bestows credibility on 
their most exaggerated heroical relations. I mean the death of the late Lord Balmerino.
	But, before we proceed, it may be proper to declare, that, if I would vindicate 
and extol his death, I by no means. intend to justify or excuse his life. I give up, with 
all good Englishmen, the French soldier, the Jacobite, the double rebel, concur with 
them in the rectitude of his sentence, and the necessity of its execution. It is at the 
Tower gate, that I (with the sheriffs) take him up:-- There the hero commences.
	I will not injure, by comparing, as has been hitherto done, with pusillanimity 
itself, a fortitude that wants no foil, which all antiquity can scarcely parallel. Lord 
Balmerino's carriage in the procession from the Tower, was easy and cheerful, his 
conversation in the preparatory room, rational and pertinent; his interview with his 
fellow-sufferer open and generous; when on the scaffold, he had so little of the 
formal, piteous countenance there usually exhibited, that those who were 
unacquainted with his person, knew not for some time that he was there. He told the 
officers that he would take up but little of their time; that he was sensible the greatest 
part of it was already elapsed; that he had had frequent opportunities to look into his 
future concerns, and should not settle this account in public. Accordingly, having with 
composure given the necessary directions, he prepared for the blow with the greatest 
alacrity, and with an expedition, which was only interrupted by an act of generosity, 
and a mistake which, to a weak mind, might have been productive of extreme 
disorder, but served only to elevate his character. And though, through the whole of 
this transaction, nothing appeared but intrepidity and constancy, yet this hero 
confessed the man. He had his fears, but they were glorious ones: he feared, he said, 
that his conduct would be thought too bold; willingly, would he have seemed less so, 
but could not play the hypocrite. So far was he from an affected ostentation of his 
prodigious courage, a courage which was attended by the most desirable effect, the 
most indisputable evidence. This nobleman parted with life with such unconcern as 
convinced the spectators that was not only to him, but really in itself, of no 
importance. The black solemnity could not obscure his serenity, nor imprint on them a 
gloom not to be dispelled by such lustre. They found there was nothing unnatural in 
dying, nothing. horrible in death itself; they felt no emotion.
	Thus greatly, unlamented, fell Arthur Lord Balmerino, a man of the most 
incredible courage, the most commendable sincerity, the most engaging simplicity, 
who was an honour to the worst cause, and would have been an ornament to the best; 
whose faults wilt one day be forgotten, and his virtues remembered.
	And sure the little here said (with strict truth) in his favour, cannot possibly 
give offence, to the most zealous loyalist. There is a justice surely due to the 
characters of gallant enemies, our law never intends to execute reputations, and its 
most rigid sentence, pronounced on the least pardonable occasion, confines the 
punishment to the body merely, and in the midst of judgment remembers mercy.



CHARLES RATCLIFFE 
Who assumed the title of Earl of Derwentwater
	This gentleman was one of those who took part in the rebellion, under a 
commission from the King Of France, and was taken, with many others, on his 
passage to Scotland, by the Seahorse frigate. He was the youngest brother of the Earl 
of Derwentwater, who was attainted and executed in the first rebellion, and his titles 
and estates consequently forfeited to the crown. He was, with his brother, taken at 
Preston; tried, convicted, and, condemned, but several times respited, and would 
probably have been pardoned, had he not, with thirteen others, made his escape out of 
a room called the Castle in Newgate, through a small door which had been 
accidentally left open, leading to the debtors Side, where the turnkey; not knowing 
them, let them out of the prison, supposing they, were persons who had come to see 
their friends.
	He immediately procured a passage to France; and from thence followed the 
Pretender to Rome, subsisting on such petty pension as his master could allow him. 
Returning some short time afterwards, he married the widow of Lord Newborough, by 
whom he had a son. In 1733 he came to England; and resided in Pall Mall, without 
any molestation, though known to the ministry. [Note: Some years after the quelling 
of the last rebellion, the Pretender came in disguise to view London. This was a 
natural; but dangerous curiosity, to behold the place where his grandfather, King 
James II. had been on the throne. On the ministers being apprised of this 
circumstance, in haste went to King George II. with the information; and 
recommended his immediate apprehension. The monarch, with one of his shrewd 
answers, for which he was remarkable, replied, "No -- let the poor man satisfy his 
curiosity; when done, he will quietly go back to France." The King's observation was 
verified.]
	He returned to France, and in 1735 again came to England to solicit his 
pardon, but without success, though he appeared publicly, and visited several families 
particularly in Essex. Returning again to France, he unfortunately accepted of the 
French king's commission, to act as an officer in the rebellion, and was taken as we 
have already described.
	On the 22d of October, 1746, he was brought to the bar of the Court of King's 
Bench and was arraigned, but refused to hold up his hand, or acknowledge any other 
jurisdiction than that of the King of France, insisting on a commission he had in his 
pocket from him, and appealing to the Sicilian ambassador, who was then in court, for 
the authenticity thereof. On hearing his former indictment and conviction read; he 
said, that he was not the Charles Ratcliffe therein named, but that he was the Earl of 
Derwentwater, and his counsel informed the court, that such was the plea they meant 
to abide by, and thereupon, issue was gained.
	Then the counsel for the prisoner moved to put off his trial, upon his own 
affidavit (to which he has subscribed himself the Count de Derwentwater,) that two of 
his material witnesses, naming them, were abroad, without whose testimony he could 
not safely go to trial. To which affidavit the counsel for the crown objected, as not 
being entitled as in the cause before the court; nor the two witnesses sworn to be 
material, in the issue then joined between the king and the prisoner; and also, because 
the prisoner had not so much as undertaken to swear for himself, that he was not the 
person, which, as it was a fact entirely in his own knowledge, ought to be required of 
him, if he would entitle himself to this favour from the court; this being a proceeding 
very different from the trial upon a not guilty, in an original prosecution on a charge 
of high treason or other crime, the identity of the person being the single fact to be 
inquired of, and a case in which the crown had a right by law to proceed instanter. 
Upon this the prisoner amended his affidavit as to the witnesses, but refused to supply 
it so far as to swear he was not the same person. And the court said, this was a new 
precedent, there being no instance of any application to put off the trial of a question 
of this sort before; and that this was like an inquest of office, in order to inform the 
conscience of the court, and what the public had a right to proceed in instanter. And 
therefore that the prisoner ought to give all reasonable satisfaction to induce them to 
grant such a favour as the prisoner desired, for they could not in conscience and 
justice to the public indulge him, without a reasonable satisfaction that his plea was 
true. But the prisoner still refusing to swear to the truth of his plea, the jury were 
called, and after two or three of the panel had been sworn, Mr. Ratcliffe challenged 
the next that was called, as of right, without assigning any reason; but upon debate of 
the question, how far he had right to challenge, the court said, it had been determined, 
before, in all the latter cases, and particularly in the case of one Jordan, that the 
prisoner, in such a case as this had no peremptory challenge; upon which the rest of 
the jury were sworn, and after a clear evidence of the identity of the person on the part 
of the crown, the prisoner producing none on his part, the jury withdrew about ten 
minutes, and then found their verdict, that he was the same Charles Ratcliffe who was 
convicted of high treason, in the year 1715. Then the attorney-general moved to have 
execution awarded against the prisoner on his former judgment; to which the 
prisoner's counsel objected, tendering a plea of pardon by act of parliament, in bar of 
execution. But the court said, as he had already pleaded such a plea as he chose to rely 
on, and as that was found against him, nothing more remained for them to do at 
present but to award execution; and if his counsel had any thing to offer in his behalf, 
they would have time to do it before the day of execution; and ordered a rule to be 
made for the proper writs for his execution on the 8th of next month, and remanded 
the prisoner to the Tower. He was about five feet ten inches high, upwards of fifty, 
was dressed in scarlet, faced with black velvet, and gold buttons, a gold-laced 
waistcoat, bag wig, and had hat with a white feather.
	His design in styling himself Earl of Derwentwater, was, that he might pass for 
Francis, his younger brother, who went to France before 1715; but was thought to be 
dead. He would not call the Lord Chief Justice lord, because the title of earl was not 
given him: he refused to hold up his hand at the bar, and being told that as a 
gentleman he ought to comply, and that his own counsel would satisfy him that it was 
only a form of the court, he said; I know many things, that I will not advise with my 
counsel upon. On hearing the rule for his execution, he desired time, because he and 
Lord Moreton (in the Bastile at Paris) should take the same journey at the same time.
	About eight o' clock on the 8th of December, two troops of life-guards, and 
one troop of horse-guards, marched through the city for Little Tower-hill, where they 
were joined by a battalion of foot-guards, to attend the execution of Charles Ratcliffe, 
Esq. About ten o' clock the block, with a cushion, both covered with black, were 
brought up, and fixed upon the stage; and soon after Mr. Ratcliffe's coffin, covered 
with black velvet, with eight handles, on which with the nails were gilt with gold, but 
there was no plate, or any inscription upon it. At near eleven the sheriffs, Mr. 
Alderman Winterbottom, and Mr. Alderman Alsop, with their officers, came to see if 
the scaffold was finished, (the carpenters, &c. who had very short notice; having 
worked all day on Sunday and the ensuing night,) and if every thing was prepared for 
Mr. Ratcliffe's reception; which, being to their satisfaction, they went to the Tower, 
and demanded the body of Mr; Ratcliffe, of General Williamson, deputy governor; 
upon being surrendered, he was first put into a landau, and carried over the Wharf, at 
the end of which he was put into a mourning coach, and conveyed into a small booth 
joining to the stairs of the scaffold, lined with black, where he spent about half an 
hour in devotion, and then, preceded by the sheriffs, the divine, and some gentlemen 
his friends. When he came upon the scaffold, he took leave of his friends with great 
serenity and calmness of mind, and having spoken a few words to the executioner, 
gave him a purse of ten guineas, put on a damask cap, knelt down to prayers, which 
lasted about seven. minutes, all the spectators on the scaffold kneeling: with him. 
Prayers being over, he pulled off his clothes, and put his head to the block, from 
whence he soon got up, and having spoke a few words, he knelt down to it, and fixing 
his head, in about two minutes gave the signal to the executioner, who at three blows 
struck it off, which was received in a scarlet cloth, held for that purpose. He was 
dressed in scarlet, faced with black velvet, trimmed with gold, a gold-laced waistcoat, 
and a white feather in his hat. He behaved with the greatest fortitude and coolness of 
temper, and was no way shocked at the approach of death.
	His body was immediately put into the coffin, and carried back in a hearse to 
the Tower; and the scaffold booth, and all the boards belonging to them, were cleared 
away in the afternoon. He behaved himself very alert until the 4th, when he received a 
letter from his niece, the Lady Petre, which engaged him to appear in a more serious 
manner, agreeably to his unhappy fate. His corpse was on the 1lth, carried in a hearse, 
attended by two mourning coaches, to St. Giles in the fields, and there interred with 
the remains of the late Earl of Derwentwater, according to his desire, with this 
inscription on his coffin:
Carolus Ratcliffe, Comes de Derwentwater, decollatus die 8 Decembris, 1746; Ætatis 
53 Requiescat in pace.
	It seems the Derwentwater estate was only confiscated to the crown for the life 
of Charles Ratcliffe, Esq.; but by a clause in an act of parliament passed some years 
since, which says, that the issue of any person attainted of high treason, born and bred 
in any foreign dominion, and a Roman Catholic, shall forfeit his reversion. Such 
estate, and the. remainder shall for ever be fixed in the crown, his son was absolutely 
deprived of any title or interest in the affluent fortune of that ancient family, to the 
amount of more than 200,000l.
	This unhappy gentleman was the youngest brother of James Earl of 
Derwentwater, who was executed in 1716; they were sons of Sir Francis Radcliffe, by 
the lady Mary Tudor, natural daughter to King Charles II by Mrs. Mary Davis.
	He died in the principles in which he had lived, and was so zealous a Papist, 
that on the absurdities of some things which are held sacred by the church of Rome 
being objected to him, he replied, "That for every tenet of that church, repugnant to 
reason, in which she requires an implicit belief, he wished there were twenty, that he 
might thereby have a nobler opportunity of exercising and displaying his faith."



THOMAS CAPPOCK 
The rebel bishop of Carlisle.

  
Thomas Cappock

	WE have already, in our statement of the strength of the garrison at Carlisle, 
announced a bishop, created by the Pretender. Such anecdotes of this enthusiastic 
rebel, as we have been able to glean from the public prints of the year of this 
rebellion, we have put together, in order to allot to this would-be Right Reverend 
Father in God, a memoir independent of the treacherous group among whom he 
swung on the gallows.
	On the 12th of August, 1746, the Lord Chief Baron Parker, Baron Clarke, 
Judges Burnett and Dennison, arrived at Carlisle, and by virtue of a special 
commission for that purpose to them directed, convened a Court, for the purpose of 
trying the rebels found in arms, on the surrender of Carlisle. On the 14th the Scotch 
prisoners were arraigned, but the witnesses in behalf of the crown (also Scotchmen) 
refused to swear in the form prescribed by the laws of England. The judges therefore 
deferred the trial in order to consult on this contumacy; but next morning allowed 
them to take the oath after the Scotch form. Bills of indictment were found against all 
the officers, as well as bishop Cappock; but the common men, amounting to near four 
hundred, were ordered to cast lots; and of every twenty nineteen were to be 
transported, and the twentieth put upon his trial for high treason. Some few refused 
this lenity, depending upon so deceiving the evidence as not to recognize them; for 
this purpose they cut off each others hair, changed their clothing, and by every other 
method which they could devise, disguised themselves.
	When the grand jury presented true bills, the whole of those indicted were 
brought to the bar, whom the Lord Chief Baron told that the Court desired them to 
choose what counsel they pleased, with a solicitor -- that the Court had given orders to 
their clerk, to make out subpoenas for them, gratis, and by virtue thereof, to bring 
forward such witnesses as they imagined could, in any manner, tend to their 
exculpation. [Note: We make here an involuntary pause upon the humanity of the 
English law, extended to the utmost in this case, to men taken in arms against their 
Sovereign and we rather doubt, whether the Pretender, had he gained his cause, would 
have allotted his prisoners quite so fair a trial.]
	In order to give them every chance for this end, the Judges adjourned the 
Court, and proceeded to the city of York, where a number of more rebels were in 
confinement, and where bills were found against seventy-nine of them. It was near a 
month before they returned to Carlisle. On the 9th of September, 1762, [they] were 
arraigned at the bar of the court of the latter city, of whom fifty-nine pleaded not 
guilty. On the 10th forty-five more were brought up, and all pleaded not guilty, except 
three, one of whom was a desperate turbulent fellow, a rebel captain named Robert 
Taylor, who had repeatedly vaunted that he would take Edinburgh castle in three days. 
The next day twelve more were arraigned, and among them was the more immediate 
subject of the present page -- the rebellious bishop.
	He appeared at the bar in his gown and cassock, assumed much confidence, 
and appeared to entertain no idea that he could be convicted. He made a speech to the 
Court and Jury, which chiefly went to shew, that he joined the rebels by compulsion 
alone. He called his father, and one Mary Humphries, to substantiate this assertion; 
but their evidence fell far short of so doing. A witness, however, proved, that the 
prisoner had made an attempt to escape from the rebels. On the other side, it was 
proved, that he voluntarily went with the rebels from Manchester to Derby, and thence 
back to Carlisle. It further appeared, that wherever the rebels went he read public 
prayers for King James, and Charles Prince of Wales, Regent of England. At 
Manchester he preached in one of the churches, and took his text from Psal. xcvii. 
"The Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof." At Carlisle he appeared the Church 
Militant, with a hanger by his side, a plaid sash, and white cockade, acting also as a 
Quarter Master. Another witness proved, that this fighting bishop told him of his 
engaging two of the kings soldiers, and taking them both prisoners; and he vaunted, 
that his Prince had offered battle to the Duke of Cumberland, who run away; that they 
(the rebels) returned to Scotland, only to join Lord George Drummond, who had 
landed with many thousand French, to assist their cause. [Note: This gasconade had a 
spice of the French in it, from whom the mock bishop doubtless acquired this 
Bobadil-like boasting. We have even seen the reverse; the Duke constantly pursuing 
the Pretender.] His evidence, Miss Humphries, was shewn a letter, which she 
acknowledged to be the hand-writing of the bishop; wherein he had the effrontery to 
tell the barefaced falsehood of the Duke of Cumberland ordering him to be kept on 
half a pound of bread per day, and nasty water, because he advised to give battle to 
him at Stanwix, and protested against the surrender of Carlisle.
	The jury, notwithstanding the confidence apparent in the prisoner through his 
whole trial, which lasted sit hours, in two minutes found him guilty. The priest, it 
seems, still did not abandon himself to his fate; for in a few days it was discovered, 
that he and six more condemned rebels, had sawed off their irons, and were about to 
attempt an escape. The instrument with which they effected this,. was prepared for the 
purpose by a new and curious method. It is thus described, "They laid a silk 
handkerchief singly over the mouth of a drinking-glass, and tied it hard at the bottom, 
then struck the edge of a case knife on the brim of the glass, (thus covered to prevent 
noise) till it became a saw. With such knives they cut their irons, and when the teeth 
were blunt, they had recourse to the glass to renew it. A knife will not cut a 
handkerchief when struck upon it in this manner."
	Cappock, with the other convicted rebels, were hanged at Carlisle, on the 28th 
of October, 1746.
	[Note: Another furious non-juring priest was taken among the rebels, of the 
name of Robert Lyon. This turbulent rebel, under the gallows at Penrith, read a long 
and infamous libel against the King and Government of England, and the sheriff, to 
his disgrace, permitted him to harangue, in a similar strain near half an hour, with the 
halter round his neck; concluding with this hardened exclamation, "If my life was now 
given to me, I would still continue in the same principles, and assist the virtuous cause 
of King James."]


THE ESCAPE OF THE PRETENDER 
After the Battle of Culloden
	To enumerate the different trials of the rebels convicted and executed would 
nearly fill one of our volumes; and having given the outlines of the treason in which 
they were all implicated, a recapitulation of the evidence to the same tenor, is 
unnecessary. Let it therefore suffice to say, that numbers were executed in different 
parts of England, and many of their heads placed on public buildings, and others 
transported to America.
	Yet, we think our readers would be gratified, by a knowledge of the escape of 
the leading men of this French treachery and rebellion,-- the young Pretender; and to 
this end, we have selected the following interesting and genuine account:
	"That decisive engagement was fought on the 16th of April, 1746, in which 
the Pretender had his horse shot under him, by one of the troopers in the kings service, 
as he was endeavouring to rally his people. After his forces were entirely defeated, he 
retired to the house of a factor of Lord Lovat, about ten miles from Inverness, where 
meeting with that lord, he stayed supper. After supper was over he set out for Fort 
Augustus, and pursued his journey next day to Invergarry, where he proposed to have 
dined; but finding no victuals, he set a boy to fishing, who caught two salmon, on 
which he made a dinner, and continued waiting there for some of his troops, who had 
promised to rendezvous at that place; but being disappointed, he resolved to proceed 
to Lochharciage.
	"He arrived there on the 18th, at two in the morning, where he went to sleep, 
which he had not done for five days and nights. He remained there till five o' clock in 
the afternoon, in hopes of obtaining some intelligence; but gaining none, he set out 
from thence on foot, and travelled to the Glen of Morar, where he arrived the 19th at 
four in the morning. He set out about noon the same day for Arrashag, where he 
arrived about four in the afternoon. He remained there about seven days, waiting for 
Captain O'Neil, who joined him on the 27th, and informed him, that there was no 
hopes of drawing his troops together again in a body, upon which he resolved to go to 
Stornway, in order to hire a ship to go to France.
	"The person employed for this purpose was one Donald M‘Leod, who had an 
interest there. On the 28th he went on board an eight-oar'd boat, in company with 
Sullivan and O'Neil, ordering the people who belonged to the boat to make the best 
haste they could to Stornway. The night proving very tempestuous, they all begged of 
him to go back, which he would not do; but, to keep up the spirits of the people, he 
sang them a Highland song; but the weather growing worse and worse, on the 29th, 
about seven in the morning, they were driven on shore, on a point of land called 
Rushness, in the island of Benbicula, where, when they got on shore, the Pretender 
helped to make a fire to warm the crew, who were almost starved to death with cold. 
On the 30th, at six in the evening, they set sail again for Stornway, but meeting with 
another storm, were obliged to put into the island of Scalpa, in the Harris, where they 
all went on shore to a farmers house, passing for merchants that were shipwrecked in 
their voyage to the Orkneys: the Pretender and Sullivan going by the names of 
Sinclair, the latter passing for the father, and the former his son.
	"They thought proper to send from thence to Donald M‘Leod at Stornway, 
with instructions to freight a ship for the Orkneys: On the 3d of May, they received a 
message from him that a ship was ready. On the 4th they set out on foot for that place, 
where they arrived on the 5th about noon, and meeting with Donald M‘Leod, they 
found that he had got into company, where growing daring, he told a friend of his for 
whom he had hired the ship, upon which there were 200 people in arms at Stornway, 
upon a report that the Pretender was landed with 600 men, and was coming to burn 
the town; so that they were obliged to lie all night upon the moor, with no other 
refreshment than biscuit and brandy.
	"On the 6th they resolved to go in the eight-oar'd boat, to the Orkneys; but the 
crew refused to venture, so that they were obliged to steer south along the coast-side 
where they met with two English ships, and this compelled them to put into a desert 
island, where they remained till the 10th, without any provision but some salt fish 
they found upon the island. About ten in the morning of that day they embarked for 
the Harris, and at break of day on the 11th they were chased by an English ship, but 
made their escape among the rocks. About four in the afternoon they arrived on the 
island of Benbicula, where they staid till the 14th, and then set out for the mountain of 
Currada in South Uist, where they staid till the militia, of the isle of Sky came to the 
island of Irasky, and then sailed for the island of Uia, where they remained three 
nights, till having intelligence that the militia were coming towards Benbicula, they 
immediately got into their boat, and sailed for Lochbusdale; but being met by some 
ships of war, they were obliged to return to Lochaguart, where they remained all day, 
and at night sailed for Lochbusdale; where they arrived, and staid eight days on a 
rock, making a tent of the sail of the boat.
	They found themselves there in a most dreadful situation; for having 
intelligence that Captain Scott had landed at Kilbride, the company was obliged to 
separate, and the Pretender and O'Neil went to the mountains, where they remained all 
night, and soon after were informed that General Campbell was at Bernary; so that 
now they had forces very near, on both sides of them, and were absolutely at a loss 
which way to move. In their road they met with a young lady, one Miss M‘Donald, to 
whom Captain O'Neil proposed assisting the Pretender to make his escape, which at 
first she refused; but upon his offering to put on woman's clothes, she consented, and 
desired them to go to the mountain of Currada till she sent for them, where they 
accordingly staid two days; but hearing nothing from the young lady, the Pretender 
concluded she would not keep her word; and therefore resolved to send Captain 
O'Neil to General Campbell, to let him know he was willing to surrender to him; but 
about five in the evening a message came from the young lady, desiring them to meet 
her at Rushness. Being afraid to pass by the Ford, because of the militia, they luckily 
found a boat, which carried them to the other side of Uia, where they remained part of 
the day, afraid of being seen by the country people. In the evening they set out for 
Rushness, and arrived there at twelve at night; but not finding the young lady, and 
being alarmed by a boat full of militia, they were obliged to retire two miles back, 
where the Pretender remained on a moor till O'Neil went to the young lady, and 
prevailed upon her to come to the place appointed at night-fall of the next day. About 
an hour after they had an account of General Campbell's arrival at Benbicula, which 
obliged them to move to another part of the island, where, as the day broke, they 
discovered four sail close on the shore, making directly up to the place where they 
were; so that there was nothing left for them to do, but to throw themselves among the 
heath. When the wherries were gone, they resolved to go to Clanronald's house; but 
when they were within a mile of it, they heard General Campbell was there, which 
forced them to retreat again.
	The young Pretender having at length, with the assistance of Captain O'Neil, 
found Miss M‘Donald in a cottage near the place appointed, it was there determined 
that he should put on women's clothes, and pass for her waiting-maid. This being 
done, he took leave of Sullivan and O'Neil with great regret, who departed to shift for 
themselves, leaving him and his new mistress in the cottage, where they continued 
some days, during which she cured him of the itch. Upon intelligence that General 
Campbell was gone further into the country, they removed to her cousins, and spent 
the night in preparing for their departure to the Isle of Sky; accordingly they set out 
the next morning, with only one man-servant named M‘Lean and two rowers. During 
their voyage they were pursued by a small vessel; but a thick fog rising they arrived 
safe at midnight in that island, and landed at the foot of a rock, where the lady and her 
maid waited while her man M‘Lean went to see if Sir Alexander M‘Donald was at 
home; M‘Lean found his way thither, but lost it returning back; his mistress and her 
maid, after in vain expecting him the whole night, were obliged in the morning to 
leave the rock, and go in the boat up the creek to some distance, to avoid the militia 
which guarded the coast.
	They went on shore again about ten o' clock, and, attended by the rowers, 
enquired the way to SirAlexander's: when they had gone about two miles, they met 
M‘Lean; he told his lady that Sir Alexander was with the Duke of Cumberland, but 
his lady was at home, and would do them all the service she could; whereupon they 
discharged their boat, and went directly to the house, where they remained two days, 
they being always in her lady's chamber, except at nights, to prevent a discovery. But 
a party of the M‘Leods having intelligence that some strangers were arrived at Sir 
Alexander's, and knowing his lady was well-affected to the Pretender, came thither; 
and demanding to see the new comers, were introduced to Miss's chamber, where she 
sat with her new maid. The latter hearing the militia was at the door had the presence 
of mind to get up and open it, which occasioned his being the less taken notice of; and 
after they had narrowly searched the closets, they withdrew.
	The enquiry, however, alarmed the lady, and the next day she sent her maid to 
a steward of Sir Alexander's, but hearing that his being in the island was known, he 
removed to Macdonald's at Kingsborough, ten miles distant, where he remained but 
one day; for on receiving intelligence that it was rumoured he was disguised in a 
woman's habit, M‘Donald furnished him with a suit of his own clothes, and he went in 
a boat to Macleod's, at Raza; but having no prospect, of escaping thence to France, he 
returned back on foot to the Isle of Sky, being thirty miles, with no attendant but a 
ferryman, whom he would not suffer to carry his wallet, M‘Leod assuring him that the 
elder Laird of M‘Innon would there render him all the service in his power.
	When he arrived, not knowing the way to M‘Innon's house, he chanced to 
enquire of a gentleman, whom he met on the top of a mountain; this gentleman having 
seen him before, thought he recollected his face, and asked him if he was not the 
Prince. This greatly surprised him; but seeing the gentleman had only one person, a 
servant, with him, be answered, I am, at the same time putting himself in a posture of 
defence: but this person immediately discovered himself to be his good friend, 
Captain Macleod, and conducted him to M‘Innon's. The old man instantly knew him; 
but advised him immediately to go to Lochabar, and he accordingly set sail in a vessel 
which M‘Innon procured for that purpose.
	After remaining seven days in the glens of Morar, he received advice that 
M‘Donald of Lochgarrie expected him in Lochabar, where he had one hundred 
resolute Highlanders in arms; upon this he went over the great hill of Morar, in a 
tattered Highland habit, and was joyfully received by M‘Donald at the head of his 
men.
	With this party he roved from place to, place, till finding he could no longer 
remain in Lochabar, he removed to Badenoch; but being harassed by the king's troops, 
and losing daily some of his men in skirmishing, they dispersed; and the Pretender, 
with Lochiel of Barrisdale, and some others, skulked about in Moidart. Here they 
received advice that two French privateers were at anchor in Lochnanaugh in Moidart, 
in one of which, called the Happy, he embarked with 23 gentlemen, and one hundred 
and seven common men, and soon after arrived safe in France.



LORD LOVAT 
Beheaded for High Treason, at the age of Eighty, on 9th of April, 1747

  
Execution of Lord Lovat

	LORD LOVAT, who in 1715 had been a supporter of the House of Hanover, 
in 1745 changed sides, and became a friend of the party which he had before opposed.
	His career in life began in the year 1692, when he was appointed a captain in 
Lord Tullibardine's regiment, but he resigned his commission in order to prosecute his 
claim to be the Chief of the Frasers; in order to effect which he laid a scheme to get 
possession of the heiress of Lovat, who was about to be married to a son of Lord 
Salton. He raised a clan, who violently seized the young lord, and, erecting a gibbet, 
showed it to him and his father, threatening their instant deaths unless they 
relinquished the contract made for the heiress of Lovat. To this, fearing for their lives, 
they consented; but, still unable to get possession of the young lady, he seized the 
Dowager Lady Lovat in her own house, caused a priest to marry them against her 
consent, cut her stays open with his dirk, and, assisted by his ruffians, tore off her 
clothes, forced her into bed, to which he followed her, and then called his companions 
to witness the consummation of the outrageous marriage. For this breach of the peace 
he was indicted, but fled from justice; but he was nevertheless tried for rape, and for 
treason, in opposing the laws with an armed force; and sentence of outlawry was 
pronounced against him. Having fled to France, he turned Papist, ingratiated himself 
with the Pretender, and was rewarded by him with a commission; but he was 
apprehended on the remonstrance of the English ambassador in Paris, and lodged in 
the Bastille, where, having remained some years, he procured his liberty by taking 
priests' orders, under colour of which he became a Jesuit in the College of St Omer.
	In the first rebellion of 1715 he returned to Scotland, and, joining the King's 
troops, assisted them in seizing Inverness from the rebels; for which service he got the 
title of Lovat, was appointed to command, and had other favours conferred upon him. 
In the rebellion of which we are now treating he turned sides and joined the Pretender, 
a step treacherous in the extreme. When taken, he was old, unwieldy and almost 
helpless; although in that condition he had been possessed of infinite resources to 
assist the rebellion. He petitioned the Duke of Cumberland for mercy; and, hoping to 
work upon his feelings, recapitulated his former services, the favours that he had 
received from the Duke's grandfather, King George I., and dwelt much upon his 
access to Court, saying he had carried him to whom he now sued for life in his arms 
and, when a baby, held him up while his grandsire fondled him.
	On the 9th of March, 1747, however, he was taken from the Tower to 
Westminster Hall for trial, and, the evidence adduced clearly proving his guilt to be of 
no ordinary character, he was convicted. He was next day brought up for judgment, 
and sentence of death was pronounced.
	That this sentence was not ill deserved appears from a speech of Lord 
Belhaven, delivered in the last Parliament held in Edinburgh, in 1706, in which his 
lordship, speaking of this nobleman, then Captain Fraser, on occasion of the Scots 
plot, commonly called Fraser's plot, says that "he deserved, if practicable, to have 
been hanged five several times, in five different places, and upon five different 
accounts at least: as having been notoriously a traitor to the Court of St James's, a 
traitor to the Court of St Germain's, a traitor to the Court of Versailles and a traitor to 
his own country of Scotland; in being not only an avowed and restless enemy to the 
peace and quiet of its established government and constitution, both in Church and 
State, but likewise, a vile Proteus-like apostate and a seducer of others in point of 
religion, as the tide or wind changed; and, moreover, that (abstracted from all those, 
his multiplied acts of treason, abroad and at home) he deserved to be hanged as a 
condemned criminal, outlaw and fugitive, for the barbarous, cruel and most flagitious 
rape he had, with the assistance of some of his vile and abominable band of ruffians, 
violently committed on the body of a right honourable and virtuous lady, the widow 
of the late Lord Lovat, and sister of his Grace the late Duke of Atholl. Nay, so 
hardened was Captain Fraser, that he audaciously erected a gallows, and threatened to 
hang thereon one of the said lady's brothers and some other gentlemen of quality who 
accompanied him in going to rescue him out of that criminal's cruel hand."
	On the morning fixed for his execution, 9th of April, 1747, Lord Lovat, who 
was now in his eightieth year, and very large and unwieldy in his person, awoke at 
about three o'clock, and was heard to pray with great devotion. At five o'clock he 
arose, and asked for a glass of wine-and-water, and at eight o'clock he desired that his 
wig might be sent, that the barber might have time to comb it out genteelly, and he 
then provided himself with a purse to hold the money which he intended for the 
executioner. At about half-past nine o'clock he ate heartily of minced veal, and 
ordered that his friends might be provided with coffee and chocolate, and at eleven 
o'clock the sheriffs came to demand his body. He then requested his friends to retire 
while he said a short prayer; but he soon called them back, and said that he was ready.
	At the bottom of the first pair of stairs, General Williamson invited him into 
his room to rest himself, which he did, and on his entrance, paid his respects to the 
company politely, and talked freely. He desired of the general, in French, that he 
might take leave of his lady, and thank her for her civilities: but the general told his 
lordship, in the same language, that she was too much affected with his lordship’s 
misfortunes to bear the shock of seeing him, and therefore hoped his lordship would 
excuse her. He then took his leave, and proceeded. At the door he bowed to the 
spectators, and was conveyed from thence to the outer gate in the governor’s coach, 
where he was delivered to the sheriffs, who conducted him in another coach to the 
house near the scaffold, in which was a room lined with black cloth, and hung with 
sconces, for his reception. His friends were at first denied entrance but, upon 
application made by his lordship to the sheriffs for their admittance, it was granted. 
Soon after, his lordship, addressing himself to the sheriffs, thanked them for the 
favour, and taking a paper out of his pocket, delivered it to one of them, saying he 
should make no speech and that they might give the word of command when they 
pleased. A gentleman present beginning to react a prayer to his lordship while he was 
sitting, he called one of the warders to help him up, that he might kneel. He then 
prayed silently a short time, and afterwards sat again in his chair. Being asked by one 
of the sheriffs if he would refresh himself with a glass of wine, he declined it, because 
no warm water could be had to mix with it, and took a little burnt brandy and bitters in 
its stead. He requested that his clothes might be delivered to his friends with his 
corpse, and said for that reason he should give the executioner ten guineas. He also 
desired of the sheriffs that his head might be received in a cloth, and put into the 
coffin, which the sheriffs, after conferring with some gentlemen present, promised 
should be done; as also that the holding up the head at the corners of the scaffold 
should be dispensed with, as it had been of late years at the execution of lords.
	When his lordship was going up the steps to the scaffold, assisted by two 
warders, he looked round, and, seeing so great a concourse of people, "God save us," 
says he, "why should there be such a bustle about taking off an old grey head, that 
cannot get up three steps without three bodies to support it?"
	Turning about, and observing one of his friends much dejected, he clapped 
him on the shoulder, saying: "Cheer up thy heart, man! I am not afraid; why should 
you be so?" As soon as he came upon the scaffold he asked for the executioner, and 
presented him with ten guineas in a purse, and then, desiring to see the axe, he felt the 
edge and said he "believed it would do." Soon after, he rose from the chair which was 
placed for him and looked at the inscription on his coffin, and on sitting down again 
he repeated from Horace: "Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori" [it is sweet and 
fitting to die for one's country] and afterwards from Ovid [Met. 13. 140-1]: "Nam 
genus et proavos, et quae non fecimus ipsi, Vix ea nostra voco." [As for things done 
by our ancestors and other people than ourselves, I say we can have no credit for 
them]
	He then desired all the people to stand off, except his two warders, who 
supported his lordship while he said a prayer; after which he called his solicitor and 
agent in Scotland, Mr W. Fraser, and, presenting his gold-headed cane, said, "I deliver 
you this cane in token of my sense of your faithful services, and of my committing to 
you all the power I have upon earth," and then embraced him. He also called for Mr 
James Fraser, and said: "My dear James, I am going to heaven; but you must continue 
to crawl a little longer in this evil world." And, taking leave of both, he delivered his 
hat, wig and clothes to Mr William Fraser, desiring him to see that the executioner did 
not touch them. He ordered his cap to be put on, and, unloosing his neckcloth and the 
collar of his shirt, knelt down at the block, and pulled the cloth which was to receive 
his head close to him. But, being placed too near the block, the executioner desired 
him to remove a little farther back, which with the warders' assistance was 
immediately done; and, his neck being properly placed, he told the executioner he 
would say a short prayer and then give the signal by dropping his handkerchief. In this 
posture he remained about half-a-minute, and then, on throwing his handkerchief on 
the floor, the executioner at one blow cut off his head, which was received in the 
cloth, and, with his body was put into the coffin and carried in a hearse back to the 
Tower, where it was interred near the bodies of the other lords.
	  His lordship professed himself a papist, and, at his request, was attended by 
Mr Baker. attached to the chapel of the Sardinian ambassador; and though he insisted 
much on the services he had done the royal family in 1715, yet he declared, but a few 
days before his death, that he had been concerned in all the schemes formed for 
restoring the house of Stuart since he was fifteen years old.
	This nobleman’s intellectual powers seem to have been considerable and his 
learning extensive. He spoke Latin, French, and English, fluently, and other modern 
languages intelligibly. He studied at Aberdeen, and disputed his philosophy in Greek; 
and, though he was educated a protestant, yet, after three years’ study of divinity and 
controversy, he turned papist. He maintained an appearance of that facetious 
disposition for which he was remarkable, to the last ; and seems to have taken great 
pains to quit the stage, not only with decency, but with that dignity which is thought 
to distinguish the good conscience and the noble mind.
	The following lines upon the execution of these noblemen are said to have 
been repeated with great energy by Dr Johnson, although there appears to he no 
ground for supposing that they were the Doctor’s own composition. They first 
appeared in the Gentleman’s Magazine:
Pitied by gentle minds, Kilmarnock died 
The Brave, Balmerino, were on thy side; 
Ratcliffe, unhappy in his crimes of youth, 
Steady in what he still mistook for truth, 
Beheld his death so decently unmoved, 
The soft lamented, and the brave approved. 
But Lovat’s end indifferently we view, 
True to no King, to no religion true: 
No fair forgets the ruin he has done; 
No child laments the tyrant of his son; 
No Tory pities thinking what he was 
No Whig compassions, for he left the cause; 
The brave regret not, for he was not brave; 
The honest mourn not, knowing him a knave."


FRANCIS TOWNLEY, JEMMY DAWSON AND OTHERS 
Lesser rebels against his Majesty
	FRANCIS TOWNLEY, Late Rebel Colonel of their Manchester Regiment, 
was indicted at the sessions held at St. Margaret's Hall, for the part he had acted in the 
rebellion. His counsel insisted that he was not a subject of Great Britain, being an 
officer in the service of the French king; but this the judges observed was a 
circumstance against him; as he had quitted his native country., and engaged in the 
French service, without the consent of his lawful sovereign. Some other motions, 
equally frivolous, being overruled, he was capitally convicted, and adjudged to die.
	Colonel Townley was the son of—Townley, Esq; of Townley-Hall in 
Lancashire, who was tried for the share he had in the rebellion of 1715, but acquitted.
	Young Mr. Townley being educated in the rigid principles of popery, went 
abroad in early life, and entering into the service of France, distinguished himself in 
the military line, particularly at the siege of Phillipsbourg.
	Coming to England in 1742, he associated chiefly with those of the Catholic 
religion; and it was thought that he induced many of them to take an active part in the 
rebellion. When the Pretender came to Manchester, Townley offered his services: 
which being accepted, he was commissioned to raise a regiment, which he soon 
completed; but being made a prisoner at Carlisle, he was conducted to London.
	After conviction he behaved in the most reserved manner, scarcely speaking to 
any one but his brethren in misfortune.
	John Barkwick, formerly a linen-draper of Manchester, but afterwards a 
lieutenant, was the next person tried and convicted. This man was distinguished by 
living elegantly in prison; and it was remarked that the prisoners in general were 
amply supplied with the necessaries of life, by the bounty of their friends. It is 
asserted that they expected to be treated as prisoners of war; but it is not credible that 
they could be so totally ignorant of the law of nations, or their duty as subjects.
	James Dawson, a native of Lancashire, was genteelly born, and liberally 
educated at St. John's College, in Cambridge. After leaving the University he repaired 
to Manchester, where the Pretender gave him a captain's commission. Dawson had 
paid his addresses to a young lady, to whom he was to have been married immediately 
after his enlargement, if the solicitations that were made for his pardon had been 
attended with the desired effect.
	The circumstance of his love, and the melancholy that was produced by his 
death, is so admirably touched in the following ballad of Shenstone, that Dawson's 
story will probably be remembered and regretted when that of the rest of the rebels 
will be forgotten. A man must have lost all feeling who can read this beautiful ballad, 
equally remarkable for its elegance, its simplicity, and its truth, and remain 
unaffected.
JEMMY DAWSON, A BALLAD.
Come listen to my mournful tale, 
Ye tender hearts and lovers dear;  
Nor will you scorn to heave a sigh, 
Nor will you blush to shed a tear.
And thou, dear Kitty, peerless maid, 
Do thou a pensive ear incline, 
For thou canst weep at ev'ry woe, 
And pity ev'ry plaint but mine. --
Young Dawson was a gallant youth, 
A brighter never trod the plain; 
And, well he lov'd one charming maid, 
And dearly was he lov'd again.
One tender maid she lov'd him dear, 
Of gentle blood the damsel came, 
And faultless was her beauteous form; 
And spotless, was her virgin fame.
But curse on party's hateful strife, 
That led the faithful youth astray, 
The day the rebel clans appeared: 
O! had he never seen that day!
Their colours and their sash he wore, 
And in their fatal dress was found;  
And now he must that death endure, 
Which gives the brave the keenest wound.
How pale was then his true-love's cheek,  
When Jemmy's sentence reach'd her ear?  
For never yet did Alpine snows, 
So pale, nor yet so chill appear.
Yet might sweet mercy find a place, 
And bring relief to Jemmy's woes,  
O George! without a pray'r for thee, 
My orisons should never close.
The gracious prince that gives him life,  
Would crown a never dying flame,  
And ev'ry tender babe I bore, 
Should learn to lisp the givers name.
But though, dear youth, thou should'st be dragg'd  
To yonder ignominious tree, 
Thou shalt not want a faithful friend, 
To share thy bitter fate with thee.
O then her mourning coach was call'd; 
The sledge mov'd slowly on before;  
Though borne in a triumphal car, 
She had not lov'd her fav'rite more.
She follow'd him, prepar'd to view.  
The terrible behests of law; 
And the last scene of Jemmy's woes,  
With calm and steadfast eyes she saw.
Distorted was that blooming face, 
Which she had fondly lov'd so long;  
And stifled was that tuneful breath,  
Which in her praise had sweetly sung:
And sever'd was that beauteous neck, 
Round which her arms had fondly clos'd;  
And mangled was that beauteous breast,  
On which her love-sick head repos'd:
And ravish'd was that constant heart, 
She did to ev'ry heart prefer? 
For though it could his king forget, 
'Twas true and loyal still to her.
Amidst those unrelenting flames, 
She bore this constant heart to see;  
But when 'twas moulder'd into dust, 
Yet, yet, she cry'd, I'll follow thee,,
My death, my death, can only shew, 
The pure and lasting love I bore;  
Accept, O Heav'n! of woes like ours, 
And let us, let us weep no more.
The dismal scene was o'er and past, 
The lover's mournful hearse retied; 
The maid drew back her languid head, 
And, sighing forth his name, expir'd.
Tho' Justice ever must prevail, 
The tear my Kitty sheds is due:  
For seldom shall we, hear a tale; 
So sad, so tender, and so true.
	Another of the parties tried on this occasion was George Fletcher, who had 
been a linen-draper at Stratford near Manchester, managing the business for his 
mother, who, on her knees, persuaded him not to engage with the rebels; and offered 
him 10001. on the condition that he would not embark in so desperate an enterprize; 
but he was deaf to her entreaties, and so ambitious of serving the Pretender, that he 
gave his secretary, Mr. Murray, fifty pounds for a captain's commission. Fletcher 
having induced one Maddox to enlist, the man would have deserted, but he produced 
a handful of gold, and said he should not want money if he would fight for the 
Pretender; which induced Maddox to keep his station.
	Thomas Syddall was a barber at Manchester, and had supported a wife and 
five children in a creditable way, till the rebels troops arrived at that place. His father 
was hanged at Manchester, for his concern in the rebellion of 1715, and his head had 
remained on the market-cross till the year 1745, when it was taken down on the 
arrival of the Pretender. Syddall, who was a rigid Roman Catholic, now vowed 
revenge against the Protestants, with a view to accomplish which, he obtained an 
ensign's commission from the Pretender's secretary. The attachment of this man to the 
Pretender was so extraordinary, that almost in the last moment of his life, he prayed 
that his children might be ready to assert the same at the hazard of their lives.
	Thomas Chadwick was tried immediately after Syddall. He was a tallow-
chandler, but had not long followed business; for, associating with persons of 
Jacobitical principles, he accepted the commission of lieutenant in the Pretender's 
service; and he was tried for, and convicted of acting in that capacity. Chadwick 
appeared to have great resolution; and told his friends that death, in any shape, had no 
terrors for him: but his courage forsook him, and he seemed greatly agitated on taking 
leave of his father the night before his execution.
	Thomas Deacon, the next person tried, was the son of a physician of 
eminence. His principles of loyalty being tainted by associating with Jacobites, he 
became zealous in the cause of the Pretender; and his zeal was rewarded by the 
commission of lieutenant-colonel in the Manchester regiment. Mr. Deacon had 
declared his resolution of joining the rebels as soon as he heard they were in arms in 
Scotland; and when they arrived at Manchester, he became one of their number. His 
two brothers likewise embarked in this fatal business: and one of them was sentenced 
to die with him: but being only sixteen years of age, he was happy enough to obtain a 
pardon.
	The next convict on this melancholy occasion was Andrew Blood, who had 
been steward to a gentleman in Yorkshire, of which county he was a native, and 
descended from a respectable family. Quitting his service, he went to Manchester to 
join the rebels, and received a captains commission. He pleaded guilty to the 
indictment, and received sentence with the utmost composure and resignation. The 
gentleman whom he had served as steward exerted his utmost influence to procure a 
pardon for him; but the Culprit being told that all endeavours were fruitless, expressed 
the utmost unconcern, and said he was willing to become a martyr for the cause he 
had abetted; adding that he had prepared for death, having entertained no hope of 
pardon.
	The next person brought to trial and conviction was David Morgan, Esq. of 
Monmouthshire. This man had been sent by his father to study law in the Temple; and 
practised a short time as a counsellor; but his father dying, he went to reside on his 
estate in the country. He was distinguished by the haughtiness of his temper, and a 
disposition to quarrel with his neighbours and servants. Having met the rebels at 
Manchester, he advised the Pretender to proceed immediately to London, assuring 
him that the whole force to oppose him did not exceed three thousand men. Had this 
advice been attended to, the rebellion might have been crushed much sooner than it 
was: for, no doubt, the people would have arisen as one man, to oppose the progress 
of the lawless insurgents.
	The Pretender having granted Morgan a warrant to search the houses in 
Manchester for arms, he did this in the strictest manner, and threatened with 
exemplary punishment all those who opposed him.
	A colonel's commission was offered him; but he declined the acceptance of it, 
proposing rather to give his advice than his personal assistance. When the rebels 
marched to Derby, he quitted them; but, being taken into custody, he was lodged in 
Chester castle, and thence conveyed to London: and conviction following 
commitment, he was sentenced to die with his associates.
	After the sentence of the law was passed, the convicts declared that they had 
acted according to the dictates of their consciences, and would again act the same 
parts, if they were put to trial. When the keeper informed them that the following day 
was ordered for their execution, they expressed a resignation to the will of God, 
embraced each other, and took an affectionate leave of their friends.
	On the following morning they breakfasted together, and having conversed till 
near eleven o' clock, were conveyed from the New Gaol, Southwark, to Kennington 
Common, on three sledges. The gibbet was surrounded by a party of the guards, and a 
block; and a pile of faggots, were placed near it. The faggots were set on fire while the 
proper officers were removing the malefactors from the sledges.
	After near an hour employed in acts of devotion, these unhappy men, having 
delivered to the sheriffs some papers, expressive of their political sentiments, then 
underwent the sentence of the law. They had not hung above five minutes, when 
Townley was cut down, being yet alive, and his body being placed on the block, the 
executioner chopped off his head with a cleaver. His heart and bowels were then taken 
out, and thrown into the fire; and the other parts being separately treated in the same 
manner, the executioner cried out "God save King George !"
	The bodies were quartered and delivered to the keeper of the New Gaol, who 
buried them: the heads of some of the parties were sent to Carlisle and Manchester, 
where they were exposed; but those of Townley and Fletcher were fixed on Temple-
Bar, where they remained many years, till they fell down.
	These victims to their rashness suffered on Kennington Common, on the 20th 
of July, 1746.
	Three other persons suffered soon afterwards on the same spot, for similar 
offences; of which the following are such particulars as will be interesting to the 
reader.
	Donald M‘Donald had joined the Pretender soon after he came to Scotland, 
and had received a captain's commission. He was educated by an uncle, who told him 
he would tarnish the glory of his ancestors, who had been warmly attached to the 
cause, if he failed to act with courage.
	M‘Donald was ever foremost where danger presented itself: he was greatly 
distinguished at the battle of Preston Pans, and joined with Lord Nairn in taking 
possession of Perth; services that greatly recommended him to the Pretender. This 
man was exceedingly assiduous to learn the art of war, and made himself of so much 
consequence as to be intrusted with the command of, two thousand men. The Duke of 
Perth having ordered two men, who refused to enlist, to be shot, M‘Donald 
complained to his uncle, who had likewise a command in the rebel army, of the 
injustice of this proceeding; but the uncle ordered the nephew into custody, and told 
him that he should be shot on the following day; and actually informed the Pretender 
of what had passed; but M‘Donald was only reprimanded, and dismissed, on promise 
of more cautious behaviour in future..
	After his commitment to prison, M‘Donald frequently wished that he had been 
shot. Being advised to repent, he said it would be fruitless, and he had rather hear a 
tune on the sweet bagpipes that used to play before the army. He often told the 
keepers of the prison, that "if they would knock off his fetters, and give him a pair of 
bagpipes he would, treat them with a highland dance."
	He said, he thought the Pretender's service very honourable when he first 
engaged in it, which he would never have done if he had thought him so ill provided 
for the expedition.. He likewise expressed the utmost resentment against the French 
king for not supplying them with succours.
	James Nicholson had been educated in principles averse to those of the 
abettors of the house of Stuart, but had been fatally prevailed on to change his 
political sentiments, by some Jacobites, who frequented a coffeehouse which he kept 
at Leith with great reputation for a considerable time.
	Having accepted a lieutenant's commission on the arrival of the rebels at 
Edinburgh, he proceeded with them as far as Derby; but when they returned to 
Carlisle, he was taken into custody, and sent with the other prisoners to London.
	After conviction he was visited by his wife and children, which afforded a 
scene of distress that is not to be described. He now lamented the miseries that he had 
brought on his family; but his penitence came too late!
	The county of Banff, in Scotland, gave birth to Walter Ogilvie, who was 
brought up a Protestant, and taught the duty of allegiance to the illustrious house of 
Brunswick; but some of his associates having contaminated his principles, he went to 
Lord Lewis Gordon, and joined the division of rebels under his command.
	Ogilvie's father represented to him the rashness and impracticability of the 
scheme in which he was about to engage; but the young man said he was persuaded of 
its justice; and that the Pretender had a right to his best services.
	After conviction these unfortunate men behaved for some time with great 
indifference; but on the nearer approach of death they grew more serious. On the 
morning of their execution, having been visited by some friends, they were drawn on 
a sledge to Kennington Common, where they were turned off as soon as their 
devotions were ended; and after hanging about a quarter of an hour, they were cut 
down, their heads cut off, their bowels taken out and burnt, and their bodies conveyed 
to the New Gaol, Southwark, and on the following day they were interred in one 
grave, in the new burial ground belonging to the parish of Bloomsbury.
	These unfortunate men suffered at Kennington Common, on the 22d of 
August, 1746.
	Alexander M‘Gruther, a lieutenant in the Duke of Perth's regiment, and who 
had been very active among the rebels, was condemned with the three parties above-
mentioned, but he had the happiness to obtain a reprieve through the interest of his 
friends.
	Many other of the prisoners tried and convicted in Surrey were reprieved, as 
proper objects of the royal mercy; and the assizes for that county being ended, the 
judges, who were furnished with a special commission, proceeded to Carlisle to try 
those confined in the castle of that city, the number of whom was no less than three 
hundred and seventy.
	Orders were given that nineteen out of twenty of these should be transported, 
and only the twentieth man tried for his life; and that the chance of trial should be 
determined by lot; but many of them refused to accept these merciful terms.
	Bills of indictment having been found against them, they were informed that 
counsel and solicitors would be allowed them without expense; and were told that the 
clerk of the peace was commissioned to grant subpoenas for such witnesses as they 
thought might be of service to them. This being done, the Judges proceeded to York 
Castle, to try those there confined, and adjourned the assizes at Carlisle till the ninth 
of September, that the accused parties might have time to make a proper defence.
	In the mean time seventy were condemned of those confined at York, the most 
remarkable of whom was John Hamilton, Esq. who had been appointed Governor of 
Carlisle, having joined the Pretender after the battle of Preston Pans. On the first of 
November, ten of the convicts were executed at York, and eleven more on the eighth 
of the same month; and four were ordered to suffer on the fifteenth, but three of these 
were reprieved.
	The Judges now returned to Carlisle, and as many of the witnesses on the 
behalf of the prisoners had time from Scotland, they refused to be sworn in the 
English manner, and at length they were sworn according to the custom of their own 
country.
	Many of the prisoners pleaded guilty, and among those who stood the event of 
a trial, and were convicted, was a nonjuring clergyman named Cappock, who had 
preached to the rebels at Carlisle and Manchester;
	No less than ninety-one persons received sentence of death at Carlisle, several 
of whom were people of fortune, who had abandoned their better prospects in life to 
take part in this desperate rebellion. Ten of them were hanged and quartered at 
Carlisle on the 18th of October, and ten more at Brampton, in Cumberland, on the 1st 
of the same. month; but a number of them were transported, and several received an 
unconditional pardon.
	Five other of the rebels who had been tried in Surrey, suffered at Kennington 
Common, on the 28th of the month above-mentioned, one of whom at the place of 
execution drank a health to the Pretender.
	In, consequence of these convictions, many estates were forfeited to the 
crown; but King George the Second ordered them to be sold, and the whole produce, 
above twenty years purchase, to be given to the orphans of those who had forfeited 
them. The rest was employed in establishing schools in the Highlands, and instructing 
the natives in useful arts.


JOSEPH RAWLINS, alias GREAT JOE 
A daring and notorious Smuggler, executed at Winchester, October 10, 1748 
for burglary.

	THIS offence [burglary] is a felony at common law; it is described to be when 
a person, by night, breaketh into the mansion of another, with an intent to commit a 
felony; whether the felonious intent be executed or not.
	By the 18th. of Elizabeth, cap. 7, the benefit of clergy is taken. away from the 
offence; and by the 3d and 4th William and Mary, cap. 9, from accessories before the 
fact. By the 12th of Anne, stat. 1, cap. 7, if any person shall enter into a mansion or 
dwelling-house by day or by night, without breaking into the same with an intent to 
commit any felony; or being in such house, shall commit any felony; and shall, in the 
night-time, break the said house to get out of the same, he is declared guilty of the 
offence of burglary, and punished accordingly.
	It is, without doubt, highly expedient that this offence should be punished 
more severely than any other species of theft; since, besides the loss of property, there 
is something very terrific in the mode of perpetration, which is often productive of 
dreadful effects.
	The ancient laws made a marked distinction in the punishment, between this 
offence, which was called Hamsokne (and which name it retains at present, in the 
northern part of this kingdom) and robbing a house in the day-time.
	It is impossible to reflect upon the outrages and acts of violence continually 
committed, more particularly in and near the metropolis, by lawless ravagers of 
property, and destroyers of lives, in disturbing the peaceful mansion, the castle of 
every Englishman, and also in abridging the liberty of travelling upon the public 
highways, without asking -- Why are these enormities suffered, in a country where the 
criminal laws are supposed to have arrived at a greater degree of perfection than any 
other?
	This is an important inquiry, interesting, in the highest degree, to every 
member of the body politic.
	If, in pursuing such an inquiry, the situation of Holland, Flanders, and several 
of the northern states on the continent, be examined, it will be found that this terrific 
evil had (alluding to these states previous to the present war) there scarcely an 
existence; and that the precaution of bolting doors and windows during the night was 
even seldom used; although, in these countries, from the opulence of many of the 
inhabitants, there were great temptations to plunder property.
	This security did not proceed from severer punishments; for in very few 
countries are they more sanguinary than in England. It is to be attributed to a more 
correct and energetic system of Police, joined to an early and general attention to the 
employment, education, and morals, of the lower orders of the people; a habit of 
industry and sobriety is thus acquired, which, universally imbibed in early life, "grows 
with their growth, and strengthens with their strength!"
	Houses, intended to be entered during the night, are previously reconnoitred 
and examined for days preceding. If one or more of the servants are not already 
associated with the gang, the most artful means are used to obtain their assistance; and 
when every previous arrangement is made, the mere operation of robbing a house 
becomes a matter of little difficulty.
	By the connivance and assistance of immediate, or former servants, they are 
led to the places where the most valuable, as well as the most portable, articles are 
deposited, and the object is speedily attained. In this manner do the principal burglars 
and housebreakers proceed: and let this information serve as a caution to every person 
in the choice both of their male and female servants; since the latter as well as the 
former are not seldom accomplices in very atrocious robberies. It frequently happens 
that the burglars make their contracts with the receivers on the evening before the 
plunder is obtained; so as to secure a ready admittance immediately afterwards, and 
before daybreak, for the purpose of effectual concealment by melting plate, 
obliterating marks, and securing all other articles so as to place them out of the reach 
of discovery. This has long been reduced to a regular system which is understood and 
followed as a trade.
	Night coaches promote, in an eminent degree, the perpetration of burglaries 
and other felonies: bribed by a high reward many hackney-coachmen eagerly enter 
into the pay of nocturnal depredators, and wait in the neighbourhood until the robbery 
is completed, and then draw up, at the moment the watchmen are going their round; or 
off their stands, for the purpose of conveying the plunder to the house of the receiver, 
who is generally waiting the issue of the enterprise. Nearly one-half of the hackney 
coachmen in London, are said to be, (in the cant phrase ) flashmen, designed to assist 
thieves.
	[Note: On the 21st, April, 1747, two smugglers, George Kingman and Barnet 
Wollit, both outlaws, one of whom murdered a man on. Hurst-Green, were killed in a 
skirmish with the townsmen of Goodhurst in Kent, who found it necessary to arm 
against those desperadoes, who rob and plunder wherever they go, and live upon the 
spoil. 
	This spirited conduct of the people of this town was highly praiseworthy. They 
acted under the following order of council: 
	"In consequence of a report of the Attorney and Solicitor General, wherein 
they, gave their opinion, that all his Majesty's subjects, civil and military, magistrates, 
officers, and private persons, have, by law, without any express warrant for that 
purpose, authority to seize and apprehend any persons assembled, armed, and acting 
in such manner, as described in the laws against smuggling, and bring them before a 
magistrate, who may commit them to prison: and in seizing, apprehending, securing, 
and committing them to prison, may repel force with force, and justify any violence or 
hostilities which may be necessary to suppress and subdue them, to bring them to 
justice. 
	"His Majesty in council is pleased to require and command all officers, both 
civil and military, to use their utmost force in support of the laws, and suppressing, 
subduing, and bringing, all such offenders to justice."]
	Joseph Rawlins was indicted at the assize held at Winchester, for the year 
1748, for burglariously breaking into the dwelling-house of Mr. Wakefield, of 
Selborne, in the county of Hants, on the 6th of September, 1747, and therefrom stole 
cash, plate, and other effects, the property of the said Wakefield.
	It appeared in evidence, that this fellow, at the head of thirteen more, met on 
the day of the robbery, at Adverse Heath, in Sussex, whence they proceeded to 
Woolmer. Forest, where they lay concealed till the evening. Then they mounted their 
horses, and arrived about eight near Mr. Wakefield's. Jeremiah Curtis, one of the 
villains, rode up to the house; and pretending he had lost his way; desired to be set 
right. The men-servants of the house having informed him, he asked for some beer, 
when an old maid-servant went to draw some; but he found great fault with it, and 
called for ale. She told him, that her master had the key, and was gone to bed. On this 
he rode back to his companions, who immediately came up, armed with 
blunderbusses and pistols; and, pretending to be officers, demanded the master of the 
house, insisting that he harboured outlawed smugglers. Being answered that he was in 
bed, they broke open the door, and going up to Mr. Wakefield's room, presented a 
blunderbuss to his breast, and, with horrid imprecations, demanded where he kept his 
money. On being told he had no money, they pulled him across the bed; yet still he 
persisted. They then told him to point out his plate; and, fearing to be murdered, he 
showed them the chest. This they immediately broke open, and stole thereout a silver 
tankard, a salt, porrenger; salver, and twelve spoons: from another room, fourteen 
guineas, a silver watch, and several other things of value. Meanwhile the prisoner at 
the bar, Rawlins, with another, held the horses of those plundering, fearing to enter, as 
they were known to the family. Another of the party kept guard over the servants, 
threatening them with instant death, if they stirred.
	Having plundered the house of every portable valuable, they returned to Mr. 
Wakefield, and with dreadful oaths, demanded two hundred pounds, which they 
insisted he had just received from Bristol. He protested that he had received none; 
upon which they dragged him out of bed, and swore they would carry him off, unless 
he discovered his money; but finding him resolute, they let him go. The next day, the 
thieves divided their booty, of which the prisoner had his share.
	The old servant woman who had kindly given drink to the first villain, swore, 
that they rifled her pockets of four shillings -- most mean and ungrateful.
	The defence set up by this old offender was weak and ignorant; so that the 
jury, without hesitation, found him guilty; and he was accordingly executed.
	We have already observed what a pest to the country were these different 
gangs of smugglers; for when none of the vessels employed in this illicit trade were in 
the harbours and creeks, with their contraband cargoes, the villains employed the time 
in housebreaking, highway and foot robberies; and it was long before they could be 
extirpated.



GEORGE LANCASTER 
Executed at Tyburn, 16th of November, 1747, for forging a Seaman's Will, 
in order to rob his Wife and Child

	THIS offender was born in Hatton Garden, London, of respectable parents, 
who placed him with a reputable attorney, with whom he served part of his clerkship 
in the most regular manner; but, making very bad connections, his master requested 
his parents to take him home and send him to sea as the most likely means to prevent 
his ruin.
	The parents, approving this hint, persuaded the son to sail as captain's clerk on 
board a ship in the Royal Navy; and he continued some years in this station.
	He came to London when his ship was paid off, and having received a 
considerable sum of money dissipated the whole in houses of ill-fame. His father was 
now dead; but his mother, with a fondness very natural, but which perhaps contributed 
to his ruin, supplied his extravagances till she was very much reduced in her 
circumstances; and in the meantime the son borrowed money in her name of anyone 
who would trust him; but at length his character being lost, and his mother totally 
impoverished, he determined on the commission of the crime for which his life paid 
the forfeit.
	A seaman, named Hugh Price, to whom thirty-six pounds were due for wages, 
died on board the Dorchester man-of-war, having made a will in favour of his wife 
and son, who lived near Whitehaven, in Cumberland. Lancaster, hearing of the death 
of Price, forged a will purporting to be his, and, carrying it to Doctors' Commons, 
obtained a probate of the will, in consequence of his swearing that he was the son of 
the above-mentioned Price.
	Being thus possessed of the probate, he went to a public-house, producing to 
the landlord a letter signed George Price, whom he averred was the son of the 
deceased, and had empowered him to dispose of his father's wages. The landlord, 
unacquainted with these matters, applied to a gentleman, who told him he might 
safely purchase if Lancaster could get the original ticket and would lodge the probate 
in his hands as a collateral security.
	The publican mentioning this to Lancaster, the latter said he would procure the 
original ticket from Portsmouth; but at the expiration of four days he produced a 
forged ticket, which the landlord, on the advice of a friend, purchased for twenty-
seven pounds.
	About three months after this transaction, a clerk of the Navy Office called on 
the publican, and he showed him the ticket. He said he thought it a good one, but he 
would write to the agent at Portsmouth to inquire into the fact. The agent's answer was 
that Hugh Price's ticket in favour of his son George was still in the office; so that it 
was evident that Lancaster's ticket must be a forgery.
	The publican then went to an attorney, who advised him to make a debt of the 
affair, and arrest Lancaster for the money. This being done, he was committed to the 
Poultry Compter, where he was informed that he should be set at liberty if his friends 
would make a subscription to raise the sum; but not having friends to assist him in this 
essential matter, the publican went to the Navy Office, where he informed the 
commissioners of the affair, and they ordered Lancaster to be prosecuted by their 
solicitor.
	Lancaster's guilt being proved in the clearest manner on his trial, he was 
convicted, received sentence of death, and was executed at Tyburn, on 16th of 
November, 1747.


HOSEA YOUELL 
Executed at Tyburn, Nov. 16, 1747, for murder.

	IT is estimated in another part of our chronology, that there are more Jew 
thieves in London, on a fair calculation of their numbers, than of the abandoned of all 
other persuasions. For some years these Levites, formerly kept under a necessary 
restriction by the Christian laws, presuming upon too ample a toleration, have become 
the bullies of people of London, The disgraceful practice of pugilism, revived by 
Mendoza, on their part, has greatly increased their depredations as well as their 
audacity. The ruffian set of the disciples of Moses, sent into Covent-garden theatre 
some years since, in order to awe the public to an acquiescence in an imposition of 
increased prices to that place of public amusement, shews to what a daring pitch they 
have arrived.
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey in October, 1747, Hosea Youell, and 
Jacob Lopez, two Jews, were indicted for the murder of Captain Johns, when the 
former was convicted, and the latter acquitted.
	The story of this affair is as follows: Mr. Johns coming up Sandwich-court, 
Devonshire Square, between ten and eleven o'clock at night, met two men whom he 
believed to be Jews, who robbed him of his watch and money. Hearing some people 
coming towards him, he called out, "Stop thief;" on which one of them returned, and 
gave him a stab in the body, of the depth of nine inches, as appeared by the deposition 
of the surgeon who attended Captain Johns at the Dolphin inn, Bishopsgate-street, and 
extracted a piece of the sword from his body.
	Youell being taken into custody, Alderman Rawlinson attended the wounded 
man, who positively charged Youell with being the murderer, and signed his charge, 
being in his perfect senses, but died within fifteen minutes afterwards.
	The wounded man being asked how he could be so positive to Youell, said, he 
knew him by the light from a lamp, and that he should know his voice. Youell being 
bid to turn round, slouch his hat, and speak, hesitated for a while; but at length 
complying, the captain said, "You are the man that stabbed me, I am positive of the 
voice."
	A piece of a sword was found in the court where the captain was stabbed, 
which exactly tallied with the piece lodged in the body of the deceased: and it also 
appeared that Youell had requested the city-marshal to speak to the alderman, that he 
might be admitted an evidence; and averred, that the murder was not committed by 
himself, but by one Hart.
	After conviction, the prisoner said that he was only eighteen years of age, and 
born of Jewish parents, who lived in Creed-lane, Leadenhall-street. He was so 
illiterate that he could neither read Hebrew nor English. The ordinary of Newgate 
representing to him the advantages of the Gospel over the Mosaic dispensation, he 
said, that as he was born and bred a Jew, he would die such.
	He was attended by a rabbi, and at the place of execution steadfastly denied 
having been guilty of the murder. However, he earnestly advised young people to be 
cautious in the choice of their company, as it was by a neglect of that caution that he 
had come to a fatal end.


HENRY SIMMS 
The Extraordinary Career of a Youth, who was executed at Tyburn, 16th of 
November, 1747, after returning from Transportation, for Highway Robbery

	HENRY SIMMS was born in the parish of St Martin's-in-the-Fields, London, 
and was soon a helpless orphan. His grandmother, who was a Dissenter, sent him first 
to a school kept by a clergyman, but as he frequently ran away she placed him at an 
academy in St James's parish, where he became proficient in writing and arithmetic, 
and was likewise a tolerable Latin and French scholar.
	Before the boy had completed his tenth year he gave a specimen of his 
dishonest disposition. His grandmother taking him with her on a visit to a tradesman's 
house, he stole twenty shillings from the till in the shop, which being observed by the 
maid-servant, she informed her master; and, the money being found on the youth, he 
was severely punished. He now began to lie from home at nights, and associated with 
the vilest of company, in the purlieus of St Giles's. His companions advising him to 
rob his grandmother, he stole seventeen pounds from her and, taking his best apparel, 
repaired to St Giles's, where his new acquaintances made him drunk, put him to bed, 
and then robbed him of his money and clothes. On his waking he covered himself 
with some rags he found in the room and, after strolling through the streets in search 
of the villains, went into an ale-house, the landlord of which, hearing his tale, 
interceded with his grandmother to take him again under her protection. To this, after 
some hesitation, she consented; and, buying a chain with a padlock, she had him 
fastened, during the daytime, to the kitchen grate, and at night he slept with a man 
who was directed to take care that he did not escape.
	After a month of confinement he had his liberty granted him and new clothes 
purchased, with which he immediately went among some young thieves who were 
tossing up for money, in St Giles's. On the approach of night they took him to a brick-
kiln near Tottenham Court Road, where they broiled some steaks, and supped in 
concert; and were soon joined by some women, who brought some geneva, with 
which the whole company regaled themselves.
	Simms, falling asleep, was robbed of his clothes; and when the brickmakers 
came to work in the morning they found him in his shirt only. While they were 
conducting him towards town he was met by his grandmother's servant, who was in 
search of him, and conveyed him to her house. Notwithstanding his former behaviour 
the old lady received him kindly, and placed him with a breeches-maker. He having 
corrected him for his ill behaviour, he ran away, and taking his best clothes from his 
grandmother's house, in her absence, sold them to a Jew, and spent the money in 
extravagance.
	The old gentlewoman now went to live at the house of Lady Stanhope, whither 
the graceless boy followed her, and being refused admittance he broke several of the 
windows. This in some measure compelled his grandmother to admit him; but that 
very night he robbed the house of as many things as produced him nine pounds, which 
he carried to a barn in Marylebone Fields, and spent among his dissolute companions. 
For this offence he was apprehended, and, after some hesitation, confessed where he 
had sold the effects. From this time his grandmother gave him up as incorrigible. 
Soon afterwards he was apprehended as a pickpocket, but he was discharged for want 
of evidence.
	Simms now associated with the worst of company; but after a narrow escape 
on a charge of being concerned in sending a threatening letter to extort money, and 
two of his companions being transported for other offences, he seemed deterred from 
continuing his evil courses; and thereupon wrote to his grandmother, entreating her 
further protection. Still anxious to save him from destruction, she prevailed on a 
friend to take him into his house, where for some time he behaved regularly; but, 
getting among his old associates, they robbed a gentleman of his watch and money, 
and threw him into a ditch in Marylebone Fields; when only some persons 
accidentally coming up prevented his destruction.
	Two more of Simms' companions being now transported, he hired himself to 
an innkeeper as a driver of a post-chaise; and after that lived as postilion to a 
nobleman, but was soon discharged on account of his irregular conduct. Having 
received some wages, he went again among the thieves, who dignified him with the 
title of "Gentleman Harry," on account of his presumed skill, and the gentility of his 
appearance. Simms now became intimately acquainted with a woman who lived with 
one of his accomplices, in revenge for which the fellow procured both him and the 
woman to be taken into custody on a charge of felony, and they were committed to 
Newgate; but, the Court paying no regard to the credibility of the witnesses, the 
prisoners were acquitted.
	Soon after his discharge Simms robbed a gentleman of his watch and 
seventeen pounds on Blackheath, and likewise robbed a lady of a considerable sum 
near the same spot. Being followed to Lewisham, he was obliged to quit his horse, 
when he presented two pistols to his pursuers, by which he so intimidated them as to 
effect his escape, though with the loss of his horse.
	Repairing to London he bought another horse, and travelling into 
Northamptonshire, and putting up at an inn at Towcester, learned that a military 
gentleman had hired a chaise for London; on which he followed the chaise the next 
morning, and kept up with it for several miles. At length the gentleman, observing 
him, said: "Don't ride so hard, Sir, you'll soon ride away your whole estate"; to which 
Simms replied: "Indeed I shall not, for it lies in several counties"; and, instantly 
quitting his horse, he robbed the gentleman of one hundred and two guineas.
	He now hastened to London, and, having dissipated his ill-acquired money at a 
gaming-table, rode out towards Hounslow, and meeting the postilion who had driven 
the above-mentioned gentleman in Northamptonshire gave him five shillings, begging 
he would take no notice of having seen him. A reward being at length offered for 
apprehending Simms, he entered on board a privateer; but being soon weary of a 
seafaring life he deserted, and enlisted for a soldier. While in this station he knocked 
out the eye of a woman at a house of ill-fame, for which he was apprehended and 
lodged in New Prison. Soon after this, Justice de Veil admitted him an evidence 
against some felons, his accomplices, who were transported, and Simms regained his 
liberty.
	Being apprehended for robbing a baker's shop, he was convicted, and being 
sentenced to be transported was, accordingly, shipped on board one of the transport 
vessels. As this sailed round to the Isle of Wight he formed a plan for seizing the 
captain, and effecting an escape; but as a strict watch was kept on him it was not 
possible for him to carry this plan into execution. The ship arriving at Maryland, 
Simms was sold, for twelve guineas, but he found an early opportunity of deserting 
from the purchaser. Having learned that his master's horse was left tied to a gate at 
some distance from the dwelling-house, he privately decamped in the night, and rode 
thirty miles in four hours, through extremely bad roads: so powerfully was he 
impelled by his fears.
	He now found himself by the seaside, and, turning the horse loose, he hailed a 
vessel just under sail, from which a boat was sent to bring him on board. As hands 
were very scarce, the captain offered him six guineas, which were readily accepted, to 
work his passage to England. There being at this time a war between England and 
France, the ship was taken by a French privateer, but soon afterwards ransomed; and 
Simms entered on board a man-of-war, where his diligence promoted him to the rank 
of a midshipman. But the ship had no sooner arrived at Plymouth than he quitted his 
duty and, travelling to Bristol, spent the little money he possessed in the most 
dissipated manner.
	His next step was to enter himself on board a coasting vessel at Bristol, but he 
had not been long at sea before, on a dispute with the captain, he threatened to throw 
him overboard, and would have carried his threat into execution if the other seamen 
had not prevented him. Simms asked for his wages when the ship returned to port; but 
on the captain threatening imprisonment for his ill behaviour at sea he decamped, with 
only eight shillings in his possession.
	Fertile of contrivances, he borrowed a bridle and saddle, and having stolen a 
horse, in a field near the city, he went once more on the highway, and taking the road 
to London robbed the passengers in the Bristol coach, those in another carriage, and a 
single lady and gentleman, and repaired to London with the booty he had acquired.
	Having put up the stolen horse at an inn in Whitechapel, and soon afterwards 
seeing it advertised, he was afraid to fetch it: on which he stole another horse; but as 
he was riding through Tyburn Turnpike, the keeper, knowing the horse, brought the 
rider to the ground. Hereupon Simms presented a pistol, and threatened the man with 
instant death if he presumed to detain him. By this daring mode of proceeding he 
obtained his liberty, and, having made a tour round the fields, he entered London by 
another road. On the following day he went to Kingston-upon-Thames, he stole a 
horse, and then robbed several people on his return to London; and the day afterwards 
robbed seven farmers of eighteen pounds. His next depredations were in Epping 
Forest, where he committed five robberies in one day, but soon spent what he thus 
gained among women of ill-fame. Thinking it unsafe to remain longer in London, he 
set out with a view of going to Ireland; but had ridden only to Barnet when he crossed 
the country to Harrow-on-the-Hill, where he robbed a gentleman, named Sleep, of his 
money and watch, and would have taken his wig, but the other said it was of no value, 
and he hoped, as it was cold weather, his health might not be endangered by being 
deprived of it. The robber threatened Mr Sleep's life unless he would swear never to 
take any notice of the affair; but this the gentleman absolutely refused. Hereupon 
Simms said that if he had not robbed him, two other persons would; and told him to 
say "Thomas" if he should meet any people on horseback.
	Soon after this, Mr Sleep, meeting two men whom he presumed to be 
accomplices of the highwayman, cried out "Thomas!" -- but the travellers paying no 
regard to him he was confirmed in his suspicions, and rode after them; and on his 
arrival at Hoddesdon Green he found several other persons, all of them in pursuit of 
the highwayman.
	In the meantime Simms rode forward, and robbed the St Albans stage; after 
which he went as far as Hockliffe; but, being now greatly fatigued, he fell asleep in 
the kitchen of an inn, whither he was pursued by some light horsemen from St Albans, 
who took him into custody. Being confined for that night, he was carried in the 
morning before a magistrate, who committed him to Bedford Jail. By an 
unaccountable neglect his pistol had not been taken from him, and on his way to 
prison he attempted to shoot one of his guards; but the pistol missing fire, his hands 
were tied behind him; and when he arrived at the prison he was fastened to the floor, 
with an iron collar round his neck. Being removed to London, by a writ of habeas 
corpus, he was lodged in Newgate, where he was visited, from motives of curiosity, 
by numbers of people, whom he amused with a narrative of his having been employed 
to shoot the King.
	On this he was examined before the Duke of Newcastle, then Secretary of 
State; but, his whole story bearing evident marks of a fiction, he was remanded to 
Newgate, to take his trial at the ensuing Old Bailey sessions. Ten indictments were 
preferred against him; but, being convicted for the robbery of Mr Sleep, it was not 
thought necessary to arraign him on any other of the indictments.
	After conviction he behaved with great unconcern, and in some instances with 
insolence. Having given a fellowprisoner a violent blow, he was chained to the floor. 
He appeared shocked when the warrant for his execution arrived; but soon resumed 
his former indifference, and continued it even to the moment of execution, when he 
behaved in the most thoughtless manner.
	He was hanged at Tyburn, on the 16th of November, 1747.


SERJEANT SMITH 
An English Deserter to the French, shot in the Park on the 11th 
day of December, 1747.

	WE should not have accorded to the case of this ungrateful traitor a separate 
memoir, were it not to hand down his crime to posterity, as an example to the army, 
and a caution against desertion.
	Courts-martial are composed of a certain number of officers, according to the 
magnitude of the charge against the prisoner, of which one is the president, and 
another judge-advocate. A regimental court-martial is appointed by the commander of 
each troop or regiment for the trial of offences which are not deemed sufficiently 
heinous to be carried to a general court-martial. Regimental courts-martial are often 
assembled, sometimes in a few minutes, at the drum-head, and consist of a captain, 
the president, and four subaltern officers, members. They are not sworn, but give 
sentence and judgment like the Lords, sitting on the trial of a peer, on a charge 
affecting his life—"Upon their honours." This may be termed the internal or domestic 
management of a regiment, trying offences by a court of its own officers; but where a 
charge is of a serious nature, as mutiny, desertion, or treason, then application is made 
to the commander-in-chief for a general court-martial. It is composed of veteran 
officers, the oldest being the president, and the advocate-general, or his deputy, 
attending. This office partakes of both civil and military functions. He regulates the 
evidence, propounds questions, as well for the prosecutor as the accused, takes 
minutes of the trial, and sums up the evidence in the manner of a civil judge, on the 
trial of a criminal, for the determination of the court. This done, the court is cleared of 
all strangers, and the members alone debate on the nature of the crime, and offer their 
respective opinions, beginning with the youngest, who being called upon by the 
president, pronounces "Guilty," or "Not Guilty," as he feels the case. The next is then 
called upon, and a, majority of voices forms the sentence; the president, on an equal 
number for and against the prisoner, has the casting vote., When found guilty, in like 
manner they determine upon the punishment, whether death or corporeal punishment. 
The sentence is then sent to the King for approbation, and when confirmed, the 
punishment is inflicted.
	On the 26th of November, 1747, a court-martial assembled at Whitehall, of 
which Marshal Wade was president, for the purpose of trying Serjeant Smith who had 
been lately brought from Scotland, charged with deserting into the service of the 
French, and afterwards to that of the rebels, and having heard the evidence for and 
against the prisoner, he was found guilty.
	On the l1th of December he was conducted from the Savoy prison to the 
parade in St. James's Park, where he was met by a detachment of the foot-guards, 
commanded by Colonel Drury, to Hyde Park. The unhappy man was attended by the 
minister of the Savoy, and having arrived at a gibbet, under which was a new-made 
grave, to receive his body; to which dreadful preparation he seemed little moved: 
indeed, there was an apparent unconcern in the whole of his behaviour.
	This was a man of extraordinary abilities, and as vicious in his principles. He 
had served several of the Princes in the then late wars in Germany, and abused them 
all by desertion. He was master of several languages, and from this acquirement he 
acted as interpreter to our officers, who were so partial to him, that they appointed 
him a paymaster-serjeant, and in fact treated him as their companion. His income 
could not have been less than 200l. a year. A man thus caressed must be truly a villain 
who could be base enough to desert his duty; but Smith was of a roving turn, and 
could not keep long in a place,. the excuse he gave for his crimes. He died undaunted, 
and declared himself a protestant. Reports had been circulated, owing probably to the 
fluency with which he spoke French, that he was a papist. He was immediately buried 
under the gibbet, which was erected on the bank of the Serpentine river.


WILLIAM WHURRIER 
Executed at Tyburn for murder, March 7, 1748, and his body 
hung in chains on Finchley common. (A Hard Case.)

	WE cannot so clearly see by the report of this trial, as the jury might have 
done by the evidence adduced, the malice propense necessary to constitute the 
conviction of murder. But, though we are by no means disposed to question a verdict 
of the country, yet we cannot avoid saying, that the case added to the services which 
the unfortunate man had rendered the king, should have proved a strong 
recommendation to royal mercy.
	This soldier was a native of Morpeth, in Northumberland, and brought up as a 
husbandman; but having inlisted in general Cope's regiment, he served five years and 
a half in Flanders; when, some horses being wanted for the use of the army, he and 
another man were sent to England to purchase them.
	On the 11th of February, 1748, as Whurrier and his companion were walking 
over Finchley Common towards Barnet, the latter, being wearied, agreed with a post-
boy, who went by with a led horse, to, permit him to ride to Barnet, leaving Whurrier 
at an alehouse on the road. Whurrier having drank freely; met with a woman who 
appeared to be his country-woman, and with her he continued drinking till both of 
them were intoxicated, when they proceeded together towards Barnet; but they were 
followed by some sailors, one of whom insulted Whurrier, telling him that he had no 
business with the woman.
	Whurrier suspecting there was a design to injure him, asked the woman if she 
had any connection with those men. She said she had not: but in the meantime the 
other Sailors coming up, said they came to rescue the woman; on which Whurrier 
drew his sword; but returned it into the scabbard without annoying any one.
	A soldier riding by at this instant, Whurrier told him that the sailors had ill-
treated him, and begged his assistance, on which the soldier getting off his horse, the 
sailors ran away, and Whurrier pursuing them, overtook the first that had assaulted 
him, and drawing his sword, cut him in such a manner that he was carried in a 
hopeless condition to a house in the neighbourhood, where he languished till the 
Sunday following, and then died.
	It appeared by the testimony of a surgeon that the deceased had received a cut 
across the skull, as if done with a butcher's chopper; so that the brains, lay open; 
besides a variety of other wounds..
	Whurrier being taken into custody for the commission of this murder, was 
brought to trial at the next sessions at the Old Bailey and being capitally convicted on 
the clearest, evidence, was sentenced to die.
	After conviction he said he thought there was a combination between the 
woman he had met with and the sailors; and a day or two before he suffered, he 
procured the following paper to be published, which he called, "Whurrier's 
Declaration."
	"This is to let the world know that I have lived in good credit, and have served 
his Majesty eight years and two months. In the time of my service, I have stood six 
campaigns, and always obeyed all lawful commands: I have been in three battles, and 
at Bergen-op-zoom, during the time it was besieged. The first battle was at Dettingen, 
June, 1743, when his Majesty headed his army: the second was in the year 1745, April 
30, at Fontenoy; the third was at Luckland, by siege; besides several skirmishes, and 
other great dangers. I had. rather it had been my fate to have died in the. field of 
battle, where I have seen many thousand wallowing in their blood, than to come to 
such disgrace: but, alas! I have escaped all these dangers to come to this unhappy fate, 
to suffer at Tyburn, and afterwards to hang in chains on a gibbet, which last is the 
nearest concern to me; and I cannot help expressing, that it would be more beneficial 
to the public to employ blacksmiths to make breast-plates for the soldiers, than irons 
to inclose their bodies to be exposed to the fowls of the air.
	"I have been a true subject and faithful servant, as is well known to the officers 
of the regiment to which I belonged. If I had been a pick-pocket, or a thief, I should 
have suffered much more deservedly, in my own opinion, than I now do; for what I 
did was in my own defence: I was upon the king's duty, and was assaulted by the men 
in sailors' habits, who gave me so many hard blows, as well as so much bad language, 
that I could no longer bear it, and was obliged to draw my sword in my own defence; 
and being in too great a passion, as well as too much in liquor, I own I struck without 
mercy; as thinking my life in danger, surrounded by four men, who I thought designed 
to murder me; who, or what they were the Lord knows; it is plain they had a false 
pass, as it was proved: and that they had travelled but seven miles in nine days; but I 
forgive them, as I hope forgiveness: and the Lord have mercy on My soul, and the 
poor man's whom I killed. 
	W. WHURRIER."


WILLIAM YORK  
"The Boy Murderer," convicted of the Murder of another Child in the 
Poorhouse of Eyke, in Suffolk, May, 1748

  
William York, aged 10, killing Susan Matthew, aged 5

	THIS sinner was but just turned ten years of age when he committed the 
dreadful crime. He was a pauper in the poorhouse belonging to the parish of Eyke, in 
Suffolk, and was committed, on the coroner's inquest, to Ipswich Jail for the murder 
of Susan Mahew, another child, of five years of age, who had been his bedfellow. The 
following is his confession, taken and attested by a Justice of the Peace, and which 
was, in part, proved on his trial, with many corroborating circumstances of his guilt.
	He said that a trifling quarrel happening between them, on the 13th of May, 
1748, about ten in the morning, he struck her with his open hand, and made her cry. 
That she going out of the house to the dunghill, opposite to the door, he followed her 
with a hook in his hand, with an intent to kill her; but before he came up to her he set 
down the hook, and went into the house for a knife; he then came out again, took hold 
of the girl's left hand, and cut her wrist all round and to the bone, with his knife, and 
then threw her down, and cut her to the bone just above the elbow of the same arm. 
That after this he set his foot upon her stomach, and cut her right arm round about, 
and to the bone, both on the wrist and above the elbow. That he then thought she 
would not die, and therefore took the hook and cut her left thigh to the bone; and, 
observing she was not dead yet, his next care was to conceal the murder. For this 
purpose he filled a pail with water at a ditch, and washed the blood off the child's 
body, buried it in the dunghill, together with the blood that was spilt upon the ground, 
and made the dunghill as smooth as he could; afterwards he washed the knife and 
hook, and carried them into the house, washed the blood off his own clothes, hid the 
child's clothes in an old chamber, and then came down and got his breakfast.
	This "boy murder" was found guilty, and sentence of death pronounced 
against him; but he was respited from time to time, and on account of his tender years, 
was at length pardoned.



GEORGE COCK 
A most Plausible Scoundrel, executed at Tyburn, 13th of June, 1748, for 
privately stealing

	THIS artful rogue was born in the neighbourhood of Aldgate, and for seven or 
eight years lived as errand-boy and porter to several tradesmen, none of whom had 
reason to suspect that he purloined their property; but he was held by them in no 
esteem, on account of his being frequently intoxicated and associating with people of 
dissolute principles.
	Having made pretensions of love to a maid-servant in the neighbourhood of 
Mayfair, she invited him to her master's house. He was punctual to the appointment, 
and during his stay treacherously stole a silver spoon of about twelve shillings' value.
	Learning that a lady lived at Streatham whose son was abroad, he went to her 
house and informed her that he was lately arrived in England, and waited upon her by 
the desire of the young gentleman, to assure her of the continuance of his filial 
affection. He was invited to partake of the best provisions the house could afford, and 
entertained with great liberality, kindness and respect. After he had sufficiently 
refreshed himself, and secreted a large silver spoon in his pocket, he departed.
	Upon gaining information that the father of a young gentleman of 
Bartholomew Lane was abroad, he went to the house and pretended to the youth that 
he was preparing to embark for the country in which his father resided; saying that, as 
he was acquainted with the old gentleman, he should be happy to deliver any message 
or letter, or execute any commission with which the son might think proper to charge 
him. His reception here was not less hospitable than that he experienced at Streatham, 
and he did not take leave till he had conveyed a silver cup into his pocket, with which 
he got off undiscovered. He sold the cup, and expended the money it produced in the 
most extravagant manner.
	Cock went to the house of the captain of a trading vessel in Ratcliff Highway, 
whom he knew was at sea, expecting that he should be able to amuse his wife by 
some plausible pretences, and to obtain a booty before he left the house. He was 
informed that the captain's lady was not at home; but was invited into the house by her 
mother, who told him that she expected her daughter's return in a very short time. 
Being shown into the kitchen, he asked the maid-servant for some table-beer, and 
while she was gone to draw it he secreted a large silver tankard. Upon the maid's 
bringing the beer he drank heartily, and then, pretending that he had some business to 
transact which would not permit him to stay any longer, took leave, promising to 
return on the following day. He sold the tankard to a Jew.
	He inquired of a servant-maid in Spitalfields whether there were not some 
women in that neighbourhood whose husbands were in foreign parts. The girl said the 
husbands of two or three of her master's neighbours were abroad, and asked the name 
of the person he desired to find. He said he had forgotten the name, but artfully added 
that he should remember it upon hearing it repeated; in consequence of which she 
mentioned some names, and upon his saying that one of them was that of the party he 
wanted the girl directed him to the house where the wife of his supposed friend 
resided. He told the woman that he was lately arrived in England, and by her 
husband's particular desire called to inform her of his being in perfect health when he 
embarked. He formed some trifling excuse for occasioning the woman to leave the 
apartment, and soon after her return he went away, taking with him a pint silver 
tankard and two silver tablespoons.
	By the above, and other villainies of a similar nature, he gained a maintenance 
for several years; but it will now appear that, notwithstanding the art he employed in 
the pursuit of villainy, he at length fell a just victim to the insulted laws of his country.
	Cock went to two ladies in Soho Square in one day, under the pretext of 
delivering messages from their husbands, who had been several years resident in 
foreign parts, and was received by them in the most kind and hospitable manner. He 
had been gone but a short time when one of the ladies missed some silver spoons; in 
consequence of which he was pursued and taken before a magistrate, and during his 
examination the other appeared, and on oath identified a silver tankard found in the 
prisoner's possession. He was committed to Newgate, and at the ensuing sessions at 
the Old Bailey condemned to suffer death.
	During his confinement in Newgate he showed not the least remorse for his 
past offences, nor employed any part of the short time he had to exist in making the 
necessary preparation for the awful change he was about to experience; but flattered 
himself in the expectation of being reprieved. However, after learning that he was 
ordered for execution, he in some degree corrected the irregularity of his behaviour; 
but still his conduct was by no means such as might have been expected from a man 
in his dreadful situation.
	He was almost wholly regardless of the devotional exercises at the place of 
execution, and refused to address the populace, though urged to it by the ordinary.


THOMAS THOMPSON 
Executed at Tyburn, Oct. 24, 1748, for horse-stealing.

	THE parents of this offender lived at Otley in Yorkshire: his father dying, his 
mother and a numerous family were left in very indigent circumstances. Thomas 
being arrived at a proper age, the parish-officers proposed binding him apprentice; but 
he declined the offer, saying he should prefer going to sea with a captain who was 
come into the country, to visit his mother and other relations. He accompanied the 
captain to Durham; and the master of the post-house in that city, thinking him an 
active and promising youth, hired him to wait upon his customers three days in a 
week, and to ride post on the others. During the three years that he remained in this 
station, he was guilty of stealing money out of letters, and of several other acts, of 
delinquency, of which, however, he was not suspected until some time after he had 
quitted his master's service.
	From Durham he went, to Otley, but not being able to procure employment 
there, he proceeded to Rippon, where he was engaged as a waiter at the sign of the 
King's Head. In about three months; he robbed his master of thirteen pounds, and 
absconded. Going again to the place of his nativity, he learnt that an aunt lately 
deceased had bequeathed him twelve pounds and having received the legacy, and 
purchased some new apparel, set out for London, where in a short. time he spent all 
his money in disorderly houses, among women of ill fame. Being in circumstances of 
distress, he, made application for relief to a relation, who behaved to him with great 
tenderness and generosity: notwithstanding which he availed himself of an 
opportunity of robbing his benefactor of two silver spoons.
	He offered the. spoons for sale to a silversmith near Charing-cross; but his 
honesty being suspected, a messenger was dispatched to inquire whether he lived at 
the place he had mentioned to the shop-keeper. Before the messenger's return 
Thompson effected his escaped ; and it appeared that he had given a false direction. In 
a few days he was met near Exeter-change by the silversmith, who insisted upon his 
going home with him; but being a man of an easy disposition, he was prevailed upon 
by the entreaties of the young villain to favour his escape.
	He now returned to Otley, and a dancing meeting being held there one 
evening; he made one of the company: at this place he prevailed upon a young 
woman, to consent to his partaking to her bed; but she dismissed him upon 
discovering that he was destitute of money. Thus disappointed, he returned to the 
house where he lodged, and broke open a box, whence he stole fifteen shillings.
	Early the next morning he stole a horse, and rode his late master's at Durham, 
where he said he was employed to go to Newcastle on some business of importance, 
and should return on the following day. The inn-keeper believed his tale, and upon his 
repeating his visit the next day, gave him a hearty welcome, and expressed much 
pleasure at the seemingly favourable change in his situation. In the morning, however, 
the boy who had been with the mail to Darlington, informed Thompson that the hue-
and-cry was after him on suspicion of horse-stealing. In consequence of this 
intelligence he took the road for Scotland, and selling the stolen horse at Berwick-
upon-Tweed, proceeded on foot to Cockburn, and hiring a horse there, rode to Dunbar 
where having slept one night, he se out for Edinburgh in a post-chaise.
	At Edinburgh he pretended to be servant to a military officer, and persuaded a 
young woman, who was servant at the inn where he lodged, to admit him to a share of 
her bed. In the morning she discovered that her box had been broken open, and her 
money, besides two gold rings bequeathed her by a relation; stolen thereout. She 
accused Thompson of the robbery, and threatened a prosecution; but was appeased 
upon his restoring the effects.
	His next expedition was to Perth, where he engaged himself as a servant to a 
military officer, His master being ordered into Yorkshire upon the recruiting service, 
Thompson accompanied him: but thinking it unsafe to remain in a part of the country 
where he was well known, he stole a horse about eleven o'clock at night, and took the 
road to Nottingham. For this offence he was tried at the next assizes, and sentenced to 
die; but interest being made in his favour, he received a pardon on condition of 
transportation for fourteen years.
	As he behaved in a remarkably decent and regular manner, the keeper of the 
prison granted him many indulgences, which he determined to seize an opportunity of 
making use of to his own advantage; and accordingly observing that on some occasion 
the maid-servant was intrusted with the keys, he seized her by surprise, and taking 
them from her recovered his liberty,
	Upon his escape from prison he proceeded to London, where be inlisted into a 
regiment then abroad, and was conducted to the Savoy: but being soon after attacked 
by a fever, he was sent to an hospital. Being tolerably recovered in about two months, 
he deserted, and going to Rochester inlisted into a regiment lying in that city. About 
five weeks after his arrival in Rochester, he robbed the waiter of the house where he 
was quartered, and again deserting travelled to Hatfield in Hertfordshire, where he 
inlisted into a regiment, from which he also deserted in about six weeks. He now went 
to Chichester, and having there entered into his majesty's service as a marine, was 
ordered on board a ship, lying at Portsmouth. In about two months he was ordered on 
shore, and quartered in Chichester, where he robbed his lodgings, and having stolen a 
mare belonging to a farmer rode towards the metropolis.
	The farmer having a value for the beast hastened to London, expecting that she 
would be exposed for sale in Smithfield. He put up at the White Bear in Basinghall-
street, and there found both his mare and the man who had stolen her. Thompson 
being taken before the Lord Mayor, was committed for trial at the Old Bailey, where 
he was convicted, and sentenced to die.
	When he was confined in the cells of Newgate, he appeared to be struck with a 
consciousness of the enormity of his guilt. He constantly attended divine service in 
the chapel; and when visited by the ordinary behaved in a manner that evinced the 
sincerity of his repentance.


JOHN WHITMORE AND JEREMIAH DAWES  
of the University of Oxford. Convicted and punished for Sedition, 28th of 
November, 1748
	SOON after the Rebellion was crushed, great discontent was discovered in 
several private meetings, which, being of little import to the commonweal, was passed 
over, under the hopes that time would reconcile jarring opinions to the family on the 
throne. But it was little expected that the smallest spark of sedition should be fanned 
into a flame among students at a university, among men half grown in body and still 
weaker in mind.
	That such was actually the case we shall show; and to this end give verbatim 
the proclamation of the Vice-Chancellor of Oxford. At a meeting of the Vice-
Chancellor, Heads of Houses, and Proctors of the University of Oxford, on Monday, 
11th of April, 1748: --
	"Whereas there have been lately some very tumultuous disturbances and 
outrages committed in the public streets of Oxford, by young scholars of the 
University, particularly on the 23rd of February last past, amounting to a notorious 
insult on his Majesty's crown and government, and in utter contempt of the 
wholesome laws and discipline of this University and the Governors thereof; we, the 
Vice-Chancellor, Heads of Houses, and Proctors, this day assembled, think it 
incumbent on us to make this public declaration of our sincere abhorrence and 
detestation of such factions and seditious practices, as also of our firm resolution to 
punish all offenders (of what state or quality soever they are) who shall be duly 
convicted thereof, according to the uttermost severity and rigour of our statutes.
	"And whereas many of the disorders complained of have been chiefly and 
immediately owing to scholars having private entertainments and company at their 
chambers, which are generally attended with great intemperance and excess, and 
always with expense, that are both needless and hurtful: we therefore earnestly 
recommend it to all bursars, deans, censors and tutors to prevent, as much as in their 
power, this unstatutable and mischievous practice, and to oblige all persons to attend 
in the common hall at the usual hours of dinner and supper.
	"And as these irregularities are too frequently practised (as we have reason to 
believe) at coffee-houses, cook-shops and victualling-houses, all proctors and 
magistrates of the University are strictly required to be vigilant and careful in visiting 
all such public-houses and places of entertainment and idleness, and in duly punishing 
all young scholars whom they shall at any time find at such places; and likewise 
laying a mulct on the masters or mistresses of such houses for receiving and 
entertaining such scholars, contrary to the known rules, orders and statutes of the 
University. Given under our hand the day and year above mentioned. 
	J. PURNELL, 
	Vice-Chancellor.
	In consequence of this proclamation several of these beardless striplings of 
sedition were apprehended, and removed to the Court of King's Bench at 
Westminster, to take their trial before a jury of their country, and John Whitmore and 
Jeremiah Dawes were found guilty. Charles Luxmore, after a trial of eight hours, was 
acquitted.
	On Monday, 28th of November, 1748, these two scholars were brought up to 
the bar of the Court of King's Bench to receive sentence, which was, "To be fined five 
nobles each, to suffer two years' imprisonment in the King's Bench Prison, and to find 
two sureties for their good behaviour for seven years, themselves to be bound in five 
hundred pounds and their securities in two hundred and fifty pounds each; and that 
they immediately walk round Westminster Hall, with a label affixed to their 
foreheads, denoting their crime and sentence, and to ask pardon of the several 
Courts."
	They accordingly were each labelled on the forehead and led round the Hall, 
stopping at each Court to solicit pardon, and then sent to prison.


THE THIEF, THE PRIESTS, AND THE GREAT KING OF 
PRUSSIA 
An Anecdotal Fact, and a touch at Superstition.

	To this monarch have many good sayings been ascribed; for many noble and 
generous deeds has he been accredited; and more is yet due to his memory than comes 
to the share of conscience in a whole batch of Buonaparte's kings.
	A Prussian soldier on duty, in a small garrison town in Silesia, being suspected 
of making free with some offerings made by pious Catholics to the Blessed Virgin, 
was watched and detected, and two silver hearts were found upon him, for which. he 
was sentenced to die. The man pleaded innocence, and insisted that the Virgin, in pity 
to his poverty, had appeared to him, and ordered him to take the two pieces. And on 
this plea he appealed to the King, who, on the soldier's representation, consulted with 
the ablest of the Roman Catholic divines, if they thought such a miracle impossible, 
who unanimously declared, that the case was extraordinary, but not impossible.
	On which his Majesty wrote, with his own hand, words to, the following 
effect:
	"The convict cannot justly be put to death, because he owes the present of the 
two pieces of silver to the bounty of the Blessed Virgin; and the divines of his religion 
are unanimously of opinion, that the miracle wrought in his favour is not impossible; 
but have strictly forbid him to receive any more such presents from any saint 
whatever."


JOHN YOUNG  
Executed for Forgery, at Edinburgh, 19th December, 1748

	THE subject of this narrative was born of a Protestant family at Belfast, in 
Ireland, and received a liberal education. At the usual time of life he was apprenticed 
to a linen-draper residing in the town where he was born. Having served about three 
years, his master died; and, as the widow declined business, he engaged as clerk to a 
wholesale dealer, whose goods were principally sent to the London market and 
Chester fair.
	He remained with his employer till his arrival at manhood; but at length 
absconded, in consequence of one of his master's servant-maids proving with child by 
him. He intended to settle in Dublin; but in his way to that city he met with a 
recruiting party belonging to the fourth regiment of foot, who urged him to drink till 
he became intoxicated, and then prevailed upon him to enlist.
	Young, being handsome in person and accomplished in manners, was soon 
distinguished by his officers, who, on the first vacancy, promoted him to be a 
sergeant.
	He marched from Tournay to join the regiment at Ghent, in Flanders, and 
arrived but a few days preceding that on which was fought the terrible battle of 
Fontenoy. His behaviour in that action was greatly commended by his officers, who, 
upon the return of the regiment to Ghent, conferred upon him many instances of 
particular respect, and appointed him paymaster to the company to which he 
belonged.
	The regiment in which Young was a sergeant was one of those ordered into 
Scotland for the purpose of suppressing the rebellion, which broke out soon after the 
battle of Fontenoy; but, as a considerable loss of private men had been sustained, he 
was ordered to go upon the recruiting service to Chester, Manchester, Liverpool, and 
other places.
	The recruits engaged by Young were paid the bounty-money without the least 
deduction, and he would not encourage them to spend any part of it in an extravagant 
or useless manner. In the space of four months he raised a hundred and fifty men; and 
it is presumed that the strict integrity of his conduct greatly promoted his success. 
Upon joining his regiment in Scotland, his officers advanced him to the post of 
sergeant-major, as a reward for his services. At the battle of Falkirk he put several of 
the rebels to death with his halbert, and behaved in other respects with remarkable 
intrepidity.
	Upon the command of the army being assumed by the Duke of Cumberland, 
the regiment to which Young belonged was ordered to march to the north. On account 
of the singular bravery they displayed at the battle of Culloden, and the great slaughter 
of men, this regiment was not ordered to return to Flanders, but permitted to remain in 
Scotland.
	Upon tranquillity being re-established in the Highlands, the fourth regiment 
was appointed to perform duty in Edinburgh Castle, and Young was dispatched to 
Bristol upon a recruiting expedition. He enlisted a considerable number of men at 
Bristol, and, on his return to Scotland, his officers complimented him with a 
handsome present. He was now sent to raise recruits in Yorkshire; and, while at 
Sheffield, in that county, he engaged in a criminal intercourse with the wife of an 
innkeeper, who, when he was preparing to depart, secreted property to a considerable 
amount, and followed her lover to Scotland. In a short time the innkeeper came to 
Edinburgh in search of his wife, and complained in passionate terms of the cruel and 
treacherous treatment he had received. The nature of his connexion with the woman 
being made public, Young appeared to be greatly disconcerted whenever be met with 
persons to whom he supposed the matter had been communicated; but in justice to his 
character we must observe, that, so far from encouraging the woman to rob her 
husband, he was entirely ignorant of every thing relating to that matter till her 
husband's arrival at Edinburgh. Notwithstanding the above affair, Young was still 
held in much esteem by his officers; and in a short tune the regiment was ordered to 
proceed to the North, and remained in the royal barracks at Inverness for above a 
twelvemonth.
	Young being both sergeant-major and paymaster, many notes on the bank of 
Scotland necessarily came into his possession. While looking over some of these 
notes in the guard-room, a man named Parker, whom he had enlisted in England, 
observed that, if he had a few tools, he could engrave a plate for counterfeiting the 
notes on the Edinburgh bank. Young seemed to give but little attention to what the 
other said; but took him to an alehouse on the following day, and requested an 
explanation as to the manner of executing the scheme he had suggested. Parker 
informed him that, besides engraving an exact resemblance of the letters and figures, 
he could form a machine for printing such notes as should not he known from those of 
the Scotch hank.
	In short, Young hired a private apartment for Parker, and supplied him with 
every utensil necessary for carrying the iniquitous plan into effect; and, in a short 
time, some counterfeit notes were produced, hearing a near resemblance to the real 
ones. Upwards of six months elapsed before the fraud was detected.
	Orders being issued for the regiment to march to England, Young determined 
to procure cash for as many notes as possible previously to his departure from 
Inverness, knowing that in the southern parts the forgery would be liable to immediate 
detection. With this view he applied to Mr. Gordon, who was concerned in the 
stocking-manufactory at Aberdeen, and prevailed upon him to give sixty pounds in 
cash for notes expressing to be of the same value.
	On his journey from Inverness, Mr. Gordon parted with several of the notes at 
different places; but, upon reaching Aberdeen, an advertisement in the newspapers, in 
the name of the governors of the bank at Edinburgh, convinced him that he had been 
deceived. In consequence of this Mr. Gordon wrote to the sheriff of Inverness, who 
immediately took Young into custody, and found three hundred notes, and the copper-
plate from which they bad been printed, in his possession. Parker was admitted an 
evidence for the crown, and Young was removed to Edinburgh for trial before the 
High Court of Justiciary. After a trial that lasted a whole day, he was pronounced to 
be guilty, and sentenced to suffer death.
	While this malefactor was under confinement be would not consent to be 
visited by the clergy, though several, from motives of humanity, were desirous of 
using their endeavours to prepare him for eternity. He was informed by his fellow-
prisoners that, if he could procrastinate his execution beyond the appointed time, his 
life would of necessity be preserved; for that the crown law of Scotland declared that 
condemned prisoners should be executed between two and four o'clock on the days 
expressed. Being ignorant of the law, the unhappy man was amused by this story, and 
hoped to escape punishment by the following means: he secured the strong iron door 
of the room wherein he was confined in such a manner, that when the gaoler came, in 
order to conduct him to the place of execution, he could not gain admittance.
	Upwards of fifty carpenters, smiths, masons, and other artificers, were sent 
for, to open a passage; but they all declined undertaking a business which they 
deemed to be impracticable, and were unanimously of opinion that an aperture could 
not be made in the wall without endangering the whole fabric.
	Matters being thus circumstanced, the lord-provost and the rest of the 
magistrates assembled at the prison, and, after long debates, it was determined to form 
an opening to the room by breaking through the floor of that immediately above.
	The opening being made, the prisoner leaped up, and, seizing a musket from 
one of the city guards, declared, with an oath, that, if any man attempted to molest 
him, he would immediately dash out his brains. Six of the soldiers, however, suddenly 
descended, and one of them received a terrible blow from the prisoner; but he was 
immediately after secured by the other five, and executed.
	John Young underwent the sentence of the law in the Grassmarket of 
Edinburgh, about six o'clock on the evening of the 19th of December, 1748.
	Young was not addicted to indulge himself in expensive pleasures; and we 
may suppose that his pay as a private soldier, added to the emoluments be derived 
from the posts of sergeant-major and paymaster to his regiment, would have proved 
equal to every reasonable gratification, especially in a country where the necessaries 
and conveniences of life were to be procured with moderate expense.
	It must be acknowledged that his seduction of his master's maid-servant and 
the innkeeper's wife were offences of a most heinous nature; but in other respects his 
character was unimpeached: he was highly respected by his officers, and universally 
esteemed by all who were acquainted with him; be was in the way to preferment, and 
would, in all probability, have made a distinguished figure in life, had he been 
contented to proceed by the gradual advances to fortune; but, from the hint given by 
Parker, he conceived the hopes of speedily amassing great riches, without considering 
that wealth unjustifiably obtained must necessarily prove the source of affliction to 
the possessor.


BENJAMIN TAPNER, JOHN COBBY, JOHN 
HAMMOND, RICHARD MILLS, RICHARD MILLS THE 
YOUNGER, AND OTHERS 
Revengeful Smugglers, who were executed for a Diabolical Murder, 18th of 
January, 1749

  
The murder of Chater by the smugglers

	While London and its environs were beset with gangs of highwaymen and 
pickpockets, the country was infested by villains not less dangerous, and much more 
cruel, who preyed upon the public by defrauding the revenue.
	Smugglers formerly went in parties, strong enough to oppose the officers of 
excise; and, whenever a custom-house officer fell into their hands, he was most 
barbarously treated, and often murdered.
	The two unfortunate men who were cruelly murdered by this gang of 
desperate villains, were W. Galley, the elder, a custom-house officer in Southampton; 
and D. Chater, a shoe-maker, of Fordingbridge. Having been sent to give information 
respecting some circumstances attending the daring burglary into the custom-house at 
Pool; and not returning to their respective homes, a suspicion arose that they had been 
waylaid, and murdered by the smugglers; and a search for them was therefore 
instituted.
	Those employed for this purpose, after every inquiry, could bear no certain 
tidings of them; as the fear of the smugglers' resentment, silenced such inhabitants on 
the road, over which they had carried the unfortunate men, as were not in connection 
with them. At length, a Mr Stone, following his hounds, came to a spot, which 
appeared to have been dug not long before; and the publicity of the circumstances of 
those men being missed, he conjectured that they might have been buried there, and, 
upon digging nearly seven feet in the earth, were found the remains of Galley, but in 
so putrid a state, as not to be known, except by the clothes. The search after Chater 
was now pursued with redoubled vigilance, till found in a well, six miles distant from 
Galley, in Harris Wood, near Lady Holt Park, with a quantity of stones, wooden rails, 
and earth, upon him.
	The two men, Galley and Chater, went on Sunday, Feb. 14, 1748, to Major 
Batten, a justice of the peace, at Stanstead, in Sussex, with a letter written by Mr 
Shearer, collector of the customs at Southampton, requesting him to take an 
examination of Chater, concerning one Diamond, or Dymar, who was committed to 
Chichester gaol, on suspicion of being one who broke the King's warehouse at Poole. 
Chater was engaged to give evidence, but with some reluctance, having declared that 
he saw Diamond, and shook hands with him, who, with many others, was coming 
from Poole, loaded with tea, of which he threw him a bag. Having passed Havant, and 
coming to the New Inn, at Leigh, they enquired their way, when G. Austin, his 
brother, and brother-in-law, said that they were going the same road, and would 
accompany them to Rowland's Castle, where they might get better direction, it being 
just by Stanfield Park.
	A little before noon, they came to the White Hart at Rowland's Castle, kept by 
Eliz. Payne, widow, who had two sons, blacksmiths, in the same village. After some 
talk, she told G. Austin, privately, she was afraid that these two strangers were come 
to hurt the smugglers. He said, No, sure; they were only carrying a letter to Major 
Batten. Upon this, she sent one of her sons for W. Jackson and W. Carter, who lived 
near her house. Meanwhile, Chater and Galley wanted to be going, and asked for their 
horses; but she told them, that the Major was not at home, which, indeed, was true.
	As soon as Jackson and Carter came, she told them her suspicions, with the 
circumstance of the letter. Soon after, she advised G. Austin to go away, lest be 
should come to some harm; he did so, leaving his brothers.
	Payne's other son went and fetched in W. Steele, S. Downer, (otherwise Little 
Samuel,) Edm. Richards, and H. Sheerman, (otherwise Little Harry,) all smugglers, 
belonging to the same gang.
	After they had drank a little while, Carter, who had some knowledge of 
Chater, called him into the yard and asked him where Diamond was? Chater said, he 
believed he was in custody, and that he was going to appear against him, which he 
was sorry for, but could not help it. Galley came into the yard to them, and asking 
Chater why he would stay there? Jackson, who followed him, said, with a horrid 
imprecation, What is that to you? and immediately struck him a blow in the face, 
which knocked him down, and set his nose and mouth a-bleeding. Soon after, they all 
came into the house, when Jackson, reviling Galley, offered to strike him again but 
one of the Paines interposed.—Galley and Chater now began to be very uneasy, and 
wanted to be going; but Jackson, Carter, and the rest of them, persuading them to stay 
and drink more rum, and make it up, for they were sorry for what had happened, they 
sat down again; Austin and his brother-in-law being present.—Jackson and Carter 
desired to see the letter, but they refused to shew it. The smugglers then drank about 
plentifully, and made Galley and Chater fuddled; then persuaded them to lie down on 
a bed, which they did, and fell asleep. The letter was then taken away, and read; and, 
the substance of it greatly exasperating them, it was destroyed.
	One John Royce, a smuggler, now came in; and Jackson and Carter told him 
the contents of the letter, and that they had got the old rogue, the shoe-maker, of 
Fordingbridge, who was going to inform against J. Diamond, the shepherd, then in 
custody at Chichester.—Here W. Steele proposed to take them both to a well, about 
two hundred yards from the house, and to murder and throw them in.
	This proposal was not taken, as they had been seen in their company by the 
Austins, Mr Garnet, and one Mr Jenks, who was newly come into the house to drink. 
It was next proposed to send them to France; but that was objected against, as there 
was a possibility of their coming over again. Jackson and Carter's wives being 
present, cried out, Hang the dogs, for they are come here to hang you. It was then 
proposed and agreed, to keep them confined till they could know Diamond's fate; and 
whatever it was, to treat these in the same manner; and each to allow threepence a 
week towards keeping them.
	Galley and Chater continuing asleep, Jackson went in, and began the first 
scene of cruelty; for having put on his spurs, he got upon the bed, and spurred their 
foreheads, to wake them, and afterwards whipped them with a horse-whip; so that 
when they came out, they were both bleeding. The abovesaid smugglers then took 
them out of the house; but Richards returned with a pistol, and swore be would shoot 
any person who should mention what had passed.
	Meanwhile, the rest put Galley and Chater on one horse, tied their legs under 
the horse's belly, and then tied both their legs together; they now set forward, all but 
Race, who had no horse. They had not gone above two hundred yards before Jackson 
called out, Whip 'em, cut 'em slash 'em, d--n 'em; upon which all began to whip, 
except Steele, who led the horse, the roads being very bad. They whipped them for 
half a mile, till they came to Woodash, where they fell off, with their heads under the 
horse's belly, and their legs, which were tied, appeared over the horse's back. Their 
tormentors soon set them upright again, and continued whipping them over the head, 
face, shoulders, &c. till they came to Dean, upwards of half a mile farther; here they 
both fell again, as before, with their heads under the horse's belly, which were struck, 
at every step, by the horse's hoofs.
	Upon placing them again on the saddle, they found them so weak, that they 
could not sit; upon which they separated them, and put Galley before Steele, and 
Chater before Little Sam, and then whipped Galley so severely that the lashes coming 
upon Steele, at his desire they desisted. They then went to Harris's Well, near Lady 
Holt Park, where they took Galley off the horse, and threatened to throw him into the 
well. Upon which he desired them to dispatch him at once, and put an end to his 
misery. No, said Jackson, cursing, if that's the case, we have more to say to you; then 
put him on a horse again, and whipped him over the Downs, till he was so weak, that 
be fell off; when they laid him across the saddle, with his breast downwards, and 
Little Sam got up behind him, and, as they went on, he squeezed Galley's testicles, so 
that he groaned with the agony, and tumbled off: being then put on astride, Richards 
got up behind him, but soon the poor man cried out, I fall, I fall, I fall! and Richards 
pushing him said, Fall, and be d--n'd. Upon which he fell down; and the villains 
thinking this fall had broke his neck, laid him again on the horse, and proposed to go 
to some proper place where Chater might be concealed till they heard the fate of 
Diamond.
	Jackson and Carter called at one Pescod's house, desiring admittance for two 
sick men; but he absolutely refused it.
	Being now one o'clock in the morning, they agreed to go to one Scardefield's, 
at the Red Lion, at Rake, which was not far. Here Carter and Jackson got admittance, 
after many refusals. While Scardefield went to draw liquor, be heard more company 
come in; but though they refused to admit him into the room, he saw one man 
standing up very bloody, and another lying as dead. They said they had engaged some 
officers, lost their tea, and several of them were wounded, if not killed.
	Jackson and Little Harry now carried Chater down to one Old Mill's, which 
was not far off, and chained him in a turf-house, and Little Harry staying to watch 
him, Jackson returned again to the company.—After they had drank gin and rum they 
all went out, taking Galley with them; Carter compelled Scardefield to shew them the 
place where they used to bury their tea, and to lend them spades and a candle and 
lantern: there they began to dig, and, it being very cold, he helped to make a hole, 
where they buried something that lay across a horse, like a dead man.
	They continued at Scardefield's, drinking all that day, and in the night went to 
their own homes, in order to be seen on Tuesday, agreeing to meet again upon 
Thursday at the same house, and bring more of their associates. They met accord 
ingly, and brought old Richard Mills, and his sons Richard and John, Tho. Stringer, 
John Cobby, Benj. Tapner, and John Hammond, who, with the former, made fourteen. 
They consulted now what was to be done with Chater; it was unanimously agreed that 
he must be destroyed. R. Mills, jun. proposed to load a gun, clap the muzzle to his 
head, tie a long string to the trigger, then all to pull it, that all might be equally guilty 
of his murder. This was rejected, because it would put him out of his pain too soon; 
and at length they came to a resolution to carry him up to Harris's Well, which was 
not far off, and throw him in.
	All this while, Chater was in the utmost horror and misery, being visited by 
one or other of them, who abused him both with words and blows. At last they all 
came, and Tapner and Cobby going into the turf-house, the former pulled out a 
claspknife, and said, with a great oath, Down on your knees, and go to prayers, for 
with this knife I'll be your butcher. The poor man knelt down; and, as he was at 
prayers, Cobby kicked him, calling him informing villain. Chater asking what they 
had done with Mr Galley, Tapner slashed his knife across his eyes, almost cutting 
them out, and the gristle of his nose quite through: he bore it patiently, believing they 
were putting an end to his misery. Tapner struck at him again, and made a deep cut in 
his forehead. Upon this, old Mills said, Do not murder him here, but somewhere else. 
Accordingly they placed him upon a horse, and all set out together for Harris's Well, 
except Mills and his sons, they having no horses ready, and saying, in excuse, That 
they were enough, without them, to murder one man. All the way, Tapner whipped 
him till the blood came, and then swore, that if he blooded the saddle, he would 
torture him the more.
	When they were come within two hundred yards of the well, Jackson and 
Carter stopped, saying to Tapner, Cobby, Stringer, Steel, and Hammond, Go on and 
do your duty on Chater, as we have ours upon Galley.—In the dead of the night, of 
the 18th, they brought him to the well, which was near 30 feet deep, but dry, and 
paled close round. Tapner, having fastened a noose round Chater's neck, they bid him 
get over the pales to the well. He was going through a broken place; but though he 
was covered with blood, and fainting with the anguish of his wounds, they forced him 
to climb up, having the rope about his neck, one end of which being tied to the pales, 
they pushed him into the well; but the rope being short, he hung no farther within it 
than his thighs, and, leaning against the edge, he hung above a quarter of an hour, and 
was not strangled. Then they untied him, and threw him head foremost into the well. 
They tarried some time, and hearing him groan, they concluded to go to one Wm. 
Comleah's, a gardener, to borrow a rope and ladder, saying, they wanted to relieve one 
of their companions, who had fallen into Harris's Well. He said they might take them. 
But they could not manage the ladder, in their confusion, it being a long one.
	They then returned to the well; and still finding him groan, and fearing that he 
might be heard, so as to make a discovery, the place being near the road, they threw 
upon him some of the rails and gate-posts fixed about the well, and also some great 
stones; when, finding him silent, they left him.
	The next consultation was how to dispose of the two horses. To prevent 
discovery, they killed Galley's, which was grey, and took his hide off, cut it into small 
pieces, and hid them; but a bay horse, which Chater rode on, got from them.
	This daring gang, being now broken, a number of witnesses came forward on 
their trial, and two of their accomplices being pardoned, were admitted evidence 
against them. The charge, in all its horrors, was fully proved; whereupon the judge, 
Sir Michael Foster, pronounced sentence on the convicts, in one of the most pathetic 
addresses that was ever heard; repre senting the enormity of the crime, and exhorting 
them to make immediate preparation for the awful fate that awaited them; adding, that 
"Christian charity obliges me to tell you, that your time in this world will be very 
short."
	The heinousness of the crime, of which these men had been convicted, 
rendering it necessary that their punishment should be exemplary, the judge ordered 
that they should be executed on the following day; and the sentence was accordingly 
carried into execution against all but Jackson, who died in prison on the evening that 
he was condemned. They were attended by two ministers, and all, but Mills and his 
son (who took no notice of each other, and thought themselves not guilty, be cause 
they were not present at the finishing of the inhuman murder), shewed great marks of 
penitence. Tapner and Carter gave good advice to the spectators, and desired dillgence 
might be used to apprehend Richards, whom they charged as the cause of their being 
brought to this wretched end. Young Mills smiled several times at the executioner, 
who was a discharged marine, and having ropes too short for some of them was 
puzzled to fit them. Old Mills being forced to stand tip toe to reach the halter, desired 
that he might not be hanged by inches. The Mills's were so rejoiced at being told that 
they were not to be hanged in chains after execution, that death seemed to excite in 
them no terror; while Jackson was so struck with horror, at being measured for his 
irons, that he soon expired.
	They were hanged at Chichester, on the 18th of January, 1749, amidst such a 
concourse of spectators as is seldom seen on such occasions.
	Carter was hung in chains, near Rake, in Sussex; Tapner on Rook's hill, near 
Chichester; and Cobby and Hammond at Cesley Isle, on the beach where they 
sometimes landed their smuggled goods, and where they could be seen at a great 
distance, east and west.


USHER GAHAGAN AND TERENCE CONNER 
Erudite Men, who were executed for High Treason, in diminishing the 
Current Coin of the Realm, 28th of February , 1749
	USHER GAHAGAN and Terence Conner were natives of Ireland. The former 
received his education in Trinity College, Dublin, and was intended for the 
honourable profession of the law, in which several of his relations had become 
eminent.
	He had been instructed by his parents in the Protestant religion, but falling into 
company with some priests of the Romish persuasion they converted him to their 
faith, which was a principal obstacle to his future advancement ,in life; for as no 
gentleman can be admitted a counsellor-at-law without taking the Oaths of Supremacy 
and Faith prevented his complying with these terms, he declined any further 
prosecution of his legal studies.
	His parents and other relations were greatly offended with his conduct; and 
those who had particularly engaged themselves for the advancement of his fortune 
forbade him to visit them, through indignation at the impropriety of his behaviour.
	Thus reduced to an incapacity of supporting himself, he sought to relieve his 
circumstances by a matrimonial scheme; and having addressed the daughter of a 
gentleman, he obtained her in marriage, and received a good fortune with her; but, 
treating her with undeserved severity, she was compelled to return to the protection of 
her relations.
	His conduct having now rendered him obnoxious to his acquaintances in 
Dublin, he quitted that city, and repaired to London, with a view to supporting himself 
by his literary abilities.
	On his arrival in the metropolis he made some connections with the 
booksellers, and undertook to translate Pope's Essay on Man into Latin; but, becoming 
connected with some women of abandoned character, he spent his time in a dissipated 
manner, and thus threw himself out of that employment which might have afforded 
him a decent support.
	He now made an acquaintance with an Irishman, named Hugh Coffey, and 
they agreed on a plan for the diminution of the current coin. At this time Gahagan had 
a lodger named Conner, and, it being agreed to receive him as a partner in this 
iniquitous scheme, they procured proper tools. Having collected a sum of money, they 
filed it and put it off; and procuring more, filed that also and passed it in the same 
manner.
	Having continued this business some months, during which they had saved a 
sum of money, they went to the bank, and got some Portugal pieces, under pretence 
that they were intended for exportation to Ireland. Thus they got money repeatedly at 
the bank; but at length one of the tellers, suspecting their business, communicated his 
suspicion to the governors, who directed him to drink with them, as the proper method 
to discover who they were and what was their employment.
	In pursuance of this order he, on their next appearance, invited them to drink a 
glass of wine at the Crown Tavern, near Cripplegate; to which they readily agreed, 
and met him after the hours of office.
	When the circulation of the glass had sufficiently warmed them, Gahagan, 
with a degree of weakness that is altogether astonishing, informed the teller that he 
acquired considerable sums by filing gold, and even proposed that he should become 
a partner with them. The gentleman seemed to accede to the proposal, and, having 
learned where they lodged, acquainted the cashiers of the bank with what had passed.
	On the following day Coffey was apprehended; but Gahagan and Conner 
being suspicious of the danger of their situation, retired to a public-house called Chalk 
Farm, a little way out of the road from London to Hampstead, where they carried their 
implements for filing; but Coffey having been admitted an evidence it was not long 
before the place of their retreat was known; on which they were apprehended, and 
lodged in Newgate.
	Terence Conner was a native of Ireland, and had received a most liberal 
education. It is recorded of him that he was so perfectly well read in Roman history as 
to be able to turn to any part of it without the assistance of an index. He was, by birth, 
heir to a considerable fortune; but, his father dying without a proper adjustment of his 
affairs, some intricate lawsuits were the consequence; so that the whole estate was 
only sufficient to discharge the demands of the gentlemen of the long robe.
	Conner, being reduced in circumstances, came to London, and, becoming 
acquainted with Gahagan and Coffey, was concerned in diminishing the coin, as 
above mentioned. On their trial the evidence of Coffey was positive; and, being 
supported by collateral proofs, the jury could not hesitate to find them guilty, and they 
received sentence of death. They were hanged on 28th of February, 1749.


BRIAN SEYMOUR 
Executed for murder, 2nd March, 1749

	BRIAN SEYMOUR was born at Waterford, in Ireland; and his father having 
served in the army many years, and been at length promoted to the post of a right-
hand man, or, in a more military phrase, made a corporal, the son must also 'Seek for 
honour even in the cannon's mouth.' He enlisted in the sixth regiment of foot, and, 
soon afterwards embarking for Flanders, had a share in the memorable battle of 
Fontenoy.
	The rebellion in 1745 occasioned his being sent to England, when he served 
under General Wade, who then commanded in Yorkshire; but, marching thence to 
Newcastle, Seymour had there a quarrel with a soldier respecting a woman of ill fame; 
and, a duel ensuing, his antagonist was killed: but the troublesome situation of affairs 
induced the general to grant Seymour a free pardon, without a minute scrutiny into his 
conduct.
	Proceeding to Scotland, this man was present at the battle of Culloden, where 
he behaved with singular courage; but the regiment in which he served, having been 
greatly injured, was ordered into winter quarters at Edinburgh, where the indulgence 
of his irregular passions gave rise to the crime which cost him his life.
	At this time it was customary for some of the ministers of the church of 
Scotland, who were out of employment, to marry people at alehouses, in the same 
manner that the Fleet marriages were conducted in London. Sometimes people of 
fortune thought it prudent to apply to these marriage-brokers; but, as their chief 
business lay among the lower ranks of people, they were deridingly called by the 
name of 'Buckle the Beggars.'
	Most of these marriages were solemnized at public houses in the Cannongate; 
and Seymour happening to be present there when a couple came to be married, and no 
priest present, be whispered the landlady, that if she would procure him a suit of black 
he would officiate as the parson. The woman, unwilling to lose a customer, procured 
the clothes, and Seymour, being dressed in them, went into the room where the young 
couple waited, assuming the grave deportment of a real clergyman.
	The lady who was to be married hinting that she did not think he was a 
minister, he solemnly averred that he was, and the marriage took place accordingly.
	Before ten o'clock at night Seymour was obliged to return to the barracks in 
the Castle; but by this time he was so much intoxicated, that he was prepared to 
affront every one he met. When he came to the Lawnmarket, he ran against a 
gentleman's servant named Johnson, who, being irritated, struck Seymour a blow on 
the face; on which the latter drew his sword, and stabbed Johnson, so that he instantly 
died; when the murderer put up his sword, and proceeded towards the Castle. A 
shoemaker, named Young, having observed what had passed, followed Seymour to 
the gate of the Castle; but the clock striking ten at that instant, the drawbridge was 
pulled up, so that Young could not be admitted for that night.
	On the following morning Young went to the Lord Justice Clerk, and, 
informing him of what he knew of the transaction, offered his assistance in 
discovering the murderer: on which his lordship ordered an officer to attend him, and 
directed the governor to let him have a sight of all the soldiers.
	At ten o'clock the men were drawn up on the parade, and Young, walking 
round the lines, fixed on Seymour as the man who had committed the murder; 
whereupon he was delivered up, to abide the determination of the laws.
	On the trial Young positively swore to the identity of the offender; and other 
evidence arising to prove that he was the party, he was capitally convicted, and 
sentence of death was pronounced against him.
	This offender denied his guilt for some time, and hinted that Young was 
perjured; but he afterwards became truly sensible of the enormity of his crime, and 
confessed it, with all its aggravating circumstances. Two clergymen attended him to 
the place of execution, to which he walked, dressed in a shroud, and reading a 
religious book.
	He was executed at Edinburgh on the 2d of March, 1749.


JOHN COLLINGTON 
A Man of extraordinary Violence and Inhumanity. Executed at Canterbury 
with his Accomplice, John Stone, for setting fire to a Barn

	IN the history of Collington, we find an uncommon share of depravity of mind 
united to cruelly and vice of every description.
	The father of John Collington was Rector of Pluckley, near Sandwich, in Kent; 
and the youth was qualified, by a most liberal education and his great natural talents, 
to have made a very respectable figure in life; but his passions were so violent, and his 
revenge so implacable, that all who knew him beheld him with horror. He used to 
declare that he would be a sincere friend but an inveterate foe; and even while at 
school created such dissensions among the other scholars that he was held in universal 
contempt, and was discharged from more schools than one with marks of ignominy.
	At length his father apprenticed him to a grocer, in Newgate Street, London; 
but he behaved in such a manner as to become an object of terror to his fellow-
servants. The following circumstance, trifling as it is, will serve to mark his 
disposition: One of the maid-servants desiring him to fetch some mustard, he went out 
for that purpose; but calling a coach at the door, he drove to Cheapside, purchased the 
mustard, and on his return, paid the fare out of his master's money in the till. The 
master, astonished at his behaviour, demanded the reason of it: when he gave for 
answer, that "his parents had not bound him apprentice to be an errand boy."
	On another occasion he asked his master's permission to visit his relations for 
a fortnight, and his request was complied with. When the time of his departure 
arrived, his master being absent, he asked his mistress to give him leave to stay three 
weeks, to which she consented. But he returned not till the end of five weeks; and his 
master enquiring why he had been so long absent, Collington replied that he had 
allowed him a fortnight, and his mistress three weeks, so that he had not out-staid his 
time. This duplicity of conduct incensed the master so, that he gave up his indentures 
and discharged him. Having served the remainder of his apprenticeship with a grocer 
of Maidstone, he opened a shop at Rye, in Sussex, where he lived for some years; but 
his temper was so bad that he fomented perpetual discord among his neighbours. 
From this place he went to Charing, in Kent, where he likewise kept a shop a 
considerable time; but the same conduct which had rendered him an object of 
contempt at Rye made him equally obnoxious to the inhabitants of this latter place.
	Collington had not been long in business before he married a young lady, with 
whom he received a considerable fortune, and by whom he had ten children, four of 
whom were living at the time of their father's fatal exit. The conduct of this man 
towards his wife and children was the most extravagant that can be imagined. The six 
children who died he buried in his own garden, nor would he permit any of them to be 
baptized. He frequently beat his children in a barbarous manner, and when the mother 
interposed on their behalf he used to confine her whole nights in a saw-pit.
	Being remarkably fond of sporting, his wife, when big with child, requested 
that he would procure her a partridge; in consequence of which he went out, and shot 
several: but when the birds were dressed, and ready for the table, one of the children 
happening to offend him, he corrected it in so severe a manner, as to endanger its life; 
and the mother interposing for the preservation of the child, he was so enraged that he 
cut the partridges in pieces, and threw them to the cats and dogs.
	This instance of worse than savage ferocity so affected his wife, that she fell 
into fits, and miscarried: but she had not long been recovered, when on her 
interposing, in behalf of one of the children, whom he was treating with severity, he 
threw her down stairs, and stamped on her breast, which gave rise to a cancer that 
occasioned her death.
	Collington's father dying soon after this event, he succeeded to a good estate at 
Throwleigh, in Kent, to which place he removed, and took to the practice of exporting 
wool contrary to law; for which he was prosecuted in the Court of Exchequer, and 
ordered to pay a large penalty. But he avoided payment by having previously 
conveyed his estate to another and then swearing that he was not worth five pounds.
	Notwithstanding the treatment his first wife had received from him, he soon 
married a second, by whom he had six children; and four of these, besides the same 
number by the former marriage (as we have mentioned), were living at the time of his 
death. Being fond of hunting, his offences against the laws made for the preservation 
of game became so numerous that the Dowager Countess of Rockingham built a 
cottage, in which she placed one of her servants as a spy upon his conduct. 
Collington, incensed by this circumstance, tempted a poor countryman to set fire to 
the cottage; but the man had courage and honesty enough to resist the temptation. 
Thereupon Collington took one of his servants, named Luckhurst, to Faversham, in 
Kent, at the time of the fair; and on their way thither told him he would give him half-
a-guinea to fire the said cottage; which the man received, promising to comply.
	On the following day, when Luckhurst recollected the nature of the contract he 
had been making, his mind was so disturbed that he went to Collington and offered 
back the money, declaring that he would have no share in the transaction. Collington 
was so enraged that he threatened to destroy him unless he kept the money and did as 
he had agreed; the consequence of which was, the man fired the cottage at midnight, 
by which it was reduced to the ground.
	Collington was so neglectful of his children that he would not buy them 
necessary apparel, so that they appeared like beggars; nor would he even pay for their 
learning to read. The following is a striking proof of his want of humanity. One of his 
sons, a boy twelve years old, having offended him, he confined him in a saw-pit, 
where he must have been starved but that he was occasionally supplied with food by 
the humanity of the servants; and for this conduct their brutal master turned them out 
of the house without paying what was due to them. This inhuman father then refused 
to maintain his son, so that the child absolutely begged his bread in the 
neighbourhood; but he had not wandered long in this manner when Mr Clarke, the 
churchwarden, received him into his house, and provided for him till the Quarter 
Sessions, when he submitted the case to the consideration of the magistrates.
	These gentlemen, having reflected that Mr Collington was in affluent 
circumstances, gave directions that the child should be properly provided for; and 
issued a warrant for seizing part of the father's effects to defray the charge. This 
warrant was executed by a constable, whom Clarke attended: a circumstance which 
gave such offence to Collington that he vowed revenge, and bade Clarke make his 
will. After this he hired five fellows to go to Mr Clarke's house and demand the child, 
on pretence that he belonged to a ship; but Mr Clarke, having the magistrates' order 
for his proceedings, said he was willing to answer for his conduct before any Justice 
of the Peace. No sooner had he thus expressed himself than they beat him in the most 
violent degree, and threatened his instant destruction unless he consented to 
accompany them. These threats had such an effect that he mounted a horse behind one 
of them, but as they were riding along he jumped off, and ran into the courtyard of a 
gentleman whose gate happened to stand open, while the other parties fired at him; 
but he escaped unhurt. Here he remained till the following day, when he went to his 
own house, and thence to a magistrate, before whom he swore the peace against 
Collington; on which the magistrate granted his warrant for the apprehension of the 
offender, who, refusing to give bail for his good behaviour, was lodged in the jail of 
Canterbury.
	During his confinement he continually threatened vengeance against Clarke; 
and to execute his purpose he sent for a labouring man, named Stone, and the above-
mentioned Luckhurst, and offered them a guinea each, on the condition of their setting 
fire to Mr Clarke's barn, in which a considerable quantity of corn was deposited. The 
villains, agreeing to this bargain, fired the barn at midnight, and likewise a number of 
hayricks, all of which were destroyed. Mr Clarke, suspecting that Collington was the 
contriver of this horrid scheme, made application to a magistrate, who issued an order 
that the prisoner should be more closely confined, and that the jail-keeper should take 
particular notice of his visitors. This precaution led to a discovery of the offenders; for 
on Luckhurst coming to procure more money of Collington he was taken into custody, 
and conducted before a Justice of the Peace, to whom he confessed the affair; and 
being admitted an evidence, Stone was soon taken up as one of the principals.
	At the following assizes, held at Maidstone, Collington and Stone were 
brought to trial; when the former turned his back on the Court with an air of such utter 
contempt that the judge declared he had never been witness to such a scene of 
insolence. The prisoners, being convicted on the fullest evidence, were carried back to 
Canterbury, where the debtors commiserated their unhappy circumstances; but 
Collington made a jest of his situation, and swore he did not regard it, as he was 
certain of obtaining the Royal mercy.
	This hardened villain likewise encouraged Stone to hope for mercy, as he 
could get him included in the pardon; but the event proved how much he was 
mistaken in his conjecture.
	Collington's wife, coming to visit him, was so affected with grief as to be 
unable to speak to him for a considerable time; yet he was so hardened as not to feel 
for her situation, but bade her not give herself the least concern, as he was certain of 
getting a reprieve, and hoped to live to revenge himself on his enemies, even if he 
should be transported.
	He frequently expressed himself in the most revengeful terms against his 
prosecutor; and appeared, in other respects, so destitute of all the feelings of humanity 
that his conduct surprised everyone who was witness to it. Thus he spent his time 
without preparing for the sentence that he was to suffer, still boasting to his visitors 
that the rank of life he held as a gentleman would secure him a reprieve.
	Luckhurst, who had been evidence against him, being apprehended for 
committing a robbery on the highway, Collington thought this a fair opportunity to 
solicit a reprieve, for which purpose he dispatched an express to the Duke of 
Newcastle; but the answer he received was that he must not expect any favour, for 
that the gentlemen of the county had exerted their influence that the law might be 
permitted to take its course. On being informed that the warrant for his execution was 
arrived, his boasted courage left him for a short time; but recollecting himself he 
inquired if Stone was included in the warrant; and being answered in the affirmative, 
said he lamented his situation more than his own. After this he soon recovered his 
spirits, and still flattered himself with the hope of being pardoned. The day preceding 
his execution he was visited by his wife and several relations, who advised him to 
make a serious preparation for his approaching death, and asked him where he would 
be buried. This question inflamed all his passions, so that he swore he would not be 
hanged; but soon afterwards, calling for a glass of wine, he drank it, saying: "Let us 
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die."
	On the following day Collington was conveyed to the place of execution in a 
mourning-coach, and Stone in a cart; and both of them being placed under the 
gallows, Collington prayed with the minister, but declined making any speech to the 
surrounding multitude.


RICHARD COLEMAN 
Who was executed on Kennington Common, in Surrey, 12th of April, 1749, 
for a Murder he did not commit.

	RICHARD COLEMAN was indicted at the assizes held at Kingston, in 
Surrey, in March 1749, for the murder of Sarah Green, on the 23rd of July preceding; 
when he was capitally convicted.
	Mr Coleman had received a decent education, and was clerk to a brewer at the 
time the affair happened which cost him his life; and had a wife and several children, 
who were reduced to accept the bounty of the parish, in consequence of his 
conviction.
	The murdered person was Sarah Green, who, having been with some 
acquaintances to a beanfeast in Kennington Lane, stayed to a late hour, and on her 
return towards Southwark she met with three men, who had the appearance of 
brewers' servants, two of whom used her in so inhuman a manner as will bear no 
description.
	Such was the ill-treatment she had received that it was two o'clock in the 
morning before she was able to reach her lodgings, and on the following day was so 
ill that she informed several people how she had been treated; on which she was sent 
to St Thomas's Hospital.
	While in the hospital she declared that the clerk in Taylor's (then Berry's) 
brew-house was one of the parties who had treated her in such an infamous manner; 
and it was supposed that Coleman was the person to whom she alluded.
	Two days after the shocking transaction had happened, Coleman and one 
Daniel Trotman called at the Queen's Head ale-house, in Bandy-Leg Walk, when the 
latter was perfectly sober, but the former in a state of intoxication. Having called for 
some rum-and-water, Coleman was stirring it with a spoon when a stranger asked him 
what he had done with the pig—meaning a pig that had been lately stolen in the 
neighbourhood. Coleman, unconscious of guilt, and conceiving himself affronted by 
such an impertinent question, said: "D--n the pig, what is it to me?"
	The other, who seems to have had an intention to ensnare him, asked him if he 
did not know Kennington Lane. Coleman answered that he did, and added: "D--n ye, 
what of that?" The other then asked him if he knew the woman that had been so 
cruelly treated in Kennington Lane. Coleman replied: "Yes," and again said: "D--n ye, 
what of that?" The other man asked: "Was not you one of the parties concerned in that 
affair?" Coleman, who, as we have said, was intoxicated, and had no suspicion of 
design, replied: "If I had, you dog, what then?"—and threw at him the spoon with 
which he was stirring the liquor. A violent quarrel ensued; but at length Coleman went 
away with Trotman.
	On the following day, Coleman calling at the Queen'sHead above mentioned, 
the landlord informed him how imprudently he had acted the preceding day. Coleman, 
who had been too drunk to remember what had passed, asked if he had offended any 
person; on which the landlord informed him of what had happened, but the other, still 
conscious of his innocence, paid no regard to what he said.
	On the 29th of August, Daniel Trotman and another man went before Mr 
Clarke, a magistrate in the Borough, and charged Coleman on suspicion of having 
violently assaulted and cruelly treated Sarah Green, in the Parsonage Walk, near 
Newington Church, in Surrey.
	The magistrate, who does not seem to have supposed that Coleman was guilty, 
sent for him and hired a man to attend him to the hospital where the wounded woman 
lay; and pointing out Coleman, he asked her if he was one of the persons who had 
used her so cruelly. She said she believed he was, but, as she declined to swear 
positively to his having any concern in the affair, Justice Clarke admitted him to bail.
	Some time afterwards Coleman was again taken before the magistrate, when, 
nothing positively being sworn against him, the justice would have absolutely 
discharged him, but Mr Wynne, the master of the injured girl, requesting that he might 
once more be taken to see her, a time was fixed for that purpose, and the justice took 
Coleman's word for his appearance.
	The accused party came punctually to his time, bringing with him the landlord 
of an ale-house where Sarah Green had drunk on the night of the affair with the three 
men who really injured her; and this publican, and other people, declared on oath that 
Coleman was not one of the parties.
	On the following day Justice Clarke went to the hospital to take the 
examination of the woman on oath. Having asked her if Coleman was one of the men 
who had injured her, she said she could not tell, as it was dark at the time; but, 
Coleman being called in, an oath was administered to her, when she swore that he was 
one of the three men that abused her.
	Notwithstanding this oath, the justice, who thought the poor girl not in her 
right senses, and was convinced in his own mind of the innocence of Coleman, 
permitted him to depart on his promise of bringing bail the following day to answer 
the complaint at the next assizes for Surrey; and he brought his bail, and gave security 
accordingly.
	Sarah Green dying in the hospital, the coroner's jury sat to inquire into the 
cause of her death; and, having found a verdict of wilful murder against Richard 
Coleman and two persons then unknown, a warrant was issued to take Coleman into 
custody.
	Though this man was conscious of his innocence, yet such were his terrors at 
the idea of going to prison on such a charge that he absconded, and secreted himself at 
Pinner, near Harrow-on-the-Hill.
	King George II. being then at Hanover, a proclamation was issued by the 
Lords of the Regency offering a reward of fifty pounds for the apprehension of the 
supposed offender; and to this the parish of St Saviour, Southwark, added a reward of 
twenty pounds.
	Coleman read the advertisement for his apprehension in the Gazette, but was 
still so thoughtless as to conceal himself; though perhaps an immediate surrender 
would have been deemed the strongest testimony of his innocence. However, to assert 
his innocence, he caused the following advertisement to be printed in the newspaper:-- 
"I, Richard Coleman, seeing myself advertised in the Gazette as absconding on 
account of the murder of Sarah Green, knowing myself not any way culpable, do 
assert that I have not absconded from justice; but will willingly and readily appear at 
the next assizes, knowing that my innocence will acquit me."
	Strict search being made after him, he was apprehended at Pinner, above 
mentioned, on the 22nd of November, and lodged in Newgate, whence he was 
removed to the New Jail, Southwark, till the time of the assizes at Kingston, in 
Surrey; when his conviction arose principally from the evidence of Trotman and the 
declaration of the dying woman.
	Some persons positively swore that he was in another place at the time the fact 
was committed, but their evidence was not credited by the jury. After conviction 
Coleman behaved like one who was possessed of conscious innocence, and who had 
no fear of death for a crime which he had not committed.
	He was attended at the place of execution by the Rev. Mr Wilson, to whom he 
delivered a paper in which he declared, in the most solemn and explicit manner, that 
he was altogether innocent of the crime alleged against him. He died with great 
resignation, lamenting only the distress in which he should leave a wife and children.
	Note: This man's innocence was fully established in 1751, when James Welsh 
and Thomas Jones confessed that they committed the crime. See below.


THOMAS KINGSMILL, FAIRALL AND PERIN 
Three of the thirty Smugglers who broke open the Custom-House at Poole, 
and were executed at Tyburn, 26th of April, 1749

	KINGSMILL was a native of Goudhurst, in Kent, and had passed some part of 
his life as a husbandman; but having associated with the smugglers, he made no 
scruple of entering into the most hazardous enterprises, and became so distinguished 
for his courageous—or rather ferocious—disposition that he was chosen captain of the 
gang.
	Fairall was a native of Horsendown Green, in Kent, and the son of poor 
parents, who were unable either to educate him or to give him any regular 
employment by which he might obtain a livelihood. He began to associate with the 
smugglers while quite a boy, and was frequently employed by them to hold their 
horses; and when he grew up to man's estate he was admitted as one of the fraternity. 
He was so remarkable for his brutal courage that it was not thought safe to offend 
him.
	Perin was a native of Chichester, in Sussex. Having served his time to a 
carpenter, he practised some years as a master, and was successful in trade; but a 
stroke of the palsy depriving him of the use of his right hand he became connected 
with the smugglers, on whose behalf he used to sail to the coast of France and 
purchase goods, which he brought to England; and in this capacity he proved very 
serviceable to the gang.
	It is evident that these men must have greatly injured the revenue and the fair 
trader, for they had a number of warehouses in different parts of Sussex for the 
concealment of their goods, and kept not less than fifty horses, some of which they 
sent loaded to London, and others to the fairs round the country.
	Perin, being in France in the year 1747, bought a large quantity of goods, 
which he loaded on board a cutter, with a view to run them on the coast of Sussex; 
but, as several smuggling vessels were expected at this juncture, Captain Johnson, 
who commanded a cutter in the Government's service, received orders to sail in search 
of them.
	In consequence thereof he sailed from Poole and took the smuggling cutter 
above mentioned on the following day; but Perin and his accomplices escaped by 
taking to their boat. Captain Johnson found the cargo to consist of brandy and tea, to a 
very large amount, which he carried safe into the harbour of Poole.
	Soon after this transaction, which happened in the month of September, the 
whole body of smugglers assembled in Charlton Park, to consult if there was any 
possibility of recovering the goods of which they had thus been deprived. After many 
schemes had been proposed, and rejected, Perin recommended that they should go in a 
body, armed, and break open the custom-house at Poole; and, this proposal being 
acceded to, a paper was drawn up, by way of bond, that they should support each 
other; and this was signed by all the parties.
	This agreement, which was filled with dreadful curses on each other in case of 
failure to execute it, was signed on the 6th of October. Having provided themselves 
with swords and fire-arms they met on the following day; and, having concealed 
themselves in a wood till the evening they proceeded towards Poole, where they 
arrived about eleven at night.
	Having forced the door of the custom-house open, with hatchets and other 
instruments, they carried off the smuggled goods, with which they loaded their horses; 
and, travelling all night, stopped in the morning at Fording's Bridge.
	The smugglers numbered thirty, and their horses thirty-one. Continuing their 
journey to a place named Brook, they divided the booty into equal shares, and then 
departed, each to his own house.
	This daring transaction being represented to the Secretaries of State, King 
George II gave orders for issuing a proclamation, with a reward for the apprehension 
of the offenders. At length two of the smugglers gave intelligence of the usual place 
of meeting of the others, in consequence of which Fairall, Kingsmill, Perin, and 
another, named Glover, were taken into custody, and conducted to Newgate. They 
were brought to trial, were capitally convicted, and received sentence of death; but the 
jury recommended Glover as an object of the Royal clemency.
	On the following day Perin was carried to the place of execution in a 
mourning-coach; the two others in a cart with a guard of Horse and Foot Guards. The 
behaviour of Fairall and Kingsmill was remarkably undaunted; but all of them joined 
in devotion with the ordinary of Newgate when they came to the fatal tree. The bodies 
of Kingsmill and Fairall were hung in chains in the county of Kent.


SAMUEL COUCHMAN AND JOHN MORGAN, 
LIEUTENANTS OF MARINES, THOMAS KNIGHT, 
CARPENTER, AND OTHERS 
Part of the Crew of His Majesty's Ship Chesterfield, shot at 
Portsmouth, for mutiny, July 14, 1749.
	THE Chesterfield man of war, under the command of Captain O'Brian Dudley, 
was stationed off Cape-Coast Castle, on the coast of Africa, when a dangerous mutiny 
broke out among the crew, of whom the above-named officers were the leaders. They 
were charged with "exciting and encouraging mutiny, and running away with his 
Majesty's ship Chesterfield, on the 10th day of October, 1748, from the coast of 
Africa, leaving their captain, two lieutenants, with other officers, and some seamen, 
on shore."
	Hereupon a court-martial, was held on board his Majesty's ship Invincible, of 
which Sir Edward Hawke, of glorious memory, was president.
	The first evidence called in support of the prosecution was Mr. Gasterin, the 
late boatswain of the Chesterfield, who deposed that, on the 15th of October, 1748, 
Captain Dudley, being then on shore at Cape-Coast Castle, sent off his barge to Mr. 
Couchman, ordering him to send the cutter on shore, with the boatswain of the ship, to 
see the tents struck on shore, and to bring every thing belonging to the ship on board 
that night; but Couchman directly ordered the barge to be hoisted in, and the 
boatswain to turn all the hands to the quarterdeck, where Mr. Couchman, coming, 
from his cabin with a drawn sword, said, "Here I am: G--d d--n me, I will stand by 
you while I have a drop of blood in my body!" He was accompanied by John Morgan, 
the lieutenant of marines; Thomas Knight, the carpenter; his mate, John Place, (a 
principal actor); and about 30 seamen with cutlasses. They then gave three huzzas, 
and threw their hats overboard; damning old hats, they would soon get new.
	Couchman then sent for the boatswain to know if he would stand by him, and 
go with him; he replied, No; and said, "For God's sake, Sir, be ruled by reason, and 
consider what you are about." Couchman then threatened to put him in irons if he did 
not join with him, but the boatswain told him he never would [join] in such piratical 
designs; he was then ordered into custody, and two sentinels put over him. Couchman 
soon after sent for Gilham, the mate of the ship, and made the same speech to him, 
who desired to know where he was bound; and upon what account? He replied, "To 
take burn, and sink, and settle a colony in the East Indies." There were five or six 
more put into custody with the boatswain in the same place, and were confined only 
five or six hours, for, in the middle of the night, after their confinement, Couchman 
sent for them into the great cabin, and desired them to sit and drink punch, and then 
dismissed them.
	The next day the boatswain was invited to dinner by the new commander, who 
began to rail against Captain Dudley, and asked him and one of the mates what they 
thought of the affair: the boatswain replied, he thought it rank piracy; on which 
Couchman said, "What I have done I cannot now go from: I was forced to it by the 
ship's-company." The boatswain then told him "that would be no sanction for his 
running away with the king's ship." The carpenter and lieutenant then proposed their 
signing a paper, to which the boatswain replied he never would, and would sooner 
suffer death: the mate said the same. When the boatswain came out of the great cabin, 
he went to the gunner's cabin, who was then sick, and unable to come out of it, but 
was of great use, by his prudent advice and assistance; for, after the boatswain had 
told him that Couchman's party had taken possession of all the arms, he said that he 
could furnish him with twenty pistols. By this time Mr. Fraser and Mr. Gilham, mates 
of the ship, the gunner's mate and yeoman, and the cockswain of the barge, were come 
to them, when the boatswain communicated his design of recovering the ship that 
very night. To this they all agreed with the greatest resolution.
	It began then to be very dark, being 10 P.M. when the boatswain went to 
sound the ship's company, and on the forecastle there were about 30 men: he then in a 
plain but prudent manner disclosed the secret, and soon convinced them both of the 
facility and necessity of putting his scheme immediately in practice: accordingly, the 
first step was to get up all the irons or bilboes on the forecastle; he then sent for the 20 
pistols, which were all loaded: he next ordered three men upon the grand magazine, 
and two to that abaft; and the remainder, who had no pistols, to stay by the bilboes, 
and secure as many prisoners as he should send. This disposition being made, he went 
directly down on the deck, where he divided his small company into two parties; and, 
one going down the main, the other the fore hatchway, they soon secured eleven or 
twelve of the ringleaders, and sent them up to the forecastle without the least noise. 
The two parties then joined, and went directly to the great cabin, where they secured 
Couchman, and the lieutenant of marines, with the carpenter, whom they immediately 
confined in different parts on board.
	Thus was the ship bravely rescued by the intrepidity and prudence of a few 
honest men, after she had been about thirty hours in the possession of a poor unhappy 
man, who appears to have been utterly unfit for so daring an enterprise, and in his 
unfortunate condition very penitent.
	The boatswain (Roger Winket) was afterwards rewarded with three hundred 
pounds a year, as master-attendant of Woolwich yard.
	John Place was charged with being very active in the mutiny. The gunner 
deposed that the said Place came to him as he lay sick in his cabin, with a drawn 
cutlass and a cocked pistol, and swore that he would murder him if he did not deliver 
to him the key of the magazine. He made no defence, but submitted to the mercy of 
the court.
	John Place, after sentence, wrote letters of religious exhortation to his brothers 
in affliction. His letter to Mr. Couchman upbraids him with having been the murderer 
of those who were condemned with him, by first seducing them from their duty—
exhorts him not to attempt to screen himself by imputing his guilt to others—and 
concludes, "I freely forgive you, though you are the cause of my death, as you know 
full well: and I would have you act with a becoming resignation to the will of God; 
and not, by mean hopes of life, lose an opportunity to secure a blessed eternity.—
Despise life (as I do, with God's assistance), and die like a man."
ANSWER.
"Mr. PLACE, 
"You will die like a villain !—S..Couchman."
	The Court found the following guilty, who were executed in manner hereafter 
mentioned:—
	On the 14th of July, 
Samuel Couchman, first lieutenant of marines,  
Shot.
	July 14, 
John Morgan, second lieutenant of marines; 
Shot.
	July 24, 
Thomas Knight, carpenter. 
John Place, carpenter's mate. 
John Meeks, seaman. 
William Anderson, seaman. 
John Reed, quarter-master. 
Thomas Scott, seaman. 
Hanged.
	Captain Dudley was tried for "neglect of duty, in keeping a number of his 
officers on shore, at Cape-Coast Castle, when the ship was seized," and acquitted.
	Others of the ship's company, also tried for mutiny, were acquitted.
	On the 26th of June, 1749, James Colvin, late boatswain's mate on board the 
Richmond man of war, was hanged at Portsmouth, for mutiny.


JOHN MILLS  
His Father and Brother were hanged, and he suffered a similar Fate on 
Slendon Common, Sussex, 12th of August, 1749

  
Mills and his companions whipping Hawkins to death

	THIS monster was another son of Richard Mills, who was executed for 
murder. He was concerned in the murder of the custom-house officers, but escaped for 
a time the slow but unerring hand of justice. He was also one of that gang of villains 
who most daringly broke open the custom-house at Poole; and yet was he reserved to 
make atonement for a fresh murder, equally as cruel as that with which his father and 
brothers had imbrued their hands.
	John Mills and some associates, travelling over Hindheath, saw the judges on 
their road to Chichester to try the murderers of Chater and Galley; on which young 
Mills proposed to rob them; but the other parties refused to have any concern in such 
an affair. Soon after his father, brother and their accomplices were hanged, Mills 
thought of going to Bristol, with a view to embarking for France; and having hinted 
his intentions to some others they resolved to accompany him, and stopping at a house 
on the road they met with one Richard Hawkins, whom they asked to go with them; 
and when the poor fellow hesitated, they put him on horseback behind Mills, and 
carried him to the Dog and Partridge, on Slendon Common, which was kept by John 
Reynolds.
	They had not been long in the house when complaint was made that two bags 
of tea had been stolen, and Hawkins was charged with the robbery. He steadily denied 
any knowledge of the affair; but this not satisfying the villains, they obliged him to 
pull off his clothes; and, having likewise stripped themselves, they began to whip him 
with the most unrelenting barbarity; and Curtis, one of the gang, said he did know of 
the robbery, and if he would not confess he would whip him till he did; for he had 
whipped many a rogue, and washed his hands in his blood. These bloodthirsty villains 
continued whipping the poor wretch till their breath was almost exhausted; while he 
begged them to spare his life, on account of his wife and child. Hawkins drawing up 
his legs to defend himself in some measure from their blows, they kicked him on the 
groin in a manner too shocking to be described, continually asking him what was 
become of the tea. At length the unfortunate man mentioned something of his father 
and brother; on which Mills and one Curtis said they would go and fetch them; but 
Hawkins expired soon after they had left the house.
	Rowland, one of the accomplices, now locked the door; and, putting the key in 
his pocket, he and Thomas Winter (who was afterwards admitted evidence) went out 
to meet Curtis and Mills, whom they saw riding up a lane leading from an adjacent 
village, having each a man behind him. Winter desiring to speak with his companions, 
the other men stood at a distance while he asked Curtis what he meant to do with 
them, and he said to confront them with Hawkins. Winter now said that Hawkins was 
dead, and begged that no more mischief might be done; but Curtis replied: "By G--! 
we will go through it now." But at length they permitted them to go home, saying that 
when they were wanted they should be sent for.
	The murderers now coming back to the public-house, Reynolds said, "You 
have ruined me"; but Curtis replied that he would make him amends. Having 
consulted how they should dispose of the body, it was proposed to throw it into a well 
in an adjacent park; but this being objected to, they carried it twelve miles, and having 
tied stones to it, in order to sink it, they threw it into a pond in Parham Park, 
belonging to Sir Cecil Bishop; and in this place it lay more than two months before it 
was discovered.
	This horrid and unprovoked murder gave rise to a Royal proclamation, in 
which a pardon was offered to any persons, even outlawed smugglers -- except those 
who had been guilty of murder, or concerned in breaking open the custom-house at 
Poole -- on condition of discovering the persons who had murdered Hawkins, 
particularly Mills, who was charged with having had a concern in this horrid 
transaction. Thereupon William Pring, an outlawed smuggler, who had not had any 
share in either of the crimes excepted in the proclamation, went to the Secretary of 
State and informed him that he would find Mills if he could be assured of his own 
pardon; and added that he believed he was either at Bath or Bristol. Being assured that 
he need not doubt of the pardon, he set out for Bristol, where he found Mills, and with 
him Thomas and Lawrence Kemp, brothers, the former of whom had broken out of 
Newgate, and the other was outlawed by proclamation. Having consulted on their 
desperate circumstances, Pring offered them a retreat at his house near Beckenham, in 
Kent, whence they might make excursions and commit robberies on the highway.
	Pleased with this proposal, they set out with Pring, and arrived in safety at his 
house, where they had not been long before he pretended that, his horse being an 
indifferent one, and theirs remarkably good, he would go and procure another, and 
then they would proceed on the intended expeditions. Thus saying, he set out, and 
they agreed to wait for his return; but instead of going to procure a horse he went to 
the house of Mr Rackster, an officer of the excise at Horsham, who, taking with him 
seven or eight armed men, went to Beckenham at night, where they found Mills and 
the two brothers Kemp just going to supper on a breast of veal. They immediately 
secured the brothers, by tying their arms; but Mills, making resistance, was cut with a 
hanger before he would submit. The offenders were conducted to the county jail for 
Sussex, and, being secured till the assizes, were removed to East Grinstead, where the 
brothers Kemp were tried for highway robberies, convicted, sentenced and executed.
	Mills, being tried for the murder of Hawkins, was capitally convicted, and 
received sentence of death, and to be hanged in chains near the place where the 
murder was committed.
	After conviction he mentioned several robberies in which he had been 
concerned, but refused to tell the names of any of his accomplices, declaring that he 
thought he should merit damnation if he made any discoveries by means of which any 
of his companions might be apprehended and convicted.
	The country being at that time filled with smugglers, a rescue was feared; 
wherefore he was conducted to the place of execution by a guard of soldiers; and 
when there prayed with a clergyman, confessed that he had led a bad life, 
acknowledged the murder of Hawkins, desired that all young people would take 
warning by his untimely end, humbly implored the forgiveness of God, and professed 
to die in charity with all mankind.
	After execution he was hanged in chains on Slendon Common.


THOMAS NEALE and WILLIAM BOWEN 
Highwaymen; (The former a most hardened Sinner, who died 
cursing the Spectators of his Execution, August 12, 1749.)

	IT must, on the perusal of these volumes, have been observed that the 
unfortunate subjects of the different cases reported have generally been not only 
guilty of the crime for which they suffered, but of many others, and often more 
heinous ones. The reader, too, must have frequently felt indignant at the fool-hardy 
protestations of innocence, with the rope of death suspended over them, of numbers 
whose guilt had been most incontestably proved. We shudder at the very idea of a 
sinner departing this world, and his soul journeying to the next, accompanied by the 
wicked lie with which the breath fled.
	Some malefactors will have been found, affecting to brave the terrors of death 
merely, to gratify the few moments of life left, in exultation of the unnatural reflection 
of having boldly launched themselves into eternity, and that succeeding felons might 
hereafter say (to use a Newgate phrase) "he died game!"
	Of the very worst description of hardened villains was that whose crimes we 
are about to bring to view—a wretch callous to hope and fear, and who died mocking 
his God, and cursing his fellow-creatures!
	The proclamation of peace occasioning the discharge of many seamen, Neale 
was paid off, and bringing his wages to London, he soon wasted his money in the 
most dissipated manner, and in the worst of company; and then had recourse to the 
dangerous practices of a footpad robber.
	On a particular occasion he stole a tankard from an inn in Hertfordshire, for 
which he was apprehended, and lodged in the county gaol, and, being tried at the next 
assizes, was capitally convicted; but obtained a pardon, on the condition of 
transporting himself for seven years, through the interest of the late duke of 
Cumberland.
	Having given bail thus to transport himself, he entertained no thought of 
fulfilling the contract; but, immediately associating with Bowen and other villains, 
they committed a variety of robberies in the vicinity of London.
	William Bowen was a native of Londonderry, in Ireland. His parents, who 
kept an inn, and lived respectably, proposed that he should succeed them in their 
business; but an attachment to bad company led him astray from the paths of duty.
	His father dying just before he came of age, left him the inn, on the condition 
of his supporting his mother, a brother, and two young sisters: but the young man, 
deaf to every prudent consideration, associated with people whose circumstances were 
much superior to his own, to the neglect of that business which would have supported 
the family.
	Aware of the decay of his trade, and the consequent ruin that stared him in the 
face, he came over to London with all the cash he could secure, and fell in company 
with people who assisted him to spend his money; and, when that was gone, he 
entered on board a ship as a common sailor.
	The seamen having received their wages, Bowen got into company with his 
old associates and some women of ill fame, with whom he spent his last shilling, and 
then had recourse for support to the perpetration of robberies in the neighbourhood of 
London, particularly near Stepney and Mile-End.
	One of Bowen's companions being apprehended for picking pockets, he and 
others joined to rescue him, as the peace-officers were conveying him to Newgate in a 
coach.
	The public being alarmed by this daring rescue, Bowen did not think it safe to 
stay in London; and having heard that his brother, then a seaman, was at Liverpool, he 
went thither in search of him: but, on his arrival, he learnt that, having received a large 
sum as prize-money, he had sailed, to see his friends in Ireland.
	Bowen immediately wrote to Londonderry; but, not having a letter in return, 
he came to the metropolis in the most distressed circumstances; when, going to a 
house where he had formerly lodged, he was informed that Neale had been to inquire 
for him; and on the following day Neale came to see him, in company with a man 
named. Vincent.
	After drinking together, Neale said to Bowen, "Come and take a ride with 
me." Bowen said he had no money, but the other told him that would soon be 
procured. On this Neale went out to borrow him a pair of boots; while Bowen went 
with Vincent to his lodgings, where the latter gave him a hanger and a pair of pistols, 
which Bowen concealed under a great coat; and then all the parties met at an alehouse 
in Southwark, whence they went to an inn, and hired horses, on the pretence of going 
to Gravesend; instead of which they went towards Kingston, where Vincent had a 
relation who belonged to the Oxford Blues.
	In their way they purchased a whip for Bowen, and loaded their pistols. On 
their arrival at Kingston they went to a public-house, and, sending for Vincent's 
kinsman, they all dined together, and drank themselves into a state of perfect 
intoxication.
	Having paid their reckoning, they mounted their horses, determined on the 
commission of robbery; and, meeting a gentleman named Ryley, Bowen pulled him 
from his horse, and in the same instant quitted his own. Mr. Ryley ran off; but Bowen 
following him, threw him down, and, kneeling on his breast, the other entreated that 
he would not hurt him. Bowen threatened his instant destruction if he did not quietly 
submit; and, having robbed him of his watch and money, bade him run after his horse, 
which had quitted the place on Neale's whipping him; and, in the interim, Vincent 
watched, lest any person should come up to interrupt him.
	The highwaymen now rode towards London, and when they, came near 
Wandsworth determined to go to Fulham, and thence to town by the way of Hyde-
park Corner. Having divided the booty (except a thirty-six shilling piece, which 
Bowen secreted) at the Greyhound inn, near Piccadilly, they supped and slept at that 
house.
	In the morning they told the landlord that they wanted to go towards Highgate, 
but were not well acquainted with the road. As they had been good customers, the 
landlord begged to treat them with half a pint of rum; and then went a little way with 
them to show them the nearest road.
	Having arrived at Highgate, they drank at that place, and then determined to 
proceed to Barnet, at which place they put up their horses, and called for rum and 
water, of which they swallowed such quantities that Vincent and Bowen fell fast 
asleep.
	In the mean time Neale endeavoured to secrete a silver pint mug; but, being 
detected in the attempt, he was taken before a magistrate, and loaded pistols being 
found on him, orders were given that his companions should likewise be taken into 
custody, and all of them were lodged in the county gaol.
	At the, next assizes an order was made for their discharge (as nothing 
appeared against them), on their giving security for their good behaviour. For this 
purpose they wrote to London to procure bail; but Mr. Ryley, hearing that three men 
of doubtful character were in the gaol of Hertford, went thither, and immediately 
knew that they were the parties by whom he had been robbed. Hereupon a detainer 
was lodged against them, and, they were removed for trial at the Surrey assizes, 
previous to the holding of which Vincent was admitted an evidence fore the crown. 
His testimony corroborating that of Mr. Ryley, Neale and Bowen were found guilty, 
and sentenced to die.
	Being lodged in the New Gaol, Southwark, Bowen was taken ill, and 
continued so till the time of his execution, He behaved with some degree of 
resignation to his fate; but was violent in his exclamations against Vincent, on account 
of his turning evidence.
	Neale evinced no concern on account of his unhappy situation; but behaved in 
a manner more hardened than language can express. At the place of execution he paid 
no regard to the devotions, but laughed at the populace while he played with the rope 
which was to put a period to his life, After the cap was drawn over his face, he put it 
up again, and addressed the people in the following shocking terms:—"I shall very 
soon see my Lord Balmerino. He was a very good friend of mine; so that is what I had 
to say, and d--n you all together." He then drew the cap over his eyes, and was 
launched into eternity.
Henceforth let honour's path be trod, 
Nor villains seek in vain 
To mock the sacred laws of God, 
And give their neighbours pain."


BENJAMIN NEALE 
Executed at Surrey, August 12, 1749, for burglary.

	HOUSE-BREAKING is a desperate species of robbery. Those who engage in 
it may be fitly compared to Satan, who, in an inauspicious hour, broke into the garden 
of Eden, stripped our first parents of their innocence, and filled the world with 
violence and rapine. Thieves and robbers are of their father the devil, and the work of 
their father they will do; but all such enjoy short and unsatisfying pleasure, to which 
long woe frequently succeeds: and, in the mean time, while such persons are carrying 
on their depredations on the public, they cannot but at times, unless entirely hardened, 
be subject to the stings of an accusing conscience, which severely condemns the 
guilty. The terrors of an agonizing conscience have, in many instances, been so 
intolerable, that the atrocious offender, unable to support the violence of divine wrath, 
has often laid violent hands on himself; but this desperate expedient will prove at 
length, to all such, only the beginning of sorrows in the world to come.
	Benjamin Neale was a hardened sinner,. whose fate exhibits a melancholy 
instance of the danger of mixing in dissolute company. He was the son of an 
apothecary and surgeon at Extel, in Warwickshire, who, having, many children to 
provide for, apprenticed Benjamin to a baker in a large business, at Coventry.
	During his apprenticeship his conduct was very reprehensible, for he would 
frequently stay out whole nights, and return to his master's house in the morning in a 
state of intoxication.
	With some difficulty he served to the end of his time, when several of the 
inhabitants of Coventry recommended it to his father to put him into business, and 
promised to deal with him; and the father enabled him to begin the world in a 
creditable manner. For a considerable time he had such success in business, that he 
became the principal baker in the place; and he married the daughter of one of the 
aldermen, with whom he received a good fortune, and would soon have been a rich 
man if he had paid a proper attention to his business: however, it was not long after he 
received his wife's fortune before he began to give himself such airs of consequence 
as rendered him disagreeable to his wife, and made the servants look on him as a 
perfect tyrant.
	To this behaviour succeeded a neglect of his business, which visibly declined, 
while he frequented cock-pits and horse-races, it was in vain that his father and his 
wife remonstrated on the impropriety of this conduct, and represented its 
inconsistence with the life of a tradesman: he continued his courses till his character 
was lost, and he was reduced to labour as a journeyman baker.
	Unable to submit with decency to a fate which he had brought on himself, he 
wandered about the country, picking up a casual and doubtful subsistence. Returning 
one night to Coventry, he found his mother, his wife, and child, in company. He 
demanded money, but they refusing to supply him, he threatened to murder them, and 
was proceeding to put his threats into execution, when their cries alarmed the 
neighbours, and prevented the perpetration of the deed; but this affair had such an 
effect on his wife that she was seized with a fever, which soon put a period to her life.
	This disaster did not seem to make any impression on his mind, for, travelling 
soon after into Staffordshire, he married a second wife; but, returning to Coventry, he 
privately sold off his effects, and left the poor woman in circumstances of great 
distress.
	It was not long after this before he commenced highwayman, and committed a 
variety of robberies on different roads, and at length became a house-breaker, which 
brought him to a fatal end.
	At Farnham, in Surrey, lived a gentleman of fortune, named Newton, at whose 
house Neale thought he might acquire a considerable booty, and, in pursuance of this 
plan, he broke into the house at four o'clock in the morning, and, forcing open a 
bureau, he stole several bank-notes, an East-India bond, between fifty and sixty 
pounds in money, some medals of gold, and several valuable articles.
	Mr. Newton no sooner discovered the robbery than he sent off a messenger, 
with a letter to his brother in London, requesting that he would advertise the loss, and 
stop payment of the notes. When Neale had committed the robbery, he likewise 
proceeded towards London, and, when he came to Brentford, offered some water-men 
three shillings and sixpence to row him to town; but this they refused, and Neale had 
no sooner got into another boat which was putting from the shore, than the messenger 
arrived at Brentford; and the watermen, having entertained a suspicion of Neale, 
asked the man if he was in pursuit of a thief, and, he replying in the affirmative, they 
pointed to the boat in which Neale was sitting.
	On this the messenger hired another boat, and having overtaken him, found 
him wrapped up in a waterman's coat. The criminal being conducted before a 
magistrate, the stolen effects were found in his possession: on which he was ordered 
for commitment, and conveyed to Newgate the same day.
	When the assizes for Surrey began, he was sent to Guildford, where he was 
capitally convicted, and sentenced to die. After conviction his behaviour was such as 
might have been expected from one who was too hardened to repent of crimes which 
he could not hesitate to commit. His conduct was so totally improper for his situation, 
that even the keepers of the gaol seemed to be shocked at his want of feeling, and 
advised him to amend his manners: but their advice was lost on one of the most 
abandoned of the human race.
	[Note: We could wish to caution housekeepers to look every evening about 
their houses, and particularly in their bedchambers, for lurking thieves, who often 
steal in unobserved about twilight, and lie concealed until they find an opportunity of 
plundering, and perhaps murdering, the family in their sleep. The following anecdote, 
among many similar circumstances which we have met with, may serve to strengthen 
our admonition: Mrs. Lewis, who kept a public-house at Hilsea, near Portsmouth, was 
alarmed, on going to bed, by observing the feet of a man below the window curtain; at 
the same moment her young child, who slept with her, cried for beer, and, with a 
happy presence of mind, she answered, that she would go down stairs, and bring it 
drink. This fortunate pretence afforded her an opportunity of alarming her neighbours, 
who entered the house, and seized the villain, with a razor in his hand, with which he 
most likely meant to have cut her throat. It is remarkable that this woman's husband 
was, a few years before, shot by a robber of the name of Williams, who was executed 
for the murder, and his body at the time hanging in chains on South-sea common, 
adjoining Portsmouth.]


HUGH DAWSON and JOHN GAMMELL 
Executed on Kennington-common, August 22, 1749.

	THE repeated comments we have made on the effects of idleness, 
extravagance, and drunkenness, in bringing such numbers to the gallows, would 
render repetition tedious and unnecessary. For this reason we pass over many cases 
without observation; but there are crimes resulting from some of those vices, without 
any particular circumstances arising in the short career of villainy to an untimely fate.
	If this description of criminals are those we are now about to bring forward; 
yet in the character of Dawson there is a wicked attempt to brave his fall, but which 
the more immediate approach of death happily turned to the fear of God.
	Dawson was an Irishman, and born of respectable parents, his father having 
been a bookseller in Londonderry. Gammell was a Scotchman, of Greenock, and both 
were lazy worthless fellows.
	The father of Dawson, finding his son would settle to no business in his own 
country, sent him to sea. After the first voyage he remained some time at home, and 
did not seem to entertain any further thoughts of going to sea; but, falling in love with 
a young woman in the neighbourhood, she promised him marriage, but advised him to 
follow his former occupation some time longer.
	In consequence of this advice he went again to sea, and on his return from 
each voyage visited his favourite girl; but at length it was discovered by her parents 
that she was pregnant by her lover. Alarmed by this circumstance, they proposed to 
Dawson's father to give him a fortune proportioned to what they would bestow on 
their girl; but this the old man obstinately refused, though the son earnestly entreated 
him to accede to the proposal.
	Hereupon young Dawson left his parents, swore he would never again return 
home, and went once more to sea. Having made some voyages, the vessel in which he 
sailed put into the harbour of Sandwich; on which Dawson quitted a sea-faring life, 
and married a girl of fortune, who bore him two children, which were left to the care 
of her relations at her death which happened six years after the marriage.
	On this event Dawson went again to sea, and was in several naval 
engagements. When his ship was paid off he went to Bristol, where he was arrested 
for a debt he had contracted. At this period he heard of the death of his father, and that 
his mother's affection for him was in no degree diminished; on which he wrote her an 
account of his situation; and she sent him fifty pounds, which relieved him from his 
embarrassments.
	Having procured his liberty, he went to London, and marrying the widow of a 
seaman, who possessed some money, they lived in harmony a considerable time, till, 
making a connexion with dissolute companions, he commenced the practices which 
led to his ruin.
	Gammell, who had been a ship-mate with Dawson, was one of these 
companions, add, being now out of employment, advised him to go on the highway. 
He hesitated for some time; but, having drank freely, his resolution failed him, and he 
agreed to the fatal proposal.
	These accomplices dressed themselves as sailors, and, concealing bludgeons 
under their jackets, knocked down the persons they intended to rob, and stripped them 
of their effects.
	The robbery which cost them their lives was committed near New-cross 
turnpike, on a gentleman named Outridge, from whom they took his money, and 
watch, and treated him with great barbarity. Being pursued by some people whom Mr. 
Outridge informed of the robbery, Dawson was overtaken and confined; and, having 
given information where Gammell lodged, he likewise was apprehended; and both of 
them being conveyed to the New Gaol, Southwark, they mutually recriminated on 
each other.
	On the approach of the assizes for Surrey, the prisoners were carried to 
Croydon, where they were both tried, and capitally convicted. After passing sentence, 
Dawson was visited by a Roman Catholic priest, who intimated that he had heard he 
was of the Romish religion; but the, other said he would die in the Protestant faith, in 
which he had been educated: but notwithstanding this declaration, and his regular 
attendance on the forms of the Protestant mode, there was reason to conclude that he 
was a Catholic, from a paper that was found in his cell after his death.
	On the night preceding the execution the behaviour of Dawson evinced the 
distraction of his mind. He was visited by his wife, who had been sitting some time 
with him, when the turnkey came, and intimated that he must retire; on which he 
refused to go, and knocked the fellows down; but, others of the keepers coming, he 
was secured. His wife would now have taken a final leave of him; and he said if she 
did not depart he would murder her.
	As the keepers were conducting him through the courtyard to his cell, he 
called to the other prisoners, saying, Holla! my boys! Dawson is to be hanged to-
morrow."
	The prisoners were conveyed to the place of execution in the same cart; and, 
when there, Dawson expressed his hope of salvation through the merits of Jesus 
Christ, and declared he died in charity with all men: Gammell addressed the 
surrounding multitude, particularly hoping. that his brother seamen would avoid the 
commission of such crimes as led to his deplorable end, He hoped forgiveness from 
all whom he had injured, and acknowledged that he fell a victim to the equity of the 
laws.


ROBERT COX  
Late Captain's Clerk of the Royal George Man-of-War. Executed at 
Winchester, 1st of September, 1749, for Forging Seamen's Tickets

	THIS man was tried on several indictments: the first for stealing a certain 
obligation, called "a seaman's ticket," the property of Benjamin Berry; the others for 
forgery in endorsing the same.
	When ships-of-war return from a long foreign station the crews are generally 
turned over to others, fit for service; and upon these occasions each man is delivered a 
warrant, signed by the principal officers, under whom he served, and which is called a 
seaman's ticket; in fact, it is a negotiable property when endorsed, like a note of hand 
or bill of exchange; but, because the men should not be tempted to sell their tickets 
under price, instead of being put into their possession they are sent with them to the 
captain of the ship to which they are turned over, and lodged in his hands till they are 
ordered to some other ship, and then these tickets are still sent with them. In this 
manner, the Glasgow man-of-war being laid up, part of her crew were turned over to 
several ships successively, and at length to the Royal George.
	Soon after the peace was agreed upon, these men were of course discharged, 
and the tickets put into the hands of their proper owners; but those of Mr Berry and 
twelve seamen more were missing, and no account could be given of them. They 
immediately laid the fact before the Lords of the Admiralty, by way of petition, who 
wrote to Captain Harrison, to know the reason why the petitioners were refused their 
tickets. The Captain answered the letter, but was unable to give any reason, or to say 
more than that they could not be found. Upon which the Lords of the Admiralty 
thought fit to mulct the wages due to the men out of Captain Harrison's pay, who, now 
feeling most sensibly the case of the poor sailors, made more immediate inquiry after 
the lost tickets, and accordingly advertised for them, with a reward to any person who 
should make a discovery.
	Mr Cullen, who formerly kept the inn called the India Arms, at Gosport, 
deposed that the identical tickets so advertised were deposited with him by the 
prisoner, Robert Cox, as security for twenty guineas, which he had lent him; and that 
on the appearance of the advertisement Cox came to him to beg he would take his 
bond for the twenty guineas and give him up the tickets. But the witness refused so to 
do; telling him if he came honestly by them he might immediately sell them, and, out 
of what they brought, pay him the sum lent; but that if he had not come honestly by 
them it was fit the truth should be known. Upon this, the witness continued, Cox went 
his way, and the witness hastened to give information to Captain Harrison.
	Upon the trial of the first indictment no proof could be adduced that the 
prisoner stole the tickets, and he was accordingly acquitted; but the second was fatal 
to him: for it was fully proved that he forged the name of Berry to the tickets, was 
found guilty, and received sentence of death. He suffered at Winchester, in 
September, 1749.


ANN FLYNN 
A Sad Case with a Humorous Sequel
	ANN FLYNN was indicted at the Old Bailey for stealing from a butcher in 
Whitechapel a shoulder of mutton. It appeared in evidence that, the prosecutor being 
busy with his customers on a Saturday night, the prisoner availed herself of that 
opportunity, and carried away the shoulder of mutton. She was, however, soon seized 
and brought back, and, an officer being sent for, she was carried before a magistrate, 
and committed for trial. These facts being proved, the prisoner was called upon for 
her defence; and she told a tale of woe that penetrated every heart. She acknowledged 
the robbery; but solemnly declared she was urged to it by the most afflicting distress. 
Her husband had been ill and unable to earn a shilling for twelve weeks, and she was 
driven to the last extremity, with two infant children. In that deplorable situation, 
continued the unfortunate woman, while the tears ran down her wan cheeks, she 
desperately snatched the shoulder of mutton—for which she had already been 
confined five weeks.
	The jury found her guilty, with a faltering accent; and the recorder 
immediately replied, "Gentlemen, I understand you," and sentenced her to be fined 
only one shilling and discharged, which the jury themselves paid, but the officer of 
the prison gave it to her.
	This case, if the extremity of the law had been resorted to, was felony.
	As soon as she was taken away, the prosecutor addressed the Court, and said 
that the constable had done him more injury than the thief; for though Sir William 
Parsons, the magistrate that committed her, had ordered him to take care of the 
shoulder of mutton, he thought fit to cook it for his own dinner, and to sit down and 
eat it.
	[This new complaint, as might naturally be supposed, excited not a little the 
risible muscles of the Court.]
	The constable was immediately called upon to account for his conduct, who 
said: "My Lord, I did take care of it, as ordered; I kept it whilst it was worth keeping, 
and if my wife and I had not eaten it, the dogs must have dined on it."


BOSAVERN PENLEZ  
Executed for rioting, 18th October, 1749

	THIS unhappy youth (for he can hardly be deemed a malefactor) was the son 
of a native of the island of Jersey, who, having been educated at Oxford, entered into 
orders; and, having obtained a small church preferment, settled near Exeter, where his 
unfortunate son was born.
	His father dying while he was young, he was placed as an apprentice to a 
barber and peruke-maker at Exeter, by the stewards of the Sons of the Clergy. Having 
served his apprenticeship with the highest reputation for good character and sobriety, 
he came to London, and lived in several places with the utmost credit, till a 
circumstance equally unpremeditated and unforeseen occasioned his destruction.
	On Saturday, the 1st of July, 1749, three seamen belonging to the Grafton man 
of war, having called at a house of ill fame in the Strand, were there robbed of their 
watches, a bank-note value twenty pounds, four moidores, and thirty guineas.
	The seamen demanded a reparation for their loss; instead of which some 
bullies belonging to the house pushed them from the door; whereupon they went 
away, denouncing vengeance; and, having collected a number of their companions in 
the neighbourhood of Wapping, they returned at night, broke open the house, turned 
the women almost naked into the streets, ripped up the beds, threw the feathers out of 
the window, broke the furniture in pieces, and made a bonfire of it.
	Having proceeded to behave in a similar manner at another house of ill fame, a 
party of the guards was sent for, and the mob for the present dispersed.
	On the following day. being Sunday, immense numbers of people crowded to 
see the ruins of the infamous houses; and on this day Bosavern Penlez went to the 
house of Mr. Pearce, in Wych Street, where be had left some clothes; and, when he 
had cleaned himself, he visited an acquaintance named Taylor, with whom he drank at 
a public house, dined, and spent the afternoon.
	In the evening Penlez walked in Somerset Gardens, and, at eight o'clock, went 
back to his friend Taylor, who being engaged with company, Penlez declined staying, 
and proceeded to meet an acquaintance at the Horseshoe, near Temple Bar. Having 
drank some beer with him, be was returning to his lodgings, when he unfortunately 
met with another acquaintance, who told him it was his birth-day, and begged he 
would drink some punch with him.
	This request being complied with, Penlez became quite intoxicated; and, in his 
way home, found a mob at the door of the Star tavern, near Temple Bar, endeavouring 
to destroy what the seamen had left undemolished. Many of the people got into the 
house, and did great damage; and Penlez, with John Wilson and Benjamin Launder, 
was taken into custody.
	Being brought to trial at the next sessions at the Old Bailey, the witnesses were 
Peter Wood (the landlord), his wife, and one Reeves, their servant, who positively 
swore to the commission of the facts alleged in the indictment.
	To discredit their testimony, Mr. John Mixon, the collector of the scavenger's 
rate, deposed that he did not think the oath of Mr. or Mrs. Wood was to be taken, and 
that he would not hang a cat or a dog on their evidence. He added, that the house they 
kept was of the most notorious ill fame; that the rates were paid in the name of 
Thompson; that Wood and his wife had been often prosecuted for keeping a 
disorderly house; and that the neighbours were afraid to appear against them.
	In the course of the trial Wood swore 'that the mob amounted to about seven 
hundred people; that eight or ten of them came into his parlour, among whom were 
Wilson and Penlez; that they broke the partition with their sticks, pulled out the pieces 
with their hands, destroyed all the furniture in the parlour, and threw it into the street, 
broke down his bar, and knocked him down on the stairs;' with many other 
circumstances, tending to prove the riot, and that the prisoners were concerned in it.
	Several persons of reputation appeared to the character of the prisoners; but 
the positive evidence against them induced the jury to convict Penlez and Wilson; but 
Launder was acquitted.
	The inhabitants of the parish of St. Clement Panes, and many individuals, 
made great interest to save these unfortunate youths, in consequence of which Wilson 
was reprieved, but Penlez was ordered for execution.
	It is said that the king was disposed to have pardoned them both; but that Lord 
Chief Justice Willes, before whom they were tried, declared in council that no regard 
would be paid to the laws except one of them was made an example of. Our account 
informs us that the king still inclined to pardon them both, and that the chief justice 
was three times sent for and consulted on this occasion; but that he still persisted in 
his former opinion. [It is a well-known fact that Lord Chief Justice Willes was a 
steady assertor of the dignity of the law. It could not be supposed that he could have 
any prejudice against the convict; and it must he concluded that his opinion arose 
from a regard to the public weal.]
	After conviction Penlez behaved in such a manner as evidently testified the 
goodness of his disposition, and the little probability there was of such a man 
committing a wilful premeditated crime. It is not in language to describe how much he 
was pitied by the public. Every one wished his pardon, and wondered, without 
considering the necessity that there was for an example, that he was not spared.
	When the day of execution arrived be prepared to meet his fate with the 
consciousness of an innocent man, and the courage of a Christian. The late Sir 
Stephen Theodore Janssen, Chamberlain of London, was at that time sheriff; and a 
number of soldiers being placed at Holborn Bars, to conduct Penlez to Tyhurn (as a 
rescue was apprehended), the sheriff politely dismissed them, asserting that the civil 
power was sufficient to carry the edicts of the law into effectual execution.
	This unhappy youth was executed at Tyburn on the 18th of October, 1749.
	The worthy inhabitants of St. Clement Danes, who had been among the 
foremost in soliciting a pardon for Penlez, finding all their efforts ineffectual, did all 
possible honour to his memory, by burying him in a distinguished manner in a 
churchyard of their parish, on the evening after his unfortunate exit, which happened 
in the twenty-third year of his age.


CAPTAIN CLARKE, R.N. 
Convicted and condemned to be hanged for the Murder of Captain Innis, in 
a Duel, and pardoned, 12th of June, 1750

	THE Captains Innis and Clarke were commanders under Admiral Knowles—
the first of the Warwick, and the latter of the Canterbury, line-of-battle-ships, of sixty-
four guns each—when he obtained a victory over a Spanish fleet of equal force, and 
took from them the Conquistadore, and ran their Vice-Admiral on shore, where she 
blew up, the rest escaping under favour of the night. It was the opinion that had the 
Admiral availed himself of an opportunity which at one time presented of bringing up 
his fleet to bear at once upon the enemy the whole might have been taken.
	The issue of this battle was therefore unsatisfactory to the nation, and the 
Admiral was called to account for his conduct before a court martial, held on board 
the royal yacht, the Charlotte, at Deptford, which sat during nine days.
	The opinion of the Court being unfavourable to the Admiral caused a divided 
opinion among the officers. It did not, however, affect the personal bravery of that 
commander, but, on the contrary, as appeared in evidence, he displayed the greatest 
intrepidity, exposing his person to imminent danger, after his ship was disabled; but it 
appears that in manoeuvering, previous to the engagement, he had not availed himself 
of an advantage, by which neglect it was begun by four of his, when six might have 
been brought up. The Court therefore determined that he fell under the 14th and 23rd 
Articles of War—namely, the word "negligence"; for which they sentenced him to be 
reprimanded. This sentence caused much ill blood among the officers. The Admiral 
had already been called out twice in duels with his captains, and had received more 
challenges of the same kind; but Government, being apprised of the outrages, put a 
stop to them by taking the challengers into custody.
	Captain Clarke, it appears, had given evidence on the trial of the Admiral 
which displeased Captain Innis to so great a degree that he called him "a perjured 
rascal," and charged him with giving false evidence. This was certainly language 
worse to be borne by an officer than rankling wounds, or even death. Captain Clarke, 
being apprised that Innis in this way traduced and vilified him in all companies, gave 
him a verbal challenge, which the other accepted.
	On the 12th of August, 1749, early in the morning, these gentlemen, attended 
by their seconds, met in Hyde Park. The pistols of Captain Clarke were screw-
barrelled and about seven inches long; those of Captain Innis were common pocket-
pistols, three inches and a half in the barrel. They were not more than five yards 
distant from each other when they turned about, and Captain Clarke fired before 
Captain Innis had levelled his pistol. The ball took effect in the breast, of which 
wound Captain Innis expired at twelve o'clock the same night. The coroner's jury 
found a verdict, of wilful murder against Captain Clarke, on which he was 
apprehended, brought to trial at the Old Bailey, found guilty, and sentenced to death. 
The King, in consideration of his services, and the bravery he displayed in fighting his 
ship under Admiral Knowles, was pleased to grant him a free pardon.
	There were other circumstances in this unfortunate rencounter which were 
favourable to Captain Clarke, for his firing on turning round, and his pistol being 
larger than that of Captain Innis, was not deemed unfair by the sanguinary rules of 
duelling; for Captain Innis might have provided, himself with a large pair had he 
pleased. But what pleaded powerfully on his behalf was the expressions of the dying 
man, who acquitted and forgave him. When a soldier seized Captain Clarke, the 
former asked the wounded man what he should do with him, to which he faintly 
answered: "Set him at liberty, for what he has done was my own seeking."
	On the 1st of June, 1750, being the last day of the sessions of the Old Bailey, 
Captain Clarke, among the other convicts, was brought up to receive sentence of 
death, when he pleaded his Majesty's pardon, which had been then lately sent him, 
and which being recorded, he was discharged.


MARGARET HARVEY  
Executed for Privately Stealing

	MRS. HARVEY was a native of the city of Dublin, and descended from 
parents of reputation, by whom she was educated in a very decent manner. She 
married the valet of a nobleman when she was only sixteen years of age; and her 
husband, soon afterwards, procuring a lieutenant's commission on board a man-of-
war, sailed in the service of his country.
	Returning after an absence of six months, he became extremely jealous of his 
wife; but we have no account that he had then any cause for such jealousy. Be this as 
it may, he treated her with such severity that she left him, in apprehension that her life 
was in danger.
	Some of her relations afforded her present support; but, when they began to 
think her troublesome, she went to her parents, who received her with the utmost 
affection: but her husband had art enough to persuade her father that she had no good 
cause to have left him; on which the old man insisted on her returning to her duty as a 
wife.
	When she was again at home with him he treated her no less cruelly than 
heretofore; and, on a particular occasion, without any previous quarrel, he cut her on 
the arms and head with a hanger, so that she carried the marks to the grave; yet still 
she continued to love him with unabating affection.
	At length, when she was on a visit, in company with several other women, and 
complaining of the cruelty of her husband, they recommended her to avenge herself 
by quitting him, and putting herself under the protection of a gentleman who knew her 
situation, pitied her case, and would be proud to become her benefactor.
	Fatally for her repose, she listened to this advice, and went to live with the 
stranger; on which her husband left Dublin, and set out for London.
	The man who had thus been the indirect means of seducing her from her duty 
soon grew tired of her company, and quitted her, leaving her in circumstances of utter 
distress.
	In this dilemma she determined to go in search of her husband, and solicit his 
forgiveness; and, with this view, sailed for England, and travelled to London; but her 
inquiries after him proving fruitless, she went into service in Marylebone Street, and 
remained about four months in that station.
	When the fireworks were exhibited in St. James's Park, on occasion of the 
peace with France, she was permitted to go and see the extraordinary sight; and, while 
she was a spectator of that magnificent show, some women and seamen entered into 
conversation with her; and, going to a public-house, they spent the night and 
following day in intemperance.
	Ashamed now to return to her service, she took a lodging in St. Giles's, and, 
becoming acquainted with some women of ill fame, who were supported by sailors 
who visited them, she soon became as abandoned in manners as her associates.
	Some Irish seamen being acquainted with her, she went with them to 
Wapping; and, having drank very freely, she was met on her return home by a 
gentleman, who took her to a tavern, where she found means to rob him of his gold 
watch; but, being taken into custody that night, she was lodged in the Round-house, 
and committed to Newgate the following day.
	Being brought to trial at the Old Bailey sessions, she was capitally convicted; 
but, pleading that she was with child, she was respited till the year 1750, when 
sentence of death was passed on her.
	While in this distressed situation, she acknowledged that she should not have 
pleaded being with child, but that she had hopes of obtaining a pardon on condition of 
transportation; and on the arrival of the warrant for her execution she wrung her 
hands, cried exceedingly, and lamented the misfortunes which first induced her to 
come to London.
	On the morning of her execution she was visited by some of her 
countrywomen, who, having privately brought in some brandy, induced her to drink 
such a quantity of it, that she died in an absolute state of intoxication; though before 
this circumstance she had exhibited every real sign of penitence and contrition.
	She was executed at Tyburn on the 6th of July, 1750.


JAMES COOPER  
Executed for murder, August 26th, 1750

	THIS man was the son of a butcher at Lexton, in Essex; and his father, who 
had wholly neglected his education, employed him in his own business when he was 
only ten years of age. Having lived with his father till he was twenty-two, he then 
married, and opened a shop at Colchester, where he dealt largely as a butcher, and 
likewise became a cattle-jobber.
	At the end of thirteen years, Cooper, through neglect, found his losses so 
considerable that he could no longer carry on business; and, one of his creditors 
arresting him, he was thrown into the King's-Bench prison; but, as his wife still 
carried on trade, he was enabled to purchase the rules. Soon after this, the marshal of 
the King's Bench dying, he was obliged to pay for the rules a second time.
	He now sued for an allowance of the groats; and they were paid him for about 
a year, when, through neglect of payment, he got out of prison, and took a shop in the 
Mint, Southwark, where he carried on his business with some success, his wife 
maintaining the family in. the country.
	[The groats: By 23d George II. debtors, after being a certain time in prison, 
might claim the benefit therein imposed upon the plaintiff in the suit on which they 
were confined; being fourpence (a groat) per day; and in default of any one weekly 
instalment they were entitled to their discharge; but the expense of moving the Court 
to this end was generally too great for the prisoner to bear.]
	At length he was arrested by another creditor, and waited two years for the 
benefit of an act of insolvency. On his going to Guildford, to take the benefit of the 
act, he found that the marshal had not inserted his name in the list with those of the 
other prisoners; and, having informed his creditor of this circumstance, the marshal 
was obliged to pay debt and costs, the debtor was discharged, and the marshal fined 
one hundred pounds for his neglect.
	Cooper having now obtained his liberty, and his wife dying about the same 
time, and leaving four children, he sent for them to London; and, not long afterwards, 
married a widow, who had an equal number of children.
	He now, unfortunately, got acquainted with Duncalf and Burrell, the former a 
notorious thief, and the latter a soldier in the guards; and these men advising him to 
commence robber, he fatally complied with their solicitations; and the following is an 
account of a number of robberies which they committed.
	Between Stockwell and Clapham they overtook two men, one of whom, 
speaking of the probability of being attacked by footpads, drew a knife, and swore he 
would kill any man who should presume to molest them. The parties all drank 
together on the road, and then proceeded towards London, when Cooper threw down 
the man who was armed with the knife, and took it from him, and then robbed him 
and his acquaintance of a watch, about twenty shillings, and their handkerchiefs.
	Their next robbery was on Mr. James, a tailor, whom they stopped on the road 
to Dulwich, and took from him his watch and money. He gave an immediate alarm, 
which occasioned a pursuit; but the thieves effected their escape. Two of the three 
robbers wearing soldiers' clothes, Mr. James presumed that they were of the guards; 
and, going to the Parade in St. James's park, he fixed on two soldiers as the parties 
who had robbed him.
	As it happened that these men had been to Dulwich about the time that the 
robbery had been committed, they were sent to prison, and brought to trial; but were 
acquitted.
	The accomplices in iniquity being in waiting for prey near Bromley, Duncalf 
saw a gentleman riding along the road; and, kneeling down, he seized the bridle, and 
obliged him to quit his horse, when the others robbed him of his watch and two 
guineas and a half.
	Meeting soon afterwards with a man and woman on one horse, near 
Farnborough, in Kent, they ordered them to quit the horse, robbed them of near forty 
shillings, and then permitted them to pursue their journey. Soon after the commission 
of this robbery they heard the voices of a number of people who were in pursuit of 
them: on which Cooper turned about, and they passed him, but seized on Burrell, one 
of them exclaiming 'This is one of the rogues that just robbed my brother and sister!'
	On this Burrell fired a pistol into the air, to intimidate the pursuers, among 
whom were two soldiers, whom Duncalf and Cooper encountering at this instant, one 
of them was so dangerously wounded by his own sword, which Duncalf wrested from 
his hand, that be was sent as an invalid to Chelsea, where he finished his life.
	The brother of the parties robbed, and a countryman, contested the matter with 
the thieves, till the former was thrown on the ground, where Burrell beat him so 
violently that he died on tile spot. The robbers now took their way to London , where 
they arrived without being pursued.
	Cooper and Duncalf, the latter being provided with a bag, went once to a farm-
house, and stole all the fowls that were at roost; and Duncalf saying, 'The first man we 
meet must buy my chickens,' they had not travelled far before they met with a man 
whom they asked to buy the fowls. He said he did not want any; but they seized his 
horse's bridle, knocked him down, and robbed him of above twelve pounds, with his 
hat and wig, watch and great coat.
	On one of their walks towards Camberwell they met a man of fortune, named 
Ellish, whose servant was lighting him home from a club. Putting pistols to the 
gentleman's breast, his servant attempted to defend him; on which they knocked him 
down with a bludgeon; and the master still hesitating to deliver, they threw him to the 
ground, and robbed him of his money, watch, and other articles; and, tying him and 
his servant back to back, threw them into a ditch, where they lay in a helpless manner 
till a casual passenger released them from their disagreeable situation.
	The villains now returned towards London. In their way, meeting a man with a 
sack of stolen venison, they robbed him of his great coat and thirty-six shillings; and, 
a few nights afterwards, they robbed a man of a few shillings on the Hammersmith 
road, and destroyed a lantern which he carried, that be should not be able to make any 
pursuit after them.
	On their return home they met a man on horseback, whom they would have 
robbed; but, turning his horse suddenly, he rode to Kensington turnpike, and gave an 
alarm, while the thieves got through a hedge, and concealed themselves in a field. In 
the interim, the man they had robbed of a few shillings brought a number of people to 
take the thieves; but, not finding them, though within their hearing, the man went 
towards his home alone; but the rogues, pursuing him, took a stick from him, and beat 
him severely for attempting to raise the country on them.
	Immediately afterwards they hastened towards Brompton, and stopped a 
gentleman, whom they robbed of his watch and money. The gentleman had a dog, 
which flew at the thieves; but Cooper, coaxing the animal into good humour, 
immediately killed him.
	Their next expedition was to Paddington, where they concealed themselves 
behind a hedge, till, observing two persons on horseback, they robbed them of their 
watches, great coats, and twelve guineas; and though an immediate alarm was given, 
and many persons pursued them, they escaped over the fields as far as Hampstead 
Heath, and came from thence to London.
	Soon afterwards they stopped a gentleman between Kingsland and Stoke 
Newington, who whipped Duncalf so that he must have yielded, but that Cooper at the 
instant struck the gentleman to the ground. They then robbed him of above seventeen 
pounds, and, tying his hands behind him, threw him over a hedge, in which situation 
he remained till some milkmen relieved him on the following morning.
	Meeting a man between Knightsbridge and Brompton, who had a shoulder of 
veal with him, they demanded his money; instead of delivering which, the man 
knocked Cooper down three times with his veal, but the villains, getting the 
advantage, robbed the man of his hat and meat, but could find no money in his 
possession.
	Cooper being incensed against the person who had first arrested him, who was 
Mrs. Pearson, of Hill Farm, in Essex, determined to rob her; on which he and his 
accomplices went to the place, and, learning that she was on a visit, waited till her 
return at night; when they stopped her and her servant, and robbed them of eight 
guineas.
	On the following day Mrs. Pearson went to a magistrate, and charged a person 
named Loader with having committed the robbery; but it appearing that this man was 
a prisoner for debt at the time, the charge necessarily fell to the ground.
	Cooper and his associates meeting a farmer, named Jackson, in a lane near 
Croydon, he violently opposed them: on which they knocked him down, and, 
dragging him into a field, robbed him of his watch and money, tied him to a tree, and 
turned his horse loose on a common.
	For this robbery two farriers, named Shelton and Kellet, were apprehended; 
and, being tried at the next assizes for Surrey, the latter was acquitted, but the former 
was convicted on the positive oath of the person robbed, and suffered death.
	The three accomplices, being out on the road near Dulwich, met two 
gentlemen on horseback, one of whom got from them by the goodness of his horse; 
and the other attempted to do so, but was knocked down, and robbed of his watch and 
money. In the interim, the party who had rode off, whose name was Saxby, fastened 
his horse to a gate, and came back to relieve his friend: but the robbers first knocked 
him down, and then shot him.
	Having stripped him of what money he had, they hastened towards London: 
but a suspicion arising that Duncalf was concerned in this robbery and murder, he was 
taken into custody on the following day; and, Cooper being taken up on his 
information, Burrell surrendered, and was admitted an evidence for the crown.
	William Duncalf was a native of Ireland, and had received a decent education. 
Ho was apprenticed to a miller, who would not keep him on account of his knavish 
disposition; and, being unable to procure employment in Ireland, he came to London, 
where he officiated as a porter on the quays.
	Extravagant in his expenses, and abandoned in principle, he commenced 
smuggler: but, being taken into custody by the custom-house officers, be gave 
information against some other smugglers; by which he procured his discharge, and 
was himself made a custom-house officer.
	A variety of complaints respecting the neglect of his duty having been 
preferred to the commissioners of the customs, he was dismissed, and once more 
commenced smuggler. Among his other offences, he alleged a crime against a 
custom-house officer, who was transported in consequence of Duncalf's perjured 
testimony.
	We have already recounted many of his notorious crimes, in conjunction with 
his accomplices above mentioned: but he did not live to suffer the punishment that he 
merited; for he had not been long in prison before the flesh rotted from his bones, and 
he died a dreadful monument of the Divine vengeance, though not before he had 
acknowledged the number and enormity of his crimes.
	Cooper frequently expressed himself in terms of regret that a villain so 
abandoned as Burrell should escape the hands of justice. In other respects his 
behaviour was very resigned, and becoming his unhappy situation. He acknowledged 
that he had frequently deliberated with Burrell on the intended murder of Duncalf, lest 
he should become an evidence against them: but he now professed his happiness that 
this murder had not been added to the black catalogue of his crimes.
	When brought to trial he pleaded guilty, and confessed all the circumstances of 
the murder; and, after sentence was passed against him, appeared to be a sincere 
penitent for the errors of his past life.
	Being visited by a clergyman and his son, who had known him in his better 
days, he was questioned respecting the robbery of Mrs. Pearson, which he denied; but 
he had no sooner done so than he was seized with the utmost remorse of mind, which 
the gaoler attributed to the dread of being hung in chains; and, questioning him on this 
subject, he said that he was indifferent about the disposal of his body, but wished to 
communicate something to the clergyman who attended him; and, when he had an 
opportunity, confessed that his uneasiness arose from the consciousness of having 
denied the robbery of Mrs. Pearson, of which he was really guilty.
	Cooper suffered on Kennington Common, August 26, 1750.
	Few offenders commit such a number of crimes as this man did before they 
are called to answer for them at the most awful tribunal. From his fate we may learn 
that a continuance in villainy is so far from affording security, that it effectually leads 
to ruin.
	Habits of vice are not easily shaken off; and those of virtue are equally apt to 
remain with us. What a lesson does this afford for the practice of early piety, which 
will essentially influence all our future lives!
	Parents should remember that an education strictly religious is the best 
foundation for their children's future conduct in life.
	What bless'd examples do we find 
Writ in the word of truth, 
Of children that began to mind 
Religion in their youth!
	On the contrary, how many instances do we meet with, in which the want of a 
religious education is productive of every vice!


JAMES MACLANE 
Called "The Gentleman Highwayman." Executed at Tyburn, 3rd of October, 
1750, for Highway Robbery

	THE subject of this memoir was descended from a reputable family in the 
north of Scotland. His father, after being liberally educated in the University of 
Glasgow, went to settle at Monaghan, in the north of Ireland, as preacher to a 
congregation of Dissenters. He married and had two sons, the elder of whom was bred 
to the Church, and preached many years to the English congregation at The Hague, 
and was equally remarkable for his learning and the goodness of his heart. The 
younger son was the unfortunate subject of this narrative.
	As a young man James was very extravagant, and after dissipating a fortune 
left by his father he came to London, and married the daughter of Mr Macglegno, a 
horse-dealer, with whom he received five hundred pounds, with which he commenced 
business as a grocer in Welbeck Street, Cavendish Square, and supported his family 
with some degree of credit till the expiration of three years, when his wife died, 
bequeathing two infant daughters to the care of her parents, who kindly undertook to 
provide for them; and both these children were living at the time of their father's 
ignominious death.
	Hitherto Maclane's character among his neighbours was unimpeached; but 
soon after the death of his wife he sold off his stock-in-trade and furniture and 
assumed the character of a fine gentleman, in the hope of engaging the attention of 
some lady of fortune, to which he thought himself entitled by the gracefulness of his 
person and the elegance of his appearance.
	At the end of about six months he had expended all his money, and became 
greatly dejected in mind from reflecting on that change of fortune that would probably 
reduce him to his former state of servitude. While in this state of dejection an Irish 
apothecary, named Plunkett, visited him and inquired into the cause of his 
despondency. Maclane acknowledged the exhausted state of his finances, candidly 
confessing that he had no money left, nor knew any way of raising a shilling but by 
the disposal of his wearing apparel; in answer to which Plunkett addressed him as 
follows:--
	"I thought that Maclane had spirit and resolution, with some knowledge of the 
world. A brave man cannot want; he has a right to live, and not want the conveniences 
of life while the dull, plodding, busy knaves carry cash in their pockets. We must 
draw upon them to supply our wants; there needs only impudence and getting the 
better of a few idle scruples; there is scarce any courage necessary. All whom we have 
to deal with are mere poltroons."
	These arguments, equally ill founded and ridiculous, co-operated so forcibly 
with the poverty of Maclane that he entered into conversation with Plunkett on the 
subject of going on the highway; and at length they entered into a solemn agreement 
to abide by each other in all adventures, and to share the profit of their depredations to 
the last shilling.
	The first robbery these men committed was on Hounslow Heath, where they 
stopped a grazier, on his return from Smithfield, and took from him about sixty 
pounds.
	This money being soon spent in extravagance, they were induced to take a ride 
on the St Albans Road, and seeing a stage-coach coming forward they agreed to ride 
up on the opposite sides of the carriage. Maclane's fears induced him to hesitate; and, 
when at length Plunkett ordered the driver to stop, it was with the utmost trepidation 
that the other demanded the money of the passengers.
	On their return to London at night Plunkett censured him as a coward, and told 
him that he was unfit for his business. This had such an effect on him that he soon 
afterwards went out alone, and unknown to Plunkett; and, having robbed a gentleman 
of a large sum, he returned and shared it with his companion.
	A short time only had elapsed after this expedition when he stopped and 
robbed the Honourable Horace Walpole, and his pistol accidentally went off during 
the attack. For some time he continued this irregular mode of life, during which he 
paid two guineas a week for his lodgings and lived in a style of elegance, which he 
accounted for by asserting that he had an estate in Ireland which produced seven 
hundred pounds a year.
	The speciousness of his behaviour, the gracefulness of his person and the 
elegance of his appearance combined to make him a welcome visitor, even at the 
houses of women of character; and he had so far ingratiated himself into the affections 
of a young lady that her ruin would probably have been the consequence of their 
connection but that a gentleman, casually hearing of this affair, and knowing Maclane 
to be a sharper, interposed his timely advice and saved her from destruction.
	On the 26th of June, 1750, Plunkett and Maclane, riding out together, met the 
Earl of Eglinton in a post-chaise, beyond Hounslow, when Maclane, advancing to the 
post-boy, commanded him to stop, but placed himself in a direct line before the 
driver, lest his lordship should shoot him with a blunderbuss, with which he always 
travelled, for he was certain that the peer would not fire so as to endanger the life of 
the post-boy. In the interim Plunkett forced a pistol through the glass at the back of 
the chaise, and threatened instant destruction unless his lordship threw away the 
blunderbuss.
	The danger of his situation rendered compliance necessary, and his lordship 
was robbed of his money and a surtout coat. After the carriage drove forward, 
Maclane took up the coat and blunderbuss, both of which were found in his lodgings 
when he was apprehended; but when he was afterwards tried for the offence which 
cost him his life, Lord Eglinton did not appear against him.
	Notice of their next robbery—of a stage-coach—was given in the newspapers, 
and the articles stolen were described; yet Maclane was so much off his guard that he 
stripped the lace from a waistcoat, the property of one of the gentlemen who had been 
robbed, and happened to carry it for sale to the laceman of whom it had been 
purchased. He also went to a salesman in Monmouth Street, named Loader, who 
attended him to his lodgings, but had no sooner seen what clothes he had to sell than 
he knew them to be those which had been advertised; and pretending enough to 
purchase them said he that he had not money would go home for more; instead of 
which he procured a constable, apprehended Maclane, and took him before a 
magistrate.
	Many persons of rank of both sexes attended his examination, several of 
whom were so affected with his situation that they contributed liberally towards his 
support.
	Being committed to the Gatehouse, he requested a second examination before 
the magistrate, when he confessed all that was alleged against him. At his trial the jury 
brought him in guilty without going out of court. A youth who had been condemned, 
but was afterwards ordered to be transported for life, chose to continue in the cell with 
Maclane; and, as they had opportunity, they went among the other prisoners who were 
ordered for execution, to instruct them, pray with them, and assist them in their 
preparation for death. But Maclane was greatly shocked at the insensibility and 
profaneness of some, and pitied the souls which were going into eternity in so 
hopeless a state.
	Arrived at Tyburn, he looked sadly up at the gallows, and with a heartfelt sigh 
exclaimed: "O Jesus!"


WILLIAM SMITH 
A Captain's Clerk in the Royal Navy, Forger of Seamen's Tickets; Executed 
at Tyburn, October 3, 1750.

	WHEN we hear of the commission of crimes by uneducated men, we are led 
to make some allowance for their ignorance, and the want of precept in their early 
years; but when men of liberal education descend to mean and vile practices, we are 
shocked at the debasement of human nature. Already has our duty too often depicted 
scholars expiating their sins at the gallows; and, here have, we to bring forward 
another instance of this unpleasant nature. Mr. Smith, like his countrymen Gahagan 
and Conner, received an excellent education, and, like them, used it for the basest 
purposes.
	The father of this unfortunate man (and this circumstance renders his crimes 
still more odious) was a pious clergyman, and rector of Kilmore in Ireland, who 
himself gave his graceless son a tolerable idea of the learned languages at home, sent 
him to Trinity College, Dublin, to finish his education, and then placed him with an 
attorney of eminence.
	His father dying before the expiration of his clerkship, he abandoned himself 
so much to his pleasures, that he was induced to commit a forgery on his master; in 
consequence of which he received a considerable sum: but, being afraid of detection, 
he resolved to quit his native country.
	Hereupon he entered as captain's clerk on board a man of war, and behaved 
with propriety till about the time that, the ship was paid off, when he took to the 
dangerous practice of forging seamen's tickets: for the captain employing him to make 
out tickets for the men, he made several of them payable to himself, and disposed of 
them for above a hundred pounds, and likewise secreted about a hundred pounds 
more, which were due for wages to the seamen, and stole a sum of money belonging 
to the surgeon's mate; with all which he decamped.
	Repairing to London, he took the name of Dawson, and served some time as 
clerk to an attorney; but his employer going into the country, and Smith knowing that 
he had capital connexions in Ireland, he forged a letter in his name, on a merchant in 
Dublin for 130l. and carrying it himself, received the sum demanded, partly in cash, 
and partly in bank-notes; on which he took his passage to England, and received the 
amount of the notes in London.
	His appearance in the capital now becoming very dangerous, he strolled about 
the country till he was almost reduced to poverty, when he again went to Ireland, 
where he forged an order for the payment of 174l. 19s. which he received, and 
brought to England, though a King's- bench. warrant was issued for his apprehension 
in Ireland, and he was likewise indicted in that country.
	Assuming a false name, he secreted himself more than half a year in England, 
when being reduced to poverty, he was met by a gentleman who knew him; who 
remarking on the meanness of his appearance, seemed surprised that, with his 
abilities, he should be destitute of the conveniences of life.
	Smith told a deplorable tale of poverty; said that he was in a bad state of 
health, and unable to visit his friends in his present situation; on which the gentleman 
clothed him decently, gave him money, and recommended him to a physician, whose 
skill restored him to health in a short time.
	Thus reinstated for the present in fortune and constitution, he no longer visited 
his benefactors, and was soon reduced to his former state of distress.
	His friend again meeting him in the usual wretched plight, asked him the 
occasion of it; on which he said, that, being indebted for lodging, he was obliged to 
sell his clothes; and that he did not call to thank the physician, because his appearance 
was so exceedingly abject.
	Hereupon his friend once more supplied him with clothes; on which he went to 
see the physician, who desired him to repose himself awhile, and conversed with him 
in the most social way. Smith arising as if to depart, presented a pistol to the doctor's 
face, and threatened his destruction if he did not instantly give him five guineas: but 
the other with great indifference, told him that he was an old man, not afraid of death; 
that he might act as he thought proper; but that if he perpetrated his design, the report 
of the pistol would be infallibly heard by his servants, and that the consequence would 
prove fatal to himself.
	Having said this, the gentleman refused to deliver the money demanded; on 
which Smith was so terrified, that he dropped on his knees, wept with apparent 
concern for his offence, and begged pardon with such appearance of sincerity, that the 
physician's humanity was excited, and he gave him three guineas, with his best advice 
for the reformation of his conduct.
	Not long after this, Smith casually meeting an acquaintance named Weeks, 
who stopped at a shop to receive 45l. for a bill of exchange, was paid only 10l. in part, 
being desired to call for the rest on a future day. Smith having witnessed what passed, 
forged Mr. Week's name to a receipt for the remaining 35l. which he received, and 
embarked for Holland before the villainy was discovered.
	The next offence this malefactor committed, or rather, intended to commit, 
afforded the immediate occasion of his being brought to justice. Going to the seat of 
Sir Edward Walpole, near Windsor, and demanding to see him, he told him he had a 
bond from Sir Edward to a person named Paterson, who being in distressed 
circumstances, he (Smith) was commissioned to deliver the bond on a trifling 
consideration: but Sir Edward, knowing that no such bond subsisted, seized the 
villain, and committed him to the care of his servants, who conducted him before a 
magistrate, by whom he was committed to prison at Reading.
	He was examined by different justices of the, peace on four successive days: 
but all that he confessed was, that he was born at Andover. This, however, could not 
be credited, as the tone of his voice testified that he was a native of Ireland; on which 
he was committed to the gaol at Reading, for farther examination.
	Smith's transactions having rendered him the subject of public conversation, a 
suspicion arose that he (though then unknown) was the party who had defrauded Mr. 
Weeks; on which notice of the affair was sent to London: and Mr. Weeks going to 
Reading, knew him to be the person who had forged the receipt in his name.
	Hereupon he was removed to Newgate, and the next sessions at the Old Bailey 
was capitally convicted; and though the jury recommended him to mercy, this could 
not be obtained, as his character was notorious, and there were five indictments 
against him.
	From the time of his commitment, he behaved in the most penitent manner, 
expressing the utmost compunction for the crimes of which he had been guilty, and 
preparing for death with every sign of unfeigned repentance; though, for some time, 
he reflected on the Honourable Edward Walpole, as the author of his destruction, by 
an interception of the royal Mercy; but being assured that Sir Edward had not 
interposed to injure him, he took the whole blame of his misfortunes on himself.
	He was so reduced in circumstances before the day of execution, and so utterly 
destitute of friends to procure him a decent interment, that he was induced to insert 
the following advertisement in the newspapers:
	"In vain has mercy been entreated; the vengeance of heaven has overtaken me; 
I bow myself unrepining to the fatal stroke. Thanks to my all-gracious Creator: thanks 
to my most merciful Saviour, I go to launch into the unfathomable gulph of eternity !
	"Oh! my poor soul! How strongly dost thou hope for the completion of eternal 
felicity! Almighty Jehovah, I am all resignation to thy blessed will. Immaculate Jesus! 
Oh send some ministering angel to conduct me to the bright regions of celestial 
happiness.
	"As to my corporeal frame, it is unworthy of material notice; but for the sake 
of that reputable family from whom I am descended, I cannot refrain from anxiety, 
when I think how easily this poor body, in my friendless and necessitous condition, 
may fall into the possession of the surgeons, and perpetuate my disgrace beyond the 
severity of the law. So great an impoverishment has my long confinement brought 
upon me, that I have not a shilling left for subsistence, much less for the procuring the 
decency of an interment.
	"Therefore, I do most fervently entreat the generosity of the humane and 
charitably compassionate, to afford me such a contribution as may be sufficient to 
protect my dead body from indecency, and to give me the consolation of being 
assured, that my poor ashes shall be decently deposited within the limits of 
consecrated ground.
	"The deprivation of life is a sufficient punishment for my crimes, even in the 
rigorous eye of offended justice; after death has permitted my remains to pass without 
further ignominy; then why should inhumanity lay her butchering hands on an 
inoffensive carcase? Ah! rather give me the satisfaction of thinking I shall return to 
my parent dust, within the confines of a grave.
	"Those who compassionate my deplorable situation, are desired to send their 
humane contributions to Mrs, Browning's, next door to the Golden Acorn, in Little 
Wild-street; and that Heaven may reward their charitable disposition, is the dying 
prayer of the lost and unhappy 
   "WILLIAM SMITH."
	When brought into the press-yard, and bound with a halter, he dropped upon 
his knees, and prayed very devoutly, and acknowledging his crimes, said, he died in 
charity with all mankind, and hoped for forgiveness at the great Tribunal; which, in 
the sublime lines of the poet, he thus addressed:
"Thee I will sing, Almighty Maker! thee, 
"Father of all! Whether the rising sun
"Sheds forth his golden beams: or, when at night 
"The moon unveils her orb; thou art my strength,  
"My life, my glory, and my sure defence,  
"My castle, my deliverance, my hope,
"My better hope, when dread affliction's hand  
"Wide wasting, me o'erwhelms."
	How melancholy the reflection that such abilities should have been thus 
prostituted! It would be strange if this address, so calculated to impress the feeling 
heart, had not produced the intended effect. Mrs. Browning advertised, that the 
subscriptions of the humane were sufficient to answer the proposed end.



AMY HUTCHINSON  
Executed at Ely, 7th of November, 1750, for Petit Treason, in the Murder of 
her Husband

THE Isle of Ely gave birth to this malefactor. At the age of sixteen she was grown a 
tall fine girl; at which time she was addressed by a young man, whose love she 
returned with equal affection. Her father, being apprised of the connection, strictly 
charged his daughter to decline it; but there was no arguing against love: the 
connection continued till it became criminal.
	The young fellow began to grow tired of her, and declared his resolution of 
going to London, but said that he would wed her on his return. Shocked at this 
apparent infidelity, she determined on revenge. The former lover had no sooner left 
her than she was addressed by a young man named John Hutchinson, and, though he 
had been always extremely disagreeable to her, she agreed to marry him the very next 
day after he had paid her a formal visit.
	The consequence was that the marriage took place immediately; but her 
admirer happening to return from London, just as the newly wedded pair were coming 
out of church, the bride was greatly affected at the recollection of former scenes, and 
the irrevocable ceremony which had now passed.
	She was unable to love the man she had married, and doted to distraction on 
him she had rejected; and only a few days after her marriage admitted him to his 
former intimacy with her: a circumstance that gave full scope to the envious tongues 
of her neighbours.
	Hutchinson becoming jealous of his wife, a quarrel ensued; in consequence of 
which he beat her with great severity; but this producing no alteration in her conduct 
he had recourse to drinking, with a view to avoid the pain of reflection on his 
situation.
	In the interim his wife and the young fellow continued their guilty intercourse 
uninterrupted; but, considering the life of her husband as a bar to their happiness, it 
was resolved to remove him by poison; for which purpose the wife purchased a 
quantity of arsenic; and Mr Hutchinson being afflicted with an ague, and wishing for 
something warm to drink, the wife put some arsenic in ale, of which he drank very 
plentifully; and then she left him, saying she would go and buy something for his 
dinner.
	Meeting her lover, she acquainted him with what had passed; on which he 
advised her to buy more poison, fearing the first might not be sufficient to operate; but 
its effects were fatal, for he died about dinner-time on the same day. The deceased 
was buried on the following Sunday, and the next day the former lover renewed his 
visits; which occasioned the neighbours to talk very freely of the affair. The young 
widow was taken into custody the same day, on suspicion of having committed a 
murder.
	The body of the deceased being now taken up, the coroner's jury was 
summoned, and the verdict they gave was that John Hutchinson had died by poison: 
on which the woman was committed to the jail at Ely.
	She had counsel to plead for her on the trial; but, the evidence against her 
being such as satisfied the jury, she was convicted, and ordered for execution.
	After conviction she confessed the justice of those laws by which she had been 
condemned. She was attended by a clergyman, to whom she acknowledged the 
magnitude of her crime, and professed the most unfeigned penitence.
	The miserable woman, willing to make atonement for her crimes, left a written 
paper with the clergyman who attended her in her last moments, on which was the 
following advice to her own sex:--
	"All the good I can now do, after my repentance and abhorrence of my 
abominable crime, and prayers to God, is:  
	"First: To warn all young women to acquaint their friends when any addresses 
are made to them; and, above all, if any base or immodest man dare to insult you, with 
anything shocking to chaste ears. 
	"Secondly: That they should never leave the person they are engaged to in a 
pet, nor wed another to whom they are indifferent, in spite; for if they come together 
without affection, the smallest matter will separate them. 
	"Thirdly: That being married, all persons should mutually love, forgive and 
forbear, and afford no room for busy meddlers to raise and foment jealousy between 
two who should be one.
(Signed) "AMY HUTCHINSON."
Note: see the next case (John Vicars) for a description of her execution.


JOHN VICARS  
Executed at Ely, 7th of November, 1750, for the Murder of his Wife, after 
first witnessing the Strangling of a Woman for murdering her Husband

	JOHN VICARS'S grandfather and father were born at Oxford, and lived in 
good credit, till misfortunes obliged them to go to Dodington, in the Isle of Ely. His 
father dying and leaving him young, and his mother taking a second husband, he had 
but a slight education. At thirteen he was apprenticed to Mr J. Aaron, of Holkham, 
Norfolk, gardener to Thomas Coke, Esq. (now Earl of Leicester), where he served his 
time faithfully, and was employed in the gardens, till an intrigue with a married 
woman obliged him to leave that place. Having a recommendation to Mr Bridgman, 
gardener at Kensington, he went and worked some time there, and then engaged 
himself to Captain Duroy, of the Exeter man-of-war, and served him about nine 
months. Being paid off, he assisted in a party of smugglers about a year, and being 
taken prisoner, with others, by a custom-house smack, near Rye, was committed to the 
New Jail, in Southwark, tried, and acquitted by the indulgence of the Court. He then 
was employed in the Earl of Oxford's gardens at Chelsea, under Mr Miller, where he 
stayed one year.
	Falling into company with one Anne Easom, he made love to her and married 
her. They lived seven years very happily, but had no children. About that time she 
began to be very much afflicted with illness, which altered her temper so much that it 
occasioned frequent uneasiness between them, and gave him such disgust that he 
enlisted in the Duke of Bedford's regiment as a six months' man, where he continued 
about a year, and then came to his wife again and lived with her till her death, which 
happened about twelve months after. He continued a widower about a year, in which 
time, observing one Mary Hainsworth to keep a great deal of company, he asked her 
one evening if they were all her sweethearts; she replied no. He then offered himself, 
met with great encouragement, and from that time he was refused no favours. But he 
had no intention of marriage, nor did he promise any such thing. They continued a 
criminal familiarity for a fortnight, all which time she pressed him to marry her. He 
told her there was no occasion for her to be in such a hurry; but she replied she was 
with child, and if he would not marry her she would get a warrant and force him. He 
said he should not care to be forced to do anything against his will; on which she 
replied, if he would not marry her she would certainly make away with herself. He 
then kept away for two or three nights, to see how she would behave. In the meantime 
came a hackney-coachman to town, with whom she seemed to be so very much taken 
that a woman who worked in Vicar's garden told him that he had lost his sweetheart. 
He said he was glad of that, thinking he had got a good riddance. But he was not so 
fortunate; for two or three nights after this the coachman left the place; on which she 
flung herself in his way and, he says, he was so simple as to renew their former 
acquaintance, but not on the score of marriage, which she well knew, and agreed 
readily to keep him company. But after two or three nights she threatened him again 
with a warrant if he would not marry her.
	At last, his affections growing stronger on her repeated assurance that she 
would make him a careful and industrious wife, he unfortunately married her; but not 
till he had earnestly desired that if there was any other person for whom she had a 
greater respect than himself she would consider of it, for when once married it would 
be too late. This unhappy woman had learned the glover's business, which she 
followed, and they lived very lovingly for about two months; but after that time, he 
says, words frequently arose between them, occasioned by her adhering to bad advice 
given her by her mother, and others, by some of whom, she owned to him, she was 
advised to poison him. From words they came to blows, to which she provoked him, 
though he entreated her to forbear. At length she went away from him to live with her 
mother, and notwithstanding the most earnest entreaties refused to return. One day, 
going by her mother's house with some fruit, and seeing his wife there, he went in, 
offered her some fruit, and forced a kiss from her, desiring to be reconciled. Her 
mother came in and, after giving loose to her tongue in a virulent manner, fell to 
beating him, swearing she would kill him, and advising his wife, who had a knife in 
her hand, to stab him, which she endeavoured to do; but he, feeling something against 
his belly, ran backwards to the door, and fell upon the threshold, with the old woman 
upon him. He rolled her off, and, getting up, found his thumb cut, a hole in his shirt, 
and the skin ruffled; then, thinking himself in great danger, went home. But his 
mother-in-law and his wife swore the peace against him, and had a warrant to take 
him up. Upon 24th of April, therefore, to prevent their serving it, he went to a 
gentleman's about three miles from Whittlesea, to beg his advice, which was to make 
a bill of sale of his goods and go off. He resolved to do so, and came back to 
Whittlesea about six o'clock the same evening. By the way, on seeing his wife in the 
new shop which her mother had provided for her, his heart beat with love for her, but 
on the thought of her obstinacy, and that his life or ruin was what they aimed at, by 
laying him in jail, his resentment got the better of his reason. Stepping into the shop 
where she was sitting at work, and placing his left hand under her chin (he 
apprehended she thought he was going to kiss her, because she seemed to smile) and 
drawing his knife out of his pocket with his other hand, he made an attempt to cut her 
throat, but was prevented by her putting her hands up when she felt the knife. He then 
placed the point of the knife under her left ear, the back part upwards, and stuck it 
downward as they stick sheep. She once cried: "Murder!" He said: "Molly, it is now 
too late, you should have been ruled in time." He then ran into the street and called 
out for somebody to take him prisoner, but everyone was afraid; on which he 
threatened if they did not he would do more mischief; on which one Thomas Boone 
took hold of his arm, and he surrendered himself; but appeared as a lunatic till next 
day, when he was very calm.
	This account was signed by himself, and it being reported that he had 
committed more murders, he further desired it might be explained as follows.
	While he was gardener to R. Man, Esq., the garden was often robbed, on 
which his master set him to watch one night, armed with a gun and a hanger, and 
fixed a trap at the supposed place of entrance. The thief came, and soon saw reason to 
run off; but Vicars cut him in the leg with his hanger; besides which he was so 
unfortunate as to be taken in the trap, the teeth of which, reaching about the middle of 
his body, struck into him, so that, being carried before a justice and committed to 
Maidstone jail, he soon after died of his wounds; "but this I apprehend," says he, 
"cannot be deemed a murder."
	While in prison he said that he dearly loved his wife, but her provocation was 
so great that he could not let her live, nor live without her, he first intending to kill 
himself also. He persisted in it that he should do the same again on such provocation, 
though he injured many in the same way without reluctance.
	Vicars at the tree behaved very steadily, but penitent, praying with the minister 
and singing Psalm VI. A woman named Amy Hutchinson, who had been convicted 
for the murder of her husband, was present to be strangled and burnt for her crime, 
and Vicars expressed a desire to see her dispatched first.
	Accordingly, her face and hands being smeared with tar, and having a garment 
daubed with pitch, after a short prayer the executioner strangled her, and twenty 
minutes after the fire was kindled, and burned half-an-hour. He went then to Vicars, 
who very undauntedly helped him to fix the knot, and immediately threw himself off, 
and expired in a few minutes.


JOHN CARR  
The Victim of Swindlers himself, he became a Pirate and Smuggler, and was 
executed at Tyburn, 16th of November, 1750, for Forgery

	JOHN CARR was a native of the north of Ireland. His parents were 
respectable, and his education was genteel. At sixteen years of age he was sent to 
reside with a kinsman in Dublin. When he grew to years of maturity his kinsman put 
him into business as a wine and brandy merchant, and he seemed to be on the road to 
success; but his friend dying, he attached himself to bad company, neglected his 
business, lost his customers and was soon greatly reduced in his circumstances.
	A man of fortune who was one of his abandoned associates invited Carr to 
pass part of the summer at his seat in the country, and setting out together they 
stopped at Kilkenny, where some passengers quitted a coach; among whom was a 
young lady, whose elegant person and appearance impressed Carr with an idea that 
she was of rank, and inspired him with the first sentiments of love that he ever felt.
	Throwing himself from his horse, he handed her into the inn; and a proposal 
being made that the company should sup together it was agreed to on all hands; and 
while the supper was preparing, Carr applied himself to the coachman, to learn the 
history of the young lady; but all the information he could obtain was that he had 
taken her up at Dublin, and that she was going to the Spa at Mallow.
	Carr, being anxious to become better acquainted with the lady, prevailed on 
the company to repose themselves the next day at Kilkenny, and take a view of the 
Duke of Ormond's seat, and the curiosities of the town. This proposal being acceded 
to, the evening was spent in the utmost harmony and good humour; and the fair 
stranger, even then, conceived an idea of making a conquest of Mr Carr, from whose 
appearance she judged that he was a man of distinction.
	In the morning she dressed herself to great advantage, not forgetting the 
ornament of jewels, which she wore in abundance; so that when she entered the room, 
Carr was astonished at her appearance. She found the influence she had over him, and 
resolved to afford him an early opportunity of speaking his sentiments; and while the 
company was walking in the gallery of the Duke of Ormond's palace this opportunity 
offered.
	The lady affected displeasure at this explicit declaration, but soon assuming a 
more affable deportment she told him she was an Englishwoman of rank; that his 
person was not disagreeable to her, and that if he was a man of fortune, and the 
consent of her relations could be obtained, she should not be averse to listening to his 
addresses. She further said that she was going to spend part of the summer at Mallow, 
where his company would be agreeable.
	He followed her to that place, contrary to the advice of his friend, who had 
formed a very unfavourable opinion of the lady's character.
	Here he dissipated so much cash in company with this woman that he was 
compelled to borrow of his friend, who remonstrated on the impropriety of the 
connection: but Carr still kept her company, and at the end of the season returned with 
her to Dublin.
	Here the lovers agreed to sail for England, and Carr sold some small estates, 
and, borrowing all the money he possibly could, delivered the whole to his mistress.
	Preparations were now made for the voyage, and Carr employed himself in 
procuring a passage to England; but in his absence the lady shipped all the effects on 
board a vessel bound for Amsterdam; and, having dressed herself in man's apparel, 
she embarked and sailed, leaving Carr to regret his ill-judged credulity.
	On his return home, discovering how he had been robbed, he was at first half-
distracted with his loss; but, on cooler reflection, he thought it would be in vain to 
pursue the thief; on which he sold the few trifles that remained of his property, which 
produced about a hundred pounds, and came to London, and soon spent the whole in 
debauchery and extravagance.
	Thus reduced, he enlisted as a foot soldier, and served some years before he 
was discharged; after which he entered as a marine at Plymouth, whence he came to 
London, and opened a shop in Hog Lane, St Giles's. He now married a girl who he 
thought had money, but soon discovering her poverty he abandoned her, and removed 
to Short's Gardens, where he entered into partnership with a cork-cutter.
	Having soon ingratiated himself into the esteem of the customers, he opened a 
shop on his own account, and soon got all the business from his late partner. This, 
however, proved of no service to him, for, getting into bad company, he frequented 
the gaming-tables and became the dupe of sharpers.
	These villains, determined to possess themselves of all his money, offered to 
procure him a wife of fortune, though they knew he had a wife living, and actually 
contrived to introduce him to a young lady of property; and a marriage would 
probably have taken place but that one of them, struck with remorse of conscience, 
developed the affair to her father and frustrated the whole scheme; and soon 
afterwards Carr's companions quitted him, having reduced him to the last shilling.
	Having been entrusted by a gentleman with a draft on the bank for sixty 
pounds, he received the money and spent it all in the lowest scenes of debauchery, and 
again entered as a marine.
	There being something in his deportment superior to the vulgar, he was 
advanced to the rank of sergeant, in which he behaved so well that his officers treated 
him with singular regard.
	The vessel in which he sailed taking a merchant ship richly laden, and soon 
afterwards several smaller vessels, the prize-money amounted to a considerable sum; 
which gave Carr an idea that very great advantages might be obtained by privateering. 
Thereupon he procured a discharge, and entering on board a privateer was made 
master-at-arms.
	In a few days the privateer took two French ships, one of which they carried to 
Bristol and the other into the harbour of Poole. Having refitted their ship they sailed 
again, and in two days took a French privateer, and gave chase to three others which 
they found to be English vessels belonging to Falmouth, which had been made prize 
of by a French privateer. These they retook, and carried them into Falmouth, in their 
passage to which place they made prize of a valuable French ship, the amount of 
which contributed to enrich the crew.
	On their next trip they saw a ship in full chase of them, on which they 
prepared for a vigorous defence, and indeed it was necessary, for the vessels fought 
above forty minutes -- yardarm and yardarm. Many hands were lost by the French, 
who at length attempted to sheer off, but were taken after a chase of some leagues.
	The commander of the English privateer, being desperately wounded in the 
engagement, died in a few days; on which Carr courted his widow, and a marriage 
would have taken place, but she was seized with a violent fever which deprived her of 
life, but not before she had bequeathed him all she was possessed of.
	Having disposed of her effects, he repaired to London, where he commenced 
as smuggler; but on his ill-gotten effects being seized on by the officers of the revenue 
he took to the more dangerous practice of forging seamen's wills, and gained money 
for some time. But, being apprehended, he was brought to trial at the Old Bailey, 
convicted and sentenced to die. He was hanged at Tyburn, on the 16th of November, 
1750.


GEORGE ANDERSON ALIAS JOHN EVERETT  
Who picked Pockets at Newgate, became a Highwayman, and was executed 
for stealing Ribbons, 31st December, 1750

	JOHN EVERETT was a native of Hertford, in which town he served his 
apprenticeship to a baker. The young men in the neighbourhood declined associating 
with him, and held him in universal abhorrence, so ungracious were his manners and 
so strong was his propensity to wickedness.
	Upon the expiration of his apprenticeship he connected himself with a gang of 
notorious gamblers and other dissolute wretches, in conjunction with whom he 
perpetrated a great number of villainies, but for several years escaped the vengeance 
of the law.
	By persuasions and the promise of a sum of money Everett and a man named 
Wright induced a young woman to make a charge of felony against two innocent men, 
who were put on their trial, but happily acquitted, as the perjured evidence was not 
able to authenticate her accusation. In revenge for their failing to supply the girl with 
the money they had promised she lodged an information against Everett and Wright, 
who were in consequence indicted for subornation of perjury, and sentenced to stand 
in the pillory at the end of Chancery Lane, where they received very severe treatment 
from the populace.
	Soon after the above punishment had been inflicted Everett was tried at 
Hicks's Hall, and sentenced again to stand in the pillory, for having fraudulently 
obtained a thirty-six-shilling piece. He was afterwards convicted of having circulated 
counterfeit Portugal coin, and ordered to be imprisoned for two years in Newgate.
	Soon after Everett's trial a company of gentlemen went to Newgate to visit a 
criminal, and in a short time they discovered that they had been robbed of their 
handkerchiefs. The circumstance being mentioned to Everett, he pretended to be much 
surprised, and intimated that there was but little probability of the property being 
recovered. However in a little time he produced the handkerchiefs, and received some 
money from the gentlemen as a reward for his supposed honesty.
	While he remained in Newgate he picked the pockets of almost every person 
who came to visit the prisoners. He was continually uttering the most reprobate 
speeches, and seemed to delight in the practice of every species of wickedness. Upon 
the expiration of the time he was sentenced to remain in prison he found sureties for 
his good behaviour for two years, and was discharged.
	Having stopped a young gentleman in Fleet Street, he was asked if a robbery 
was intended, upon which he knocked the gentleman down; but a large dog belonging 
to the injured party immediately seized the villain, who, with great difficulty, 
disengaged himself just in time to escape being secured by the watch.
	Everett and a woman of the town went to a small inn at Hoddesdon, in 
Hertfordshire, which was kept by an old widow, and being invited into a room behind 
the bar, after having each drunk a glass of wine, the widow and her female guest went 
to walk in the garden. In the meantime Everett broke open a bureau and stole sixty 
pounds in cash and several gold rings. They kept the widow in conversation till the 
time of going to bed, in order to divert her from going to the bureau, and the next 
morning decamped with their booty. They took the road to Nottingham, whence they 
crossed the country to Newmarket, and then returned to London.
	Everett's numerous villainies had rendered his name so notorious that he was 
fearful of being apprehended, and therefore he went under the name of George 
Anderson, and lived in a very private manner till the money he had obtained was 
expended.
	He now procured a knife eighteen inches long, and determined to levy 
contributions on passengers on the highway. On the road between Kentish Town and 
Hampstead he attempted to rob a countryman; but he being of an intrepid temper a 
desperate contest ensued, in which Everett proved the conqueror, and dangerously 
wounded his antagonist, from whom he, however, obtained but a small booty.
	At length he was detected in stealing a quantity of ribbons in a shop in 
London, and was apprehended, but not without making a vigorous resistance, in doing 
which he dangerously wounded the shopkeeper in the face and hands with a knife.
	For this crime he was tried at the Old Bailey, convicted, and received sentence 
of death. The night after the warrant for his execution arrived he laid a plan to escape. 
He was furnished with implements for this purpose, and for sawing off his fetters, by 
his wife and his kept mistress, who, on this occasion, agreed. Being discovered, the 
former was sent to one of the compters, and his concubine to the other. On this he 
behaved so insolently and outrageously that it was necessary to chain him to the floor 
of his cell, where he remained, blaspheming and threatening vengeance to the keeper 
and turnkeys, until he was brought out for execution.


WILLIAM RILEY  
A young Soldier, whose Zeal for Sport led to a Murder, for which he was 
executed at Tyburn in 1750

	WILLIAM RILEY served the greater part of his apprenticeship to a 
watchmaker at Liverpool, but on his master dying he turned his mind to the sea, and 
sailed one voyage, which it appears was sufficient to induce him to quit the watery 
element for the service of the land; and to this end he enlisted into the second 
regiment of Foot Guards.
	Walking matches, now lately revived, were in great vogue. Considerable bets 
were depending on a man walking three hundred miles in six days -- a feat little 
inferior to Captain Barclay's thousand miles in as many successive hours. This wager 
was determined in Tothill Fields, Westminster, in favour of the pedestrian.
	Riley, also a great walker, was so much interested in the man's success that he 
undertook to clear the way; but on the last day the crowd became so great that he, in 
his anxiety, struck several who did not fall back, and among the rest one Sutton, who 
returned the blow, whereupon a scuffle ensued, and Riley, being thrown down by the 
mob, drew his sword and stabbed him, of which wound he died, and Riley was found 
guilty of wilful murder.
	After sentence of death he was very penitent, and expressed his deep contrition 
for taking away the life of a fellow-creature. He was executed, along with George 
Robins, George Anderson and Thomas Reynolds, when only nineteen years of age.


THOMAS REYNOLDS 
Executed at Tyburn, for enlisting soldiers for the service of the 
king of France.

	THIS traitor was a Roman Catholic, born and educated in Ireland. He was an 
excellent scholar, being master of the Latin and French languages. When a young 
man, he went over to France, where he enlisted as a Hussar, wearing false whiskers, 
his beard not yet being grown. On the rebel expedition being fitted out there to invade 
Scotland, he served an officer, in the capacity of valet, and who was killed at the 
battle of Culloden. After this he was taken at Carlisle, and from speaking French so 
very fluently, he was exchanged as a Frenchman.
	Being a man of genteel address, he ingratiated himself so far into the good 
opinion of a rich widow, near Carlisle, as to persuade her to marry him.
	He soon left the widow, taking away from her all he could lay his hands upon 
and returned to France, where he got an appointment in the retinue of the ambassador 
from that country to the court of St. James's.
	Having now some money, he determined on taking a public-house, his master 
having attended King George on his then visit to Hanover, and left him behind. He 
then sent for his wife, to attend the bar, while he put in effect a plan which he long 
had in contemplation, of seducing our soldiers, and enlisting them for the service of 
France; and in this treasonable practice he was too long successful. The insinuations 
which Reynolds used, to tempt the soldiers from their loyalty, was to represent the 
severe punishments in the English army and the lenity of that of the French -- that he 
had power to enlist for Lord Ogilvie's regiment, one of the finest in the French army; 
where they would be treated like gentlemen. He gave them abundance of spirituous 
liquors and sent prostitutes to keep them company, until he found an opportunity of 
shipping them. He also, contrived, at different times, to send to France English arms 
and ammunition, which were supposed to be for the purpose of another invasion and 
rebellion in Scotland. His public-house was in St. Giles's, and frequented by lewd 
women, and men of abandoned morals. Regarding the once splendid widow, in her 
present employ of waiting upon such vagabonds;

"O what a falling off was there"
	Several soldiers of the guards frequented Reynolds's house, and having 
already sent off some to France, he began to practise his deceit upon one Carnes, a 
private soldier in the foot-guards. He persuaded him to take money for this service, 
and shewed him fourteen or fifteen suits of regimentals, belonging to soldiers whom 
he had already sent to France. He desired him to cut off his hair, wear a smock frock, 
and to avoid the large towns, or pass through in the night, on his road to Dover. As a 
guard over him, he sent one of the prostitutes, many of whom he had at his command, 
who was to see him shipped, and give him money. Thus he meant to evade the proof 
of his having enlisted him.
	Arrived at Dover, Carnes went to the castle, and disclosed the treason to the 
Fort Major. The woman, finding this, fled back to London. The Fort Major detained 
Carnes, and sent information to the War Office. Reynolds, before he could be 
apprized of this, was seized, his house searched, and different regimental clothing 
found concealed. He was convicted of the treason, on the clearest evidence, and 
sentenced to be hanged.
	He protested his innocence to the very last moment of his life; and declared 
that he went to be hanged with as much satisfaction as though again going to be 
married.


NORMAN ROSS 
A footman, executed at Edinburgh, January 8, 1751, for murdering his 
mistress

	This treacherous servant was descended from reputable parents at Inverness, in 
the north of Scotland, who gave him a good education, and intended that he should be 
brought up in a merchant's counting-house; but before he had completed his fifteenth 
year, his father and mother died, leaving Norman and several other children wholly 
unprovided for.
	Norman made application for employment to several merchants; but though he 
was well qualified for business, his proposals were rejected, because he could not 
raise the sum usually given upon entering into a merchant's service as an articled 
clerk.
	Thus situated, he engaged himself as a footman to a widow lady of fortune, 
who on account of having been acquainted with his parent, behaved to him with 
singular kindness. The lady had a son, who was then a military officer in Flanders; 
and the campaign there being concluded, the young gentleman returned to his native 
country, to visit his mother, and transact some business particularly relating to 
himself.
	Observing Ross to possess many qualifications not usual to persons in his 
situation, he proposed taking him abroad in the capacity of valet-de-chambre; and the 
old lady acquiesced in her son's desire.
	Ross continued in the officer's service for the space of about five years; during 
which period he behaved with the utmost diligence and fidelity. The regiment being 
broke, on the conclusion of the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle, the officer set out on the 
tour of France and Italy, and Ross returned to Scotland for the benefit of his native air.
	Soon after his return to Scotland, he recovered his health, and set out in order 
to pay his respects to his former mistress; but learning that she had been dead about 
three weeks, he repaired to Edinburgh, where he was hired as a footman by an 
attorney-at-law. Having contracted an intimacy with a number of livery servants, he 
was seduced by their example to the practices of swearing, gaming, drinking, and 
other vices; and he was dismissed from his service on account of his impudence and 
the irregularity of his conduct. Ross now became footman to Mrs. Hume, a widow 
lady of great fortune and remarkable piety. In the winter she resided at Edinburgh, and 
in the summer at a village called Ayton, about four miles from the town of Berwick-
upon-Tweed. About four months after he had been hired by Mrs. Hume, the lady 
removed to her house at Ayton; and some time after, a female servant in the family, 
with whom he had maintained a criminal intercourse, was brought to bed; and it 
therefore became necessary for him to supply her with money for the support of 
herself and the infant.
	He continued to provide her with the means of subsistence, from the month of 
April till August, by borrowing money of his fellow-servants and other persons with 
whom he was acquainted.
	The woman at length becoming exceedingly importunate, and his resources 
being wholly exhausted, he was driven nearly to a state of distraction, and in that 
disposition of mind formed the fatal resolution of robbing his mistress.
	Mrs. Hume slept on the first floor, in an apartment behind the dining-room, 
and being unapprehensive of danger, her bedchamber door was seldom locked; and 
with this circumstance Ross was well-acquainted, as well as that she usually put the 
keys of her bureau (and the other places where her valuable effects were deposited) 
under her pillow.
	He determined to carry his execrable design into execution on a Sunday night; 
and waiting in his bed-room, without undressing himself, till he judged the family to 
be asleep, he descended, and leaving his shoes in the passage, proceeded to his lady's 
bed-chamber. Endeavouring to get possession of the keys, the lady was disturbed, and 
being dreadfully alarmed, called for assistance; but the rest of the family lying at a 
distant part of the bouse, her screams were not heard. Ross immediately seized a 
clasp-knife that lay on the table, and cut his mistress's throat in a most dreadful 
manner. This horrid act was no sooner perpetrated, than, without waiting to put on his 
shoes, or to secure either money or other effects, he leaped out of the window, and 
after travelling several miles, concealed himself in a field of corn.
	In the morning, the gardener discovered a livery hat, which the murderer had 
dropped in descending from the window; and suspecting that something extraordinary 
had happened, he alarmed his fellow-servants.
	The disturbance in the house brought the two daughters of Mrs. Hume 
downstairs; but no words can express the horror and consternation of the young 
ladies, upon beholding their indulgent parent weltering in her blood, and the fatal 
instrument of death lying on the floor.
	Ross being absent, and his shoes and hat being found, it was concluded that he 
must have committed the barbarous deed; and the butler therefore mounted a horse, 
and alarmed the country, lest the murderous villain should escape. The butler was 
soon joined by great numbers of horsemen, and on the conclusion of the day, when 
both men and horses were nearly exhausted through excessive fatigue, the murderer 
was discovered in a field of standing corn. His hands being tied behind him, he was 
taken to an adjacent public-house, and on the following morning he was conducted 
before a magistrate of Edinburgh, who committed him to prison.
	On the trial of this offender, he had the effrontery to de clare, that his mistress 
usually admitted him to her bed, and that it was his constant practice to leave his 
shoes at the dining-room door. He said, that upon entering the chamber, he perceived 
the lady murdered, and leaped through the window in order to discover who had 
perpetrated the barbarous deed; adding, that having lost his hat, he did not chuse to 
return till evening, and therefore concealed himself among the corn. He was severely 
reprimanded by the court, for aggravating his guilt by aspersing the character of a 
woman of remarkable virtue and piety, whom he had cruelly deprived of life.
	The law of Scotland bears an affinity to that of the Romans. It invests the 
judges with power to punish criminals in such manner as they may deem to be 
proportioned to their offences. This privilege was exercised in the case of Ross, whose 
crime having been attended with many aggravating circumstances, he was sentenced 
to have his right hand chopped off, then to be hanged till dead, the body to be hung in 
chains, and the right hand to be affixed at the top of the gibbet with the knife made 
use of in the commission of the murder.
	Upon receiving sentence of death, he began seriously to reflect on his 
miserable situation, and the next day requested the attendance of Mr James Craig, one 
of the ministers of Edinburgh, to whom he confessed his guilt; declaring that there 
was no foundation for his reflections against the chastity of the deceased.
	Six weeks elapsed between the time of his trial and that of his execution, 
during which he was visited once every day by Mr Craig. He shewed every sign of the 
most sincere penitence, and refused to accompany two prisoners who broke out of 
gaol, saying he had no desire to recover his liberty, but on the contrary would 
cheerfully submit to the utmost severity of punishment, that he might make some 
atonement for his wickedness.
	The day appointed for putting the sentence of the law into force being arrived, 
Ross walked to the place of execution, holding Mr Craig by the arm. Having 
addressed a pathetic speech to the populace, and prayed some time with great 
fervency of devotion, the rope was put round his neck, and the other end of it being 
thrown over the gallows, it was taken hold of by four chimney-sweepers, who are 
obliged to assist the executioner whenever they are required. The criminal now laid 
his right hand upon a block, and it was struck off by the executioner at two blows; 
immediately after which the chimney-sweepers, by pulling the rope, raised him from 
the ground; when he felt the rope drawing tight, by a convulsive motion, he struck the 
bloody wrist against his cheek, which gave him an appearance too ghastly to admit of 
description. The body was bound in chains, and hung upon a gibbet, the hand being 
placed over the head with the knife stuck through it.


RICHARD BUTLER 
Executed at Tyburn, February 10, 1751, for forgery.

	How great the disappointment, and how melancholy the reflection, when men 
who have passed the probation of truth with credit, sink into idleness and gaming, 
from thence to thieving, and ending a life well begun, at the gallows!
	Of this description of miserable beings was Richard. Butler. He was born at 
Turlus (sic), in the county of Tipperary, Ireland. His father was a reputable farmer, 
who bound him apprentice to a baker, in Waterford. He proved so faithful and diligent 
a servant, that he was held in universal esteem; and, upon the expiration of his 
apprenticeship, his father gave him a hundred pounds, for the purpose of establishing 
him in business.
	The above sum enabled him to open a shop in Waterford, where he had a 
favourable prospect of success: but, instead of attending to his business, he frequented 
horse-races, cock-fighting, and other gaming meetings, and engaged in a variety of 
expenses greatly beyond what his income could afford; the consequence of which 
was, that in about six months his affairs were in a most embarrassed situation.
	Being unable to continue his business, he returned to Turlus, where he formed 
a great number of infamous stratagems for extorting money from his relations; and 
they threatened, that unless he quitted that part of the country, they would cause him 
to be apprehended, and proceed against him with the utmost rigour of the law.
	Butler applied to a clergyman at Turlus, representing his case in a plausible 
manner, and supplicating that he would use his interest with his father to prevail upon 
him to grant twenty pounds in addition to his former favours. The worthy divine 
pleaded in behalf of the young man, and with the desired success. Upon delivering the 
money, the reverend gentleman exhorted him to apply it to proper use; which he 
promised to do, adding that he would immediately depart for Cork, and not return to 
the place of his nativity till, by an unremitting perseverance in a system of integrity, 
he had made atonement for all the errors of his past conduct.
	On his arrival at Cork, he procured employment as a journeyman; and in that 
capacity he was so industrious and strictly economical, that in a short time he made 
such addition to his stock, that he was able to open a shop on his own account. He was 
much encouraged, and his circumstances were supposed to be more flourishing than 
they were in reality.
	Coming into possession of a handsome sum of money, by marrying the widow 
of a customhouse officer, who lived in the neighbourhood, Butler took a tavern of 
considerable business, where his circumstances would have been much improved, but 
for his connexions with maritime people, to whom he gave unlimited credit, and was 
under the necessity of taking smuggled goods in payment or losing his money.
	An information being lodged against him for having smuggled goods in his 
possession, his effects were seized for the use of the crown, and he was under the 
necessity of quitting Ireland. Butler and his wife took shipping for Plymouth, and in 
that town they hired a house, which they let in lodgings to seafaring people. In about 
three years he was obliged to quit Plymouth, and repaired to the metropolis in a most 
distressed condition.
	He had not been long in London, before the grief consequent on the various 
scenes of distress he had passed through, produced the death of his wife.
	Butler now being in very distressed circumstances, he communicated his case 
to some of his countrymen; and he yielded to their persuasions for acquiring a 
livelihood by forging seamen's wills.
	Butler, Horne, and a woman named Catherine Gannon, went to the Navy-
office: to inquire what wages were due to Thomas Williamson, a foremast man 
belonging to the Namur, and learnt that the sum was about eight and thirty pounds. 
They then made application to a proctor, the woman producing a forged will, and 
declaring herself to be the widow of Williamson. They were desired to call the next 
day, when a probate would be granted.
	Butler and his female accomplice attended according to the appointment; but 
the proctor having, in the mean time searched the offices, found that the will in 
question was opposed by four caveats; and having further reason to suspect an 
intended fraud, he caused them to be apprehended. Being taken before the lord-mayor, 
Gannon acknowledged that she had received a few shillings from Butler and Horne, 
who had promised to make the sum up to five pounds; on condition of her swearing 
herself to be the widow of Thomas Williamson. Butler was committed to Newgate; 
and Gannon and Horne were admitted evidences for the crown.
	At the ensuing sessions at the Old. Bailey, Butler was tried, and sentenced to 
die. While under sentence of death he regularly attended prayers, in the chapel and 
employed a great part of his time in private devotions, agreeably to the doctrines of 
the protestant faith. At the place of execution he prayed with great fervency of zeal, 
acknowledged the justice of his sentence, and after addressing the populace, was 
turned off.


WILLIAM PARSONS, ESQ. 
Eldest Son of a Baronet, who became a Swindler and Highway Robber, and 
was executed for returning from Transportation, 11th of February, 1751

  
Parsons imploring his father's forgiveness

	The unhappy subject of this narrative was born in London, in the year 1717, 
the eldest son and heir to Sir William Parsons, Bart. of the county of Nottingham. He 
was placed under the care of a pious and learned divine at Pepper-harrow, in Surrey, 
where he received the first rudiments of education. In a little more than three years, he 
was removed to Eton college, where it was intended that he should qualify himself for 
one of the universities.
	While he was a scholar at Eton, he was detected in stealing a volume of Pope's 
Homer in the shop of a bookseller named Pate. Being charged with the fact, he 
confessed that he had stolen many other books at different times. The case being 
represented to the master, Parsons underwent very severe discipline.
	Though he remained at Eton nine years, his progress in learning was very 
inconsiderable. The youth was of so unpromising a disposition, that Sir William 
determined to send him to sea, as the most probable means to prevent his destruction, 
and soon procured him the appointment of midshipman on board a man of war, then 
lying at Spithead, under sailing orders for Jamaica, there to be stationed for three 
years.
	Some accident detained the ship beyond the time when it was expected she 
would sail. Parsons applied for leave of absence, and went on shore; but having no 
intention to return, he immediately directed his course towards a small town about ten 
miles from Portsmouth, called Bishop's Waltham, where he soon ingratiated himself 
into the favour of the principal inhabitants.
	His figure being pleasing, and his manner of address easy and polite, he found 
but little difficulty in recommending himself to the ladies.
	He became greatly enamoured of a beautiful and accomplished young lady, 
the daughter of a physician of considerable practice, and prevailed upon her to 
promise she would yield her hand in marriage.
	News of the intended marriage coming to the knowledge of his father sir 
William, and his uncle, the latter hastened to Waltham to prevent a union which he 
apprehended would inevitably produce the ruin of the contracting parties.
	With much difficulty the uncle prevailed upon Parsons to return to the ship, 
which in a few days afterwards proceeded on her voyage.
	The ship had not been long arrived at the place of destination, when Parsons 
resolved to desert, and return to England, and soon found an opportunity of shipping 
himself on board the Sheerness man of war, then preparing to sail on her return home.
	Immediately after his arrival in England, he set out for Waltham, in order to 
visit the object of his desires; but his uncle being apprised of his motions, repaired to 
the same place, and represented his character in so unfavourable, but at the same time 
in so just a manner, that he prevented the renewal of his addresses to the physician's 
daughter.
	He went home with his uncle, who observed his conduct with a most 
scrupulous attention, and confined him, as much as possible, within doors. This 
generous relation at length exerted his interest to get the youth appointed midshipman 
on board his majesty's ship the Romney, which was under orders for the 
Newfoundland station.
	Upon his return from Newfoundland, Parsons learnt, with infinite 
mortification, that the duchess of Northumberland, to whom he was related, had 
revoked a will made in his favour, and bequeathed to his sister a very considerable 
legacy, which he had expected to enjoy. He was repulsed by his friends and 
acquaintance, who would not in the least countenance his visits at their houses; and 
his circumstances now became exceedingly distressed.
	Thus situated he applied to a gentleman named Bailey, with whom he had 
formerly lived on terms of intimacy; and his humanity induced him to invite Parsons 
to reside in his house, and to furnish him with the means of supporting the character 
of a gentleman. Mr Bailey also was indefatigable in his endeavours to effect a 
reconciliation between young Parsons and his father, in which he at length succeeded.
	Sir William having prevailed upon his son to go abroad again, and procured 
him an appointment under the governor of James Fort, on the river Gambia, he 
embarked on board a vessel in the service of the Royal African company.
	Parsons had resided at James Fort about six months, when a disagreement took 
place between him and governor Aufleur; in consequence of which the former 
signified a resolution of returning to England. Hereupon the governor informed him 
that he was commissioned to engage him as an indented ser vant for five years. 
Parsons warmly expostulated with the governor, declaring that his behaviour was 
neither that of a man of probity or a gentleman, and requested permission to return. 
But so far from complying, the governor issued orders to the sentinels to be 
particularly careful lest he should effect an escape.
	Notwithstanding every precaution, Parsons found means to get on board a 
homeward-bound vessel, and being followed by Mr Aufleur, he was commanded to 
return, but cocking a pistol, and presenting it to the governor, he declared he would 
fire upon any man who should presume to molest him. Here upon the governor 
departed, and in a short time the ship sailed for England.
	Soon after his arrival in his native country, he received an invitation to visit an 
uncle who lived at Epsom, which he gladly accepted, and experienced a most cordial 
and friendly reception.
	He resided with his uncle about three months, and was treated with all 
imaginable kindness and respect. At length one of the female servants in the family 
swore herself to be pregnant by him, which so incensed the old gentleman, that he 
dismissed Parsons from his house.
	Reduced to the most deplorable state of poverty, he directed his course 
towards the metropolis; and three half-pence being his whole stock of money, he 
subsisted four days upon the bread purchased with that small sum, quenching his 
thirst at the pumps he casually met with in the streets. He lay four nights in a hay-loft 
in Chancery-lane, belonging to the master of the rolls, by permission of the coachman, 
who pitied his truly deplorable case.
	At length he determined to apply for redress to an ancient gentlewoman with 
whom he had been acquainted in his more youthful days, when she was in the 
capacity of companion to the duchess of Northumberland. Weak and emaciated 
through want of food, his appearance was rendered still more miserable by the 
uncleanliness and disorder of his apparel; and when he appeared before the old lady, 
she tenderly compassionated his unfortunate situation, and recommended him to a 
decent family in Cambridge Street, with whom be resided some time in a very 
comfortable manner, the old gentlewoman defraying the charge of his lodging and 
board; and a humane gentleman, to whom she had communicated his case, supplying 
him with money for common expenses.
	Sir William came to town at the beginning of the winter, and received an 
unexpected visit from his son, who dropped upon his knees, and supplicated 
forgiveness with the utmost humility and respect. His mother-in-law was greatly 
enraged at his appearance, and upbraided her husband with being foolishly indulgent 
to so graceless a youth, at the same time declaring, that she would not live in the 
house where he was permitted to enter.
	Sir William asked him what mode of life he meant to adopt? and his answer 
was, that he was unable to determine; but would cheerfully pursue such measures as 
so indulgent a parent should think proper to recommend. The old gentleman then 
advised him to enter as a private man in the horse-guards; which he approved of, 
saying, he would immediately offer himself as a volunteer.
	Upon mentioning his intention to the adjutant, he was in formed that he must 
pay seventy guineas for his admission into the corps. This news proved exceedingly 
afflicting, as he had but little hope that his father would advance the necessary sum. 
Upon returning to his father's lodgings, he learnt that he had set out for the country, 
and left him a present of only five shillings.
	Driven now nearly to a state of distraction, he formed the desperate resolution 
of putting an end to his life, and repaired to St. James's Park, intending to throw 
himself into Rosamond's pond. While he stood on the brink of the water, waiting for 
an opportunity of carrying his impious design into effect, it occurred to him, that a 
letter he had received, mentioning the death of an aunt, and that she had bequeathed a 
legacy to his brother, might be made use of to his own advantage; and he immediately 
declined the thoughts of destroying himself.
	He produced the letter to several persons, assuring them that the writer had 
been misinformed respecting the legacy, which in reality was left to himself; and 
under the pretext of being entitled to it, he obtained money and effects from different 
people to a considerable amount. Among those who were deceived by this stratagem 
was a tailor in Devereux court in the Strand, who gave him credit for several genteel 
suits of clothes.
	The money and other articles thus fraudulently obtained, enabled him to 
engage in scenes of gaiety and dissipation; and he seemed to entertain no idea that his 
happiness would be but of short duration.
	Accidentally meeting the brother of the young lady to whom he had made 
professions of love at Waltham, he intended to renew his acquaintance with him, and 
his addresses to his sister; but the young gentleman informed Parsons that his sister 
died suddenly a short time after his departure from Waltham.
	Parsons endeavoured, as much as possible, to cultivate the friendship of the 
above young gentleman, and represented his case in so plausible a manner, as to 
obtain money from him, at different times, to a considerable amount.
	Parsons' creditors now became exceedingly importunate, and he thought there 
was no probability of relieving himself from his difficulties, but by connecting 
himself in marriage with a woman of fortune.
	Being eminently qualified in those accomplishments which are known to have 
a great influence over the female world, Parsons soon ingratiated himself into the 
esteem of a young lady possessed of a handsome independency bequeathed her by her 
lately deceased father. He informed his creditors that he had a prospect of an 
advantageous marriage; and as they were satisfied that the lady had a good fortune, 
they supplied him with every thing necessary for prosecuting the amour, being 
persuaded that, if the expected union took place, they should have no difficulty in 
recovering theirS respective demands.
	The marriage was solemnized on the 10th of February, 1740, in the 23d year 
of his age. On this event, the uncle, who lived at Epsom, visited him in London, and 
gave him the strongest assurances that he would exert every possible endeavour to 
promote his interest and happiness, on condition that be would avoid such 
proceedings as would render him unworthy of friendship and protection. His relations 
in general were perfectly satisfied with the connexion he had made, and hoped that his 
irregular and volatile disposition would be corrected by the prudent conduct of his 
bride, who was justly esteemed a young lady of great sweetness of temper, virtue, and 
discretion.
	A few weeks after his marriage, his uncle interceded in his behalf with the 
right honourable Arthur Onslow; and through the interest of that gentleman he was 
appointed an ensign in the thirty-fourth regiment of foot.
	He now discharged all his debts, which proved highly satisfactory to all his 
relations; and this conduct was the means of his obtaining further credit in times of 
future distress.
	He hired a very handsome house in Poland Street, where he resided two years, 
in which time he had two children, one of whom died very young. From Poland 
Street, he removed to Panton-square, and the utmost harmony substituted between 
him and his wife, who were much respected by their relations and acquaintances.
	But it must be observed, that though his conduct in other respects had been 
irreproachable from the time of his mar riage, be was guilty of unpardonable 
indiscretion as to his manner of living; for he kept three saddle-horses, a chaise and 
pair, several unnecessary servants, and engaged in many other superfluous expences 
that his income could not afford.
	Unfortunately Parsons became acquainted with an infamous gambler, who 
seduced him to frequent gaming-houses, and to engage in play. He lost considerable 
sums, which were shared between the pretended friend of Parsons, and his wicked 
accomplices.
	Parsons was now promoted to a lieutenancy in a regiment that was ordered 
into Flanders, and was accompanied to that country by the abandoned gamester, 
whom he considered as his most valuable friend. The money he lost in gaming, and 
the extravagant manner in which he lived, in a short time involved him in such 
difficulties that he was under the necessity of selling his commission, in order to 
discharge his debts contracted in Flanders. The commission being sold, Parsons and 
his treacherous companion returned to England.
	His arrival was no sooner known, than his creditors were extremely urgent for 
the immediate discharge of their respective claims; which induced him to take a 
private lodging in Gough-square, where he passed under the denomination of captain 
Brown. He pretended to be an unmarried man; and saw his wife only when 
appointments were made to meet at a public-house. While he lodged in Gough-square, 
he seduced his landlord's daughter, who became pregnant by him; and her imprudence 
in yielding to the persuasions of Parsons, proved the means of involving her in 
extreme distress.
	His creditors having discovered the place of his retreat, he deemed it prudent 
to remove; and at this juncture an opportunity offered by which he hoped to retrieve 
his fortune; and he therefore embarked as captain of marines on board the Dursley 
privateer.
	Soon after the arrival of the ship at Deal, Parsons went on shore, provided with 
pistols, being determined not to submit to an arrest, which he supposed would be 
attempted. He had no sooner landed on the beach, than he was approached by five or 
six men, one of whom attempted to seize him; but Parsons, stepping aside, discharged 
one of the pistols, and lodged a ball in the man's thigh. He then said, he was well 
provided with weapons, and would fire upon them if they presumed to give him 
further molestation. Hereupon the officers retreated; and Parsons returned to the ship, 
which sailed from Deal the following morning.
	They bad been in the channel about a week, when they made prize of a French 
privateer, which they carried into the port of Cork. Parsons being now afflicted with a 
disorder that prevailed among the French prisoners, was sent on shore for the recovery 
of his health. During his illness, the vessel sailed on another cruise, and he was no 
sooner in a condition to permit him to leave his apartment, than he became anxious to 
partake of the fashionable amusements.
	In order to recruit his finances, which were nearly exhausted, he drew bills of 
exchange on three merchants in London, on which he raised 60L.; and before advice 
could be transmitted to Cork, that he had no effects in the hands of the persons on 
whom he had drawn the bills, he embarked on board a vessel bound for England.
	He landed at Plymouth, where he resided some time under a military 
character, to support his claim to which he was provided with a counterfeit 
commission. He frequented all places of public resort, and particularly where gaming 
was permitted. His money being nearly expended, he obtained a hundred pounds from 
a merchant of Plymouth, by means of a false draft upon an alderman of London. Some 
time after the discovery of the fraud, the injured party saw Parsons a transport 
prisoner on board a ship bound to Virginia, lying in Catwater bay, where he assured 
him of an entire forgiveness, and made him a present of a guinea.
	From Plymouth, Parsons repaired to London, and his money being nearly 
spent, he committed the following fraud, in conjunction with a woman of the town: 
taking his accomplice to a tavern in the Strand (where he was known), he represented 
her as an heiress, who had consented to a private marriage and requested the landlord 
to send immediately for a clergyman. The parson being arrived, and about to begin the 
ceremony, Parsons pretending to recollect that he had forgotten to provide a ring, and 
ordered the waiter to tell some shop-keeper to the neighbourhood to bring some plain 
gold rings. Upon this the clergyman begged to recommend a very worthy man, who 
kept a jeweller's shop in the neighbourhood: and Parsons said it was a matter of 
indifference with whom he laid out his money; adding, that as he wished to 
compliment his bride with some small present, the tradesman might also bring some 
diamond rings.
	The rings being brought, and one of each chosen, Parsons produced a 
counterfeit draft, saying, the jeweller might either give him change then, or call for 
payment after the ceremony; on which the jeweller retired, saying, he would attend 
again in the afternoon. In a little time, the woman formed a pretence for leaving the 
room, and upon her not returning soon, our hero affected great impatience, and, 
without taking his hat, quitted the apartment, saying, he would enquire for the people 
of the house whether his bride had not been detained by some unforeseen accident.
	After waiting a considerable time, the clergyman called the landlord; and as 
neither Parsons nor the woman could be found, it was rightly concluded, that their 
whole intention was to perpetrate a fraud. In the mean time, our hero and his 
accomplice met at an appointed place, and divided their booty.
	In the year 1745, he counterfeited a draft upon one of the collectors of the 
excise, in the name of the duke of Cumberland, for five hundred pounds. He carried 
the draft to the collector, who paid him fifty pounds in part, being all the cash that 
remained in his hands.
	He went to a tailor, saying, he meant to employ him, on the recommendation 
of a gentleman of the army, whom he had long supplied with clothes; adding, that a 
captain's commission was preparing for him at the war-office. The tailor furnished 
him with several suits of clothes; but not being paid according to agreement, he 
entertained some suspicion as to the responsibility of his new customer; and therefore 
enquired at the war-office respecting captain Brown, and learnt that a commission was 
making out for a gentleman of that name. Unable to get any part of the money due to 
him, and determined to be no longer trifled with, he instituted a suit at common-law, 
but was non-suited, having laid his action in the fictitious name of Brown, and it 
appearing that Parsons was the defendant's real name.
	Parsons sent a porter from the Ram Inn, in Smithfield, with a counterfeit draft 
upon Sir Joseph Hankey and Co. for five hundred pounds. Parsons followed the man, 
imagining that if he came out of Sir Joseph's house alone, he would have received the 
money; and that if he was accompanied by any person, it would be a strong proof of 
the forgery being dis covered; and as he observed sir Joseph and the porter get into a 
hackney-coach, he resolved not to return to the inn.
	He next went to a widow named Bottomley, who lived near St. George's 
church, and saying that he had contracted to supply the regiment to which he belonged 
with hats, gave her an order to the amount of a hundred and sixty pounds. He had no 
sooner got possession of the hats, than he sold them to a Jew for one half of the sum 
he had agreed to pay for them.
	Being strongly apprehensive that he could not long avoid being arrested by 
some of his numerous and highly exasperated creditors, by means of counterfeit 
letters, he procured himself to be taken into custody, as a person disaffected to the 
king and government; and was supported without expense, in the house of one of the 
king's messengers, for the space of eighteen months.
	Being released from the messenger's house, he resolved in his mind a variety 
of schemes for eluding the importunity of his creditors and at length determined to 
embark for Holland. He remained in Holland a few months, and when his money was 
nearly expended he returned to England. A few days after his arrival in London, he 
went to a masquerade, where he engaged in play to the hazard of every shilling he 
possessed, and was so fortunate as to obtain a sufficient sum for his maintenance for 
several months.
	His circumstances being again distressed, he wrote in pressing terms to his 
brother-in-law, who was an East-India director, intreating that he would procure him a 
commission in the company's service, either by land or sea. The purport of the answer 
was, that a gentleman in the Temple was authorised to give the supplicant a guinea, 
but that it would be fruitless for him to expect any further favours.
	Having written a counterfeit draft, he went to Ranelagh on a masquerade 
night, where he passed it to a gentleman who had won some small sums of him. The 
party who received the draft offered it for payment in a day or two afterwards, when it 
was proved to be a counterfeit; in consequence of which Parsons was apprehended, 
and committed to Wood Street compter.
	As no prosecutor appeared, Parsons was necessarily acquitted; but a detainer 
being lodged, charging him with an offence similar to the above, he was removed to 
Maidstone gaol, in order for trial at the Lent assizes at Rochester.
	Mr Carey, the keeper of the prison, treated Parsons with great humanity, 
allowing him to board in his family, and indulging him in every privilege that he 
could grant, without a manifest breach of the duties of his office. But such was the 
ingratitude of Parsons, that he formed a plan, which, had it taken effect, would have 
utterly ruined the man to whom he was indebted in such great obligations. His 
intention was, privately to take the keys from Mr Carey's apartment; and not only to 
escape himself, but even to give liberty to every prisoner in the gaol: and this scheme 
he communicated to a man accused of being a smuggler, who reported the matter to 
Mr Carey, desiring him to listen at an appointed hour at night, when he would hear a 
conversation that would prove his intelligence to be authentic. Mr Carey attended at 
the appointed time, and being convinced of the ingratitude and perfidy of Parsons, he 
abridged him of the indulgences he had before enjoyed, and caused him to be closely 
confined.
	Being convicted at the assizes at Rochester, he was sentenced to transportation 
for seven years; and in the following September be was put on board the Thames, 
captain Dobbins, bound for Maryland, in company with upwards of one hundred and 
seventy other convicts, fifty of whom died in the voyage. In November, 1749, Parsons 
was landed at Annapolis, in Maryland; and having remained in a state of slavery about 
seven weeks, a gentleman of considerable property and in fluence, who was not 
wholly unacquainted with his family, compassionating his unfortunate situation, 
obtained his freedom, and received him at his house in a most kind and hospitable 
manner.
	Parsons had not been in the gentleman's family many days before he rode off 
with a horse which was lent him by his benefactor, and proceeded towards Virginia; 
on the borders of which country he stopped a gentleman on horseback, and robbed 
him of five pistoles, a moidore, and ten dollars.
	A few days after, he stopped a lady and gentleman in a chaise, attended by a 
negro servant, and robbed them of eleven guineas and some silver: after which he 
directed his course to the Potomack river, where finding a ship nearly ready to sail for 
England, he embarked, and after a passage of twenty-five days landed at Whitehaven.
	He now produced a forged letter, in the name of one of his relations, to a 
capital merchant of Whitehaven, signifying that he was entitled to the family estate, in 
consequence of his father's decease, and prevailed upon him to discount a false draft 
upon a banker in London for seventy-five pounds.
	Upon his arrival in the metropolis, he hired a handsome lodging at the west 
end of the town; but he almost constantly resided in houses of ill fame, where the 
money he had so un justly obtained was soon dissipated.
	Having hired a horse, he rode to Hounslow-heath, where, between ten and 
eleven o'clock at night, he stopped a postchaise, in whicb were two gentlemen, whom 
he robbed of five guineas, some silver, and a watch.
	A short time afterwards he stopped a gentleman near Turnham-green, about 
twelve o'clock at night, and robbed him of thirty shillings, and a gold ring. He 
requested that the ring might be returned, as it was his wife's wedding ring. Parsons 
compiled with the gentleman's request, and voluntarily returned the gentleman five 
shillings, telling him, at the same time, that nothing but the most pressing necessity 
could have urged him to the robbery: after which the gentleman shook hands with the 
robber, assuring him that, on account of the civility of his behaviour, he would not 
appear to prosecute, if he should hear of his being apprehended.
	Returning to his lodgings near Hyde-park-corner one evening, he overtook a 
footman in Piccadilly, and joining company with him, a familiar conversation took 
place, in the course of which Parsons learnt that the other was to set out early on the 
following Sunday with a portmanteau, containing cash and notes to a considerable 
value, the property of his master, who was then at Windsor.
	On the Sunday morning he rode towards Windsor, intending to rob the 
footman. Soon after he had passed Turnham-green, he overtook two gentlemen, one 
of whom was Mr Fuller, who had prosecuted him at Rochester, and who perfectly 
recollecting his person, warned him not to approach. He however paid no attention to 
what Mr Fuller said, but still continued sometimes behind and sometimes before 
them, though at a very inconsiderable distance.
	Upon coming into the town of Hounslow, the gentlemen alighted, and 
commanded Parsons to surrender, adding that if he did not instantly comply, they 
would alarm the town. He now dismounted, and earnestly entreated that the 
gentlemen would permit him to speak to them in private which they consented to; and 
the parties being introduced to a room at an inn, Parsons surrendered his pistols, 
which were loaded and primed, and supplicated for mercy in the most pathetic terms.
	In all probability he would have been permitted to escape,had not Mr Day, 
landlord of the Rose and Crown at Houns low, come into the room, and advised that 
be might be detained as he conceived him very nearly to answer the description of a 
highwayman by whom the roads in that part of the country had been long infested. He 
was secured at the inn till the next day, and then examined by a magistrate, who 
committed him to Newgate.
	Parsons was now arraigned for returning from transportation before the 
expiration of the term of his sentence: nothing therefore was necessary to convict him 
but the identifying of his person. This being done, he received sentence of death. His 
distressed father and wife used all their interest to obtain a pardon for him, but in vain: 
he was an old offender, and judged by no means a fit object for mercy.
	While Parsons remained in Newgate, his behaviour was such that it could not 
be determined whether be entertained a proper idea of his dreadful situation. There is 
indeed but too much reason to fear that the hopes of a reprieve (in which he deceived 
himself even to the last moments of his life) induced him to neglect the necessary 
preparation for eternity.
	His taking leave of his wife afforded a scene extremely affecting: he 
recommended to her parental protection his only child, and regretted that his 
misconduct had put it in the power of a censorious world to reflect upon both the 
mother and son.
	He suffered at Tyburn, on the 11th of February, 1751. At the place of execution 
he joined in the devotional exercises with a zeal that proved him to be convinced of 
the necessity of obtaining the pardon of his creator.
	In tracing the depraved and melancholy course of this ill-fated man, the 
humane reader cannot but be struck with the apparent hollow-heartedness and apathy 
of his father. It is, no doubt, difficult to tell the precise degree of provocation Sir 
William had received; but we see that young Parsons was befriended, long after his 
natural protector had abandoned him, by an uncle, and several other more distant 
connexions; and it should be recollected that, if the child owes affection and patient 
forbearance towards its parent, the latter is no less bound to exercise similar duties 
towards the being whom he has been instrumental in bringing into the world. Nothing 
but the most hopeless and resolute depravity (if even that) should extinguish a father's 
tenderness; and it certainly does not appear to us that the wretched subject of the 
preceding narrative had reached that point at the period of his utter desertion by the 
baronet. If, at their last recorded interview, instead of advising his penitent son to 
enter the horse-guards as a private (for which purpose, too, he left him altogether 
unprovided), Sir William Parsons had extended to him the feelings of real kindness 
and reconciliation, it is possible that his own name might have been saved from 
ignominy, and the youthful prodigal (who was then at an age, perhaps, the most 
susceptible of moral improvement) restored to his family, to himself, and to his God.


JOHN CAULFIELD 
Murder foretold by a Dream, in consequence of which the Murderer was 
apprehended, convicted, and executed at Waterford in 1751
	ONE Adam Rogers, a creditable man, who kept a public-house at Portlaw, a 
small village nine or ten miles from Waterford, in Ireland, dreamed one night that he 
saw two men at a particular green spot on an adjacent mountain; one of them a sickly-
looking man, the other remarkably strong and large. He then fancied that he saw the 
little man murder the other, and he awoke in great agitation. The circumstances of the 
dream were so distinct and forcible that he continued much affected by them. He 
related them to his wife and also to several neighbours next morning.
	After some time he went out coursing with greyhounds, accompanied, 
amongst others, by one Mr Browne, the Roman Catholic priest of the parish. He soon 
stopped at the above-mentioned particular green spot on the mountain, and, calling to 
Mr Browne, pointed it out to him, and told him what had appeared in his dream. 
During the remainder of the day he thought little more about it. Next morning he was 
extremely startled at seeing two strangers enter his house about eleven o'clock in the 
forenoon. He immediately ran into an inner room, and desired his wife to take 
particular notice, for they were precisely the two men whom he had seen in his dream.
	When they had consulted with one another, their apprehensions were alarmed 
for the little weakly man, though contrary to the appearance in the dream. After the 
strangers had taken some refreshment and were about to depart, in order to prosecute 
their journey, Rogers earnestly endeavoured to dissuade the little man from quitting 
his house and going on with his fellow-traveller. He assured him that if he would 
remain with him that day he would accompany him to Carrick next morning, that 
being the town to which the travellers were proceeding. He was unwilling and 
ashamed to tell the cause of his being so solicitous to separate him from his 
companion. But as he observed that Hickey, which was the name of the little man, 
seemed to be quiet and gentle in his deportment, and had money about him, and that 
the other had a ferocious bad countenance, the dream still recurred to him. He dreaded 
that something fatal would happen, and he wished, at all events, to keep them asunder. 
However, the humane precautions of Rogers proved ineffectual; for John Caulfield -- 
the other's name -- prevailed upon Hickey to continue with him on their way to 
Carrick, declaring that, as they had long travelled together, they should not part, but 
remain together until he should see Hickey safely arrive at the habitation of his 
friends. The wife of Rogers was much dissatisfied when she found they were gone, 
and blamed her husband exceedingly for not being absolutely peremptory in detaining 
Hickey.
	About an hour after they left Portlaw, in a lonely part of the mountain, just 
near the place observed by Rogers in his dream, Caulfield took the opportunity of 
murdering his companion. It appeared afterwards, from his own account of the horrid 
transaction, that as they were getting over a ditch he struck Hickey on the back part of 
his head with a stone, and when he fell down into the trench, in consequence of the 
blow, Caulfield gave him several stabs with a knife, and cut his throat so deeply that 
the head was almost severed from the body. He then rifled Hickey's pockets of all the 
money in them, took part of his clothes, and everything else of value about him, and 
afterwards proceeded on his way to Carrick. He had not been long gone when the 
body, still warm, was discovered by some labourers who were returning to their work 
from dinner.
	The report of the murder soon reached Portlaw. Rogers and his wife went to 
the place, and instantly knew the body of him whom they had in vain endeavoured to 
dissuade from going on with his treacherous companion. They at once spoke out their 
suspicions that the murder was perpetrated by the fellow-traveller of the deceased. An 
immediate search was made, and Caulfield was apprehended at Waterford the second 
day after. He was brought to trial at the ensuing assizes and convicted of the fact. It 
appeared on the trial, amongst other circumstances, that when he arrived at Carrick he 
hired a horse and a boy to conduct him, not by the usual road, but by that which runs 
on the north side of the River Suir, to Waterford, intending to take his passage in the 
first ship from thence to Newfoundland. The boy took notice of some blood on his 
shirt, and Caulfield gave him half-a-crown to promise not to speak of it. Rogers 
proved not only that Hickey was seen last in company with Caulfield, but that a pair 
of new shoes which Hickey wore had been found on the feet of Caulfield when he 
was apprehended; and that a pair of old shoes which he had on at Rogers's house were 
upon Hickey's feet when the body was found. He described with great exactness every 
article of their clothes. Caulfield, on cross-examination, shrewdly asked him from the 
dock whether it was not very extraordinary that he, who kept a public-house, should 
take such particular notice of the dress of a stranger accidentally calling there. Rogers, 
in his answer, said he had a very particular reason, but was ashamed to mention it. 
The Court and prisoner insisting on his declaring it, he gave a circumstantial narrative 
of his dream, called upon Mr Browne, the priest, who was then in the court, to 
corroborate his testimony, and said that his wife had severely reproached him for 
permitting Hickey to leave their house when he knew that in the short footway to 
Carrick they must necessarily pass by the green spot in the mountain which had 
appeared in his dream. A number of witnesses came forward; and the proofs were so 
strong that the jury, without hesitation, found the panel guilty. It was remarked as a 
singularity that he happened to be tried and sentenced by his namesake, Sir George 
Caulfield, at that time Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, which office he 
resigned in the summer of the year 1760.
	After sentence Caulfield confessed the fact. It came out that Hickey had been 
in the West Indies two-and-twenty years, but falling into a bad state of health he was 
returning to his native country, Ireland, bringing with him some money his industry 
had acquired. The vessel on board which he took his passage was, by stress of 
weather, driven into Minch Head. He there met with Frederick Caulfield, an Irish 
sailor, who was poor, and much distressed for clothes and common necessaries. 
Hickey, compassionating his poverty, and finding he was his countryman, relieved his 
wants, and an intimacy commenced between them. They agreed to go to Ireland 
together. And it was remarked that on their passage Caulfield spoke contemptuously, 
and often said it was a pity such a puny fellow as Hickey should have money and he 
himself be without a shilling. They landed at Waterford, at which place they stayed 
some days, Caulfield being all the time supported by Hickey, who bought there some 
clothes for him.
	Caulfield walked to the gallows with a firm step and undaunted countenance, 
being executed at Waterford in 1751.


THOMAS COLLEY 
Executed 24th of April, 1751, for the Murder of People who were reputed to 
be possessed of Witchcraft

  
Colley ducking a suspected witch

	ON the 18th of April, 1751, a man named Nichols went to William Dell, the 
crier of Hemel Hempstead, in Hertfordshire, and delivered to him a piece of paper, 
with fourpence, to cry the words which were written on the paper, a copy of which is 
as follows:--
	"This is to give notice that on Monday next a man and a woman are to be 
publicly ducked at Tring, in this county, for their wicked crimes."
	This notice was given at Winslow and Leighton Buzzard, as well as at Hemel 
Hempstead, on the respective market-days, and was heard by Mr Barton, overseer of 
the parish of Tring, who, being informed that the persons intended to be ducked were 
John Osborne and Ruth, his wife, and having no doubt of the good character of both 
the parties, sent them to the workhouse as a protection from the rage of the mob.
	On the day appointed for the practice of the infernal ceremony an immense 
number of people, supposed to be not fewer than five thousand, assembled near the 
workhouse at Tring, vowing revenge against Osborne and his wife, as a wizard and 
witch, and demanding that they should be delivered up to their fury: they likewise 
pulled down a wall belonging to the workhouse, and broke the windows and their 
frames.
	On the preceding evening the master of the workhouse, suspecting some 
violence, from what he had heard of the disposition of the people, sent Osborne and 
his wife to the vestry-room belonging to the church, as a place the most likely to 
secure them from insult.
	The mob would not give credit to the master of the workhouse that the parties 
were removed, but rushing into the house searched it through, examining the closets, 
boxes, trunks, and even the salt-box, in search of them. There being a hole in the 
ceiling which appeared to have been left by the plasterers, Colley, who was one of the 
most active of the gang, cried out: "Let us search the ceiling." This being done by 
Charles Young, with as little success as before, they swore they would pull down the 
house and set fire to the whole town of Tring unless Osborne and his wife were 
produced.
	The master of the workhouse, apprehensive that they would carry their threats 
into execution, informed them where the poor people were concealed; on which the 
whole mob, with Colley at their head, went to the church and brought them off in 
triumph.
	This being done, the mob conducted them to a pond called Marlston Mere, 
where the man and woman were separately tied up in a cloth; then a rope was bound 
round the body of the woman, under her armpits, and two men dragged her into the 
pond and through it several times, Colley going into the pond and, with a stick, 
turning her from side to side.
	Having ducked her repeatedly in this manner, they placed her by the side of 
the pond and dragged the old man in and ducked him; then he was put by, and the 
woman ducked again as before, Colley making the same use of his stick. With this 
cruelty the husband was treated twice over and the wife three times, during the last of 
which the cloth in which she was wrapped came off and she appeared quite naked.
	Not satisfied with this barbarity, Colley pushed his stick against her breast. 
The poor woman attempted to lay hold of it, but, her strength being now exhausted, 
she expired on the spot. Then Colley went round the pond collecting money of the 
populace for the sport he had shown them in ducking the old witch, as he called her.
	Colley was taken into custody, and when his trial came on, there being a 
variety of strong proofs of the prisoner's guilt, he was convicted, and received 
sentence of death.
	The day before his execution he was removed from the jail of Hertford, under 
the escort of one hundred men of the Oxford Blues, commanded by seven officers, 
and being lodged in the jail of St Albans was put in a chaise at five o'clock the next 
morning, with the hangman, and reached the place of execution about eleven, where 
his wife and daughter came to take leave of him; and the minister of Tring assisted 
him in his last moments, when he died exhibiting all the marks of unfeigned 
penitence.
	His body was hung in chains at a place called Gubblecut, near where the 
offence was committed.
	Still more surprising it is to find that the dangerous absurdity of the belief in 
witchcraft was manifested in England in the beginning of the more enlightened 
nineteenth century. Two ignorant and deluded people, H. Ibbelson and his wife, were 
committed to Wakefield House of Correction for violently assaulting and wounding 
E. Berry, their niece, who had been lately married.
	These ignorant people, having conceived the idea that the young woman had 
bewitched them, formed a plan to draw blood from her, in order to dispel the charm; 
and meeting with her in the market-place they both suddenly assailed her, the woman 
biting and scratching her, while the husband stabbed her in the body.


THOMAS QUIN, JOSEPH DOWDELL, AND THOMAS 
TALBOT 
A Gang of Notorious Thieves, executed at Tyburn, June 17, 
1751, for robbery.

"At length these miserable robbers see, 
Unhappy fruit, suspended on the tree; 
They teach, sad lesson! in their wretched state, 
That shame and ruin are the villain's fate;  
And that too late each guilty man will find,  
Justice, though sometimes slow, is never blind."
	THE villains disclosed in this narrative, will shew the necessity of the act of 
parliament for inflicting punishment on masters and mistresses giving a false 
character. of a servant.
	A corrupt servant is the most dangerous inmate of a house; and therefore too 
much caution cannot be used in admitting such domestics.
	Quin, a murderer in his own country, Ireland, was recommended to London as 
a youth of good morals; while his disposition was base to a great degree.
	Dowdell, who in his apprenticeship had injured his first master, procured a 
recommendation to another, to whom he also proved a villain.
	Talbot, the third of this dangerous gang, after having robbed on the highway; 
and being afraid of apprehension; applied to be restored to honest servitude, and was 
refused; but his master, in pity to his distresses, recommended, him to a nobleman.
	Talbot, on the first opportunity, robbing his noble employer, we would ask 
whether the late master, knowing the servant to have been a thief, was not, in 
recommending him to an honest employ, virtually, the greater villain of the two? In 
fine, they were all from early youth, delinquents; and each had been imposed on 
honest people by those who knew them to be such. No wonder, then, that they will be 
found thereof the greatest rascals in this calendar of crimes.
	Quin was a native of Dublin, the son of honest, but poor parents; and his father 
dying while he was a child, his uncle put him to school, and afterwards placed him 
apprentice to a buckle-maker, with whom be served three years faithfully; but his 
friends supplying him with clothes too genteel for his rank in life, he began to 
associate with gay company, and was guilty of many irregularities.
	These thoughtless youths were frequently concerned in riots, and Quin was 
considered as the head of the party. In one of these nocturnal insurrections, Quin 
murdered a man, whose friends, watching him to his master's house, desired that he 
might be delivered up to justice; but some of the journeymen sallying forth with 
offensive weapons, drove off the people; on which a warrant was issued for 
apprehending the murderer, when his master advised him to depart for England.
	A subscription for his use being raised by his friends, he came to London, 
having recommendations to some gentlemen in that city; but of these he made no use, 
for, frequenting the purlieus of St. Giles's, he spent his money among the lowest of his 
countrymen, and then entered on board a man of war.
	After a service of six months, he quitted the ship at Leghorn, and sailed in 
another vessel to Jamaica, where he received his wages, which he soon spent. He now 
agreed to work his passage to England, and the ship arriving in the port of London, he 
took lodgings in St. Giles's, and soon afterwards became acquainted with Dowdell and 
Talbot, of whom we are now to give an account.
	Dowdell was the son of a bookbinder in Dublin, who being in low 
circumstances was unable to educate his children as he could have wished. His son 
Joseph, who was remarkable for the badness of his disposition, he 'prenticed to a 
breeches-maker, but the graceless youth grew weary of his place before he had served 
two years of his time.
	Dowdell being ordered by his master to take proper care of some green 
leather, particularly to defend it from the snow; instead thereof, he heaped such 
quantities of snow and ice on it, that it was greatly reduced in value. This 
circumstance so exasperated his master, that he was glad to get rid of him by 
delivering up his indentures of apprenticeship.
	Thus at large, and the father ill able to support him, he was recommended to 
the service of a gentleman in the country, with whom he might have lived happily: but 
he behaved badly in his place, and running away to Dublin, commenced pickpocket.
	After some practice in this way, he became connected with a gang of 
housebreakers, in company with whom he committed several depredations in Dublin. 
Having broke open a gentleman's house, he was opposed by the servants, and effected 
his escape only by the use he made of a hanger; soon after which he was taken by the 
watchmen, and being carried before a magistrate, he was committed to prison till the 
next morning, His person was advertised, and he was brought to trial, but none of the 
servants being able to swear to him, he was acquitted for want of evidence.
	He now renewed his dangerous practices, and committed a variety of 
robberies. The following is one of the most singular of his exploits. Going to the 
house of a farmer, near Dublin, he pretended to be a citizen who wanted a lodging, for 
the benefit of his health, and he would pay a liberal price.
	The unsuspecting farmer put his lodger into the best chamber, and supplied his 
table in the most ample manner. After a residence of ten days, he asked the farmer's 
company to the town of Finglass, where he wanted to purchase some necessaries. The 
farmer attending him; Dowdell purchased some articles at different shops, till seeing a 
quantity of gold in a till, he formed a resolution of appropriating it to his own use.
Having returned home with the farmer, Dowdell pretended to recollect that he had 
omitted to purchase some medicines, which he must take that night, and which had 
occasioned his going to Finglass. Hereupon the farmer ordered a horse to be saddled, 
and Dowdell set forwards, on a promise to return before night. On his arrival at 
Finglass he put up his horse, and stealing stealing unperceived into the shop above-
mentioned, he stole the till with the money, and immediately set out for Dublin.
	In the interim, the farmer missing his lodger, went to Finglass, and not finding 
him there, proceeded to Dublin, where he chanced to put up his horse at the same inn 
where Dowdell had taken up his quarters.
	In a short time he saw our adventurer with some dealers, to whom he would 
have sold the horse; on which the farmer procured a constable, seized the offender, 
and lodged him in prison.
	For this presumed robbery (a real one, doubtless, in the intention) he was 
brought to trial; but it appearing that the farmer had intrusted him with the horse, he 
could be convicted of nothing more than a fraud, for which he received sentence of 
transportation.
	The vessel in which he sailed being overtaken by a storm, was dashed on the 
rocks of Cumberland, and many lives were lost, but several, among whom was 
Dowdell, swam on shore, and went to Whitehaven, where the inhabitants contributed 
liberally to their relief. Dowdell travelling to Liverpool, entered on board a privateer, 
which soon took several prizes, for which he received 60l. to his share, which he soon 
squandered in the most thoughtless extravagance. Being reduced to poverty, he 
robbed a Portuguese gentleman; for which he was apprehended, but afterwards 
released on the intercession of the gentlemen of the English factory; on which he 
sailed for England, and arrived at London.
	He had not been long in the metropolis, before he associated with a gang of 
pickpockets and street-robbers (among whom was one Carter), whose practice it was 
to commit depredations at the doors of the theatres. Dowdell had not long entered into 
this association, before he and Carter went under the piazzas in Covent-garden, where 
the latter demanded a gentleman's money, while Dowdell watched at a little distance, 
to give notice in case of a surprise. While Carter was examining the gentleman's 
pockets, he drew his sword and killed the robber on the spot, and a mob gathering at 
the instant, it was with great difficulty that Dowdell effected his escape.
	He now went to the lodgings of a woman of ill fame, who having been 
heretofore kept by a man of rank, he had given her a gold watch and some trifling 
jewels, which Dowdell advised her to pawn, to raise him ready money.
	The girl hesitating to comply, he beat her in a most violent manner, on which 
she swore the peace against him; whereupon he was lodged in Newgate, but 
discharged at the next sessions, no prosecution being commenced against him.
	He was no sooner at large, than he made a connexion with a woman of the 
town, whom an officer had taken to Gibraltar, and during her residence with him she 
had saved a hundred moidores. Dowdell having possessed himself of this sum, soon 
spent it extravagantly, and then prevailed on her to pawn her clothes for his support.
	Talbot was the son of poor parents, who lived in Wapping, and having 
received a common education, he engaged himself as the driver of a post-chaise, in 
the service of a stable-keeper in Piccadilly. While he was driving two gentlemen on 
the Bath road, a highwayman stopped the carriage, and robbed them of their watches 
and money.
	This circumstance gave Talbot an idea of acquiring money by illicit means; 
wherefore, on his return to London, he made himself acquainted with some 
highwaymen, assuring them that he was properly qualified to give them the 
intelligence necessary for the successful management of their business.
	His proposal met with a ready acceptance; and a company having soon 
afterwards hired a coach and six of his master to go to Bath, Talbot gave one of the 
highwaymen notice of the affair; and it was resolved that the robbery should be 
committed on Hounslow-heath.
	The highwaymen meeting the carriage on the appointed spot, robbed the 
parties of all they had, so that they were obliged to return to London for money before 
they could pursue their journey. Talbot's share of this ill-gotten booty amounted to 
fifty pounds, which gave him such spirits that he resolved to pursue the same 
iniquitous mode of living.
	In consequence of this resolution, Talbot informed the highwayman of some 
company going to Bath, and he attempted to rob them, but a gentleman in the carriage 
shot him dead on the spot.
	Mortified at this accident which had befel his friend, Talbot no sooner arrived 
in London than he determined to resign his employment, and commence robber on his 
own account; but previous to engaging in this business, he spent his ready money in 
the worst company.
	After several attempts to commit robberies, and having narrowly escaped the 
hands of justice, he grew sick of his employment, and requested his former master to 
take him into his service. This he declined, but in pity to his distress, recommended 
him to a nobleman, in whose family he was engaged.
	Talbot had been but a short time in his new place, before he robbed the house 
of several articles of value, which he sold to the Jews, to supply the extravagance of 
one of the maid servants, with whom he had an amour.
	This theft was not discovered at the time; but Talbot was soon discharged from 
his place, in consequence of the badness of his temper, which rendered him 
insupportable to his fellow servants.
	On his dismission he spent his ready money with the most abandoned 
company, and then commencing housebreaker, committed a variety of depredations in 
the neighbourhood of London; for one of which he was apprehended and brought to 
trial at the Old Bailey, but acquitted for want of evidence.
	On the very evening he was acquitted, he stopped a carriage in Drury-lane, and 
robbed a gentleman of his money, which he soon spent among the most dissolute of 
both sexes; and within a week afterwards, he broke into a house in Westminster, 
where he obtained plate and cash to a large amount, but was not apprehended for this 
offence.
	In a few days he was taken into custody for picking a gentleman's pocket, 
brought to trial, at the Old Bailey, sentenced to be transported for seven years, shipped 
to America, and sold to slavery.
	He had not been long in this situation, when he embarked at Boston, in New 
England, on board a privateer; but when at sea he entered into a conspiracy with some 
of the sailors, to murder the officers, and seize the vessel; but the confederacy being 
discovered in time, a severe punishment was inflicted on Talbot and the other villains.
	Talbot, quitting the privateer, sailed to England in a man of war, and engaging 
with some street-robbers in London, was apprehended, convicted, and sentenced to 
die: but he found interest to obtain a pardon on condition of transportation.
	However, he had not been long abroad before he returned, in company with an 
abandoned woman, who had been transported at the same time; and this woman 
introduced him to the acquaintance of Quin and Dowdell, in company with whom he 
committed a considerable number of robberies.
	These accomplices robbed six coaches one evening, and obtained considerable 
plunder; but this being soon spent in extravagance, they at length embarked in a 
robbery which cost them their lives.
	Having made a connexion with one Cullen, they all joined in a street-robbery, 
and stopping a coach near Long Acre, robbed a gentleman of his watch and money. 
Some people being informed of the affair, immediately pursued them; and Cullen, 
being taken into custody, was admitted an evidence against his accomplices, who 
were apprehended on the following day.
	Being brought to trial at the next sessions at the Old Bailey, they received 
sentence of death; but, after conviction, seemed as little sensible of the enormity of 
their crimes, as almost any offenders whose cases we have had occasion to record.
Dowdell and Quin were Roman Catholics; and Talbot refusing to join in devotion 
with the ordinary of Newgate, at the place of execution, we can say nothing of the 
disposition of mind in which they left this world.
	We would have wished the following exclamation the mouths of these 
miserable sinners, at the time they made their dying atonements
"O omnipotent Creator! Such hellish deeds  
My soul abhors. O Lord! behold my frame, 
My inmost frame, and cleanse my sinful thoughts 
Then ever guide me in thy perfect way, 
The way established to eternal bliss?'
	These men died, we fear, unrepenting sinners.


WILLIAM DELLICOT 
Convicted of Petty Larceny, in July, 1751, and his Estate forfeited for 
stealing a Penny
	WILLIAM DELLICOT was convicted at the Quarter Sessions, July, 1751, for 
Salisbury (Wiltshire), of petty larceny, for stealing one penny, whereby his effects, 
consisting of bank-notes of one hundred and eighty pounds and twenty guineas in 
money, were forfeited to the bishop as lord of the manor; but his lordship humanely 
ordered one hundred pounds of the money to be put to interest for the benefit of the 
wretch's daughter, twenty pounds to be given to his aged father, and the remainder to 
be returned to the delinquent himself.
	Thus have we shown the punishment for stealing a single penny. Now then let 
us look at that of a public defaulter, to the amount of thousands and tens of thousands 
of pounds. The following, taken from the term's notes, is the sentence passed upon 
this wholesale peculator:--
	"In the Court of King's Bench, on the 19th of June, 1809, Valentine Jones, 
Esq., late Commissary-General in the West Indies, was brought up to receive the 
judgment of the Court, having been found guilty of fraud and peculation, to the 
amount of eighty-seven thousand one hundred and seventy-nine pounds, being but a 
moiety of the sum of which the country had been defrauded by his collusion with Mr 
Mathew Higgins. Judge Gross, after commenting upon the enormity of the offence, 
said that whatever other proceedings might be instituted, it was the duty of the Court 
to pass such sentence as would be likely to prevent future peculation, and therefore 
adjudged him to be imprisoned three years in his Majesty's jail of Newgate, and be 
incapacitated from serving his Majesty in future."


THE QUIBBLING THIEF. 
Who stole a goose, and saved himself by a pun

	A poor pun will sometimes answer a good purpose. A baker once calling upon 
Mr. Justice Jones, of Coventry, with the last loaf in his basket, was observed, as he 
returned through the Court-yard, to lay hold of a fat goose, on which his worship, who 
was at one of the upper windows, bawled out, Baker! Baker! Baker! The varlet took 
no notice, but trudged off with his prize. When the Justice, in the afternoon went to 
his house, and asked him how he could have the villainous impudence to take the 
goose? "God bless your worship," returned he, "I only did as you. commanded, -- you 
bid me bake her, and I did so, and thank your worship's health at the eating of her." -- 
" 'Tis a poor pun, said the justice, but it shall make thy peace; -- but beware, lest the 
next GOOSE you steal, brings down the LAW upon you, hissing hot."


WILLIAM CHANDLER 
A singularly artful villain, transported in the year 1751, for. 
perjury.
	THE scheme laid by this man for the purpose of plunder, in art and 
consummate hypocrisy, had not been equalled by any of his fraternity. His plan was to 
rob a whole county. Every robbery committed, the hundred where it happens, or the 
county at large, are responsible for the amount of the loss which the injured, in certain 
cases, may sustain. In his attempt at this kind of fraud, he implicated three innocent 
men, by whom he pretended to have been robbed, and which, had his tale met credit, 
would have consequently affected their lives. Happily his diabolical attempt was 
frustrated, and we are almost led to regret that the utmost vengeance of the law could 
not overtake him.
	There is a palpable contradiction between the laws and the natural sentiments 
of mankind in the case of oaths which are administered to a criminal to make him 
speak the truth, when the contrary is his greatest interest; as if a man could think 
himself obliged to contribute to his own destruction, and as if, when interest speaks, 
religion is not generally silent: religion, which in all ages hath, of all other things, 
been most commonly abused. And indeed, upon what motive should it be respected 
by the wicked, when it has been thus violated by those who were esteemed the wisest 
of men? The motives which religion opposes to the fear of impending evil and the 
love of life are too weak, as they are too distant, to make any impression on the 
senses. The affairs of the other world are regulated by laws entirely different from 
those by which human affairs are directed; why then should you endeavour to 
compromise matters between them? why should a man, be reduced to the terrible 
alternative either of offending God, or of contributing to his own immediate 
destruction? The laws which require an oath in such a case, leave him only' the choice 
of becoming a bad Christian or a martyr. For this reason, oaths become, by degrees, a 
mere formality, and all sentiments of religion, perhaps the only motive of honesty in 
the greatest part of mankind, are destroyed. Experience proves their inutility. I appeal 
to every judge whether he has ever known that an oath alone has brought truth from 
the lips of a criminal? and reason tells us it must be so; for all laws are useless, and in 
consequence destructive, which contradict the natural feelings of mankind. Such laws 
are like a dike, opposed directly to the course of a torrent; it is either immediately 
overwhelmed, or by a whirlpool formed by itself, it is gradually undermined and 
destroyed.
	Perjury is an offence particularly prevalent among the inferior ranks in society; 
it is to be attributed in no small degree to the want of proper solemnity, and previous 
explanation on the administration of oaths. Nothing can exceed the unimpressive and 
careless manner which is in practice in calling upon witnesses to make this solemn 
appeal to the Supreme Being. It would seem highly necessary that all oaths should he 
administered in the most impressive manner by the judge, and that a form should be 
devised, calculated, in the greatest possible degree, to impress upon the mind of the 
party a high sense of the obligation he or she has come under to speak the truth.
	On the whole, it may be asserted that nothing could tend to improve the police 
of the country and the metropolis more than a general revision of the laws respecting 
misdemeanors, and particularly the act of the 17 Geo. II. cap. 5, and subsequent acts 
respecting vagrants and rogues, and vagabonds; so as to assimilate them in a greater 
degree to the present state of society, and to render their execution more certain and 
beneficial to the community.
	The Irish formerly used to swear BY THE HAND. This mode of taking an 
oath they, perhaps, adopted from the Prophet Isaiah, ch. lxii, v. 8. "The Lord hath 
sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength."
	If Virgil had suffered Mezentius to swear, who could say "Dextra mihi Deus," 
Æn. x. 773, it would have been, no doubt, by his HAND.
	Dean Swift, who was an Irishman, has exemplified this oath of his 
countrymen, in his description of an Irish feast
"By my hand you dance rarely"
	William Chandler was the only child of Mr. Thomas Chandler, of 
Woodborough, near the Devizes, a gentleman farmer, of two hundred pounds a year, 
who at the age of about seventeen, fixed him with Mr. Banks, clerk of the goldsmiths' 
company, from whom, by reason of frequent disputes, he was turned over before two 
years had passed, to Mr. Hill of Clifford's Inn, and here he gained the love of his 
master, and respect of his clients.
	Chandler, while he was with Mr: Banks, had married the maid servant, but so 
artfully concealed it, that it was never suspected by either of his masters, nor any of 
his own family; and Mr. Hill having a long contested lawsuit in hand for the father, 
the profits of which he made over to his son, he was enabled to keep his wife in 
lodgings. Chandler's clerkship being nearly expired, he had projected a scheme to 
double his fortune. This scheme was to get as much money into his hands as he could 
possibly raise, to set out with it to the country, upon some plausible pretence, swear 
he was robbed of it by the way, and then sue the hundred. To do this in the ordinary 
way he knew was hazardous, and liable to many miscarriages, he therefore laid his 
plot so deep, that, as he thought, it should be beyond the reach of human discovery.
	In the first place it was necessary to raise a sum, which could not be done 
without deceiving both his father and master; he therefore told the former that he had 
an advantageous match in view, and the latter, that he had a rich uncle in Suffolk, 
whom he pretended to visit, and to have received from him several bank bills, which 
he shewed to favour the deceit. By these artifices he obtained from his father, the 
possession of an estate worth about four hundred pounds, and accounted to his master 
for his having five hundred pounds more, which it does not appear how he acquired.
	He then applied to his master, to advance five hundred pounds upon his new 
estate, which, with his other five hundred pounds, he was going, he said, to lend to 
one Mrs. Strait, of Salisbury, on an estate at Enford, within six or seven miles from 
his father's house, on which there was a prior mortgage of five hundred pounds, with 
interest due to one Mr. Poor, of Enford, who wanted to call in his money.
	Mr. Hill believing his clerk implicitly, even with respect to the value of his 
estate, procured the five hundred pounds of one Mr. Winter. While the mortgage was 
making, Mr. Chandler went down to Mrs. Strait and offered to pay Mr. Poor his five 
hundred pounds and interest, and to advance to her five hundred pounds more, on the 
same estate, which she readily accepted; and though it was now the 14th of March, 
1747, he appointed her to meet him at Enford, on the 25th of the same month, to 
receive the money. He then hurried home, and immediately prepared a proper 
assignment for Mr. Poor's mortgage, to himself, with receipts for the thousand 
pounds, and wrote to Mrs. Strait, not to forget the day, (March 24, 1748,) appointing 
ten as the hour of meeting. Now on the 22d the mortgage of Chandler's own estate to 
Winter was executed, and the money paid in three banknotes, which Chandler the next 
day changed, at the bank, for eight of fifty pounds, and five of twenty pounds each, all 
of the same date, and payable to Henry Taylor.
	On the 24th early, having got most of his cash in small bills, to the amount of 
nine hundred pounds, he found, when he came to put these in canvas bags under his 
garters; where he proposed to carry them for safety, that they made too great a bundle, 
and therefore he took several of the small bills, with some cash, amounting to four 
hundred and forty pounds, and exchanged them at the bank for two notes, one of four 
hundred pounds, and the other of forty pounds; the first of which, in his way home, he 
changed in his master's name at Sir Richard Hoare's, for one note of two hundred 
pounds, and two of one hundred pounds each; but told his master, that the bank clerks 
were a little out of humour at the trouble he had already given them, and that he had 
changed his small notes with a stranger in the bank-hall for the notes which he in 
reality, had received at Sir Richard Hoare's. Mr. Hill, at Chandler's request, having 
wrote down the numbers and dates of the several bills, and seen them put safe up, 
Chandler took leave of him, and about twelve o'clock set out.
	About four the same afternoon, though he had ninety miles to go by ten on the 
morrow, he had reached no further than Hare-hatch, about thirty miles from London, 
where he stopped at Mr. Butler's to refresh, and about five, just as he had left his inn, 
was, as he said, unfortunately met by three bargemen on foot, who, after they had 
robbed him of his watch and money, took him to a pit close by the road, and there 
stripped him of all his bank notes, bound his hands and feet, and left him, threatening 
to return and shoot him, if he made the least noise. In this woeful condition he lay 
three hours, though the pit was so hear the road that not a single horse could pass 
without his hearing; yet when night came he could jump, bound as he was, near half a 
mile all up hill, till, luckily for his purpose, he met one Avery, a silly shepherd, who 
cut the strings, but could give no account what they were or how fastened.
	The first question Chandler asked Avery after he had unbound him was, where 
a constable or tythingman lived; upon which Avery conducted him to Richard Kelly 
the constable's just by, and with him Mr. Chandler left the notices required by the 
statutes; with the description of the persons who robbed him, so exactly, that Mr. 
Young of Hare-hatch remembered three such men to have passed by his house about 
the very time the robbery was said to have been committed, who were also seen and 
known by Mr. Dredge; the mayor of Reading, on Maidenhead thicket, between four 
and five the same day. Chandler then returned to the inn where he had refreshed, and 
after telling his deplorable tale, and acquainting his landlord with his intentions of 
suing the hundred, he ordered a good supper, with a bowl of punch, and sat down with 
as little concern as if nothing had happened.
	Next day Chandler returned to London, acquainted his master with what had 
happened, and requested his assistance.
	Mr. Hill gave him the memorandum he had of the numbers, dates, and sums of 
the notes, and sent him to the bank to stop payment, but instead of that he went to Mr. 
Tufley, a silversmith in Cannon-street, bought a silver tankard, and in payment 
changed one of the notes for one hundred pounds which he received the day before at 
Sir Richard Hoare's; and on his return to his master, told him that the bank did no 
business that day because the hurry the city was in on account of the fire in Cornhill, 
which happened the night before; he therefore went again next morning, and when 
came back being asked by Mr. Hill for the paper on which he had taken down the 
numbers, &c. he said, he had left it with the clerks of the bank, who were to stop the 
notes; but that he had taken an exact copy of it; which was false, for he had reserved 
Mr. Hill's copy, and left another at the bank, in which he had so craftily altered the 
numbers and dates of the three notes he received at Sir Richard Hoare's, amounting to 
four hundred pounds, as to prevent their being stopped, and Mr. Hill's remembering 
the difference. Thus, he opened a way for getting four hundred pounds into his hands, 
without obstruction. But when it appeared that three of the notes had been falsely 
described, there having been none such given out by the bank, and Chandler was 
questioned by his master about it, and ordered to bring back the original paper, he 
made a pretence of going to the bank, and then brought back word, that the clerks 
could not find it; and said, they never kept such papers after they had made an entry.
	On the 26th, he inserted a list of his notes, being fifteen in all, with their dates 
and numbers, in the daily papers, offering a reward of fifty pounds for the recovery of 
the whole, or in proportion for any part; and on the afternoon of the same day 
withdrew his advertisement in all the daily papers and, took his own written copy 
away at each place. And on the 29th of March, 1748, he put the notice of the robbery 
and the description of the robbers in the London Gazette, as the law directs, except 
that he did not particularize the notes, as he had done in the other papers.
	On the 12th of May following, he made the proper information before a justice 
of the peace; but though Mr. Hill, his master, was with him, and had undertaken to 
manage the cause for him, yet he made the same omission in his information, as in his 
advertisement in the London Gazette.
	All things being prepared on the 19th of July, 1748, Chandler proceeded to try 
his cause, and after a hearing of twelve hours, by a special jury at Abingdon assizes, 
obtained a verdict for nine hundred and seventy pounds, subject, however, to a case 
reserved for the opinion of the Court of Common Pleas, concerning the sufficiency of 
the description of the bank notes in the London Gazette, and the information; which 
case was afterwards decided in favour of the county.
	In the mean time Chandler, fearing that by what came out upon the trial, he 
should soon be suspected, and that he might be arrested by Mr. Winter, who had now 
discovered that his mortgage was insufficient, obtained a protection from Lord 
Willoughby de Brooke, and gave out that he was removed into Suffolk, to reside, as 
he had before pretended, with his rich uncle; but in reality, he retired to Colchester, 
where his brother-in-law, Humphry Smart, had taken an inn, with whom he entered 
into co-partnership, and never came publicly to London afterwards. He was, however, 
obliged to correspond with his master, on account of the point of law, which was soon 
to be argued; and therefore, to come at his letters Without discovering his place of 
abode, he ordered them to be directed, "To Mr. Thomas Chandler, at Easton, in 
Suffolk; to be left for him at the Crown at Audley, near Colchester, in Essex."
	Mr. Hill having written several letters to Mr. Chandler, pressing, him to come 
to town, (as the term grew near) and he evading it by trifling excuses, began to 
suspect him, even before the point of law was determined.
	Just before this event, twelve of the notes, of which Mr. Chandler pretended to 
be robbed, were all brought to the bank together, having been bought, October 31, 
1748, at Amsterdam, of one John Smith, by Barent Solomon, a broker, there; and by 
him transmitted to his kin Nathan Solomon, a broker, at London. Upon further 
inquiry, it appeared, that John Smith, who sold the notes, stayed but a few days in 
Holland, that he was seen in company with Mr. Casson, a Holland trader, and came 
over in the packet with him; Mr. Casson was then found, and his description of John 
Smith answered the person of Chandler, who was then pressed, by letter, to come to 
town and face Casson, to remove suspicion, but he refused.
	And now the scene began to open apace; about this time the very paper which 
Chandler left when he stopped payment of the notes at the bank, was found; which, 
when Mr. Hill saw, and that it was not his writing, he quite gave up his clerk, and 
from that time, assisted in the prosecution. By means of the bank books, they traced 
every circumstance that has been related of his taking out the 400l. note; afterwards 
changing it at Sir Richard Hoare, for three lesser notes, his passing these notes, and by 
whom received; and even his buying the tankard of Tufley; which tankard was 
afterwards produced in evidence against him. All that now remained was to come at 
his person; and with this view, Mr. Wise, Mr. Hill, and Mr. Casson, about 
Midsummer, 1749, set out for Colchester, from thence went to the Crown, at Audley, 
and there inquiring for Easton, were directed first to one place, and then to another of 
that name; and after a fruitless journey of one hundred and fifty miles, they returned 
to the very inn then kept by Chandler at Colchester, and departed for London, without 
gaining any intelligence.
	Chandler, who himself saw them at his house, immediately sold his goods, 
and: took a small inn at Coventry, where, though one hundred and fifty miles from 
Colchester, and ninety-one miles from London, he was still apprehensive of being 
arrested by Mr. Winter; and therefore he sent a draft to Mr. Gauntlet, a linen-draper of 
his acquaintance, for one hundred and fifty pounds to be paid to Mr. Hill, and by him 
to Mr. Winter. This draft he procured at Northampton, and there put it into the post. 
By the post-mark of this letter he was at length traced to his new habitation at 
Coventry, where an indictment for perjury having been found against him; he was 
apprehended by a judge's warrant, and detained in gaol there, till by an habeas corpus 
he was removed to Reading, in order to take his trial at Abingdon assizes, on the 22d 
of July, 1750. But though the prosecutors were ready, with their Witnesses, at a vast 
expense, yet he traversed the indictment, as by law he might, and put off his trial, to 
the Lent assizes held at Reading; where the facts, already related being proved, he was 
sentenced to stand on the pillory the then market-day, and to be transported for seven 
years. But the former part of this sentence was changed by the judge into three 
month's imprisonment, for fear the populace, who were greatly enraged, should kill 
him
	[This prosecution produced two acts of parliament, one for remedying 
inconveniencies that may happen proceedings in actions on the statue of Hue and Cry, 
and the other to render prosecutions for perjury and subornation of perjury more easy 
and effectual.]


JAMES WELCH AND THOMAS JONES 
Executed on Kennington Common, 6th of September, 1751, for Murder.

	WE come to execute the task of proving the innocence of Richard Coleman, 
who, our readers will recollect, suffered death for the murder of Sarah Green.
	Two years had passed since Coleman had been ignominiously laid in his grave 
before his memory was rescued from disgrace. Circumstances then, and not before, 
arose which proved that James Welch, Thomas Jones and John Nichols (the latter of 
whom was admitted as evidence for the Crown) committed this abhorred murder; and 
the discovery without a search, so inscrutable are the ways of Providence, was thus 
effected:
	Welch, one of the murderers, and a young fellow named James Bush, while 
walking on the road to Newington Butts, their conversation happened to turn on the 
subject of those who had been executed without being guilty; and Welch said: 
"Among whom was Coleman. Nichols, Jones and I were the persons who committed 
the murder for which he was hanged." In the course of conversation Welch owned 
that, having been at a public-house called Sot's Hole, they had drunk plentifully, and 
on their return through Kennington Lane they met with a woman, with whom they 
went as far as the Parsonage Walk, near the churchyard of Newington where she was 
so horridly abused by Nichols and Jones that Welch declined offering her any further 
insult.
	Bush did not at that time appear to pay any particular attention to what he had 
heard, but soon afterwards, as he was crossing London Bridge with his father, he 
addressed him as follows: "Father, I have been extremely ill; and as I am afraid I shall 
not live long, I should be glad to reveal something that lies heavy on my mind."
	Thereupon they went to a public-house in the Borough, where Bush related his 
story to his father, which was scarcely ended when, seeing Jones at the window, they 
called him in and desired him to drink with them.
	He had not been long in their company when they told him they had heard he 
was one of the murderers of Sarah Green, on whose account Coleman had suffered 
death. Jones trembled and turned pale on hearing what they said; but soon assuming a 
degree of courage said: "What does it signify? The man is hanged and the woman 
dead, and nobody can hurt us." To which he added: "We were connected with a 
woman, but who can tell that was the woman Coleman died for?"
	In consequence of this acknowledgment Nichols, Jones and Welch were soon 
afterwards apprehended, when all of them steadily denied their guilt; and, the hearsay 
testimony of Bush being all that could be adduced against them, Nichols was admitted 
evidence for the Crown. In consequence of which all the particulars of the horrid 
murder were developed.
	The prisoners being brought to trial at the next assizes for the county of 
Surrey, Nichols deposed that he, with Welch and Jones, having been drinking at the 
house called Sot's Hole on the night that the woman was used in such an inhuman 
manner, they quitted that house in order to return home, when, meeting a woman, they 
asked her if she would drink; which she declined unless they would go to the King's 
Head, where she would treat them with a pot of beer.
	Thereupon they went and drank both beer and geneva with her, and then, all 
the parties going forward to the Parsonage Walk, the poor woman was treated in a 
manner too shocking to be described. It appeared that at the time of the perpetration of 
the fact the murderers wore white aprons, and that Jones and Welch called Nichols by 
the name of Coleman -- circumstances that evidently led to the conviction of the 
unfortunate man of that name.
	On the whole state of the evidence there seemed to be no doubt of the guilt of 
the prisoners, so that the jury did not hesitate to convict them, and sentence of death 
was passed of course.
	After conviction these malefactors behaved with the utmost contrition, being 
attended by the Rev. Dr Howard, Rector of St George's, Southwark, to whom they 
readily confessed their offences. They likewise signed a declaration, which they 
begged might be published, containing the fullest assertion of Coleman's innocence, 
and, exclusive of his acknowledgement, Welch wrote to the brother of Coleman, 
confessing his guilt, and begging his prayers and forgiveness. The sister od Jones 
living in a genteel family at Richmond, he wrote to her to make interest in his favour; 
but the answer he received was, that his crime was of such a nature, that she could not 
ask a favour for him with any degree of propriety. She earnestly begged of him to 
p[repare for death, and implore pardon at that tribunal, where alone it could be 
expected.
	They were executed on Kennington Common, on 6th of September, 1751.


MATHIAS KEYS 
Executed on Kennington Common, 6th of September, 1751, for Highway 
Robbery

	MATHIAS KEYS was the son of an inn-holder of good repute at Billericay, in 
Essex, who placed him apprentice to a vintner; and when his time had expired -- 
which, however, was not passed without censure -- placed him in a respectable inn at 
Bristol.
	The house had long-been well frequented, but Keys, presuming upon being a 
"mother's darling," was more addicted to horse-racing, cocking and gaming than to 
attending to his guests. It is therefore little to be wondered at that such men become 
bankrupts, and so with him a failure soon happened.
	He fled from his creditors, taking with him every portable valuable he 
possessed, and came to London. There, among other profligate young fellows, he 
became intimate with one William Russel, then an unworthy articled clerk to an 
attorney of good practice in Air Street, Piccadilly. In company with this reprobate he 
committed divers highway robberies; but the career of Russel was very short, for he 
was hanged ere he had attained manhood.
	In the month of August, 1747, Keys was apprehended for a highway robbery, 
was tried, and condemned to death at Chelmsford; but no other crimes being then 
alleged against him, though he had committed many, his sentence was remitted on 
condition of transporting himself for life.
	On the 14th of November, 1747, he entered on board a man-of-war, on the 
point of sailing to the East Indies, under Admiral Boscwan, and performed his duty 
with much bravery at the siege of Pondicherry, where he lost an eye. With his ship he 
returned to England, and immediately again commenced highwayman.
	He committed a daring robbery on two gentlemen in a post-chaise, in the 
vicinity of London, who had pistols with them, but were taken with too much surprise 
to be able to use them. No sooner however had he ridden off with his booty than, with 
the assistance of the post-boy, they quickly unyoked the horses and galloped after 
him.
	Unapprehensive of pursuit he was riding at a moderate pace, waiting to levy 
his contributions on the next travellers. They seized him, in their turn, before he could 
make resistance, brought him to London, and prosecuted and convicted him, having 
found the money upon him of which but a few minutes before he had robbed them. He 
was hanged on Kennington Common, on 6th of September, 1751.


WILLIAM BAKER 
A City Merchant, executed at Tyburn, 31st of December, 1751, for forging 
an East India Warrant in order to avoid Bankruptcy

	WILLIAM BAKER was born in Cannon Street, where his father kept a baker's 
shop, and lived in good reputation. The youth was educated at the Merchant Taylors' 
School, and at the usual age bound apprentice to a grocer in a considerable way of 
business; and he proved so faithful and diligent a servant that soon after the time of 
his apprenticeship had expired his master admitted him an equal partner in his trade.
	Having carried on the grocery trade for about seven years, he declined that 
business and connected himself in partnership with Mr Carter, a sugar-baker, and by 
this new undertaking he flattered himself in the expectation of speedily acquiring a 
fortune.
	About the period of his commencing as sugar-baker he married one of his 
cousins, who was the daughter of a clergyman in Northamptonshire, and with her he 
received a handsome fortune. For several years he fulfilled all his engagements with 
the greatest punctuality, and was supposed to be possessed of considerable property.
	He attended the sales of the East India Company's goods, and frequently 
purchased very large quantities of teas, and he had extensive dealings in other articles. 
But he often sustained considerable loss by the sale of his goods, and his 
circumstances at length became so embarrassed that he was under apprehension that a 
commission of bankruptcy would issue against him.
	He flattered himself, however, that, if he could support his credit for a short 
time, matters would take a more favourable turn and his circumstances be retrieved. 
His anxiety to avoid a bankruptcy induced Mr Baker to forge an East India warrant for 
goods to the amount of nine hundred and twenty-two pounds. But it must be remarked 
that the forgery was not committed with any intention to defraud, but merely to raise a 
supply for present exigencies.
	Mr Baker passed the counterfeit warrant into the hands of Mr Holland, who 
sent it to the India House, where the forgery was detected, and Baker was in 
consequence apprehended.
	Baker being put on his trial at the Old Bailey, several gentlemen of reputation 
appeared on his behalf, and spoke to his character in the most favorable terms; but 
both the forgery and the uttering the counterfeit warrant having been proved against 
him by indisputable testimony, and strongly corroborating circumstances, he of course 
was condemned to suffer death. Being conveyed to Tyburn in a mourning-coach, he 
appeared to be in a composed state of mind, and entirely resigned to his fate.


WILLIAM STROUD 
A Notorious Impostor, who was Six Times whipped through the Streets of 
Westminster, in the Month of March, 1752

	WILLIAM STROUD was well born and educated, but very early in life took 
to little tricks of cheating. When but a schoolboy he used to purloin blank leaves from 
the books of his companions, and was remarkable for robbing them of their marbles.
	This disposition continued while he was an apprentice; and at length he 
embarked in business for himself. But he had not been long a master before he 
considered trade as a drudgery; on which he sold off his stock, took lodgings in Bond 
Street, and assumed the character of a fine gentleman.
	He now lived in a most expensive manner, supplying the extravagances of 
women of ill-fame. This soon reducing him to indigent circumstances, he fixed on a 
plan of defrauding individuals; for which purpose he got credit with a tailor for some 
elegant suits of apparel, took a genteel house, and hired some servants, by which he 
imposed himself upon the public as a man of large estate.
	An extensive credit and a splendid mode of living were the consequences of 
his elegant appearance; but some tradesmen bringing in bills, which he was equally 
unable and unwilling to discharge, he sold off his household furniture and privately 
decamped.
	He now took handsome lodgings in Bloomsbury, and dressing himself in 
velvet clothes he pretended to be the steward of a nobleman of high rank. He likewise 
took a house in Westminster, in which he placed an agent, who ordered in goods as 
for the nobleman; and the tradesmen who delivered these goods were directed to leave 
their bills for the examination of the steward. But the effects were no sooner in 
possession than they were sold to a broker, to the great loss of the respective 
tradesmen.
	Stroud used to travel into the country in summer, and, having learned the 
names of London traders with whom people of fortune dealt, he used to write in their 
names for goods; but, constantly meeting the wagons that conveyed them, generally 
received the effects before they reached the places to which they were directed. 
London and the country were equally laid under contribution by him; and jewellers, 
watchmakers, lacemen, tailors, drapers, upholders, silversmiths, silk-mercers, hatters, 
hosiers, etc., were frequent dupes to his artifices.
	He was at length apprehended as a common cheat, and committed to the 
Gatehouse, Westminster. On his examination a coachmaker charged him with 
defrauding him of a gilt chariot, a jeweller of rings to the amount of a hundred 
pounds, a tailor of a suit of velvet trimmed with gold, a cabinetmaker of some 
valuable goods in his branch, and several other tradesmen of various articles.
	The grand jury having found bills of indictment against him, he was tried at 
the Westminster Sessions, when witnesses who had been duped and plundered by him 
appeared to give their evidence; and he was instantly found guilty.
	The Court sentenced him to hard labour in Bridewell for six months, and in 
that time to be whipped through the streets six times; which was inflicted with the 
severity which they intended. He was scourged so as to be made an example to others 
in the like cases offending.


ELIZABETH JEFFRIES AND JOHN SWAN 
Deprived of her Uncle's valuable Estate, the Woman and an Accomplice 
shot him dead after paying another Man to commit the Crime.

THE case of these offenders is one of the greatest atrocity. Elizabeth Jeffries was the 
niece of a gentleman of respectability residing at Walthamstow, who, having acquired 
an ample fortune, and having no children, adopted his brother's daughter, and made a 
will in her favour, bequeathing to her nearly his whole estate. The girl, however, 
returned her uncle's kindness with ingratitude; and, having heard him declare that he 
would alter his will on account of her bad behaviour, she determined to prevent his 
carrying his design to her detriment into execution by murdering him. She soon 
discovered her inability to complete this project single-handed, and she gained the 
assistance of her accomplice in the crime, John Swan, who was in the employment of 
her uncle, and with whom there is good reason to believe she was on terms of 
intimacy. They endeavoured to suborn a simple fellow named Matthews to assist 
them, but although the promise of a large reward at first staggered him, his terrors 
eventually steeled him against the temptations held out to him. The night of the 3rd of 
July, 1751, was fixed upon for the completion of this villainy; and at the trial, which 
took place at Chelmsford, before Mr Justice Wright, on the iith of March, 1752, the 
following facts were proved:--
Matthews, having travelled from Yorkshire, was accidentally met in Epping Forest by 
Mr Jeffries, who gave him employment as an assistant to Swan, who was his 
gardener. After he had been at work only four days he was sent upstairs by Miss 
Jeffries to wipe a chest of drawers, and she followed him and asked him if he was 
willing to earn one hundred pounds. He answered that he was, "in an honest way" -- 
on which she desired him to go to Swan. He accordingly joined him in the garden, and 
he offered him seven hundred pounds to murder their master. He acquiesced. On his 
being dismissed, two days afterwards, Swan gave him half-a-guinea to buy a brace of 
pistols; but having spent the money given to him he was ordered to meet Miss Jeffries 
and Swan at Walthamstow on the Tuesday following, at ten o'clock at night, the 
object being then to carry out their intentions with respect to the murder.
When he arrived he found the garden door on the latch, and going into the pantry he 
hid himself behind a tub till about eleven o'clock, when Swan brought him some cold 
boiled beef. About twelve Miss Jeffries and Swan came to him, when the latter said: 
"Now it is time to knock the old miser, my master, on the head." But Matthews 
relented and said: "I cannot find it in my heart to do it." Miss Jeffries then 
immediately replied: "You may be d---d for a villain, for not performing your 
promise!" And Swan, who was provided with pistols, also loudly abused him, and 
said he had a mind to blow his brains out for the refusal. Swan then produced a book, 
and insisted that Matthews should swear that he would not discover what had passed; 
and he did so, with this reserve, "unless it was to save his own life." Soon after this 
Matthews heard the report of a pistol, when, getting out of the house by the back way, 
he crossed the ferry and proceeded to Enfield Chase. Immediately afterwards Miss 
Jeffries appeared at the door of the house and called out for assistance, and, some of 
the neighbours going in, they found Mr Jeffries dying, but they failed in discovering 
anything which could lead to the supposition of any person having quitted the house. 
Suspicions in consequence arose, and Miss Jeffries was taken into custody; but no 
evidence arising to incriminate her she was discharged, and immediately administered 
on her uncle's estate and took possession of his property.
Renewed suspicions, however, were raised, and, Matthews having been discovered, 
Jeffries and Swan were apprehended. Upon this testimony a verdict of guilty was 
returned.
After conviction Elizabeth Jeffries made a full confession of her guilt. On the day of 
execution the convicts left the prison at four in the morning, Miss Jeffries being 
placed in a cart and Swan on a sledge. The unfortunate woman repeatedly fainted on 
her way to the gallows; and, having fallen into a fit, had not recovered when she was 
turned off. The execution took place near the sixth milestone in Epping Forest, on the 
28th of March, 1752, and, the body of Miss Jeffries having been delivered to her 
friends for interment, the gibbet was removed to another part of the Forest, where 
Swan was hung in chains.


MARY BLANDY 
Executed 6th of April, 1752, for murdering her Father at the Request of her 
Lover

  
Mary Blandy confessing having poisoned her father

	IT has been a melancholy remark that two young ladies -- Miss Jefferies and 
Miss Blandy -- well educated, and of considerable expectations from the parents 
whom they murdered, should, as it were, at the same moment contemplate the death 
of their protectors.
	Yet, though Miss Blandy's crime was committed on blood nearest in 
consanguinity, she does not appear to have been that determined murderess we find in 
Miss Jefferies.
	Public conversation was long divided on their fate, and in comparisons of their 
different degrees of crimes.
	There is too much reason to fear that both had been seduced by villainous 
men: but Miss Jefferies, as will be seen, was a premeditated and determined 
murderess. Over the fate of the wretched Miss Blandy we may indulge somewhat of 
commiseration; for the profligate wretch who seduced her was a disgrace to the noble 
blood from which he derived existence; and what renders his crime more heinous was 
his being a married man.
	It will appear that, had not this corrupt twig of the noble branch of the tree of 
genealogy from which he grew spread his insidious snares to entangle the heart and 
corrupt the mind of Miss Blandy, she would not have been guilty of the abominable 
and unnatural crime of parricide.
	In a moral point of view, though the law may not immediately overtake the 
villainy, we would appeal to the hearts of the readers of our own sex -- nay, we would 
ask the question, in cooler moments of youth -- "Can there be a more destructive vice 
than the seduction of a virtuous female, under promise of marriage?" Will not your 
inflamed passions cool? and then what must be the stings of conscience when you 
find the too-willing sacrifice to your lust a wretched creature, neglected by her 
friends, the scorn of the virtuous part of her sex, and the prey of your own?
	Thus are we led to acknowledge, with sorrow, the lines of the poet, on a 
seduced woman:--
"Man, the lawless libertine, may rove, 
Free and unquestion'd, thro' the paths of love: 
But woman, sense and nature's easy fool -- 
If poor weak woman swerve from virtue's easy rule -- 
If, strongly charm'd, she tempt the flow'ry way, 
And in the softer paths of pleasure stray -- 
Ruin ensues, remorse, and endless shame, 
And one false step entirely damns her fame: 
In vain with tears the loss she may deplore, 
In vain look back to what she was before; 
She sets, like stars that fall, to rise no more."
	Mary Blandy was the only daughter of a Mr Francis Blandy, an eminent 
attorney at Henley-upon-Thames, and town-clerk of that place. She had been educated 
with the utmost tenderness; and every possible care was taken to impress her mind 
with sentiments of virtue and religion. Her person had nothing in it remarkably 
engaging, but she was of a sprightly and affable disposition, of polite man ners, 
engaging in conversation, and was much distinguished by her good sense.
	She had read the best authors in the English language, and had a memory 
remarkably retentive of the knowledge she had acquired. In a word, she excelled most 
of her sex in those accomplishments which are calculated to grace and dignify the 
female mind.
	The father being reputed to be rich, a number of young gentlemen courted his 
acquaintance, with a view to make an interest with his daughter: but, of all the 
visitors, none were more agreeable, both to father and daughter, than the gentlemen of 
the army; and the former was never better pleased than when he had some of them at 
his table.
	Miss Blandy was about twenty-six years of age when she became acquainted 
with Captain William Henry Cranstoun, who was then about forty-six. He was the son 
of Lord Cranstoun, of an ancient Scotch family, which had made great alliances, by 
intermarriages, with the nobility of Scotland. Being a younger brother, his uncle, Lord 
Mark Ker, procured him a commission in the army, which, with the interest of fifteen 
hundred pounds, was all he had for his support.
	Cranstoun married a Miss Murray in Scotland, in the year 1745, and received a 
handsome fortune with her; but he was defective in the great article of prudence. His 
wife was delivered of a son within a year after the marriage. About this period he 
received orders to join his regiment in England, and was afterwards sent on a 
recruiting party to Henley, which gave rise to the unhappy connexion which ended so 
fatally.
	It may seem extraordinary, and is, perhaps, a proof of Cranstoun's art, that he 
could ingratiate himself into the affections of Miss Blandy; for his person was 
diminutive, he was so marked with the small-pox that his face was in seams, and he 
squinted very much: but he possessed that faculty of small-talk which is unfortunately 
too much esteemed by many of the fair sex.
	Mr Blandy, who was acquainted with Lord Mark Ker, was fond of being 
deemed a man of taste, and so open to flattery, that it is not to be wondered at that a 
man of Cranstoun's artifice ingratiated himself into his favour, and obtained 
permission to pay his addresses to the daughter.
	Cranstoun, apprehending that Miss Blandy might discover that he had a wife 
in Scotland, informed her that he was involved in a disagreeable lawsuit in that 
country with a young lady, who claimed him as a husband; and so sure was he of the 
interest he had obtained in Miss Blandy's affections, that he had the confidence to ask 
her if she loved him well enough to wait the issue of the affair. She told him that, if 
her father and mother approved of her staying for him, she had no objection.
	This must be allowed to have been a very extraordinary declaration of love, 
and as extraordinary a reply.
	Cranstoun endeavoured to conduct the amour with all possible secrecy; 
notwithstanding which it came to the knowledge of Lord Mark Ker, who wrote to Mr 
Blandy, informing him that the captain had a wife and children in Scotland, and 
conjuring him to preserve his daughter from ruin.
	Alarmed by this intelligence, Mr Blandy informed his daughter of it; but she 
did not seem equally affected, as Cranstoun's former declaration had prepared her to 
expect some such news; and, when the old gentleman taxed Cranstoun with it, he 
declared it was only an affair of gallantry, of which he should have no difficulty to 
free himself.
	Mrs. Blandy appears to have been under as great a degree of infatuation as her 
daughter, for she forbore all farther inquiry, on the captain's bare assurance that the 
report of his marriage was false. Cranstoun, however, could not be equally easy. He 
saw the necessity of devising some scheme to get his first marriage annulled, or of 
bidding adieu to all the gratifications he could promise himself by a second.
	After revolving various schemes in his mind, he at length wrote his wife, 
requesting her to disown him for a husband. The substance of this letter was, that, 
"having no other way of rising to preferment but in the army, he had but little ground 
to expect advancement there, while it was known he was encumbered with a wife and 
family; but, could he once pass for a single man, he had not the least doubt of being 
quickly preferred, which would procure him a sufficiency to maintain her, as well as 
himself, in a genteeler manner than now he was able to do. All, therefore (adds he), I 
have to request of you is, that you will transcribe the enclosed copy of a letter, 
wherein you disown me for a husband; put your maiden name to it, and send it by the 
post: all the use I shall make of it shall be to procure my advancement, which will 
necessarily include your own benefit. In full assurance that you will comply with my 
request, I remain, your most affectionate husband, 
	"W. H. Cranstoun."
	Mrs. Cranstoun, ill as she had been treated by her husband, and little hope as 
she had of more generous usage, was, after repeated letters had passed, induced to 
give up her claim, and at length sent him the requested paper, signed Murray, which 
was her maiden name.
	The villainous captain, being possessed of this letter, made some copies of it, 
which he sent to his wife's relations, and his own: the consequence of which was that 
they withdrew the assistance they had afforded the lady, which reduced her to an 
extremity she had never before known.
	Exclusive of this, he instituted a suit before the lords of session, for the 
dissolution of the marriage; but when Mrs. Cranstoun was heard, and the letters read, 
the artful contrivance was seen through, the marriage was confirmed, and Cranstoun 
was adjudged to pay the expenses of the trial.
	At the next session Captain Cranstoun preferred a petition, desiring to be heard 
by counsel on new evidence, which it was pretended had arisen respecting Miss 
Murray. This petition, after some hesitation, was heard; but the issue was, that the 
marriage was again confirmed, and Cranstoun was obliged to allow his wife a 
separate maintenance.
	Still, however, he paid his addresses to Miss Blandy with the same fervency as 
before; which coming to the knowledge of Mrs. Cranstoun, she sent her the decree of 
the Court of Session, establishing the validity of the marriage.
	It is reasonable to suppose that this would have convinced Miss Blandy of the 
erroneous path in which she was treading. On this occasion she consulted her mother: 
and, Cranstoun having set out for Scotland, the old lady advised her to write to him, to 
know the truth of the affair.
	Absurd as this advice was, she wrote to him; but, soon after the receipt of her 
letter, he returned to Henley, when he had impudence enough to assert that the cause 
was not finally determined, but would be referred to the House of Lords.
	Mr Blandy gave very little credit to this assertion; but his wife assented at 
once to all Cranstoun said, and treated him with as much tenderness as if he had been 
her own child; of which the following circumstance will afford ample proof.
	Mrs. Blandy and her daughter being on a visit to Mrs. Pocock, of Turville 
Court, the old lady was taken so ill as to be obliged to continue there for some days. 
In the height of her disorder, which was a violent fever, she cried "Let Cranstoun be 
sent for." He was then with the regiment at Southampton; but, her request being 
complied with, she no sooner saw him than she raised herself on the pillow, and hung 
around his neck repeatedly exclaiming "(My dear Cranstoun, I am glad you are come; 
I shall now grow well soon!" So extravagant was her fondness, that she insisted on 
having him as her nurse; and he actually administered her medicines.
	On the following day she grew better; on which she said "This I owe to you, 
my dear Cranstoun; your coming has given me new health and fresh spirits. I was 
fearful I should die, and you not here to comfort that poor girl. Flow like death she 
looks!"
	It would be ungenerous to the memory of Mrs. Blandy to suppose that she saw 
Cranstoun's guilt in its true light of enormity; but certainly she was a most egregious 
dupe to his artifices.
	Mrs. Blandy and her daughter having come to London, the former wanted 
forty pounds, to discharge a debt she had contracted unknown to her husband; and 
Cranstoun coming into the room while the mother and the daughter were weeping 
over their distresses, he demanded the reason of their grief; of which being informed, 
he left them, and, soon returning with the requisite sum, he threw it into the old lady's 
lap. Charmed by this apparent generosity, she burst into tears, and squeezed his hand 
fervently; on which he embraced her, and said, "Remember, it is a son; therefore do 
not make yourself uneasy: you do not lie under any obligation to me."
	Of this debt of forty pounds, ten pounds had been contracted by the ladies 
while in London, for expenses in consequence of their pleasures; and the other thirty 
by expensive treats given to Cranstoun at Henley, during Mr Blandy's absence.
	Soon after this Mrs. Blandy died; and Cranstoun now complaining of his fear 
of being arrested for the forty pounds, the young lady borrowed that sum, which she 
gave him, and made him a present of her watch: so that he was a gainer by his former 
apparent generosity.
	Mr Blandy began now to show evident dislike of Cap tain Cranstoun's visits: 
but he found means to take leave of the daughter, to whom he complained of the 
father's ill treatment; but insinuated that he had a method of conciliating his esteem; 
and that when he arrived in Scotland he would send her some powders proper for the 
purpose; on which to prevent suspicion, he would write, "Powders to clean the Scotch 
pebbles."
	It does not appear that the young lady had any idea that the powders he was to 
send her were of a poisonous nature. She seems rather to have been infatuated by her 
love; and this is the only excuse that can he made for her subsequent conduct, which 
appears otherwise totally inconsistent with that good sense for which she was 
celebrated.
	Cranstoun sent her the powders, according to promise; and Mr Blandy being 
indisposed on the Sunday se'nnight before his death, Susan Gunnel, a maid-servant, 
made him some water-gruel, into which Miss Blandy conveyed some of the powder, 
and gave it to her father; and, repeating this draught on the following day, he was 
tormented with the most violent pains in his bowels.
	When the old gentleman's disorder increased, and he was attended by a 
physician, his daughter came into the room, and, falling on her knees to her father, 
said, "Banish me where you please; do with me what you please, so you do but 
forgive me; and, as for Cranstoun, I will never see him, speak to him, or write to him, 
as long as I live, if you will forgive me."
	In reply to this the father said, "I forgive thee, my dear, and I hope God will 
forgive thee, but thou shouldst have considered before thou attemptedst any thing 
against thy father; thou shouldst have considered I was thy own father."
	Miss Blandy now acknowledged that she had put powder in his gruel, but that 
it was for an innocent purpose; on which the father, turning in his bed, said, "O such a 
villain! to come to my house, eat of the best and drink of the best my house could 
afford; and, in return, take away my life, and ruin my daughter. O! my dear, thou must 
hate that man."
	The young lady replied, "Sir, every word you say is like a sword piercing to 
my heart; more severe than if you were angry: I must kneel, and beg you will not 
curse me." The father said, "I curse thee my dear! how couldst thou think I would 
curse thee? No, I bless thee, and hope God will bless thee, and amend thy life. Do, my 
dear, go out of the room; say no more, lest thou shouldst say any thing to thy own 
prejudice. Go to thy Uncle Stephens; and take him for thy friend: poor man! I am 
sorry for him."
	Mr Blandy dying in consequence of his illness, it was suspected that the 
daughter had occasioned his death; whereupon she was taken into custody, and 
committed to the gaol at Oxford.
	She was tried on the 3d of March, 1752; and, after many witnesses had been 
called to give evidence of her guilt, she was desired to make her defence, which she 
did in the following speech:--
	"My lord, -- It is morally impossible for me to lay down the hardships I have 
receivcd. -- I have been aspersed in my character. In the first place it has been said I 
spoke ill of my father; that I have cursed him, and wished him at hell; which is 
extremely false. Sometimes little family affairs have happened, and he did not speak 
to me so kindly as I could wish. I own I am passionate, my lord; and in those passions 
some hasty expressions might have dropped; but great care has been taken to recollect 
every word I have spoken at different times, and to apply them to such particular 
purposes as my enemies knew would do me the greatest injury. These are hardships, 
my lord, such as yourself must allow to be so. It was said too, my lord, that I 
endeavoured to make my escape. Your lordship will judge from the difficulties I 
laboured under: -- I had lost my father; -- I was not permitted to go near him; -- I was 
forsaken by my friends -- affronted by the mob -- and insulted by my servants. -- 
Although I begged to have the liberty to listen at the door where he died, I was not 
allowed it. My keys were taken from me; my shoe-buckles and garters too -- to 
prevent me from making away with myself, as though I was the most abandoned 
creature. What could I do, my lord? I verily believe I must have been out of my 
senses. When I heard my father was dead, I ran out of the house, and over the bridge, 
and had nothing on but a half sack and petticoats, without a hoop -- my petticoats 
hanging about me. The mob gathered round me. Was this a condition, my lord, to 
make my escape in? A good woman beyond the bridge, seeing me in this distress, 
desired me to walk in till the mob was dispersed: the town-sergeant was there. I 
begged he would take me under his protection, to have me home: the woman said it 
was not proper, the mob was very great, and that I had better stay a little. When I 
came home they said I used the constable ill. I was locked up for fifteen hours, with 
only an old servant of the family to attend me. I was not allowed a maid for the 
common decencies of my sex. I was sent to gaol, and was in hopes there at least this 
usage would have ended; but was told it was reported I was frequently drunk; that I 
attempted to make my escape; that I did not attend at chapel. A more abstemious 
woman, my lord, I believe, does not live.
	"Upon the report of my making my escape, the gentleman who was high-
sheriff last year (not the present) came and told me, by order of the higher powers, he 
must put an iron on me. I submitted as I always do, to the higher powers. Some time 
after he came again, and said he must put a heavier one upon me; which I have worn, 
my lords till I came hither. I asked the sheriff why I was so ironed. He said he did it 
by command of some noble peer, on his hearing that I intended making my escape. I 
told him I never had any such thought, and I would bear it with the other cruel usage I 
had received on my character. The Reverend Mr Swinton, the worthy clergyman who 
attended me in prison, can testify I was regular at the chapel when ever I was well: 
sometimes I really was not able to come out, and then he attended me in my room. 
They have likewise published papers and depositions, which ought not to have been 
published, in order to represent me as the most abandoned of my sex, and to prejudice 
the world against me. I submit myself to your lordship, and to the worthy jury. I do 
assure your lordship, as I am to answer at the great tribunal where I must appear, I am 
as innocent as the child unborn of the death of my father. I would not endeavour to 
save my life at the expense of truth: I really thought the powder an innocent 
inoffensive thing; and I gave it to procure his love (meaning toward Cranstoun). It has 
been mentioned, I should say, I was ruined. My lord, when a young woman loses her 
character, is not that her ruin? Why, then, should this expression be construed in so 
wide a sense? Is it not ruining my character to have such a thing laid to my charge? 
And, whatever may be the event of this trial, I am ruined most effectually."
	The trial lasted eleven hours, and then the judge summed up the evidence, 
mentioning the scandalous behaviour of some people respecting the prisoner, in 
printing and publishing what they called depositions taken before the coroner relating 
to the affair before them: to which he added, "I hope you have not seen them; but, if 
you have, I must tell you, as you are men of sense and probity, that you must divest 
yourselves of every prejudice that can arise from thence, and attend merely to the 
evidence that has been given."
	The judge then summed up the evidence with the utmost candour; and the 
jury, having considered the affair, found her guilty without going out of court.
	After the conviction she behaved with the utmost decency and resignation. She 
was attended by the Reverend Mr Swinton, from whose hands she received the 
sacrament on the day before her execution, declaring that she did not know there was 
anything hurtful in the powders she had given her father.
	The night before her death she spent in devotion; and at nine in the morning of 
the 6th of April, 1752, she left her apartment, being dressed in a black bombasin, and 
having her arms bound with black ribands.
	The clergyman attended her to the place of execution, to which she walked 
with the utmost solemnity of deportment; and, when there, acknowledged her fault in 
administering the powders to her father; but declared that, as she must soon appear 
before the most awful tribunal, she had no idea of doing injury, nor any suspicions 
that the powders were of a poisonous nature.
	Having ascended some steps of the ladder, she said, "Gentlemen, don't hang 
me high, for the sake of decency." Being desired to go something higher, she turned 
about and expressed her apprehensions that she should fall. The rope being put round 
her neck, she pulled her handkerchief over her face, and was turned off on holding out 
a book of devotions which she had been reading.
	The crowd of spectators assembled on this occasion was immense; and when 
she had hung the usual time she was cut down, and the body, being put into a hearse, 
was conveyed to Henley, and interred with her parents, at one o'clock on the 
following morning.
	It will now be proper to return to Cranstoun, who was the original contriver of 
this horrid murdcr. Having heard of Miss Blandy's commitment to Oxford gaol, he 
concealed himself some time in Scotland, and then escaped to Boulogne, in France. 
Meeting there with Mrs. Ross, who was distantly related to his family, he acquainted 
her with his situation, and begged her protection; on which she advised him to change 
his name for her maiden name of Dunbar.
	Some officers in the French service, who were related to his wife, hearing of 
his concealment, vowed revenge, if they should meet with him, for his cruelty to the 
unhappy woman; on which he fled to Paris, from whence he went to Furnes, a town in 
Flanders, where Mrs. Ross had provided a lodging for his reception.
	He had not been long at Furnes when he was seized with a severe fit of illness, 
which brought him to a degree of reflection to which he had been long a stranger. At 
length he sent for a father belonging to an adjacent convent, and received absolution 
from his hands, on declaring himself a convert to the Romish faith.
	Cranstoun died on the 30th of November, 1752; and the fraternity of monks 
and friars looked on his conversion as an object of such importance, that solemn mass 
was sung on the occasion, and the body was followed to the grave not only by the 
ecclesiastics, but by the magistrates of the town.
	His papers were then sent to Scotland, to his brother, Lord Cranstoun; his 
clothes were sold for the discharge of his debts; and his wife came into possession of 
the interest of the fifteen hundred pounds above mentioned.
	This case is one of the most extraordinary that we shall have occasion to 
record in these volumes. The character and conduct of Cranstoun are infamous 
beyond all descrip tion. A married man seeking a young lady in marriage, deluding 
her by the vilest artifices, and the most atrocious falsehoods; and then murdering her 
father to obtain the object of his wishes, exhibits an accumulated picture of guilt to 
which no language can do justice. His sufferings afterwards appear to have been a 
providential punishment of his crimes. We are to hope that his penitence was sincere; 
but it is impossible to think highly of a religion that offers immediate pardon and 
absolution to a criminal, of whatever magnitude, on the single declaration of his 
becoming a convert to that religion.
	With regard to Miss Blandy, the public have ever been divided in opinion on 
her case. Those who have presumed on her innocence have tacitly acknowledged that 
she was very weak, which contradicts the accounts we have of her genius and mental 
acquirements. On the contrary, those who have insisted on her guilt, have made no 
allowances for the weakness of the female mind; nor considered the influence of an 
artful man over the heart of a girl in love.
	Her solemn declaration of her innocence would almost tempt one to think that 
she was innocent; for it is next to impossible to suppose that a woman of her sense 
and education would depart this life with a wilful lie in her mouth.
	Be all this as it may, an obvious lesson is to be learnt from her fate. -- Young 
ladies should be cautious of listening to the insidious address of artful love as they 
know not how soon, and how unsuspectedly, their hearts may be engaged to their own 
destruction, founded on the violation of all their nobler duties.


JOHN CATHER, PATRICK KANE, AND DANIEL 
ALEXANDER 
Pilloried for extortion, 1751.

	THERE are a set of villains constantly prowling for plunder in the metropolis 
and its environs, who extort money from men of property under threats of accusing 
them with some heinous or abominable crime.
	Oftentimes the gentleman thus singled out by these conspirators, though 
innocent, dreading even the breath of suspicion against his character, is terrified into 
consent to give them money; and, when once the devoted victim has thus yielded to 
their design, there is no end to the extortions from time to time made upon him; his 
whole fortune would scarce satisfy the rapacity of such rascals.
	In the present case the Hon. Edward Walpole became the mark of these 
extortioners. It appeared in evidence, on the trial of these men, that Mr. Walpole had 
been secretary to the Duke of Devonshire, while his grace was lord-lieutenant of 
Ireland; and, on his return to London, being in want of a confidential servant, he wrote 
to his friend Lord Boyle to procure him one, who some time after sent to England 
John Cather, the culprit above named, who was the son of one of his lordship's Irish 
tenants; but Mr. Walpole having in the meantime hired an English servant, with whom 
he was well satisfied, he declined taking him; but told him to remain in his house until 
a place could be found for him.
	Thus was Cather, when he committed the basest act of ingratitude, maintained 
like a gentleman, Mr. Walpole having, from time to time, even supplied him with 
pocket money.
	One day he was observed by one of Mr. Walpole's servants in new gay 
clothes, which he put on and off with much privacy, and slipped in and out of the 
house in a way that showed he did not wish to be seen in his new dress. This soon 
came to the knowledge of the master, who, confident that he could not honestly come 
by the means of procuring such articles, suspected he had been plundered, and forbade 
him his house.
	From this moment the ingrate meditated revenge; and, when the mind is prone 
to vice, we soon find an opportunity of putting it into practice. Cather, during the time 
he enjoyed Mr. Walpole's bounty, having no employ, formed acquaintance with bad 
characters; among whom were a gang of his own countrymen, who supported their 
excesses by extorting money: one of these was William Smith, who was hanged the 
3d of October then last past.
	These villains laid their snare for Mr. Walpole, but were therein caught 
themselves. He resisted their attempts, and caused them to be apprehended.
	On the 5th of July, John Cather, Patrick Kane, Daniel Alexander, and Dixon, 
were brought up to the King's Bench, charged with a conspiracy in swearing a 
disgraceful crime against the Hon. Edward Walpole. The trial lasted several hours, 
when they were found guilty, and received the following sentence:
	John Cather to stand three times in and upon the pillory: the first time at 
Charing Cross, the second in Fleet Street, and the third in Cornhill; to be kept to hard 
labour in Clerkenwell Bridewell for the term of four years; then to give security, 
himself in forty
	pounds, and two sureties in twenty pounds each, for his good behaviour for 
four years more.
	Patrick Kane to stand once upon the pillory, amid to be kept to hard labour in 
Clerkenwell Bridewell two years; then to give the like security for five years more.
	Daniel Alexander -- This man,
'O Name it not in Gath -- 
Proclaim it not in the streets of Ascalon,'
	was an attorney-at-law, and solicitor to the conspirators!
	The attorney, undoubtedly the greatest villain of the gang, was sentenced to 
stand once upon the pillory; to be imprisoned three years in the King's Bench Prison; 
to give security for good behaviour for three years more, himself in two hundred 
pounds, and two sureties in one hundred pounds each; and to be struck off the roll of 
attornies.
	Dixon ran away from his merited fate.
	The law, which confiscates a man's estate for stealing a penny, and hangs him 
for thieving to the amount of a shilling, had hardly provided adequate punishment for 
extortioners, conspirators, perjurers, swindlers, gamblers, and rogues of those 
descriptions.
	To some men (and surely all such men must be lost to shame) the pillory 
would be no punishment. To stand with the head and hands fastened to a block of 
wood for an hour, and where no pain arises from the punishment, would hold up no 
terror to evil-doers, were not the honest populace, indignant at the law's not hanging 
such diabolical villains by the neck on a gallows, in some measure to make good the 
defect. This was amply done on the present villains; they were most severely pelted 
and hooted.
	These exemplary punishments were exhibited in the latter end of the year 
1751.
	Dixon, above mentioned, for a while eluded the search made after him; but, 
being at length taken, he was brought to trial, and on the 4th of May, 1752, sentenced 
by the Court of King's Bench to be imprisoned two years, to find sureties for his good 
behaviour, and to stand once upon the pillory at Charing Cross, where the mob treated 
him with no less severity than they had already done his quondam friends in villainy.


ANTHONY DE ROSA 
Hanged at Tyburn for robbery and murder, 23rd March, 1752

	THIS malefactor was the son of an Englishman of Portuguese extraction; but 
his father, going abroad, settled in one of the Bermuda Islands, where be married a 
Portuguese woman, and Anthony was the first child of that marriage.
	His father, being at different times master of several vessels which traded up 
the Mediterranean, brought his son up as a seaman, and he continued with him till the 
old gentleman's death; but, when that event happened, he engaged himself as mate in 
another vessel, in which station be remained about two years.
	The vessel putting into the port of Lisbon, De Rosa embarked on hoard an 
English man of war bound to Ireland, and afterwards to this kingdom. When the ship's 
crew were paid off he quitted the naval service, lived in an idle manner, and supported 
himself some time by forging seamen's wills and powers. After this he became 
acquainted with Emanuel De Rosa, and one Fullagar, with whom he combined in the 
commission of robberies.
	On the 11th of June, 1751, Mr. William Farques, a young gentleman who lived 
in London, went to dine with his uncle, who kept an academy at Hoxton; and, having 
staid to supper, left the house about a quarter after ten o'clock, on his return to town.
	Between eleven and twelve o'clock on the night the murder was committed, 
Mr. Hendrop, of Hoxton, was going home to his house, when, seeing two men 
standing by a person lying on the ground, be asked what was the matter; to which one 
of them replied, 'I believe there is a gentleman murdered.' Mr. Hendrop took hold of 
his hand, and found it warm. He then lifted up the body of the wounded man, who 
seemed to attempt to speak, but was unable. He then observed that the body was 
bloody, and felt some blood withinside the clothes; on which he went to a public 
house in the neighbourhood, where, meeting some men who had a lantern, he returned 
with them to the spot; but the party was then dead, though by the clothes it was known 
to be Mr. William Farques; on which the body was carried to the house of his uncle.
	The coroner took an inquisition on this occasion, when the verdict of the jury 
was 'Wilful murder by persons unknown.' We have mentioned that this affair 
happened on the night of the 11th of June; but a discovery of the perpetrators of it did 
not arise till above six months afterwards.
	On the 26th of December Emanuel Be Rosa was apprehended as a disorderly 
person, and lodged in Bridewell, where the terrors of his conscience on the reflection 
of the murder were so great, that he determined to make a discovery of the affair, at 
once to ease his mind, and preserve his life by becoming an evidence for the crown.
	Having informed the keeper of Bridewell of his intention, he then sent to 
Anthony De Rosa to come and see him; on which he was taken into custody, having 
in his pocket a knife with which he had stabbed the deceased.
	Emanuel De Rosa, having given in his deposition before a magistrate, was 
admitted an evidence; and, when the trial came on at the Old Bailey, he swore to the 
following particulars:--
	That he had been acquainted with the prisoner about three years, and had been 
concerned with him in forgery, and defrauding people of money; that the prisoner 
came to his lodgings, near the Maypole, in East Smithfield, about nine o'clock on the 
night the robbery was committed; that they went together to the Minories, where they 
found Fullagar; when all three of them went down Houndsditeh, into Moorfields, 
towards the Barking Dogs (a public house opposite the late Mr. Whitefield's 
tabernacle), where many people were then walking. The prisoner said he wanted 
money that night, and bade them come along, and not be afraid of anything. They 
walked backwards and forwards for some time, thinking it was too soon to attack 
anybody, as the clock had not then struck ten.
	The prisoner soon afterwards said 'Let us cross over that road,' meaning by the 
Barking Bogs; and the gentleman who was murdered was coming alone in the middle 
of the path, when the prisoner asked him for his money. Mr. Farques said, 
'Gentlemen, I have no money for myself.' Upon this Fullagar gave him two or three 
blows on the head with a stick, which had a piece of iron on its head. Hereupon the 
gentle man turned round, on which Fullagar struck him on the back of the head; but, 
as he did not fall, Anthony De Rosa bade the evidence hold his arm, which he did, and 
the other drew a knife, and stabbed him five or six times in the breast and body, as 
fast as he could repeat the blows; and Fullagar at the same time striking him near the 
ear, he fell against the pales. The prisoner and Fullagar now searched his pockets, and 
the former produced eleven shillings only.
	The murderers now went together to the Nag's Head, on Tower Hill, and drank 
two pots of beer; and there the evidence received two shillings as his share of the 
plunder. About ten o'clock the next morning the prisoner called on the evidence, and 
bade him take care of himself, for that he and Fullagar were going down to Chatham.
	The reader is already apprised of the circumstance which led to the 
apprehension of Anthony De Rosa, on whose trial the knife with which he had 
stabbed Mr. Farques was produced; yet he steadily denied having any concern in the 
wicked transaction, and attempted to set up a defence, by endeavouring to prove an 
alibi: for Dorothy Black and her son swore that on the 11th of June the prisoner had a 
cold; and the woman added that she gave him a sweat, and that he was not out of her 
house one minute during the whole day and night; and this latter circumstance was 
likewise sworn to by the son.
	No credit, however, was given to the testimony of these evidences; the jury 
found the prisoner guilty, and the Court directed that Dorothy Black and her son 
should be taken into custody, to be tried for perjury.
	At the time of trial the prisoner was exceedingly debilitated by illness; but, 
being considerably recovered in about ten days, he was advised to make a full 
confession of the barbarous fact for which his life was so soon to pay the forfeit, and 
to consider the consequence of dying in the solemn attestation of a falsehood.
	In reply to this serious exhortation he said 'I am as innocent as the child 
unborn'; and, being farther urged on the subject, he exclaimed 'Would you have me 
own myself guilty of what I know no more of than you do? I know, if I be guilty and 
deny it, I must send my soul to the bottom of hell, which I hope I know better than to 
do.'
	He was equally obstinate at the place of execution in denying the fact for 
which he suffered, solemnly declaring to the last that ho knew nothing of the matter.
	He was hanged at Tyburn on the 23d of March, 1752.
	The horrid nature and unprovokedness of the crime which cost this man his 
life is almost without example. To the honour of this country he it remarked, that the 
instances of murder in consequence of robbery are fewer with us than in most of the 
other kingdoms of Europe; and we hope they will be fewer than they have been.
	The source of De Rosa's misfortunes appears to have been idleness; for, if he 
had followed the lawful calling in which he was brought up, be might have lived 
happy in himself, and been an useful member of society: instead of which be was cut 
off in the prime of life, (for he was only twenty-eight years of age when he suffered,) 
and became an object of public contempt and abhorrence.
	Of all things, then, let youth avoid idleness: let them consider that industry is 
the road to riches and honour; let them remember and apply the words of the poet:--
In works of labour or of skill, 
I would he busy too; 
For Satan finds some mischief still 
For idle hands to do.'


NICHOLAS MOONEY and JOHN JONES 
Executed at Bristol, May 24, 1752, for highway robbery.

	THERE was somewhat of a noble mind in the character of Mooney, though he 
suffered for an ignoble action. Many of the unfortunate men whose career we trace to 
an untimely end, have possessed hearts worthy of a better fate. Juvenile indiscretions 
have paved the way to enormities; and to support an ill-acquired habit, they have been 
driven to commit crimes, at which their minds have revolted. Melancholy, indeed, are 
our pictures of such men; and, if our drawings could but save one single youth from 
wandering into the road to ruin, our labours would be gratified in mental 
retrospection.
	The exposition of crimes and punishments goes to this end, and the editors 
sincerely, hope, that their comments will strike abhorrence in each reader against the 
violation of the laws, both of God and man.
	Nicholas Mooney and John Jones were condemned at Bristol, for a highway 
robbery. When brought to the bar, to receive sentence of death, Moony, who during 
the trial had pleaded for his fellow culprit Jones, thus addressed the Judge;
	"My Lord,
	"Permit me, again, to entreat for John Jones, whom I have inveigled and drawn 
into this trouble (as I have done many others before) that your Lordship will be 
pleased to spare his life.
	"As to my own part; I have committed many robberies and have been a rebel 
against my king, and have wronged my country, by coining money for which I can 
never make the public restitution, and therefore I am content to die, as I deserve.
	"I pray God to bless every one to whom I have done any wrong, and if there be 
any gentlemen of Bristol here, whom I have injured, I heartily ask their forgiveness, 
and more especially Mr. Washborough, (who stood near to the penitent culprit,) 
whom I attempted to murder, but God saved his life, for which I can never praise him 
enough."
	"My Lord,
	"I desire only three Sundays, and after that time has elapsed, I am willing to 
launch into eternity, and I hope, when I come to the place of execution, that God will 
open my mouth to warn all against my wicked course of life. I pray God to bless your 
Lordship, and this honourable Court, and may the Lord Jesus receive my soul!"
	On the 24th of May (three Sundays having passed since sentence was 
pronounced) Nicholas Mooney, John Jones, and William Cudmore, for returning from 
transportation before the time of his sentence had elapsed, were brought out of prison 
for execution.
	When arrived at the fatal tree, Mooney, in a pathetic manner, warned the 
surrounding multitude against deviating from the paths of rectitude, and warned them 
by his untimely fate.
	He left a letter to a gentleman who had been kind to him, in the following 
words
	Sir, 
	"Before I die, I take this opportunity of acknowledging your kindness to me in 
times past. Oh ! that I had deserved it; for then I had not brought myself into these 
circumstances. But God is wise, and seeing that; I do not hear his voice, and turn from 
my wicked life, he gave me up to my own heart's lust, and permitted me to fill up the 
measure of my iniquity, that in me at last should be shewn the severity of his justice.
	"You took me, the most abandoned wretch, for an honest man; and, as such, 
you kindly and generously recommended me where I might have done well -- it is my 
own fault I did not. On Friday I am to meet the fate my crimes too justly deserve. I 
merit not only death, but hell; to the former man has doomed me; from the latter, 
Christ, I hope, will save me. Oh ! the riches of his mercy in Jesus Christ, who has 
made, my prison as a palace, my chains as ornaments, and I am quite happy.. I hope 
every one will pray for me, that my faith fail not. I am longing for death, and in firm 
expectation of a glorious resurrection to eternal life. 
	"Your most obliged and dying servant, 
	"'N. MOONEY."
	When his irons were taken off, he smiling, said, "Death has no sting for me," 
and when released from this incumbrance, he ejaculated, "I have got rid of the chain 
of my sins;" and he appeared cheerful. When the executioner put the rope about his 
neck, he said, "Welcome halter, I am saved as the thief upon the cross;" coming to the 
fatal tree, his expression was, "Welcome gallows, for I have deserved thee many 
years."
	The executioner was about to tie up Jones; but, with much earnestness, 
Mooney exclaimed, "Tie me up first, for I am the greatest sinner;" and then said, "As 
the breath leaves my body, from my sincere repentance, I am confident I shall go to 
heaven." So saying, and we trust his words were verified, with the two, other 
unfortunate men, he yielded up his life; all of them hoping forgiveness in that to 
come.
"Parent of nature! Master of the world  
Where'er thy Providence directs, behold 
My steps with cheerful resignation turn, 
Fate leads the willing, drags the backward on. 
Why should I grieve, when grieving I must bear? 
Or take with guilt, what guiltless I might share?"


JOHN M'CANNELLY AND LUKE MORGAN 
A Daring Burglary committed in the House of Mr Porter, of the Raike 
Farmhouse, near Chester, by M'Cannelly, Morgan, Stanley, Boyd and Neill, 
Irish Haymakers, for which the first two were executed on the 25th of May, 
1752

	AS harvest approaches, numbers of the lowest class of Irish come over to the 
nearest counties in England, to be hired, as they receive better wages, and live better 
than in their own country, and a wild, ferocious, and knavish set generally mix among 
the industrious and honest, for the purpose of plundering their employers.
	Mr Porter, a wealthy farmer of Cheshire, had engaged a number of these 
people, in the year 1752, in his harvest-fields. One evening his house was beset by a 
gang of them, who forcibly broke open his doors, advanced to him while at his 
supper-table, seized and bound him with cords, at the same time, with horrid threats, 
demanding his money.
	They also seized his eldest daughter, pinioned her, and obliged her to show 
them where her father's money and plate were deposited. In the confusion the 
youngest daughter, a heroic little girl of thirteen years of age, made her escape, ran 
into the stable and got astride the bare back of a horse only haltered; but not daring to 
ride past the house beset by the rogues she galloped over the fields, leaping hedges 
and ditches, to Pulford, to inform her eldest brother of the danger they were in at the 
village. He and a friend, named Craven, determined on attacking the villains, and for 
that purpose set off at full speed, the little girl accompanying them.
	On entering his paternal roof the son found one of the villains on guard, whom 
he killed so instantaneously that it caused no alarm. Proceeding to the parlour, they 
found the other four in the very act of setting his father on the fire, after robbing him 
of fourteen guineas, in order to extort more. They had stripped down his breeches to 
his feet, and his eldest daughter was on her knees, supplicating for his life.
	What a sight was this for a son! Like an enraged lion, and backed by his brave 
friend, he flew upon them. They fired two pistols and wounded both the father and the 
son, and a servant-boy whom they had also bound, but not so as to disable them, for 
the son wrested a hanger from one of them, cleft the villain to the ground, and cut the 
others.
	The eldest daughter having unbound her father the old man united his utmost 
efforts by the side of his son and friend, and so hard did they press that the thieves 
jumped through a window and ran off.
	The young men pursued and seized two more on Chester Bridge, who dropped 
a silver tankard. The fifth got on board a vessel at Liverpool, of which his brother was 
the cook, bound for the West Indies; which sailed, but was driven back by adverse 
winds.
	The account of the robbery, with the escape of the remaining villain, having 
reached Liverpool, a King's boat searched every vessel, and at length found the 
robber, by the wounds he had received, and sent him in fetters to Chester jail.
	Mr Porter had a servant-man in the house at the time, a countryman of the 
robbers, who remained an unconcerned spectator, and, afterwards running away, he 
was also sent to prison, charged with being an accomplice. They were brought to trial 
at Chester Assizes, in March, 1752, and condemned.
	Boyd, on account of his youth, and his having endeavoured to prevail upon the 
others not to murder Mr Porter, had his sentence of death remitted for transportation. 
The hired servant of Mr Porter was not prosecuted.
	On the Thursday previous to the day fixed for execution Stanley slipped off 
his irons and, changing his dress, escaped out of jail, and got clear off. On the 25th of 
May, 1752, M'Cannelly and Morgan were brought out of prison in order to be hanged. 
Their behaviour was as decent as could be expected from such low-bred men. They 
both declared that Stanley, who escaped, was the sole contriver of the robbery.
	They died in the Catholic faith, and were attended by a priest.


THOMAS WILFORD 
A Cripple, who murdered his Wife in a Fit of Jealousy, and was executed at 
Tyburn on the 22nd of June, 1752

	THE jealous subject of our narrative was born of very poor parents, at Fulham, 
in the county of Middlesex; and, coming into the world with only one arm, he was 
received into the workhouse, where he was employed in going errands for the paupers 
and occasionally for the inhabitants of the town, and he was distinguished by his 
inoffensive behaviour.
	A girl of ill-fame, named Sarah Williams, being passed from the parish of St 
Giles-in-the-Fields to the same workhouse, had art enough to persuade Wilford to 
marry her, though he was then only seventeen years of age; and their inclinations 
being made known to the churchwardens they gave the intended bride forty shillings 
to enable her to begin the world.
	The young couple now went to the Fleet and were married, after which they 
took lodgings, in St Giles's; and it was only on the Sunday succeeding the marriage 
that the murder was perpetrated. On that day the wife, having been out with an old 
acquaintance, stayed till midnight, and on her return Wilford, who was jealous of her 
conduct, asked her where she had been. She said, "To the Park," and would give him 
no other answer; a circumstance that inflamed him to such a degree that a violent 
quarrel ensued, the consequence of which was fatal to the wife; for Wilford's passions 
were so irritated that he seized a knife and, she advancing towards him, he threw her 
down and, kneeling on her, cut her throat so that her head was almost severed from 
her body.
	He had no sooner committed the horrid deed than he threw down the knife, 
opened the chamber door, and was going downstairs, when a woman, who lodged in 
an adjacent room, asked who was there; to which Wilford replied: "It is me. I have 
murdered my poor wife, whom I loved as dearly as my own life."
	On this the woman went down to the landlord of the house, and was 
immediately followed by Wilford, who said he had killed the woman that he loved 
beyond all the world, and was willing to die for the crime he had committed; and he 
did not make the slightest effort to escape.
	On this the landlord called the watch, who, taking Wilford into custody, 
confined him for that night, and on the following day he was committed to Newgate 
by Justice Fielding.
	Being arraigned on the first day of the following sessions at the Old Bailey he 
pleaded guilty; but, the Court refusing to record his plea, he was put by till the last 
day, when he again pleaded guilty, but was prevailed on to put himself on his trial.
	Accordingly the trial came on, and the prisoner was found guilty. He was the 
first to suffer death in consequence of an Act passed in the year 1751 for the more 
effectual prevention of murder, which decreed that the convict should be executed on 
the second day after conviction: for which reason it was customary to try persons 
charged with murder on a Friday, by which indulgence, in case of conviction, the 
execution of the sentence was, necessarily postponed till Monday; and by the same 
Act it was ordained that the convicted murderer should be either hanged in chains or 
anatomised.
	The jury having found Wilford guilty, sentence against him was pronounced in 
the following terms:-- "Thomas Wilford, you stand convicted of the horrid and 
unnatural crime of murdering Sarah, your wife. This Court doth adjudge that you be 
taken back to the place from whence you came, and there to be fed on bread and water 
till Wednesday next, when you are to be taken to the common place of execution, and 
there hanged by the neck until you are dead; after which your body is to be publicly 
dissected and anatomised, agreeable to an Act of Parliament in that case made and 
provided; and may God Almighty have mercy on your soul!"
	Both before and after conviction Wilford behaved as a real penitent, and at the 
place of execution he exhibited the most genuine signs of contrition for the crime of 
which he had been guilty.


MOSES MORAVIA AND JOHN MANOURY 
Convicted at the Old Bailey, 27th of June, 1752, for sinking a Ship and 
swindling Insurers

	SHIP-INSURERS were about this time greatly defrauded by conspiracies of 
villains to sink vessels, in order to swindle the underwriters, and the utmost difficulty 
was always experienced in bringing the crimes home to them.
	It was usual for those who practised the imposition upon ship-insurers to 
purchase goods, pay for them, get them on board, and in the night-time take them 
clandestinely out of the ship and dispose of them for what they would bring.
	Thus when they had sunk the ship they could produce receipts for the goods, 
and the shipping papers for the same; upon which the insurers were compelled to pay 
the amount.
	This was precisely the crime proved upon these Jews, who, conspiring with 
one Samuel Wilson, who died before his trial came on, and Captain Misson, 
commander of the ship Elizabeth and Martha, sunk that fine ship at sea, in order to 
defraud the underwriters. Misson absconded, and a reward of fifty pounds was offered 
for apprehending him, but he was never brought to justice.
	Moravia and Manoury were arraigned for this offence at the bar of the Old 
Bailey, on the 27th of June, 1752, and, after a long trial, found guilty. Solomon 
Carolina, another Jew, was tried with them, as an accomplice; but, the proof not fully 
reaching him, he was acquitted.
	They were sentenced to a year's imprisonment in Newgate, and in that time to 
stand in the pillory, once on Tower Hill and once at the Royal Exchange; to pay a fine 
of twenty pounds each, and to find securities for their good behavior for five years, 
themselves in two hundred pounds each, and such other securities as the Court might 
require.


ANN WHALE AND SARAH PLEDGE 
Ann Whale, strangled and then burned, for the Murder of her Husband; and 
Sarah Pledge, hanged for being her Accomplice.

	ANN WHALE was born of respectable parents, at Horsham, in Sussex; but 
her father dying in her infancy, she was left to the care of her mother. Early in life she 
gave evidence of an uncontrollable disposition, and, having a dispute with her mother, 
she wandered into the country and associated with people of bad character; but her 
mother, in order to save her from ruin, at length prevailed on her to return home.
	Soon after this she was addressed by a sober young man, named James Whale; 
and as a relation had left her a legacy of eighty pounds, payable when she was of age, 
and the mother readily consenting to their alliance, the marriage took place. They had 
not been long wedded when they went to reside at a place called Steepwood; but soon 
returning to Horsham they took up their residence in the house of Sarah Pledge, who 
was distantly related to Mrs Whale.
	A short time after their abode there, a misunderstanding happening between 
the women, Mr Whale forbade Mrs Pledge to come into his apartment -- a 
circumstance that only tended to foment the quarrel. Soon afterwards, however, the 
women were privately reconciled; and as the man was remarkably sober, and they 
were of the opposite character, it is the less to be wondered at that they sought the 
means of his destruction.
	Mrs Whale having lain in, and being tolerably recovered, Mrs Pledge took the 
advantage of her husband's absence to come into her room, when she said: "Nan, let 
us get rid of this devil!" (meaning Mr Whale). The wife said: "How can we do it?" To 
which the other replied: "Let us give him a dose of poison."
	The abandoned woman too readily consented to this horrid proposal; and the 
only difficulty which appeared to arise was how the poison should be procured.
	They first attempted their purpose by roasting spiders and putting them into 
his beer, but finding this did not produce the effect, Mrs Pledge undertook to purchase 
something more efficacious, and for that purpose went to several market-towns; but as 
she went into each apothecary's shop she saw or fancied she saw, some person who 
knew her, or that her conscience interposed. At length she went to an apothecary at 
Horsham to whom she was a stranger, but was still afraid, though she made the 
purchase.
	Hastening to her more wicked friend, she gave her the bane, who with equal 
dispatch administered it; for at the moment her husband was fondling their child, on 
whom he doted, she mixed it in some hasty pudding prepared for his supper. 
Unsuspicious, the affectionate but unfortunate man ate, was soon seized with the 
racking torments occasioned by that corrosive mineral, and the next day expired; but, 
the neighbours suspecting that his death was occasioned by some sinister arts, a 
surgeon examined the body, and the coroner's jury being summoned brought in a 
verdict of "Wilful Murder."
	Thereupon Mrs Whale and Mrs Pledge were taken into custody, and carried 
before a magistrate. The latter wished to become evidence; but being separately 
examined, and both confessing the fact, they were committed to Horsham Jail. On 
their trials the confessions which they had signed were read and, some corroborative 
evidence arising, they were convicted, and received sentence of death.
	For some time after conviction Mrs Pledge behaved in the most hardened 
manner, making use of profane expressions, and declaring that she would fight with 
the hangman at the place of execution. On the contrary, Mrs Whale acknowledged the 
justice of the sentence which had condemned her, and gave evident signs of being a 
real penitent.
	On the evening preceding the execution the clergyman who attended them 
brought Mrs Pledge into a better state of mind, and then administered the Sacrament 
to both the convicts.
	They suffered on the 14th of August, 1752, at Horsham, in Sussex. An 
immense crowd attended at the place of execution where Pledge was hanged; and 
Whale, being tied to a stake, was first strangled and then burned to ashes, in the 
twenty-first year of her age.


WILLIAM MONTGOMERY 
Executed at Tyburn, December 2, 1752, for defrauding his 
creditors

	In a country like England, and more especially when we view the overgrown 
capital, though productive of crimes in fraudulent debtors, we must advocate acts of 
insolvency.
	The good of many must be pre-eminent to the villainy of a few; and, where we 
find one punished for the abuse of the lenity of the legislative body, we happily find 
thousands of unfortunate beings rescued from the horrors of a prison, where they had 
long been immured without the means of support, much less were they able to satisfy 
the demands of inexorable creditors.
	The necessity of good faith in contracts, and the support of commerce, oblige 
the legislature to secure for the creditors the person of the bankrupts; and in this point 
of view may the subject of this case, and all others who take the benefit of an act of 
insolvency, be considered.
	The fraudulent bankrupt should be punished in the same manner with him who 
adulterates the coin of the realm; for to falsify a piece of coin, which is a pledge of 
mutual obligations between men, is not a greater crime than to violate the obligations 
themselves.
	But the bankrupt who, after a strict examination, has proved before the 
commissioners that either the fraud or losses of others, or misfortunes unavoidable by 
human prudence, have stripped him of his substance, on what barbarous pretence is he 
thrown into prison, and thus deprived of the only remaining good, the melancholy 
enjoyment of mere liberty? Still more hard is the case of an unfortunate trader, who, 
disclosing his whole transactions, and offering to assign over to his creditors the 
remains of his stock, is cast into prison by a single hard-hearted unrelenting claimant. 
Yet this is constantly done in Britain.
	Why is such a man cast into a loathsome prison, ranked with criminals, and, in 
despair, compelled to repent of his honesty? Conscious of his innocence, he lived easy 
and happy under the protection of those laws, which, it is true, he violated, but not 
intentionally. Laws are dictated by the avarice of the rich, and tacitly accepted by the 
poor, seduced by that flattering and universal hope, which makes men believe that all 
unlucky accidents are the lot of others, and the most fortunate only their share.
	Mankind, when influenced by the first impressions, love cruel laws, although, 
being subject to them themselves, it is in the interest of every person that they should 
be as mild as possible; but the fear of being injured is always far more prevalent that 
the intention of injuring others.
	But, to return to the innocent bankrupt. Let his debt, if you will, not be 
considered as cancelled till payment of the whole; let him be refused the liberty of 
leaving the country with out leave of his creditors, or of carrying into another nation 
that industry, which, under a penalty, he should be obliged to employ for their benefit; 
but what pretence can justify the depriving of an innocent, though unfortunate, man of 
his liberty, without the least utility to his creditors?
	Then it may be in answer be said, that the hardships of confinement will 
induce him to discover his fraudulent transactions: an event that can hardly be 
supposed, after a rigorous examination into his conduct and affairs.
	It will be necessary to distinguish fraud, attended with aggravating 
circumstances, from simple fraud, and that from perfect innocence. For the first, let 
there be ordained the same punishment as for forgery. For the second, a punishment 
with the loss of liberty; and if perfectly innocent, let the bankrupt himself choose the 
method of re-establishing himself, and satisfying his creditors.
	With what ease might a sagacious legislator prevent the greatest part of 
fraudulent bankruptcies, and remedy the misfortunes that befall the innocent and 
industrious! A public register of all contracts, with the liberty of consulting it allowed 
to each tradesman -- a public fund, formed by the contribution of fortunate merchants, 
for the timely assistance of unfortunate industry -- would be the establishments that 
could produce no real inconveniences, but would be attended with numberless 
advantages.
	Many eminent bankers, in the history of the trade of London, by an 
unexpected run upon their house, must have become bankrupts, and thereby 
embarrassed thousands, had not the Bank of England come to their assistance; but 
alas! The unfortunate tradesman has no one to prevent his fall. Unhappily, the most 
simple, the easiest regulations, await only the nod of the legislator to diffuse through 
nations wealth, power and felicity; laws, which would be regarded by future 
generations with eternal gratitude, are either unknown or rejected. A restless and 
trifling spirit, the timid prudence of the present moment, and a distrust and aversion to 
the most useful motives, possess the minds of those who are empowered to regulate 
the actions of mankind.
	It must at the same time, be acknowledged, that the baseness of a few failures 
often tends to render callous the feelings of creditors.
	No act of insolvency has been carried into effect without the detection of 
fraud. Eager to embrace its benefits, and thus rid themselves of debt, men will wade 
through perjury, and employ every means to accomplish their purpose.
	After the destruction of the prisons in London, during the riots of the year 
1780, an act was passed for the purpose of absolving all who had been confined. Of 
this every rascal in London was ready to take the advantage. A mere form was only 
necessary, to enter their names; but the signatures, that Lord Chief Justice Mansfield, 
to his infinite honour, ordered the lists to be printed and published, which put to rout 
whole hives of impostors. Names were herein found that might as well have expected 
to appear in the list of Gazette promotions.
	A man of this description was the subject who led to this enquiry.
	William Montgomery was a native of Elphinstone, in Scotland, and educated 
in the Presbyterian form of religion.
	His father dying when he was about thirteen years old, his mother sent him to 
sea in a ship belonging to Alloa. Having continued in the naval line of business some 
years, he at length married, and opened a public house in Bishopsgate-street; and 
dealing largely as a smuggler, he frequently went to Holland, to bring home 
prohibited goods.
	Quitting Bishopsgate-street, he lived some years at the sign of the Highlander, 
in Shadwell; but, on the death of his wife, he resolved to decline business as a 
publican; and having saved some money, he entered again into the matrimonial state, 
and taking a lodging in Nightingale-lane, he let lodgings to seafaring men.
	Meeting with success, he took a shop as a seller of seamen's clothes; but left 
the care of it chiefly to his wife, while he employed his own time in frequent trips to 
Holland, in pursuit of his former illicit practice of smuggling.
	An act of insolvency passing in the year 1748, favourable to such persons as 
had been in foreign parts fugitives for debt, Montgomery took the benefit of it, 
swearing that he was at Rotterdam on the last day of the preceding year: in 
consequence of which, he was cleared of his debts, to the injury of his creditors.
	No notice was taken of this affair till the expiration of four years, when , 
Montgomery having arrested a neighbour, the man gave notice of his former 
transactions to one of his creditors, who laying an information before the lord mayor, 
Montgomery was lodged in Newgate on suspicion.
	Being brought to trial at the next sessions at the Old Bailey, several persons 
deposed that they spent the evening with him at his own house at the time he alleged 
that he was in Holland, in order to take the benefit of the act: so that he was convicted, 
and received sentence to die.
	For some time after conviction he behaved with apparent signs of devotion; 
but asserted his innocence, and said that the witnesses against him were perjured; and 
in this tale he continued till the arrival of the warrant for his execution.
	Being pressed by the divine who attended him to tell the truth, he persisted in 
the former story until the Friday before his death; but in the afternoon of that day he 
acknowledged, that after having been on board a Dutch vessel; in order to take his 
passage for Holland, he had come on shore, owing to the contrary winds.
	On the following day he insisted that, "as he had been sworn according to the 
methods used in Scotland, without kissing the book, his crime could not come within 
the meaning of the act". In rely to this he was told that the mode of administering 
could make no difference to the nature of an oath.
	Hereupon he made a full confession of his crime, and owned that, having 
come on shore, he concealed himself for some weeks in his own house; then appeared 
publicly, saying he had been at Rotterdam: after which he surrendered himself to the 
warden of the Fleet prison, and obtained the benefit of the act of insolvency.
	On the Sunday following, when he was pressed to declare the whole truth, he 
exclaimed, "What would you have me say? I have told you all the truth, and can say 
no otherwise than what I have done. If I did, I should belie myself, and my own 
knowledge."
	This malefactor appeared dreadfully shocked on the morning of execution, and 
wished for time for repentance, which he now considered highly necessary. At the 
place of execution he warned the spectators to beware of covetousness, which had 
been the cause of his destruction.


CAPTAIN PETER DE LA FONTAINE 
Convicted of Forgery

  
A tradesman's wife surprised by meeting her husband instead of De la Fontaine

	THE following short sketch of this artful and daring foreigner would furnish 
incident for a novel or a romance.
	De la Fontaine was born of noble parents in France, received a military 
education, and served at the siege of Phillipsburgh, under the Duke of Berwick.
	The campaign being ended, he went to Paris, where a gentleman invited him to 
spend some time at his country seat, when he fell in love with his daughter, who 
wished to marry him; but the father interposing, she eloped with her lover, and they 
lived a considerable time, as married people, at Rouen.
	On their return to Paris the young lady lodged in a convent; but De la Fontaine 
appearing in public, some officers of justice, seeing him in a coffee-house, told him 
they had the king's warrant for apprehending him: on which he wounded two of them 
with his sword; notwithstanding which he was seized, and lodged in prison.
	On this he wrote to the young lady, telling her he was obliged to go into the 
country on urgent business, but would soon return; and, having made an interest with 
the daughter of the keeper of the prison, she let him out occasionally, to visit his 
mistress.
	Being brought to trial for running away with an heiress, he would have been 
capitally convicted, agreeable to the laws of France, but that the young lady 
voluntarily swore that she went off with him by her own consent. Soon after his 
acquittal she was seized with the pains of labour, and died in child-bed.
	After this De la Fontaine went again into the army, and behaved so bravely at 
the battle near Kale, that the Duke of Berwick rewarded his courage with the 
commission of lieutenant of grenadiers.
	A young lady of Stratzburgh, who had fallen in love with De la Fontaine, at 
Paris, before his former connexion, now obtained a pass from the Marshal de 
Belleisle, and, being introduced to the Duke of Berwick, told him she wished to see 
De la Fontaine; and the duke, judging of the cause, ordered her to be conducted to 
him.
	On the following day she went to the duke, dressed in men's clothes, and, 
begging to enter as a volunteer in the same regiment with De la Fontaine, she was 
indulged for the novelty of the humour. She went through the regular duties of a 
soldier, and reposed in the same tent with her paramour; but, in the winter following 
the campaign, she died of small-pox, leaving a part of her fortune to her lover.
	The Duke of Berwick being killed at the siege of Phillipsburgh, De la Fontaine 
made the tour of Europe; but, returning to Paris, he fought a duel with an officer, who 
being dangerously wounded, our hero repaired to Brest, and embarked as lieutenant of 
marines on board a vessel bound for Martinico.
	The ship, being taken by a Turkish corsair, was carried into Constantinople, 
where De la Fontaine was confined in a dungeon, and had only bread and water for 
his sustenance. While in this situation he was visited by another prisoner, who had 
more liberty than himself, and who advised him, as the French consul was then 
absent, to apply to a Scotch nobleman then in the city, who was distinguished for his 
humane and generous feelings.
	De la Fontaine, having procured pen, ink, and paper, with a tinder-box to 
strike a light (all by the friendship of his fellow-prisoner), sent a letter to the 
nobleman, who had no sooner read it than he hurried to the cells, to visit the 
unfortunate prisoner.
	Having promised his interest to procure his enlargement, he went to the grand 
vizier, and pleaded his cause so effectually, that De la Fontaine was released, and 
went immediately to thank the vizier, who wished him happy, and presented him with 
a sum of money.
	Hence our adventurer sailed to Amsterdam, where, having a criminal 
connexion with a lady, who became pregnant, he embarked for the Dutch settlement 
of Curaçao; but, finding the place unhealthy, he obtained the governor's permission to 
go to Surinam, and continued above five years on that island.
	While in this place the governor invited him to a ball, where one of the 
company was a widow lady of rank, of whom he determined, if possible, to make a 
conquest; nor did he long fail of an opportunity, for, dining with her at the governor's 
house, they soon became very intimately acquainted.
	The consequence of their sociability was a residence as husband and wife; and 
four children were the fruits of the connexion, three of whom died; but the other, a 
boy, was educated by the governor of the island.
	Other officers having addressed the same lady, De la Fontaine was 
occasionally involved in difficulties on her account.
	One of these officers having traduced him in his absence, our hero, on meeting 
him, bid him draw his sword; but the other refused, on which De la Fontaine struck 
him with his cane, and cut off one of his ears.
	On this our adventurer was seized, and tried by a court-martial, but acquitted; 
and the officer degraded, on account of the provocation he had given; and from this 
time De la Fontaine was treated with unusual marks of civility.
	He still lived on the best terms with the lady, and their affection appeared to be 
reciprocal.
	The governor bestowed on him a considerable tract of land, which he 
cultivated to great advantage; but the malice of his enemies was so restless, that they 
prevailed on one of his negro servants to mix a dose of poison in his food.
	Unsuspicious of any villainy, he swallowed the poison, the consequence of 
which was, that he languished several months: and the lady, affected by his situation, 
gave way to melancholy, which brought on a consumption, that deprived her of life.
	After her death De la Fontaine obtained the governor's permission to return to 
Europe, and lived for some time in a splendid manner at Amsterdam; but at length 
determined to embark for England.
	Having arrived in London, he took elegant lodgings, lived in the style of a 
gentleman, and made several gay connexions.
	Among his acquaintance was Zannier, a Venetian, who had been obliged to 
quit his own country on account of his irregularities. This man possessed such an 
artful address, that De la Fontaine made him at all times welcome to his table, and 
admitted him to a considerable share of his confidence.
	Zannier soon improved this advantage; for, contriving a scheme with an 
attorney and bailiff, he pretended to have been arrested for three hundred pounds, and 
prevailed on his new friends to bail him, on the assurance that he had a good estate in 
Ireland, and would pay the money before the return of the writ; but, when the term 
arrived, our hero was compelled to discharge the debt, as Zannier did not appear.
	Hitherto De la Fontaine had been in London without making any connexion 
with the ladies; but, there being a procession of freemasons at that time, he dressed 
himself in the most superb taste, and his chariot being the most elegant of any in the 
procession, he was particularly noticed by the spectators.
	Among the rest, the daughter of an alderman had her curiosity so much 
excited, that she caused inquiry to be made who he was; and on the following day sent 
him a letter, intimating that she should be at a ball at Richmond, where he might have 
an opportunity of dancing with her.
	Our hero did not hesitate to comply; and, when the ball was ended, he received 
an invitation to dine with the young lady on the following day, at her father's house. 
He attended accordingly; but the father, having learnt his character, insisted that she 
should decline his visits, which put an end to all his hopes from that quarter.
	The circumstances of our hero being greatly reduced, he resolved, if possible, 
to repair them by marriage, and was soon afterwards wedded to a widow of 
considerable fortune; but his taste for extravagance rendered this fortune unequal to 
his support; nor was his conduct to his wife by any means generous.
	Soon after his marriage he was at the lord mayor's ball, where he made the 
acquaintance with the wife of a tradesman, which ended in a criminal connexion.
	The parties frequently met at taverns and bagnios; and De la Fontaine having 
written to the lady, appointing her to meet him at a tavern, the letter fell into the hands 
of her husband, who communicated the contents to her brother, and the letter was 
sealed up, and delivered according to its address.
	The brothers agreed to go to the tavern, where they told the waiter to show any 
lady to them who might inquire for De la Fontaine.
	In a short time the lady came, and was astonished to be introduced to her 
brother and husband: but the latter was so affected, that he promised a full remission 
of all that was passed, on her promise of future fidelity. These generous terms she 
rejected with contempt, and immediately left the room.
	De la Fontaine, being acquainted with this circumstance, was impressed with a 
sense of the husband's generous behavior, and advised the lady to return to her duty. 
At first she insulted him for his advice, but at length thought proper to comply with it.
	Our hero now saw his own conduct in an unfavourable light; on which he went 
into the country with his wife for some time, to avoid his old associates, and then 
returned to London, determined to abandon his former course of life.
	Unfortunately, however, he had not long formed this resolution, when Zannier 
went to him, begging his forgiveness for obliging him to pay the debt. De la Fontaine 
too easily complied with his request, and once more considered him as a friend.
	Zannier and De la Fontaine, going to a tavern, met with a woman whom the 
latter had formerly known, and a man who was dressed in black. While De la Fontaine 
was conversing with the woman, the stranger (who afterwards appeared to be a Fleet 
parson) read the marriage-ceremony from a book which he held in his hand; and the 
next week De la Fontaine was apprehended on a charge of bigamy, and committed for 
trial at the Old Bailey.
	The villain Zannier visiting him in Newgate, De la Fontaine was so enraged at 
his perfidy, that he beat him through the press-yard with a broomstick with such 
severity, that the turnkey was obliged to interpose to prevent murder.
	In revenge of this, Zannier swore that De la Fontaine had been guilty of 
forgery, in imitating the handwriting of a gentleman named Parry: in consequence of 
which De la Fontaine was brought to his trial, and capitally convicted, though a 
gentleman swore that the writing resembled that of Zannier, and there was too much 
reason to believe that his hand committed the forgery.
	Yet the jury found De la Fontaine guilty; the Court sentenced him to death, 
and the day was appointed for his execution. He was, however, respited, and this was 
from time to time continued, during five years, then he was pardoned on condition of 
transportation.
	In September, 1752, with many other convicts, he was shipped to the English 
colony of Virginia, in America.
	The villainy of Zannier, and the consequence of dissipation in the life of De la 
Fontaine, are the circumstances proper for remark on this occasion. The man who, 
like the former, could abuse the confidence of a trusting friend, is unworthy of all 
pity, and deserving only of general de testation.
	It is to be lamented that the forgery could not have been fixed on Zannier, in 
which case he would probably have met with the due reward of his villainy. With 
regard to De la Fontaine, we see that a life of dissipation ends only in disgrace, if not 
in absolute destruction. The fate of this man should teach us that the plain path of 
virtue and religion can alone be the high road to happiness.


DR. A. CAMERON 
Executed at Tyburn, 7une 7, 1753 (greatly lamented) for High Treason.

	As the rebellion was suppressed, and the British nation enjoyed internal peace, 
we could almost have wished the royal mercy had been extended to Dr. Cameron; as 
he took so small a part in the crime for which he suffered, and was drawn into it by 
attending, in his professional capacity, upon his elder brother.
	The brother of this unfortunate man was the chief of the family of their name 
in the Highlands, and had obtained the highest degree of reputation by his zealous and 
effectual endeavours to civilize the manners of his countrymen.
	Dr. Cameron, being intended by his father for the profession of the law, was 
sent to Glasgow; where he continued his studies some years; but, having an 
attachment to the practice of physic, he entered in the university of Edinburgh; 
whence he went to Paris, and then completed his studies at Leyden in Holland.
	Though well qualified to have cut a respectable figure in any capital city, yet 
he chose to reside for life near his native place; and, having returned to the Highlands, 
he married, and settled in the small town of Lochaber; where, though his practice was 
small, his generous conduct rendered him the delight and the blessing of the 
neighbourhood. His wife bore him seven children, and was pregnant of the eighth at 
the unfortunate period of his death.
	While Dr. Cameron was living happy in the domestic way, the rebellion broke 
out, and laid the foundation of the ruin of himself and his family. The Pretender 
having landed, went to the house of Mr M'Donald, and sent for the doctor's brother, 
who went to him, and did all in his power to dissuade him from an undertaking from 
which nothing but ruin could ensue.
	The elder Mr Cameron having previously promised to bring all his clan in aid 
of the Pretender, the latter upbraided him with an intention of breaking his promise; 
which so affected the generous spirit of the Highlander, that he immediately went and 
took leave of his wife, and gave orders for his vassals, to the number of near twelve 
hundred, to have recourse to arms.
	This being done, he sent for his brother, to attend him as a physician; but the 
doctor urged every argument against so rash an undertaking; from which he even 
besought him on his knees to desist. The brother would not be denied; and the doctor 
at length agreed to attend him as a physician, though he absolutely refused to accept 
any commission in the rebel army.
	This unhappy gentleman was distinguished by his humanity; and gave the 
readiest assistance, by night or day, to any wounded men of the royal army, who were 
made prisoners by the rebels. His brother being wounded in the leg at the battle of 
Falkirk, he attended him with the kindest assiduity, till himself was likewise slightly 
wounded.
	Dr. Cameron exhibited repeated instances of his humanity; but when the battle 
of Culloden gave a decisive stroke to the hopes of the rebels, he and his brother 
escaped to the western islands, whence they sailed to France, in a vessel belonging to 
that kingdom.
	The doctor was appointed physician to a French regiment, of which his brother 
obtained the command; but the latter dying at the end of two years, the doctor became 
physician to Ogilvie's regiment, then in Flanders.
	A subscription being set on foot, in England and Scotland, in the year 1750, 
for the relief of those persons who had been attainted, and escaped into foreign 
countries; the doctor came into England to receive the money for his unfortunate 
fellow sufferers. At the end of two years another subscription was opened; when the 
doctor, whose pay was inadequate to the support of his numerous family, came once 
more to this country, and having written a number of urgent letters to his friends, it 
was rumoured that he was returned.
	Hereupon, a detachment from Lord George Beauclerk's regiment was sent in 
search of him, and he was taken in the following manner: -- Captain Graves, with 
thirty soldiers, going towards the place where it was presumed he was concealed, saw 
a little girl at the extremity of a village, who, on their approach, fled towards another 
village. She was pursued by a servant and two soldiers, who could only come near 
enough to observe her whispering to a boy, who seemed to have been placed for the 
purpose of conveying intelligence.
	Unable to overtake the boy, they presented their guns at him; on which he fell 
on his knees, and begged his life; which they promised, on the condition that he would 
shew them the place where Dr. Cameron was concealed.
	Hereupon the boy pointed to the house where he was, which the soldiers 
surrounded, and took him prisoner. Being sent to Edinburgh, he was thence conducted 
to London, and committed to the Tower.
	While in this confinement, he was denied the use of pen, ink, and paper, and 
was not suffered to speak to his friends but when the warder was present. On his 
examination before the lords of the privy-council, be denied that he was the same Dr. 
Cameron whose name had been mentioned in the act of attainder; which made it 
necessary to procure living evidence to prove his identity.
	Being brought to the bar of the court of king's-bench on the 17th of May, he 
was arraigned on the act of attainder, when, declining to give the court any farther 
trouble, he acknowledged that he was the person who had been attainted: on which the 
lord chief justice Lee pronounced sentence in the following terms: "You, Archibald 
Cameron, of Lochiel, in that part of Great Britain called Scotland, must be removed 
from hence to his majesty's prison of the Tower of London, from whence you came, 
and on Thursday, the 7th of June next, your body to be drawn on a sledge to the place 
of execution; there to be hanged, but not till you are dead; your bowels, to be taken 
out, your body quartered, your head cut off, and affixed at the king's disposal; and the 
Lord have mercy on your soul!"
	After his commitment to the Tower, he begged to see his wife, who was then 
at Lisle in Flanders; and, on her arrival, the meeting between them was inexpressibly 
affecting. The unhappy lady wept incessantly, on reflecting on the fate of her 
husband, herself, and numerous family.
	Coming to take her final leave of him on the morning of execution she was so 
agitated by her contending passions, that she was attacked by repeated fits; and, a few 
days after the death of her unfortunate husband, she became totally deprived of her 
senses.
	On the 7th of June, the sheriffs went to the Tower, and demanded the body of 
Dr. Archibald Cameron, who was accordingly brought to them by William Ranford, 
Esq. the deputy-lieutenant.
	As soon as he was seated on the sledge, whereon he was to be drawn to the 
place of execution, he requested to speak to his wife, but being informed that she had 
left the Tower, after taking leave of him, at eight o'clock, he replied, he was sorry for 
it; upon which the sledge moved towards Tyburn, among a great number of 
spectators, who all pitied his situation.
	The doctor was dressed in a light-coloured coat, red waistcoat and breeches, 
and a new bag-wig. He looked much at the spectators in the houses and balconies, as 
well as at those in the streets, and bowed to several persons with whom he had been 
acquainted.
	At a quarter past twelve the solemn procession reached the place of execution, 
where he looked on the officers and spectators, with an undaunted and composed 
countenance; and as soon as unloosed from the sledge, he started up, and with a heroic 
deportment, stept up into the cart, whence looking round with unconcern on all the 
apparatus of death, he smiled. Seeing the clergyman, that had before attended him, 
coming up the steps, he came forward to meet him, and endeavoured, with his fettered 
hands, to help him up, saying, "So, you are come: -- this is a glorious day to me! -— 
'tis my new birthday! -— there are more witnesses at this birth than at my first"
	The clergyman being now at the side of the cart, asked "how he felt himself;" 
he answered, "thank God, I am very well, but a little fatigued with my journey: but, 
blessed be God, I am now come to the end of it."
	The sheriff asked the clergyman, whether he would be long about his office, 
Dr. Cameron immediately took the words, and said, he required but very little time; 
for it was disagreeable to be there, and he was as impatient to be gone as they were.
	This truly unfortunate man then told the sheriff, he would no longer presume 
upon his patience; but the sheriff, with looks that shewed a great deal of concern, 
begged he would take as much time as he pleased, for he would wait until he was 
ready. The doctor thanked him. He turned to the clergy man, and said, "I have now 
done with this world, and am ready to leave it."
	He now joined him in some short prayers, and repeated some ejaculations out 
of the Psalms; then embraced the clergyman and took his farewell.
	As the divine was going down from the cart, he had nearly missed the steps, 
which the doctor observing, called to him in a cheerful tone of voice, saying, "Take 
care how you go; I think you don't know this way as well as I do;" and now, giving 
the signal, the cart drew from under him.
	The body, after hanging twenty minutes, was cut down: it was not quartered; 
but the heart was taken out and burnt. On the following Sunday, the remains of Dr. 
Cameron were interred in a large vault in the Savoy chapel.


CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON AND JOHN STOCKDALE 
Executed at Tyburn, 3rd of July, 1753, and their Bodies hanged in Chains, 
for Murder

	CHRISTOPHER JOHNSON was born in Newgate, both his parents being 
convicted of fraud. Having imbibed false ideas of gentility, he procured some elegant 
clothes and frequented the gaming-houses, where he soon made the most dangerous 
connections and arrived at the head of his profession.
	From the practice of gaming he took to that of forgery, at which he was 
remarkably expert in imitating the hands of other people to notes payable to himself; 
by which he repeatedly acquired money, but still escaped detection.
	His daring was such that he sometimes arrested persons on whom he had 
committed forgeries and compelled the payment of the money, by having people 
ready to swear that the handwriting was that of the party whose name was subscribed 
to the draft.
	The following is one specimen of his devices. He forged a note on a lady of 
considerable fortune, and signed her name to it so like her writing that she almost 
discredited her own sight when she read it. Johnson arrested her. But as she knew she 
had given no such note, she bailed the action and prepared to stand trial; but the guilty 
man declined all further proceedings.
	After this Johnson took to picking pockets and other low practices of defraud; 
but a miserable poverty still attended him, for what he got dishonestly was soon spent 
in dissipation. At length he met John Stockdale, at Sadler's Wells, and agreed to see 
him the next evening at a house in Holborn.
	Stockdale was born at Leicester, where his father was a reputable proctor, who 
gave him an excellent education, but was too fond of him to keep that strict guard 
over his conduct which might have been essential to his future welfare. He very soon 
showed a disposition to idleness, which was not properly checked by his parents, who 
would not permit his schoolmaster to chastise him for his faults. When the father saw 
his error he determined, in pursuance of the advice of some friends, to send him to a 
proctor in Doctors' Commons, where he hoped to hear of a speedy reformation in his 
manners. Stockdale, however, was of too idle a disposition to brook confinement. His 
extravagance exceeded the bounds of his father's allowance, and he borrowed of his 
acquaintances to supply his immediate wants. In this way he went on frequenting 
places of public diversion, till those who had lent him money teased him for a return 
of it; and he was at a loss for further resources when he met Johnson at Sadler's Wells.
	On the following day these ill-fated youths met at the appointed place and 
made a contract for their mutual destruction. At this time Johnson was under twenty 
and Stockdale not eighteen years of age. Stockdale agreed to accompany Johnson, and 
the next day they hired horses and rode towards Romford, near which the party lived 
whom they intended to rob; and having wasted the time till night, they tied their 
horses to a hedge and, being armed with pistols, knocked at the door, which was 
opened by the old gentleman. Johnson presented a pistol to his breast, and then they 
bound him and his two servants, and told the master that he must expect immediate 
death if he did not discover where his money was concealed.
	Terrified by this threat, he told them to take a key from his pocket which 
would open a bureau, where they would find a bag containing all the cash then in his 
possession. The robbers having seized the property, Johnson put the bag into his 
pocket and then remounted and rode to London, where they found the booty to consist 
of one hundred and fifty pounds; but this they soon dissipated in acts of extravagance, 
and then proceeded to commit a number of robberies on the roads of Essex and Kent.
	They took horses in Holborn, and, having ridden to Edmonton, turned up a 
lane, where they met a postman, who was carrying letters round the neighbourhood. 
The man good-naturedly opened the gate for them to pass, when Johnson demanded 
his money and watch, which he held out to them, and at that instant was shot dead by 
Stockdale.
	The murder was no sooner committed than they hastened to London; and, 
though the country was alarmed by what had happened, they rode on the following 
day to Hounslow, where they dined. After dinner they called for their horses, but 
Stockdale was so intoxicated that he at first fell from the horse, but was replaced.
	The magistrates having by this time sent out a number of constables, the 
murderers were taken into custody and carried before a magistrate, when Stockdale 
acknowledged his guilt; but by this time Johnson was so drunk that he was insensible 
of his confinement to Newgate.
	When brought up to receive sentence of death, Johnson was so unwell that he 
was indulged with a chair. Stockdale kept up his spirits with decent fortitude until his 
eyes met those of a gentleman near him with whom he had lived, when he burst into 
tears, and continued in great agitation the remainder of the awful time, frequently 
beating his head and breast in a violent manner.
	Johnson was so extremely debilitated that he could pay no attention at the 
place of execution to the preparation of his soul for another life; but Stockdale prayed 
fervently, and made a pathetic address to the populace at the fatal tree. After hanging 
the usual time their bodies were taken to Surgeons' Hall for dissection; and 
preparations for that purpose were being made when an order came from the office of 
the Secretary of State that they should be hung in chains on Winchmore Hill, where 
they were accordingly placed.


WILLIAM SMITH 
Executed at York, 14th Of August, 1753, for poisoning Thomas Harper, his 
Stepfather, and his two Children, William and Anne Harper

	WILLIAM SMITH was a farmer in good circumstances at Great Broughton, 
in the county of York. His mother had married a second husband, one Thomas Harper, 
of Ingleby Manor, who had already two children. Smith therefore wished to rid 
himself of those whom he considered obtruders between him and his prospects from 
his late father's estate.
	After forming several diabolical plans for cutting them off, and his resolution 
as often failing him, being one day in an apothecary's shop purchasing some physic 
for his horses, the evil spirit whispered to him that the means were at hand, and he 
immediately asked for a little arsenic to kill the rats in his barn. The apothecary, not 
suspecting a man of Smith's respectability meant the deadly powder for any other use, 
sold him twopennyworth.
	The day chosen by this now-determined sinner to administer the poison was 
the Good Friday of the year 1753, when, observing a large cake being prepared, of 
which some neighbours had been invited to partake, he unperceived, as he imagined, 
mixed it with the flour, and thus it was served up to the table.
	It providentially happened that the neighbours did not come to dinner, and 
none ate of the cake except Thomas Harper and two of his children, William and 
Anne.
	Having made preparations for flight, the murderer, the moment he found his 
wickedness had taken its desired effect, set off for Liverpool, from which a suspicion 
arose that he was the perpetrator of the horrid deed.
	The unfortunate people languished in excruciating torments until the next day, 
when they expired.
	No sooner had Smith reached Liverpool than his conscience began to rebuke 
him, and having no kind of employment his existence became a burden to him. Nor 
could he find the least respite until he returned to the very spot where he committed 
the murder, where he was immediately apprehended, and confessed his crime.
	At the autumn assizes for the county of York, before Mr Serjeant Eyre, Smith 
was, on his own confession, the evidence of the apothecary, and a maid-servant who 
saw him busy with the flour, with other corroborating circumstantial evidence, found 
guilty, and received sentence of death.


MARY SQUIRES and ELIZABETH CANNING 
The first was convicted of robbery, and pardoned; the second was convicted 
of, and transported for, Perjury, in swearing to that robbery.

	THERE is so much of mystery in the following case, that it seems beyond the 
bounds of human sagacity to determine on which side the merit lies. The story, with 
all its particulars, must be within the memory of many of our readers, who have 
already formed their opinion of it; and it has been of such public notoriety, that few 
persons can be wholly unacquainted with it: we shall, therefore, only give an abridged 
account, fairly stated from the evidence as it arose, without favour or affection to 
either party.
	If Elizabeth Canning's own story may be credited, she quitted the house of her 
mother, near Aldermanbury, on the first of January, 1753; and, having visited her 
uncle and aunt, who lived near Saltpetre-bank, was, on her return, assaulted in 
Moorfields by two men, who robbed her of half a guinea, which was in a small box in 
her pocket, and three shillings that were loose. They also took her gown, apron, and 
hat, which one of them put into the pocket of his great-coat; on which she screamed 
out; but he bound a handkerchief round her mouth, and tied her hands behind her, 
after which, she received a violent blow on the head, which, added to her former 
terror, occasioned her falling into a fit, a disorder to which she had been subject about 
four years.
	On her recovery from the fit, and about half an hour before she reached 
Wells's house, she found herself by the road side, the two men dragging her forward. 
She observed water near the road, and arrived at the house where she said she was 
confined about three hours before day-light. When she came into the house, she did 
not see the mistress of it, Susannah Wells; but saw Mary Squires, a gipsey, and two 
girls.
	Squires taking Canning by the hand, asked her if she chose to go their way, 
and, if she would, she should have fine cloaths. Canning, understanding that her 
meaning was to commence prostitute, replied in the negative; on which Squires took a 
knife from a drawer, cut the lace from her stays, and took them from her. Then 
Squires pushed her up a few stairs out of the kitchen, to a place called the Hayloft, and 
shut the door on her. On the approach of daylight, she found that the room had neither 
bed nor bedstead, and only hay to sleep on; that there was a black pitcher nearly full 
of water, and about twenty-four pieces of bread, in the whole about the quantity of a 
quartern-loaf; and that she had in her pocket a penny minced-pie, which she had 
bought to carry to her brother.
	She said, that she covered herself with a bedgown and handkerchief, which 
she found in the grate; and that, for the space of twenty-eight days within a few hours, 
which she remained there, she had no food nor liquor except what is abovementioned, 
nor had the common evacuation of nature.
	About four in the afternoon of Monday the 29th of January, she pulled down a 
board that was nailed on the inside of the window, and getting her head first out, she 
kept fast hold by the wall, and then dropped into a narrow place by a lane, behind 
which was a field.
	Having got into the highway, she enquired her way to London, but did not 
stop. When she came into Moorfields the clock struck ten; and she thence prpceeded 
to her mother's near Aldermanbury, where she told the above story to two gentlemen 
with whom she had lived as a servant: to which she added, that the place where she 
had been confined was near the Hertfordshire road, which was evident from her 
having seen a coachman drive by, who had frequently carried her mistress into 
Hertfordshire.
	A number of circumstances giving reason to suspect that the house in which 
she had been confined was that of Susannah Wells, a warrant was issued to apprehend 
her and Squires, and such other people as might be found in the house.
	Mr Lion, with whom she had lived servant, and several other persons, went 
with her to execute the warrant. When she came to the place, she fixed on Mary 
Squires as the person who bad robbed her; and she said that Virtue Hall stood by 
while her stays were cut off.
	On this, all the parties were carried before Justice Tysh maker; when Hall so 
solemnly denied all knowledge of any such transaction having happened since she had 
been in the house, that she was discharged; but Squires was committed to New-prison 
for the robbery, and Wells for aiding and abetting her.
	Soon afterwards, justice Fielding was applied to for a warrant for the 
apprehension of Hall, and she was examined before the magistrate for six hours, 
during which she continued in her former declaration. At length the justice said, that 
'he would examine her no longer, but would commit her to prison, and leave her to 
stand or fall by the evidence that should be produced against her;' and he advised an 
attorney to prosecute her as a felon.
	Hereupon she begged to be heard, and said she would tell the whole truth: and 
the substance of her declaration was, that Canning had been at Mrs Wells's, and was 
robbed in the manner that she herself had declared.
	On this, Squires and Wells were brought to trial at the Old Bailey, and 
convicted, principally on the evidence of Virtue Hall, the first for assaulting and 
robbing Elizabeth Canning, and the latter for harbouring, concealing, and comforting 
her, well knowing her to have committed the robbery: and John Gibson, William 
Clark, and Thomas Grevil, having positively sworn that Squires was in Dorsetshire at 
the time when the robbery was said to have been perpetrated, they were committed to 
be tried for perjury.
	Some gentlemen who had heard the trial, being dissatisfied with the evidence, 
made such application, that a free pardon was granted to Squires.
	In the mean time, numbers of people were of opinion that the countrymen had 
sworn to the truth; and measures were accordingly taken to indict Canning for perjury: 
but, at the next sessions, her friends preferred bills of indictment against the men. 
Bills of indictment against the opposite parties being brought at the same time, the 
grand jury threw them all out; being resolved not to give any countenance to such a 
scene of perjury as must arise on one side or the other.
	This happened at the sessions in April; but, at the next sessions, in June, bills 
of indictment were found against the countrymen: these, however, were intended to be 
removed into the court of King's Bench, by writ of certiorari; but the court refused to 
grant the writ, alledging, that the indictments ought to be tried at the Old Bailey, 
because the king's commission of gaol-delivery was directed to that court. Hereupon 
the countrymen were bailed; and, at the sessions held in the month of September 
following, they were arraigned, but were honourably acquitted, no person appearing 
to give evidence against them.
	Squires being pardoned, and these men thus acquitted, the public opinion of 
this singular case became still more divided. Every one saw that there must have been 
perjury in the affair; but it was impossible to determine on which side it lay.
	The lord mayor of London, at that time, was Sir Crisp Gascoyne, who exerted 
himself in the most vigilant manner to come at the truth of this mysterious affair; for 
which, as is but too common, he was abused with a degree of virulence that reflected 
the highest infamy on his calum niators; for, whatever might be their private opinion, 
or whatever his own, it was certainly the duty of a good magistrate to endeavour to 
investigate the truth.
	In the month of May, 1754, Elizabeth Canning was indicted at the Old Bailey 
for wilful and corrupt perjury, in swearing, that she had been robbed by Mary Squires. 
A great number of witnesses swore that Squires was near Abbotsbury at the time that 
the robbery was said to have been committed: and, on the dontrary, more than thirty 
persons of reputation declared on oath, that Canning's character stood so fair, that they 
could not conceive her capable of being guilty of suchan atrociods crime as wilful 
perjury.
	Ingenious arguments were used by the council on each side; and the jury, after 
mature deliberation, brought in a verdict, that she was guilty; in consequence of 
which, she received sentence to be transported for seven years.
	No affair that was ever determined in a judicial way did, perhaps, so much 
excite the curiosity, or divide the opinion of the public, as that in question. The 
newspapers and magazines were for a long time filled with little else than accounts of 
Canning and Squires: prints of both parties were published, and bought up with great 
avidity. Canning was remarkable for what is called the plainness, and Squires for the 
ugliness, of person; and perhaps there never was a human face more disagreeable than 
that of the latter.
	We should hardly be thought to exceed the truth, if we were to say that ten 
thousand quarrels arose from, and fifty thousand wagers were laid on, this business. 
All Great Britain and Ireland seemed to be interested in the event: and the person who 
did not espouse either one party or the other was thought to have no feeling. The first 
question in the morning was, 'What news of Canning?' and the last squabble at night 
was, whether she was honest or perjured; but this, however, could never be 
determined; and it will probably remain a mystery as long as the world endures.
	Elizabeth Canning was transported to New England on the 31st of July, 1754, 
having first received some hundred pounds collected by the bounty of her friends and 
partizans.
	She was afterwards reputably married in America; and the newspapers gave 
notice, that she died some years ago in that country.
	From this story we may learn two useful lessons, on the fallibility of human 
testimony, and the horrid crime of perjury. If Canning was guilty, her crime was of 
the most enormous magnitude, that of endeavouring to swear away a life, in order to 
cover, perhaps, her own disgrace; for some persons thought that she had been 
debauched in her absence, and that the whole was a concerted scheme to conceal the 
truth. If she was innocent, what a variety of perjuries must have been committed by 
the opposite parties!
	Upon the whole, we must end as we began: this story is enveloped in mystery; 
and the truth of it must be left to the discoveries of that important day, when all mists 
shall be wiped from our eyes, and the most hidden things shall be made plain. In the 
mean time, it is our duty to admire and adore those inscrutable decrees of Providence, 
which can bring good out of evil, and answer its own wise and gracious purposes, by 
means least apparent to finite comprehension!


JOHN HAMBLETON 
A Soldier of the Guards, executed at Tyburn, 10th of December, 1753, for 
the Murder of Mr Crouch

	MR CROUCH, the murdered man, was head cook to the Earl of Harrington.
	On the 17th of August, 1753, he went upon the business of his employer to 
Chelsea, and in returning through King's Road, about nine o'clock in the evening, he 
was met by Hambleton and his associate, named Lattie, who, with horrid 
imprecations, demanded his money.
	Mr Crouch was a resolute man and refused to be robbed; thereupon they fired 
two pistols at him, without effect. Being himself unarmed, he had recourse to a 
pocket-knife, which he opened and told them to keep off; but they closed on him, in 
doing which he wounded Lattie in three places. The villains overpowering him, they 
threw him to the ground and rifled his pockets of his money and his watch; they then, 
not content with their booty, with which they might have escaped, wrested the knife 
from his hand, ripped open his belly, then stamped upon his mangled body, beat him 
on the head with the butt-ends of their pistols, and left him weltering in his blood. 
Early next morning some labourers going to their work discovered him still alive and 
able to describe the robbers, with his place of residence, which was a small house in 
Green Street, Grosvenor Square, near his noble employer's mansion. Thither he was 
carried, where he languished in excruciating torments three days, and then died, 
leaving a widow and three children.
	The murderers, from his description, were soon apprehended. Lattie had the 
wounds about him given by the deceased, who was able to identify them the day 
before his death.
	Hambleton was brought to his trial at the Old Bailey, and sentenced to die; but 
Lattie died of the wounds given him by the murdered man before the time of his being 
arraigned, thus robbing the gallows of its just due.
	The surviving murderer was executed at Tyburn, professing himself a Roman 
Catholic, and his body was given to the surgeons for dissection.


NICHOL BROWN 
Executed for the murder of his wife, August 14th, 1754

  
Brown holding his wife to the fire

	IN the account given of this man there is a savage ferocity which has not 
before come under our notice; for, though we read in Captain Cook's, and other 
accounts of circumnavigators, of their meeting with cannibals and, further, that even 
civilized men, by the dire dint of the excruciating pains of hunger, have slain, and, 
with horrible compunction, eaten one of their companions, to support life in the rest; 
yet where shall we find, except in this instance, a savage, in the land of civilization 
and of plenty, eat human flesh? After this it no longer remains astonishingly horrible 
that such a brute could force his wife into the fire, and burn her to death.
	This atrocious monster was a native of Cramond, a small town near 
Edinburgh, where he received a school education. At a proper age he was placed with 
a butcher in that city, and, when his apprenticeship was expired, went to sea in a man 
of war, and continued in that station four years. The ship being paid off, Brown 
returned to Edinburgh, and married the widow of a butcher, who had left her a decent 
fortune.
	Soon after this marriage Brown commenced dealer in cattle, in which he met 
with such success, that, in the course of a few years, he became possessed of a 
considerable sum. His success, however, did not inspire him with sentiments of 
humanity. His temper was so bad, that he was shunned by all serious people of his 
acquaintance; for he delighted in fomenting quarrels among his neighbours.
	Taking to a habit of drinking, be seldom came home sober at night; and, his 
wife following his example, he used frequently to beat her for copying his own crime. 
This conduct rendered both parties obnoxious to their acquaintance; and the following 
story of Brown, which may be relied on as a fact, will incontestably prove the 
unfeeling brutality of his nature.
	About a week after the execution of Norman Ross for murder, Brown had 
been drinking with some company at Leith, till, in the height of their jollity, they 
boasted what extravagant actions they could perform. Brown swore that he would cut 
off a piece of flesh from the leg of the dead man, and eat it. His companions, drunk as 
they were, appeared shocked at the very idea; while Brown, to prove that he was in 
earnest, procured a ladder, which be carried to the gibbet, and, cutting off a piece of 
flesh from the leg of the suspended body of Ross, brought it back, broiled, and ate it.
	This circumstance was much talked of, but little credit was given to it by the 
inhabitants of Edinburgh till Brown's companions gave the fullest testimony of its 
truth. It will be now proper that we recite the particulars of the shocking crime for 
which this offender forfeited his life.
	After having been drinking at an alehouse in the Cannongate, he went home 
about eleven at night, in a high degree of intoxication. His wife was also much in 
liquor; but, though equally criminal himself, he was so exasperated against her, that 
he struck her so violently that she fell from her chair. The noise of her fall alarmed the 
neighbours; but, as frequent quarrels had happened between them, no immediate 
notice was taken of the affair.
	In about fifteen minutes the wife was heard to cry out 'Murder! help! fire! the 
rogue is murdering me! help, for Christ's sake! ' The neighbours, now apprehending 
real danger, knocked at the door; but, no person being in the house but Brown and his 
wife, no admission was granted; and the woman was heard to groan most shockingly.
	A person, looking through the key-hole, saw Brown holding his wife to the 
fire; on which he was called on to open the door, but refused to do so. The candle 
being extinguished, and the woman still continuing her cries, the door was at length 
forced open; and, when the neighbours went in, they beheld her a most shocking 
spectacle, lying half-naked before the fire, and her flesh in part broiled. In the interim 
Brown had got into bed, pretended to be asleep, and, when spoken to, appeared 
ignorant of the transaction. The woman, though so dreadfully burnt, retained her 
senses, accused her husband of the murder, and told in what manner it was 
perpetrated. She survived till the following morning, still continuing in the same tale, 
and then expired in the utmost agony.
	The murderer was now seized, and, being lodged in the gaol of Edinburgh, 
was brought to trial, and capitally convicted.
	After sentence he was allowed six weeks to prepare
	himself for a future state, agreeably to the custom in Scotland.
	He was visited by several divines of Edinburgh, but steadily persisted in the 
denial of his guilt, affirming that he was ignorant of his wife being burnt till the door 
was broke open by the neighbours.
	Among others who visited the criminal was the Reverend Mr. Kinloch, an 
ancient minister, who, urging him to confess his crime, received no other reply than 
that, 'if he was to die to-morrow, he would have a new suit of clothes, to appear 
decently at the gallows.' Mr. Kinlioch was so affected by his declaration, that he shed 
tears over the unhappy convict.
	On the following day, August the 14th, 1754, he was attended to the place of 
execution at Edinburgh by the Reverend Dr. Brown; but to the last he denied having 
been guilty of the crime for which he suffered.
	After execution he was hung in chains; but the body was stolen from the 
gibbet, and thrown into a pond, where, being found, it was exposed as before. In a few 
days, however, it was again stolen; and, though a reward was offered for its discovery, 
no such discovery was made.
	It is impossible to express sufficient horror at the crime of which this man was 
guilty; and it is therefore the less necessary to make any remarks on his case, as no 
one can be tempted to think of committing a similar crime till he is totally divested of 
all the feelings of humanity. From a fate so wretched as this may the God of infinite 
mercy deliver us!


CAPTAIN JOHN LANCEY 
Executed at Execution Dock, 7th of June, 1754, for burning a Ship at the 
Instigation of a Member of Parliament

  
Captain Lancey quitting the ship with his crew after setting fire to it

	THIS unfortunate man fell a dupe to an artful and wicked villain, his 
employer, who at the time was a disgraceful Member of the House of Commons, and 
who, to avoid the punishment due to his crimes, fled, and left the unfortunate subject 
whose case is before us a victim to his baseness.
	Captain John Lancey was a native of Bideford, in Devonshire, respectably 
born and well educated. As he gave early proofs of an inclination for a seafaring life 
he was taught navigation, was attentive to his studies, and gave proofs of a goodness 
of disposition that promised a better fate than afterwards attended him.
	Lancey was sent to sea as mate of a ship, of which Mr Benson, a rich merchant 
at Biddeford, was the proprietor. Lancey, having married a relation of Benson's, was 
soon advanced to the command of the vessel. This Benson was Member of Parliament 
for Barnstaple, in Devonshire, and what kind of character he deserved will appear in 
the sequel.
	After Lancey had returned from a long voyage he was for a considerable time 
confined to his bed by a violent illness, the expense of which tended considerably to 
impoverish him. When he had partly recovered, Benson told him that he proposed to 
refit the ship in which he had formerly sailed; that Lancey should have the command 
of her; that he (Benson) would insure her for more than double her value, and then 
Lancey should destroy the vessel.
	This proposal appeared shocking to Lancey, who thought it but a trial of his 
honesty, and declared his sentiments, saying that he would never take any part in a 
transaction so totally opposite to the whole tenor of his conduct.
	For the present nothing more was said; but soon afterwards Benson invited 
Lancey and several other gentlemen to dine with him. The entertainment was liberal; 
and, Captain Lancey being asked to stay after the rest of the company were gone, Mr 
Benson took him to a summer-house in the garden, where he again proposed 
destroying the ship, and urged it in a manner that proved he was in earnest.
	Captain Lancey hesitated a short time on this proposal and then declined to 
have any concern in so iniquitous a scheme, declaring that he would seek other 
employment rather than take any part in such a transaction. But Benson, resolving if 
possible not to lose his agent, prevailed on him to drink freely, and then urged every 
argument he could think of to prevail on him to undertake the business, promising to 
shelter him from punishment in case of detection.
	Lancey still hesitated. But when Benson mentioned the poverty to which his 
family was reduced by his late illness, and offered such flattering prospects of 
protection, the unhappy man at length yielded, to his own destruction. A ship was now 
fitted out, bound for Maryland: and goods to a large amount were shipped on board, 
but relanded before the vessel sailed, and a lading of brickbats taken in by way of 
ballast. They had not been long at sea when a hole was bored in the side of the ship 
and a cask of combustible ingredients was set on fire, with a view to destroying her. 
The fire no sooner appeared than the Captain called to some convicted transports, then 
in the hold, to inquire if they had fired the vessel; which appears to have been only a 
feint to conceal the real design.
	The boat being hoisted out, all the crew got safe on shore; and then Lancey 
repaired immediately to Benson to inform him of what had passed. Benson instantly 
dispatched him to a proctor, before whom he swore that the ship had accidentally 
taken fire, and that it was impossible to prevent the consequences which followed.
	Lancey now repaired to his own house, and continued with as much apparent 
unconcern as if such a piece of villainy had not been perpetrated; but he was soon 
afterwards taken into custody by a constable, who informed him that oath had been 
made of the transaction before the Mayor of Exeter by one of the seamen. Lancey, 
however, did not express much concern, secure in his idea of protection from the 
supposed influence of Benson.
	On the following day Lancey and one of the ship's crew were committed to the 
jail of Exeter, where they remained three months; and being then removed to London 
were examined by Sir Thomas Salisbury, the judge of the Admiralty Court, and 
committed to the prison of the Marshalsea. Application was afterwards made to the 
Court of Admiralty to admit them to bail; and there appeared to be no objection to 
granting the favour, but Benson, on whom they had depended for bail, had absconded, 
to escape the justice due to his atrocious crime.
	Being committed to Newgate, they were brought to trial at the next Sessions of 
Admiralty held at the Old Bailey,when Lancey was capitally convicted, and received 
sentence of death, but the other was acquitted.
	Lancey lay in prison about four months after conviction, during which his 
behaviour was altogether consistent with his unhappy situation. His Christian charity 
was remarkable towards Benson; for, though that wicked man had been the cause and 
instigator of his ruin, yet he never once reflected on him, but imputed all the crime to 
himself, and appeared to behold it in its genuine light of deformity.
	It was presumed, when he was first apprehended, that he might have been 
admitted an evidence against Benson, if he would have impeached him; but this he 
steadily refused to do.
	His devotional exercises were exemplary: he attended prayers in the most 
regular manner, and gave every proof of his contrition. He was accompanied to the 
place of execution by two clergymen; and, having confessed his guilt in a speech to 
the surrounding multitude, he underwent the sentence of the law on the 7th of June, 
1754, at Execution Dock, in the 27th year of his age.


PAUL TIERNEY 
A Traitor, executed August 30, 1754, for enlisting Englishmen to 
serve the enemy.

	For some few years after the suppression of the second Scottish rebellion, a 
secret trade of treachery was by many disaffected villains carried on, by enlisting men 
for the service of the King of France.
	We have already adduced instances of the detection of this vile species of 
treason; and though it was well known that death would soon follow conviction: yet 
still we find men hardy enough to risk the consequences.
	Paul Tierney was of this description. He, like Thomas Reynolds had succeeded 
too well; for he deluded several soldiers from their duty to their country, and secretly 
conveyed them to France.
	At one time, on false pretences, he inveigled eight, by keeping them in a state 
of intoxication. At Calais he threw off the mask, gave them a livre each, and declared 
they were then soldiers to the King of France. The poor fellows, now sobered by their 
voyage, were so indignant at this duplicity and treachery, that with one accord they 
fell upon him, and in an instant would have beat him to death, if the captain of the 
French guard had not rescued him.
	They were now bound with ropes, carried to Dunkirk, and were thrown into a 
loathsome dungeon, where they long suffered on bread and water.
	One of them had the good fortune to escape, and procuring sailor's clothes, got 
back to England. At this time Tierney was a prisoner in Maidstone gaol, which 
circumstance coming to the knowledge of the much injured man, he went thither, and 
charged him with crime.
	On the trial it was proved that Tierney received three pounds each for the 
recruits, which was paid him in the presence of the prosecutor.
	He was convicted, and hanged upon Penenden-heath, near Maidstone.


DAVIS, THE MAIL-ROBBER 
Executed and hung in chains near the place where he committed the robbery

	THIS man was a tallow-chandler in Carnaby-market, London, where he had 
some time carried on business with apparent credit, until his goods were distrained 
upon by his landlord, for rent. On taking an inventory thereof, a pistol was found in a 
drawer of a bureau, with some parts of bank notes, and several bills of exchange.
	As the Cirencester mail had been robbed above two years before, and the 
customary reward had been in vain advertised for the discovery of the thief, a 
suspicion arose against him. The notes being shewn to an officer of the post-office, he 
suspected them to have been taken out of the mail; but lest he should prove innocent, 
and the charge be detrimental to him, a stratagem was used to carry him before a 
magistrate, to answer for some broils in which he had lately been involved. He was 
then charged with robbing the mail, which he denied.
	But when he was upon the point of being discharged, a person came to the 
office with a silver tankard, which had been advertised to have been purchased with 
one of the notes plundered from the mail, of Mr Harding in the Minories, and found 
concealed in Davis's house.
	Mr Harding was then sent for, who swore that the prisoner purchased it of 
him. Hereupon he confessed that he knew the person who had robbed the mail, and 
who, he said, then lay under sentence of death in Newgate.
	To this falsehood he was answered, that the person he described, was 
sentenced only to transportation; upon which he turned pale and was agitated. He was 
thereupon committed to prison, and a warrant of detainer lodged against the convict 
whom he had accused.
	He was removed by writ of habeas corpus, to Aylesbury, and on the 12th of 
March, 1755, there brought to trial.
	When asked, in the usual form, whether he was guilty, or not guilty, to the 
charges laid in the indictment? He refused to plead till his irons were taken off. This 
the court consented to, and he then pleaded, 'Not guilty'; but after a trial which 
occupied five hours, he was convicted.
	On the third of April following, he was executed at Gerrard's Cross, in 
Buckinghamshire, the place where he committed the robbery, and there hung in 
chains.


ROBERT ALSOP, A MIDSHIPMAN, AND SIX SEAMEN 
Convicted in 1755 for committing a Riot in the City of London, and 
impressing a Citizen thereof, but treated leniently in order that they might 
fight against France

	A PRESS-GANG in the year 1755, in a riotous manner, forced themselves 
into the house of Mr William Godfrey, a citizen of good repute and a cooper, of the 
City of London. They knocked him down and dragged him through the streets with 
only one slipper on, and thus forcibly put him on board a King's ship in the River 
Thames. There he was confined in the hold among a number of other subjects, where 
there was a suffocating stench, the effects of which long endangered his life. Twelve 
hours was he thus confined, to the scandal, as the printed accounts of this lawless 
baseness of the time said, of all government, and in derogation of the rights and 
privileges of the City of London. At length, the Lord Mayor exercising his authority, 
Mr Godfrey was released, and his friends set about the laudable task of bringing those 
spoilers to condign punishment.
	Robert Alsop, William Sturges, John Dodsey, Frederick Offler, James 
Williamson, Charles Powell and Benjamin Tidsdale, a part of this press-gang, were 
indicted, and committed to prison.
	Being brought to trial at the Guildhall of the City of London, Sturges and 
Dodsey, having surrendered themselves, and pleading for mercy, were acquitted; but 
the others were found guilty.
	While the Court was deliberating on the punishment to be inflicted on them 
some officers of Government interceded, and prayed that their country might not long 
be deprived of their services against the French, then at war with us; and in 
consequence thereof, and on their knees suing for mercy, backed by Mr Godfrey's 
generous forgiveness, they were sentenced to only ten days' imprisonment.


HENRY SAMUEL 
A Jew, punished for breaking the Christian Sabbath.

	AT the same sessions wherein Alsop the midshipman, and the seamen were 
found guilty of committing a riot, this. unbeliever was convicted of being a sabbath-
breaker and profaner of the Lord's Day, in permitting card-playing on Sunday, at his 
house in Duke's-Place, for which crime he was fined thirteen shillings and four-pence, 
and imprisoned three months in Wood-Street Compter..
	The son of Israel pleaded, that Sunday was not his Sabbath; but it was replied, 
that as he was permitted, unmolested, to turn Saturday into Sunday, he surely might 
behave with decency on the Christian's day of rest and prayer.
	Thus Jews, in a Christian country, lose a day in each week: but, aided by 
activity and cunning, they frequently do, more (in their way) in five days, than we do 
in six.


JOHN GRIERSON 
Transported for marrying without Banns, or License, December, 1755.

	JOHN GRIERSON was indicted, for that he, after the twenty- fifth of March, 
1754, to wit, on the twenty-seventh of June, in the twenty-ninth year of his present 
majesty, at the Savoy, did unlawfully, knowingly, wilfully, & feloniously, solemnize 
matrimony between JOSEPH VERNON, then a batchelor, & JANE POITIER, a 
single woman, without first publishing of banns, or any license first had, and obtained 
of a person having authority to grant the same, in contempt of our Lord the King, and 
against the Statute, &c.
	He challenged all the twelve jurymen, who had been trying that sessions on 
the Middlesex side.
	Upon which his trial was postponed till next day, when fifty-nine freeholders 
more were summoned, and a jury of twelve sworn.
MICHAEL DEATH: I am an apothecary, and live in Greek- street, Soho. I know 
JOSEPH VERNON, and her that was JANE POTIER; he lived in Great Russell-street, 
Covent-garden, and the Compton-street, St. Anne's; and I know the prisoner. I was 
present at the marriage of VERNON & POITIER at the Savoy chapel; they were 
married by the prisoner, and I gave her away. She was then in the twentieth year of 
her age.
Q.: Do you know whether they had any License?
DEATH: I do not know anything concerning it.
Q.: Do you know whether there was any consent of parents?
DEATH: There was no farther consent than a written paper signed by the mother of 
the young woman, which was produced to the prisoner and the clerk.
Q.: Did he ask them, before they were married, if there was the consent of parents?
DEATH: He did, and scrupled to marry them without that consent.
Q.: What was the purpose of that paper?
DEATH: It was this, "June 14, I do hereby declare my daughter, JANE POITIER, to 
be at free liberty to marry whomsoever she pleases." Signed by the mother.
Q.: Did any-body ascertain this paper to the prisoner?
DEATH: Yes, I and Mr. SEVANE did, that it was signed by the mother.
Council: Is her father alive?
DEATH: He is, and in court; but he did not approve of the marriage.
Council: Were they married immediately after the paper was produced?
DEATH: They were; neither did the prisoner go out of the room, but proceeded to 
marry them directly.
Council: Did you acquaint Mr. [John] Grierson there was a father?
DEATH: He knew that very well, for we had told him so; and we likewise told him 
that the father would not consent.
JOHN SEVANE: I know JOSEPH VERNON, & JANE POITIER, & was present at 
their marriage in the Savoy chapel, by the prisoner at the bar.
Q.: In the Savoy chapel in the parish of Covent-garden?
SEVANE: I don't know what parish it is in.
Q.: Were any questions asked about consent?
SEVANE: There were. The last evidence & I, the night before the marriage, had heard 
the mother say her daughter was at liberty to marry whom she pleased. I believe she 
had made some endeavours to persuade her against the marriage before that; but she 
said her daughter was at liberty, and her daughter called in the last evidence and me to 
hear her mother say that. I have heard since that the father disapproved of the 
marriage. The mother said to us, "You may tell the person that marries them he never 
will be troubled by any of our family." We told the minister what the mother had said. 
He replied, he thought that "consent was not sufficient; but if we had it signed by the 
mother, that he took to be sufficient;" and upon that he married them.
STEPHEN BROWN: I am clerk of the parish of St. Martin's. Here is the register of 
the births in our parish.
Q.: Have you any entry there relating to JANE POITIER?
BROWN: Yes; here is "Born June 8th, 1736, & baptized the 11th, JANE 
HENRIETTA POITIER, daughter of MICHAEL & CLAREMON," the father & 
mother's names.
Q.: Were there any banns published, or license produced?
DEATH: Not as I know of.
SEVANE: There was a kind of license, but I don't know what it was, filled up I 
believe by the clerk; it was taken from out of a cupboard, or off a table in the chapel.
THE PRISONER'S DEFENCE:
I rest entirely on your lordship's judgement; I did not knowingly do it to offend 
against the laws of my country; it is not probable I should do such a thing knowingly 
when I married my own son there. I never knowingly or wilfully transgressed the laws 
of my country; I married by a license, & that I thought a proper authority.
WILLIAM FORREST: I have lived in the Savoy upwards of 20 years.
Q.: During that time, how have you looked upon the Savoy to be under the church 
jurisdiction? Did you look upon it to be in diocese of London, or what?
FORREST: I am not a judge of that question.
Q.: Have you served offices there?
FORREST: I have served overseer of the poor twice; I have never had notice given 
me, for not attending any where else. I never heard of the bishop of London, or any of 
his officers interfering there; neither was I ever called upon as chapel-warden, in the 
bishop's court; nor ever heard that any was called upon in my time; nor did I attend 
any of the bishop's visitations; nor did I ever hear that there has been any of the 
bishop's jurisdiction exercised there.
Q.: Is it a parish?
FORREST: No, it's a precinct.
Q.: If a man dies there, where is his Will proved?
FORREST: In the Commons, where I suppose the administration is granted.
Q.: Did you ever know any marriage by license there before the late act?
FORREST: I never did see one.
GEORGE DORMAN: I have lived in Savoy about 20 years; and look it to be a 
jurisdiction of itself with regard to ecclesiastical affairs; and I believe no bishop or 
archdeacon ever came to do any acts there. I always looked upon it as a place peculiar 
to itself. I have served overseer and chapel-warden. Wills are proved in the Commons.
Q.: Do you know of any marriage there with a license before the last act of 
parliament?
DORMAN: Yes, about 25 years ago; it was granted by the bishop of London.
Q.: Where do you baptize your children born there?
DORMAN: At the Savoy chapel; and in the chapel-yard we bury our dead.
Q.: for the Prisoner: Do you know of any license ever granted by a minister to any 
under that jurisdiction?
DORMAN: No, I don't know that.
Q.: Before whom are your sworn chapel-warden?
DORMAN: Before a justice of the peace; we assemble in the vestry-room; we are but 
a few people. The money raised for the poor, & other charges, is accounted for in the 
vestry among ourselves.
Q.: Does not the crown pay most of the money?
DORMAN: No; I know of no such thing.
Q.: Did you ever see a justice's warrant to the Savoy?
DORMAN: Only to maintain the poor; which is directed to the church or chapel-
warden.
RICHARD PHILIPS: I am clerk to the chapel in the precinct of the Savoy, & have 
been for about five years; and I look upon it to be a peculiar jurisdiction.
Q.: How do you govern yourselves?
PHILIPS: There is a chapel-warden & overseer, but they do not qualify themselves at 
the Commons.
Q.: Who repairs the chapel?
PHILIPS: The minister has done several repairs.
Q.: Has Mr. Wilkinson been minister since you came there?
PHILIPS: Yes; & I know he has granted licenses; he did so before the late act of 
parliament, and all my time, & they have been registered in that manner.
Q.: Have you known any licenses brought there from other courts & rejected, as 
denying their authority?
PHILIPS: I have several & was never called to account for it.
Q.: Look upon that book.
PHILIPS: It's the register book, and the oldest we have.
Council: Read there.
PHILIPS: July 6th, married THOMAS PAGE & ELIZABETH PRICE by license, 
1687. Here are a great many by publication of banns, and some by License; we still do 
it in the same manner, but more perfectly.
Q.: Did you ever see in any register any alterations, where it was by a different 
license?
PHILIPS: I think I have seen two instances, one by license from the archbishop of 
Canterbury, & the other from the bishop of London; all the other licenses are by the 
minister of the Savoy; & I thought them good licenses. I never knew any jurisdiction 
as to the bishop of London or Canterbury, to be exercised in this chapel; nor never 
looked on ourselves as under any visitation. I looked upon it that the minister himself 
was ordinary, and sufficient to grant licenses.
Q.: What is the form of your licenses?
PHILIPS: The form of them is this: That whereas such & such persons, aged so & so, 
are desirous to live in the holy state of matrimony, without publication of banns, &c. 
therefore he consents that the same may be solemnized in St. John Baptist's chapel; 
and signs his name JOHN WILKINSON, ordinary & minister. (He produces a license 
on parchment). This is the License the pair were married with. It was filled up before 
they were married, and signed by WILKINSON before it was filled up.
Q.: Do you remember anything of the marriage of VERNON?
PHILIPS: I do; I remember it was very remarkable. VERNON & Miss POITIER 
came three or four days running, and desired to be married; they were refused, 
because she was something under age. They could not be married unless she had her 
friend's consent.
Q.: Who refused it?
PHILIPS: Mr. [John] Grierson & I did. The last day they came, they brought two 
gentlemen along with them (who have been sworn) to facilitate the matter. She said 
she had a father, but her father & mother had been parted several years. But she said, 
as for me, my father don't care if I go to the devil. We said, you must have the consent 
of them, or else you must not be married. Then Mr. DEATH, and the other gentleman, 
went to her mother with a paper; for Miss [POITIER] said she would never go home 
till they were married; and upon this the two gentlemen returned, and produced the 
mother's consent, and they both testified it, and said they saw the mother sign it; and 
we made them sign their names and placed of abode. Then we filled up the license, 
and they assented to every part contained therein. The one declared himself a 
batchelor, the other a single woman.
Q.: Do you think Mr. [John] Grierson used such caution for fear of offending against 
the act of parliament?
PHILIPS: He was very cautious always in these cases.
Q.: How many couples have you married in the chapel since the commencement of 
the act?
PHILIPS: I reckon about 1,400 couples.
Q.: How many hundreds of them lived in the precinct?
PHILIPS: There were many came distressed out of the country, big with child.
Q.: How many families live in the precinct?
PHILIPS: There may be 30 to 40 families.
Q.: How many couples might come distressed out of the country?
PHILIPS: There might come 900 big with child, some who could not be married any 
where else.
Council: Was you appointed surrogate?
PHILIPS: I was appointed clerk, not surrogate; for I did not apprehend I had any-thing 
to do with the bishop.
Q.: Where might Mr. WILKINSON himself be at the time of this marriage?
PHILIPS: I believe he was not far off. There were at that time bills of indictment and 
warrants against him, which obliged him to abscond. In these indictments he was 
charged with clandestine marriages.
Q.: When did he absent himself?
PHILIPS: Sometime the latter end of May; & in May he applied to this gentleman to 
officiate for him; this was after the bills of indictment.
Q.: Did Mr. WILKINSON keep a curate before these bills of indictment were found?
PHILIPS: He has had some.
Q.: Does Mr. [John] Grierson officiate in reading prayers, or preaching?
PHILIPS: No; there is one Mr. BROOKS does that.
Q.: Had Mr. WILKINSON a curate to solemnize marriages before?
PHILIPS: No, he always did that himself.
Q.: How is it possible he should think of Mr. [John] Grierson? How did he find him 
out? Is he a settled minister?
PHILIPS: Really I can't tell; he used to appear in his gown as a clergyman. Mr. 
WILKINSON being obliged to abscond, sent for him to fill up that part. People would 
come to be married, and we must have someone to do it, or they would think 
themselves very ill used.
Q.: How came Mr. [John] Grierson to be thought of?
PHILIPS: Because a little before he married his own son there.
Q.: Do you ever take down where they come from?
PHILIPS: Always; that is put down in the minute book.
Q.: Then you married them, let them come from what parish they would.
PHILIPS: We did, either in England or Scotland. We married one couple that came 
from Dumfries, and another from Dunbar in Scotland.
Q.: How long has Mr. WILKINSON'S salary been stopped by the lords of the 
treasury?
PHILIPS: About two years before I came, as I heard.
Q.: Did Mr. [John] Grierson know the reason of Mr. WILKINSON'S not being able to 
do the duty himself?
PHILIPS: I believe not.
Q.: Who applied to him for this license?
PHILIPS: I did myself.
Q.: Did you ever take an oath concerning persons under age?
PHILIPS: Yes.
Q.: Do you fill up the license without an affidavit?
PHILIPS: When he is absent I fill them up.
Q.: Who takes the affidavit when WILKINSON is absent?
PHILIPS: The minister that marries them.
Q.: Did you ever know an instance where WILKINSON or [John] GRIERSON took 
an affidavit?
PHILIPS: There have been some, but how many I can't say.
Q.: Did you ever know [John] Grierson or WILKINSON proceed against any of the 
900 women that came big with child, for fornication?
PHILIPS: No, never.
Q.: Do you know whether [John] GRIERSON did officiate any- where else before?
PHILIPS: I can't tell; but have heard he married people at May-Fair chapel.
* Here the license was read for the marriage of VERNON & POITIER.
Council: Was you by when this was signed & filled up?
PHILIPS: I was.
Council: Have you often banns published for people that do not live in the precinct?
PHILIPS: We often have.
Council: Do you ever read the rubrick in the common prayer- book, before the order 
of matrimony?
PHILIPS: I can't say.
GUILTY: "To be transported for 14 years."
This page kindly donated by Grierson World Project


BLI GONZALEZ ALIAS JOHN SYMMONDS ALIAS 
SPANISH JACK 
After a varied Criminal Career he was finally executed at Maidstone, 18th 
of April, 1756, for stealing a Silver Tankard

	GONZALEZ was descended of reputable parents residing at Alicante, in 
Spain, who were exceedingly careful of his education, intending him for Holy Orders; 
but all their hopes in him were disappointed, for he absconded from school and 
entered on board a man-of-war. Having remained some years in this station, he 
engaged on board a ship-of-war belonging to England, and sailed up the Levant.
	After staying some time at Alexandria, Smyrna and other places, the ship put 
in to Gibraltar, and was ordered to be laid up; in consequence of which he entered on 
board a Dutch vessel. He served in several English privateers during the war, and 
when peace was restored joined one of the gangs of smugglers that infested the coasts 
of Kent and Sussex.
	His connections among the English induced him to change his name to John 
Symmonds, by which appellation we shall hereafter distinguish him. Having acquired 
a sum of money, he repaired to London and formed an acquaintance with a number of 
people, of both sexes, of the most wicked and abandoned character. Having spent his 
money in scenes of riot and intoxication, he obtained credit for divers small sums 
from different people, whom he amused by assuring them that he was entitled to 
prize-money, on the receipt of which he would pay them.
	His creditors becoming importunate for their money, he formed the resolution 
of going again to sea; but, not being able to enter into such advantageous engagements 
as he expected, he became acquainted with an infamous gang of robbers, and joined in 
their iniquitous practices. They committed a variety of robberies in the fields near 
Stepney. As Symmonds was passing along Ragfair he was seized by a person whom 
he, in conjunction with other villains, had robbed the preceding evening. This event 
occasioned him to reflect on his dangerous situation; and, judging that if he continued 
his illegal courses he could not long escape detection, he determined to give 
information against his accomplices.
	He communicated his design to M'Daniel, and accompanied him and other 
thief-takers one evening to a house where they were drinking, when Mandevile, 
Holmes and Newton were taken into custody, but two others of the gang escaped 
through a window. Mandevile, Holmes and Newton were convicted on the evidence 
of Symmonds, and executed, in October, 1751, at Tyburn.
	For the apprehension of the three malefactors abovementioned the thief-takers 
received a reward of four hundred and twenty pounds, of which they allowed the 
evidence only ten pounds; and by various contrivances they kept him in custody till he 
had expended all but thirty shillings of that sum. They imagined that they might 
obtain further emolument through his means, and therefore endeavoured to keep him 
in a state of poverty, that he might be the more readily induced to return to his former 
practices, expecting that he would betray his new accomplices into the fate suffered 
by Mandevile, Holmes and Newton.
	Symmonds had for some time lived on terms of great intimacy with Anthony 
and Emanuel de Rosa, the murderers of Mr Fargues. Having engaged to go on the 
highway with Dissent and Branch (executed for the murder of Mr Brown), they called 
at his lodgings; but the girl with whom he cohabited dissuaded him from 
accompanying them. Upon seeing the watch and other property stolen from Mr 
Brown, he regretted his yielding to the persuasions of the girl, and upbraided her as 
the cause of his losing a share of so valuable a booty.
	The many robberies he had committed in London and its adjacencies having 
rendered him so notorious that he thought himself in great danger of being 
apprehended, he determined to go into the country. Having travelled to Rochester, he 
formed an acquaintance with a fellow named Smith, who was publicly known to live 
by felonious practices.
	Symmonds and Smith went to a public-house in Rochester, and while they 
were drinking some punch found an opportunity of concealing a silver tankard, which 
they carried off unperceived. On the following day they were apprehended, and 
committed to Maidstone Jail -- Symmonds to be tried for stealing the tankard, and 
Smith to appear as evidence for the Crown.
	While Symmonds was under sentence of death he acknowledged that till he 
was convinced the term of his life was nearly expired he had not reflected on the most 
important consequences that would result from his iniquitous proceedings, and that if 
he had escaped conviction he should have returned to his usual practices. He appeared 
to repent of his former wickedness with unfeigned sincerity, and expressed hopes of 
forgiveness through the merits of his Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.
	From the prison to the place of execution he was seriously employed in prayer, 
and when under the gallows he warned the people to guard against following such 
courses as had produced his destruction. After some time spent in devout prayer with 
a reverend divine, the executioner put in force the sentence of the law.


CHARLES FREDERICK WYSENTHALL 
Transported in the year 1756, for subornation of perjury.

	This was a foreigner, and a very bad character. He was a Dresden lace-maker, 
took female apprentices to his business, and a most unworthy master he proved 
himself; constantly corrupting their morals, and violating their persons.
	He was tried at the Old Bailey, on the 4th of May, 1756, charged with 
subornation of perjury. Inasmuch as the receiver of stolen goods is by the law 
considered criminal as the thief, so the suborner of perjury is equally guilty of the 
destructive crime, as the man who himself takes a false oath.
	The offence of Wysenthall was marked with every aggravation. Two of his 
apprentices, whom he had debauched, he influenced to swear a rape against an 
innocent man, whom they had never known even by sight. As this offence, if fully 
proved, affects life, this villain deserved a halter; but he was only sentenced to a year's 
imprisonment in Newgate, and at the expiration thereof, to be transported for life to 
the plantations in America.


LIEUTENANT JOHN LANDER 
Executed on Pennenden Heath, in Kent, 16th of August, 1756, for Murder

	JOHN LANDER was a lieutenant in the garrison of Chatham, and, having just 
received a month's pay, agreed with another officer, wild and unthinking as himself, 
to set off to London. For this purpose they hired a post-chaise, and ordered the post-
boy to drive at full speed, or they would run him through the body. The first stage the 
boy, thus intimidated, whipped the poor horses until he broke their wind, which 
proved infinite sport to the inhuman fellows whom they dragged after them.
	At Dartford they changed horses, and no sooner were they clear of the town 
than they repeated the word of command to the fresh boy, who accordingly urged the 
poor horses to their speed. At the foot of Shooter's Hill he slackened his pace, when 
they shouted to him to drive the same pace. On his answering the horses could not 
gallop up the hill, they jumped out of the chaise, and one of the degraded officers 
knocked the poor boy down, when Lander, drawing his sword, ran him through the 
body with such force that it actually pinioned him to the ground.
	This ungovernable and base transaction of course impeded their journey. 
Instead of revelling in London they were sent to Rochester Jail, and brought to trial, 
when Lander was found guilty of wilful murder. He was executed on the 16th of 
August, 1756.


WILLIAM CANNICOTT 
Executed at Tyburn, 20th of September, 1756, for the Murder of his Wife

	WILLIAM CANNICOTT was about forty years of age, and had been a livery-
servant from a youth, though his parents, who were substantial people, would fain 
have had him learn a trade.
	When he was about twenty years old he married Dorothy Tamlyn, a woman 
nearly forty years of age, with whom he had lived as fellow-servant; and soon after he 
set her up in a little haberdasher's shop in Boswell Court. This shop she kept nearly 
ten years, when Cannicott, being then servant to the late Admiral Matthews, took a 
house for her in East Street and furnished it to be let out in lodgings.
	They lived peaceably, if not happily, together until, without his knowledge, 
she sold two suits of his best clothes, though she had no reasonable pretence or 
provocation, for he constantly gave her all his money, and she received, without any 
account, the profits that arose from the house. Cannicott was naturally passionate, and 
coming in haste one day to put on a suit of these clothes, upon a particular occasion, 
he was so exasperatdd to find they had been sold by his wife that he swore he would 
never come home to her any more. He took a lodging in a distant part of the town 
instead of going home to his wife, though he still continued to give her his money.
	In this new neighbourhood he was of course considered as a single man; and 
indeed he was soon after hired to a gentleman in Cavendish Square who declared that 
he would not hire a married man. Among Cannicott's fellow-servants there was a 
young woman who waited upon his master's daughter, to whom he found a secret 
pleasure in recommending himself by many little acts of kindness, with which he saw 
she was pleased. He loved her not only for her person but for her mind, which was 
continually being improved by the free conversation of her amiable lady. As love is 
always vigilant and suspicious, he discovered that his master had a design upon her 
virtue, and that, at the same time, she was also addressed by a young man who would 
have married her, and whom he thought she would consent to marry, if he did not 
profit by the influence he had over her by soliciting her for himself. In this situation 
he determined to gain her if it was possible, let the consequence be what it would. 
From this time his courtship commenced, and the girl, sincerely believing he had no 
other connection, consented to have him. When this was agreed he resolved to leave 
his place, because the girl would not consent to conceal her marriage from her lady, 
nor would her lady part with her upon that account, though his master would, 
notwithstanding, think it a sufficient reason to part with him. In pursuance of this 
scheme he hired himself to the Earl of Darnley, and on the 3rd of June, 1754, he 
married his new wife at Marylebone Chapel.
	He went into Lord Darnley's place the same day, and his wife continued in 
hers a twelvemonth after they were married, and might have continued there longer if 
her master had not pursued his design with more importunity than before, 
notwithstanding the declaration of her marriage, which, upon that account, as well as 
others, she had determined to make as soon as it should have taken place. As these 
solicitations made her very uneasy, she complained of them to her husband, and he 
advised her to give warning. She immediately followed his counsel, but stayed five 
months longer to oblige her lady, who was very desirous she should go with her to 
Bath. When they came back, and her master found she was determined to go, and that 
another maid had been engaged in her stead, he was so enraged at his disappointment 
that he would scarcely suffer her to stay long enough in the house to put her clothes 
together. When she had come away Cannicott hired a lodging for her as near him as 
he could, that he might spend every leisure minute in her company; and he perceived, 
with unspeakable pleasure, an excessive fondness in her which increased his own.
	One Hobson, a coachman in Lord Darnley's family, knew Cannicott when he 
lived in another place, and knew also his first wife. It happened that the wife of this 
Hobson had become acquainted with some person in the house where Cannicott had 
taken a lodging for his second wife, and thus discovered the secret. His second wife, 
however, she did not know where to find, for she had removed into the country when 
Cannicott went out of town with his lord, and had not yet returned; but word was 
immediately sent to his wife, and she took every opportunity to haunt and reproach 
her husband with his new connection. This made him extremely wretched, not only 
because it was irksome in itself, but because it kept him in continual dread and 
solicitude lest they should find out his favourite and interrupt her peace as they had 
interrupted his. As his fears increased, so did his caution: he took another lodging for 
his young wife, whom he called Nanny, at a considerable distance, and required her 
never to call, on any pretence, where she had lodged before. With this request she 
cheerfully complied, without knowing or inquiring why it was made; but her old 
landlady, once meeting her by chance, dogged her home, and immediately acquainted 
Hobson and his wife where she lodged, who with great expedition sent Mrs Cannicott 
to acquaint her with her situation. Here was an end at once to all the stolen felicity. 
Nanny, at the next interview, reproached him; but she reproached him with such 
tenderness as showed less anger than love. She was overwhelmed with grief, and as 
often as she could find words she entreated that he would never attempt to see her 
more, but leave her to struggle alone with her misfortunes, and endeavour to get into 
another place. He could not consent to leave her, but promised to procure her a place. 
This indeed he attempted, but without success.
	She had twice removed her lodging, but was still followed by Mrs Cannicott, 
who acquainted the neighbourhood with her story. Nanny, therefore, would not suffer 
Cannicott to visit her in her lodgings, where it was known she could not be his lawful 
wife; and though he persuaded her sometimes to meet him early in the morning, yet, 
as it was chiefly in the street, that afforded him no pleasure.
	Hobson and his wife in the meantime fomented the difference between 
Cannicott and his first wife, telling her that he had received his wages, and urging her 
to solicit him for more money. This she did, with threats of prosecution if he refused, 
saying that she could and would hang him for having two wives.
	As he believed this to be in her power, he restrained his aversion, for fear she 
should execute it, and therefore appointed to meet her on Thursday evening at the Red 
Lion, in Berkeley Square, to take a little walk. Being obliged to put up at a public-
house near Tottenham Court, by a sudden storm of thunder and rain, she asked him 
for money, which he refused to give her, when she had recourse first to expostulation, 
then reproach, and then threatening, which threw him into a dreadful rage, in the 
midst of which he broke away from her and she followed him. As they were going 
downstairs he saw a cord hanging over the banisters, upon which he conceived a 
design to use it as an instrument to murder her, and therefore snatched it up and put it 
into his pocket. When they came out of the house they went towards home. Bidding 
her go on, he prepared the cord for the murder. Having tied a noose in one end and 
passed the other end through it, he walked apace after her and, coming behind her, 
threw it over her head and drew it tight. She immediately seized it with her hands, and 
struggled so hard that the cord broke, and he feared she would overpower him. He 
then thought of his scissors, and, drawing them from the sheath, he thrust them many 
times into her throat and body, upon which her grasp relaxed, and she soon expired. 
He was soon afterwards arrested and examined by the justices, and though many 
circumstances appeared against him, yet the first day he confessed nothing; but the 
next day, finding that they had found out his second wife, and confined her upon 
suspicion that she had been accessory to the fact, he immediately accused himself, 
that she might be discharged; and, having fully disclosed the whole affair, he pleaded 
guilty at his trial, and died with great penitence and resignation, being executed at 
Tyburn, on the 20th of September, 1756.


JOHN BERRY, STEPHEN M'DANIEL, JAMES EGAN, 
JAMES SALMON AND – BLEE 
A new Species of Murderers, who conspired against the Lives of many 
Innocent Men

	OUR readers might imagine that we have already related every species of 
murder, and it will hardly be credited, that so diabolical a conspiracy could be 
engendered in the mind of man, as that of enticing innocent youths to commit a 
robbery, and then apprehending them, for the sake of the reward, thus making a very 
trade of human blood. This infernal plot was however long successfully carried on, 
and many an innocent man fell a victim to the pretended violated laws of the country.
	The head, or captain, as they dignified him, was Berry; a runner, or as 
commonly denominated a 'Thief-taker', who lived at the bottom of what was then 
called George-yard, at the bottom of Hatton-Garden, and Blee was his servant.
	M'Daniel had kept a public-house in Holborn; Egan was a shoemaker, in 
Drury-lane; and Salmon a leather-breechesmaker, in Drury-lane.
	These villains, horrid to relate, conspired together, in accusing innocent people 
of crimes which took away life, for the reward offered. Various were the diabolical 
plans they laid for this purpose.
	At one time, they enticed two victims to join them in committing a highway 
robbery upon one of their own gang; a third was to purchase the stolen goods; and the 
other was to apprehend the intended victims, permitting his accomplice, who had been 
concerned in the robbery, to escape, and then to join the party robbed and the receiver 
in the prosecution. But if, through the information of the other two, the thief-taker, 
who proposed and assisted in the robbery, was apprehended, then, in order to preserve 
him, the prosecution was not supported.
	These villains exhibited an accusation of robbery against two young men, 
named Newman and March. Upon their trial, they related the manner in which they 
had been seduced; but the evidence of the thief-takers was so strong, that they were 
convicted and suffered death.
	A poor man, named Tyler, was met by one of the gang, who said he would 
make him a present of a horse, for which he had no further occasion. The unfortunate 
man joyfully received the horse from his apparently generous benefactor; by whom be 
was advised to take the beast to an inn in Smithfield, there to be taken care of till he 
should determine in what manner to dispose of him. Before he could reach Smithfield, 
he was seized by Egan, who took him before the sitting alderman; and it being sworn 
that he had stolen the horse, he was committed to Newgate, and soon afterwards 
hanged. In the year 1753, they charged an innocent man, named Woodland, with 
felony; and he was committed, and sentenced to suffer death: but he was so fortunate 
as to receive a pardon, on condition of transportation. The villains, however, claimed, 
and actually received, the reward, in consequence of having prosecuted him to 
conviction.
	Joshua Kidden, whom we shall mention hereafter, was the next who fell a 
sacrifice to their diabolical artifices. It would be tedious to recount the particulars 
relating to the many people who suffered death through the false evidence of these 
atrocious villains; and especially as the several cases bear much similarity to each 
other. We shall now proceed to a narrative of the fact of which they were convicted.
	The money obtained by the conviction of Kidden being nearly expended, they 
employed themselves in concerting new schemes of villany for recruiting their 
finances. It was determined to employ a man named Blee, a fellow of abandoned 
principles, who had for some time acted as an assistant to Berry, in attending in the 
fields about Islington till he could decoy two idle boys to consent to join him in a 
robbery.
	They all held a meeting in an arbour belonging to a public-house, the sign of 
Sir John Oldcastle, in the neighbourhood of Islington, where they appointed the time 
for committing the robbery, and that it should be near Deptford, on account of the 
inhabitants of Greenwich having advertised twenty pounds for the apprehending any 
highwayman or footpad, in addition to the reward allowed by parliament. Their 
wicked plan being settled, they separated; for, lest they should be suspected of holding 
an improper correspondence, they were particularly careful not to be seen together, 
where there was a probability of their persons being known.
	The time for holding the assizes being arrived, Mr Cox, having a warrant for 
apprehending Berry, Salmon, M'Daniel, and Egan, went to Maidstone, having Blee in 
custody. Mr Cox waited till the conclusion of the trial, but had no sooner heard the 
foreman of the jury pronounce the prisoners guilty, then he caused the four iniquitous 
accomplices to be taken into custody. They obstinately persisted in declaring 
themselves innocent; and even when confronted with Blee, denied having the least 
knowledge of him: but, on the following day, they severally requested to be admitted 
evidences for the crown; in this none of them were indulged, the evidence of Blee 
being deemed sufficient for their conviction.
	They were removed to London, in order for trial, as being accessories before 
the fact. The jury were not able to determine whether the prisoners came within the 
description of the statutes fourth and fifth of Philip and Mary, or third and fourth of 
William and Mary, and therefore referred the case to the decision of the twelve 
judges.
	The special verdict being brought to a hearing before the judges in the hall of 
Serjeant's inn, counsel was heard on both sides, and it was unanimously determined 
that the offences charged against the prisoners did not come within the meaning of the 
statutes above-mentioned: but orders were given for the indicting them for a 
conspiracy.
	An indictment being found against them, they were again put to the bar at the 
Old Bailey, and the evidences exhibited against them on their former trial being 
recapitulated, the jury pronounced them guilty, and they were sentenced to be 
punished in the following manner: Berry and M'Daniel to stand on the pillory, once at 
the end of Hatton Garden, in Holborn, and once at the end of King Street in 
Cheapside; Salmon and Egan to stand once in the middle of West Smithfield, and the 
second time at the end of Fetter-lane, in Fleet Street; and all to be imprisoned in 
Newgate for the space of seven years; and upon the expiration of that time not to be 
discharged without finding sureties to be bound in the penalties of a thousand pounds 
each for their good behaviour for the seven following years.
	March the 5th, 1756, M'Daniel and Berry were set on the pillory at the end of 
Hatton Garden, and were so severely treated by the populace that their lives were 
supposed to be in danger.
	Egan and Salmon were taken to Smithfield on Monday the eighth of the same 
month, amidst a surprising concourse of people, who no sooner saw the offenders 
exposed on the pillory, then they pelted them with stones, brick-bats, potatoes, dead 
dogs and cats, and other things. The constables now interposed; but being soon 
overpowered, the offenders were left wholly to the mercy of an enraged mob. The 
blows they received occasioned their beads to swell to an enormous size; and they 
were nearly strangled by people hanging to the skirts of their clothes. They had been 
on the pillory about half an hour, when a stone striking Egan on the head, he 
immediately expired.
	This man's fate, however illegally he met his death, will cause but little 
sorrow; yet, living under wholesome laws, we would not see even such a wretch as 
Egan punished but by the sentence of a court.
	The sheriffs, fearing that should the survivors be again exposed to the 
vengeance of an enraged people they would share the fate of their companion in 
iniquity, the remainder of the sentence of pillory was on that account remitted; but the 
length of their sentence of imprisonment, added to the great amount of the sureties for 
their good behaviour after the expiration thereof, might have been considered 
tantamount to imprisonment for life; a fate well suited to such mischievous, hard-
hearted, and unrelenting villains.
	They, however, soon died in Newgate, thus ridding the world of the principal 
part of this terrific gang.


JOSHUA KIDDEN 
A Victim of the horrid Conspirators, whose crimes and punishments are 
described above

	WE have already given the names of some of the devoted victims of these 
conspirators; but as they were chiefly selected from the very lowest part of society, 
the particulars of their unhappy cases are lost in obscurity.
	The subject of this melancholy history, was in a superior rank of life to his 
innocent fellow-sufferers; and, like them, it will be found had taken no part in the 
pretended robbery of which he was accused.
	The father of Kidden, was a reputable watch-maker in London, and having 
given his son a classical education, bound him apprentice to an apothecary; but being 
fond of idleness, he was soon discontented with culling simples and pounding roots. 
His indulgent parents, thinking that the watery element might better suit his lazy turn 
of mind, accordingly procured him a situation as a petty-officer in the royal navy; in 
which he remained during six years.
	Having now returned to his paternal home, his father, fondly hoping that he 
had settled his mind to a sea-faring life, hired masters to instruct him in the theoretical 
parts of navigation, and every other branch of that art; but he neglected his 
opportunity, and hung about his father, a useless and expensive burden; however, we 
find no propensity in him to dishonesty.
	At length, somewhat arousing from his apathy, he made an essay to earn his 
own bread, and for that purpose ranged him self among the porters, at the end of 
Fleet-market; for he had neglected to acquire any trade or business.
	Going one evening, after the toil of a hard day's work, to regale himself with 
the London labourer's most wholesome beverage, porter, he was unfortunately marked 
by the villain Blee, one of the gang last mentioned, who conceived him a fit object 
upon whom to exercise his hellish design.
	Kidden, who had uncertain employ, told Blee that be was in want of work; and 
the latter engaging to procure some for him, got him lodgings in an alley in Chick-
lane, where he continued from Friday till the following Monday, when be was told 
that there was a job at Tottenham to remove some effects of a gentleman, which 
would otherwise be seized for rent.
	At the time appointed, Kidden and Blee went to Tottenham; and having waited 
at a public-house till the approach of night, Blee went out, with a pretence of speaking 
to the gentleman whose goods were to be removed; but, on his return, said that the 
business could not be transacted that night.
	They now quitted the public-house, and proceeded towards London, after Blee 
had given Kidden eighteen-pence, as a compensation for the loss of his day's work. 
On the London side of Tottenham they observed a chaise, and a woman sitting on the 
side of the road near it. Ridden asked her if she was going to London; she replied in 
the affirmative; but he walked forwards, paying no attention to what she said, till he 
heard Blee call him back, demanding to know why be walked so fast. Kidden turning 
back, observed that Blee was robbing the woman; on which be declined a nearer 
approach, disdaining to have any concern in such a transaction: but Blee, running up 
to him, said, 'I have got the money': and would have prevailed on him to take half a 
crown; but this he declined.
	Blee then desired Kidden not to leave him; and the latter staying two or three 
minutes, a thief-taker, named M'Daniel, rushed from a hedge, and seizing Kidden, 
told him that he was his prisoner.
	The woman thus pretendedly robbed was one Mary Jones; and all the parties 
going before a magistrate, it was positively sworn that Kidden was the robber, and 
that he took twenty-five shillings from the woman; on which he was committed to 
Newgate.
	Mary Jones, the woman supposed to have been robbed, lodged in Broker's-
alley, Drury-lane; and the friends and relations of Ridden, assured in their own minds 
of his innocence, went thither to inquire after her character, which they found to be so 
totally abandoned, that they had no doubt but that the whole was a pre-concerted plot 
for his destruction.
	When the trial came on, Mary Jones, and two thief-takers swore positively to 
the unhappy lad, who was capitally convicted, and sentenced to die; and a report was 
industriously circulated that he had committed several robberies as a footpad; but this 
was only the effort of villany, to depreciate the character of an innocent man, in order 
to receive the reward for his conviction, which was actually paid.
	After sentence of death was passed, Ridden made a constant, uniform, and 
solemn avowal of his innocence. He told how the thief-takers had imposed on him; 
and his tale was universally credited, when it was too late to save him from the fatal 
consequences of their villainous devices.
	Repeated applications were made that mercy might be extended to the 
unhappy convict; but these were in vain. The warrant for his execution arrived, and he 
resigned himself to his fate in the most becoming manner, lamenting the present 
disgrace that his relations would undergo but entertaining no doubt that the decrees of 
Providence would soon give ample testimony of his innocence.
	He resigned his innocent life to the executioner, after pathetically addressing 
the multitude, and declaring again his innocence, in the year 1756, greatly lamented.
	From a comparison of the circumstances of the case of Ridden, and other 
miserable youths whom this destructive gang, under pretence of being thief-takers, for 
the ends of justice, bad given evidence against, we fear there is too much reason to 
believe that many more than those we have mentioned, fell victims to their crimes.


CHRISTOPHER WOODLAND 
Another Victim of the horrid gang of Thief-takers

	The cases of the wretched men who fell victims to the horrid plots of the thief-
takers already mentioned, shew how many arts had been practised in seeking the 
innocent blood of their fellow-creatures.
	The fate of Woodland, however, is deserving of much less pity than that of 
Kidden; the former consented to join in a burglary, which, though a trap laid for him, 
it proved that he was a man, ready to join any hardened gang of robbers.
	They thus practised upon Woodland. Berry, the head of the gang, hired a 
single room of one Mr Eveness, on Saffron-hill, ostensibly for James Egan, another of 
the gang. They put into this room some mean articles of furniture, and thus made the 
place suited to their purpose. Then Berry, M'Daniel, Egan, and Mary Jones, who had 
now become associated with them, ordered Blee to procure a victim, who might join 
some of them in robbing this room.
	Blee, ever the drudge of the gang, pitched upon a half-witted fellow, the 
immediate subject of the present enquiry.
	Egan, who had been a shoemaker, took possession of the room, and hammered 
upon his lapstone; not to mend soles, but to make souls arise from the bodies of his 
victims. Blee intoxicated Woodland, and then proposed what he called a plan to 
ensure the road to wealth. The sot, delighted with the offer, readily joined him in 
breaking into the shoe-maker's room, where he was assured a large booty might be 
obtained.
	Woodland committed the burglary, and was followed by Blee. He seized some 
bundles of clothes, placed there for the purpose, and was advised by his deceitful 
companion, to offer them for sale to Mary Jones. The gang rushed into her apartment, 
seized Woodland, but permitted Blee to escape. They took him before a justice of the 
peace, swore to the burglary, and consequently he was committed to Newgate.
	As he did not appear to be an old offender, no other offence being laid to his 
charge, the capital part of the indictment, the burglary, was not pressed; and he was 
found guilty alone of stealing.
	This disappointed the gang of their reward, as he was sentenced to 
transportation only, and was sent to America.


ADMIRAL BYNG 
Shot to death on board the Monarque, at Spithead, for Misbehaviour before 
the French Fleet in the Mediterranean

	THIS unfortunate victim to popular clamour, and political intrigue, was the 
second son of George Byng, a distinguished naval commander, in the reign of George 
the second, who, in reward for his brilliant services, was elevated to the peerage in 
1721, by the titles of Baron Byng, and Viscount Torrington. John Byng, the subject of 
this memoir, was brought up to his father's profession from his earliest youth, and up 
to the time of his embarking in the expedition to Minorca, which covered his character 
with disgrace, and consigned him to an ignominious death, was generally esteemed as 
one of the best officers in the navy.
	During the latter years of George the Second's reign, England was involved in 
a war with France, and the weak and impotent administration who then directed the 
royal councils, evinced their utter incapacity for the important duties which devolved 
upon them, by their inability to check the alarming encroachments of the French. In 
addition to great losses and disasters inflicted upon our American colonies, the enemy 
had made great havock upon our commerce in the Mediterranean and other parts. The 
city of London presented a petition and remonstrance to the king, in which the 
ministry was very roughly handled, and the example of the metropolis was 
extensively followed by many other portions of the empire, but the ministers still 
remained in office.
	In this agitated state of affairs, Admiral Byng was appointed to the command 
of a fleet consisting of ten ships, with which force he was to sail immediately to 
Gibraltar, where he was to land a reinforcement for the garrison, and then to pursue 
the French fleet, which it was supposed had been destined for North America. At 
Gibraltar the Admiral learnt that the French fleet, consisting of thirteen ships of the 
line, and a great number of transports, with 15,000 troops on board, had sailed from 
Toulon, and made a descent on Minorca, and were in possession of the whole of the 
island, except the fortress and castle of St. Philip, into which the commandant, 
General Blakeney, had retired with a very small force, and remained closely besieged 
by the French troops under the command of the Duke de Richelieu.
	In communicating to the Lords of the Admiralty this intelligence, Admiral 
Byng took occasion to make some very severe remarks, not only on the wretched 
condition of the ships under his command, but also on the neglected state of the 
magazines and store-houses at Gibraltar, and the utter want of wharfs and docks in 
which he might repair and refit the fleet. To this he added, that the engineers and 
artillery men, then in Gibraltar, who had been at Minorca, were decidedly of opinion 
that no effectual assistance could be rendered to the British forces then defending the 
fortress of St. Philip, and in this opinion he expressed his concurrence.
	This impolitic and ill-timed communication, no doubt had considerable 
influence on the spirit in which the transactions, wherein his fate was subsequently 
involved, were conducted. The first part of his letter was a palpable impeachment of 
the ministry, under whose orders he was acting; and the second seemed framed for the 
sole purpose of preparing them for the disasters which so quickly followed.
	Having refitted, and taken on board a reinforcement from the garrison, he 
sailed from Gibraltar, on the 8th of May, 1756, and was joined off Minorca by the 
Phcenix. On approaching land, the British flag was seen still flying on the castle of St. 
Philip, on which, however, a tremendous bombardment was kept up from several 
batteries over which the French flag waved. Admiral Byng attempted to open a 
communication with the shore, but before this could be effected, the French fleet, 
consisting of thirteen large ships of war and four small vessels, appeared in sight, it 
being then about six o'clock in the evening. During the night the fleets separated, but 
about two the next day, they again came into contact, and the line of battle was 
formed on both sides. Rear-Admiral West attacked the enemy with great courage and 
impetuosity, broke through their line, and disabled the ships opposed to him. Admiral 
Byng, however, who had confused the rear-admiral by contradictory orders, most 
cautiously kept out of the engagement, and when urged by his captain to bear down 
upon the enemy and carry on the engagement, very coolly declined doing so, except 
with the whole line of ships. The French admiral, though possessed of greater force, 
but already somewhat worsted, seemed equally disinclined to carry on the battle, took 
advantage of Admiral Byng's indecision, and edged off. The English gave chase, but 
were outsailed by the French, and on the following morning the enemy's fleet was 
quite out of sight.
	After this unsatisfactory engagement, which had commenced with such 
advantages on our part, the admiral called a council of war, in which it was agreed to 
abandon Minorca to its fate, and to return with the fleet to Gibraltar. The French 
redoubled their exertions against the fortress of St. Philip, and after several 
unsuccessful attempts, in which they were repulsed with great loss, by the brave but 
scanty troops under the command of General Blakeney, ultimately succeeded in 
carrying the outworks by storm. The general finding himself cut off from all hope of 
relief from the fleet, the fortress surrounded by batteries of the most destructive 
power, and the whole island in the undisputed possession of the enemy, was at length 
compelled to surrender, and the Duke de Richelieu, in consideration of the bravery of 
the defence, concluded an honourable capitulalion, in which it was agreed that the 
garrison should march out with the honours of war, and be conveyed to Gibraltar in 
French vessels.
	Admiral Byng's letter announcing the engagement and its issue, excited the 
strongest possible disappointment and indignation. It was not made public till some 
days after its arrival; but when published, every expression tending in any way to cast 
blame on the ministers was carefully expunged. Their object was accomplished to the 
full; the public mind took fire, and the rage and clamour against the admiral was 
unbounded. This feeling was artfully fomented by hired emissaries, who were sent 
into all classes of society and places of amusement to denounce the offender, and 
mobs were actually hired to hang and burn him in effigy.
	Sir Edward Hawke was sent out to supersede the unfortunate admiral, who 
was brought home under arrest, and on his arrival committed a close prisoner to an 
apartment in Greenwich Hospital. On his own part, he was actuated by a 
consciousness of having done his duty, and anxious for an opportunity of justifying 
himself before a Court Martial.
	On the meeting of Parliament Admiral Boscawen informed the House that the 
King and the Board of Admiralty being dissatisfied with the conduct of Admiral 
Byng, in a late action with the French fleet in the Mediterranean, he was in custody in 
order to take his trial. This communication was deemed to be necessary as a mark of 
respect to the House of Commons, of which Admiral Byng was a member, and to 
account for the absence of that officer from his duties in the House.
	The 28th December being fixed for the trial, the Court martial assembled on 
board the St. George, at Portsmouth. admiral Byng was escorted from Greenwich by a 
strong party of the Horse Guards, and throughout the whole line of the road was 
violently insulted by the people of every town and village through which the 
cavalcade passed.
	The sitting of the court continued for several days, and after a laborious 
investigation of the evidence, determined that during the engagement with the French 
fleet, Admiral Byng did not do his utmost to take, seize, and destroy the ships and 
vessels of the French king, nor to assist such of His Majesty's as were engaged in so 
doing; and that he did not exert his utmost power for the relief of the castle of St. 
Philip. All which being in breach of the 12th article of the Laws for the Government 
of His Majesty's Navy, and the said laws prescribing death for such dereliction of 
duty, the court adjudged the said Admiral Byng to be shot to death, at such time, and 
on board such ship, as the Lords of the Admiralty should direct. But inasmuch as he 
had shown neither disaffection nor want of personal courage, the court unanimously 
and earnestly recommended him to mercy.
	During the trial he behaved with a cheerful composure, which only resulted 
from a consciousness of innocence. So strong indeed was his confidence of receiving 
full and honourable acquittal, that after he had finished his defence be ordered his 
carriage to be in readiness to convey him to London.
	When he became acquainted with the fatal decision of the court, he expressed 
the strongest feelings of surprise and indignation, but he showed nothing like fear or 
confusion. Many members of the court overcome by grief and trepidation, actually 
shed tears; but the victim of their judgment heard his doom without the alteration of a 
single feature, and making a low obeisance to the court retired.
	Strong efforts were used to save the unhappy individual from his impending 
fate. The Lords of the Admiralty forwarded to the King the recommendation of the 
Court Martial to mercy, accompanied by one from themselves, in which they urged 
strong doubts of the legality of the sentence which had been passed. A petition was 
also presented by Lord Torrington, and other relations and friends of the unhappy 
convict also used their best exertions in his behalf. So strong and so numerous were 
the appeals for mercy, that hopes were entertained of its prevailing; but infamous arts 
were used to whet the savage appetite of the multitude for blood, and the cruel faction 
ultimately succeeded.
	The cry of vengeance was loud throughout the land; sullen clouds of suspicion 
and malevolence interposing, to obstruct the genial influence of the most enviable 
prerogative that apper tains to the throne. The Sovereign was given to understand that 
the execution of Admiral Byng was absolutely necessary to appease the fury of the 
people. His Majesty, in consequence of the representation made by the Lords of the 
Admiralty, referred the sentence to the consideration of the Twelve Judges, who 
returned a unanimous opinion that the sentence was legal. This report being 
transmitted from the privy-council to the Admiralty, their lordships issued a warrant 
for executing the sentence of death on the twenty-eighth day of February. Admiral 
Forbes, one of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, how ever, refused to sign 
the warrant, on account of his conscientious scruples of its illegality.
	The unfortunate Admiral being thus abandoned to the stroke of justice, 
prepared himself for death with resignation and tranquillity. He maintained a 
surprising cheerfulness to the last; nor did he, from his condemnation to his execution, 
exhibit the least sign of impatience or apprehension. During that interval he had 
remained on board the Monarque, under a strong guard. On the day fixed for his 
execution, the boats belonging to the squadron at Spithead being manned and armed, 
containing their captains and officers, with a detachment of marines, attended this 
solemnity in the harbour, which was also crowded with an infinite number of other 
boats and vessels filled with spectators. About noon, the Admiral having taken leave 
of a clergyman, and two friends who accompanied him, walked out of the great cabin 
to the quarter-deck, where two files of marines were ready to execute the sentence. He 
advanced with a firm deliberate step, a composed and resolute countenance, and 
resolved to suffer with his face uncovered, until his friends, representing that his looks 
would possibly intimidate the soldiers, and prevent their taking aim properly, he 
submitted to their request, threw his hat on the deck, kneeled on a cushion, tied one 
white handkerchief over his eyes, and dropped the other as a signal for his 
executioners, who fired a volley so decisive, that five balls passed through his body, 
and he dropped down dead in an instant. The time in which this tragedy was acted, 
from his walking out of the cabin to his being deposited in the coffin, did not exceed 
three minutes.
	Thus fell, to the astonishment of all Europe, Admiral John Byng; who, 
whatever his errors and indiscretions might have been, was at least rashly condemned, 
meanly given up, and cruelly sacrificed to vile political intrigues.


EDWARD MORGAN 
Executed and hung in Chains at Glamorgan, 6th of April, 1757, for 
murdering a Family and burning down their House

  
Morgan firing the house after murdering his cousin's family

	THE circumstances which came out on the trial of Edward Morgan, at the 
assizes of Glamorgan, were these. According to annual custom he had been invited by 
Mr Rees Morgan, of Lanvabon, his cousin, to spend the Christmas holidays. He had 
partaken of the first day's festivity, and retired to bed along with a young man, 
apprentice to Mr Rees Morgan. No sooner had he laid his head upon the pillow, to use 
his own expression, than the devil whispered to him to get up and murder the whole 
family, and he determined to obey.
	He first made an attempt on the apprentice, his bedfellow, but he struggled so 
far as to effect his escape and hide himself. The murderer then provided himself with 
a knife, which he sharpened on a stone as deliberately as the butcher uses his steel.
	Thus prepared, he softly crept to the bedchamber of his host and hostess, and 
cut their throats in their sleep; then he proceeded to the bed of their beautiful 
daughter, with whom the monster had but an hour before been sporting and playing, 
and with equal expedition, and by the same means, robbed her of life.
	Not, however, satisfied with causing this inundation of blood, he seized a 
firebrand and proceeded to the barn and outhouses, setting fire to them all; and to 
complete the sum of his crime he fired the dwelling-house, after plundering it of some 
articles.
	The Gloucester Journal of the year 1757 describes the property consumed by 
fire on this melancholy occasion to have been "the dwelling-house, a barn full of corn, 
a beast-house with twelve head of cattle in it; and the farmer, his wife and daughter 
were either murdered or perished in the flames."
	It was at first conjectured that the unfortunate people had perished in the 
conflagration. Their murdered bodies, it is too true, were consumed to ashes; but the 
manner of their death was proved partly by what the concealed apprentice overheard, 
but chiefly from the murderer's own confession. Morgan was executed at Glamorgan, 
on the 6th of April, 1757.


JOHN YOUNG 
Convicted of Crimping, or Kidnapping, young Men for the Service of the 
East India Company, 27th of April, 1757

	TO the disgrace of a free country this man-stealing system had long been 
carried on, and generally with impunity, in London. Among the numerous 
descriptions of villains who prowled the streets and environs of the metropolis, 
watching an opportunity to plunder, were a number of ruffians with cockades in their 
hats, calling themselves recruiting officers, watching country and unguarded youths, 
whom they decoyed into public-houses, which they had in all quarters of the town; 
there they plied them with drink, and raised their hopes to enthusiasm, by the 
description of the vast riches of the East, until they got them sworn in, as it was 
called, after which nothing more was seldom heard of the wretched dupe. They were 
hurried on board a ship, confined in a filthy hold, on scanty provisions, and sent to 
some unfriendly clime, which generally soon put an end to their miseries.
	John Young was one of these mock captains. He trepanned Henry Soppet, an 
honest sailor, while intoxicated, and confined him in a spunging or lock-up house, in 
Chancery Lane, with a design to send him to the East Indies. When sober, Jack, 
however, made such an uproar, that the captain was fain to let go his supposed prize. 
It did not rest here, for the tar instantly steered to the Lord Mayor and tendered his 
complaint, in consequence of which the man-stealer was apprehended, and brought to 
trial for the offence, at the sessions at Guildhall, on the 27th of April, 1757, and found 
guilty.
	The crimp, or man-stealer, Young, pleaded guilty, and endeavoured to cozen 
the Court, by a mock puritanical whine of contrition, into mercy; but he soon found 
that he could not trick the City magistrates, who ordered him to be imprisoned in 
Newgate for twelve months, and at the expiration of that time to give security for his 
good behaviour for two years more, himself with one hundred pounds and two 
sureties in fifty pounds each.


WILLIAM ADAMS 
A Custom-House Officer in London, executed at Tyburn on 18th of May, 
1757, for Forgery

	WILLIAM ADAMS was in a position of public trust. The department in 
which he served the public was the examining of certificates of over-entries on the 
duties on wines. This gave him an opportunity, with the greatest security, of 
committing the crime for which he suffered, and it is possible he might long have 
continued the practice had not an accidental omission of a date led to the discovery.
	It was usual for merchants landing their wines to pay the duty; but if upon trial 
they appeared to be so damaged as not to be saleable, upon a proper application, and 
giving up the wines for the King's use, they were furnished with such certificates as 
entitled them to the repayment of the duty.
	It was a certificate of this kind which Adams forged; and though such 
certificates are usually signed by six different persons, who are severally checks upon 
each other, yet he had counterfeited the names and signatures of all these, and actually 
received the drawback on ten tuns of damaged wines, amounting to two hundred and 
fifty-two pounds, for the use of Phineas Coats, in whose name the certificate was 
forged. But it being immediately discovered that a figure in the date was wanting, and 
he offering to supply it himself, a suspicion arose, and an inquiry was occasioned; 
upon which it was found that not one of the clerks whose signatures appeared knew 
anything of the matter.
	Adams was apprehended, committed, and brought to trial at the Old Bailey for 
this forgery. He had little to urge in his defence further than that it had been a practice 
to receive such certificates as cash; that he had received this particular certificate as 
such; and that if it was forged he knew nothing of the forgery. This had no weight 
against the evidence which appeared against him, in the opinion of the jury, who, 
without hesitation, pronounced him guilty. He was executed on the same gallows with 
three other men.


RICHARD HUGHES 
Executed at Tyburn, May 18, 1757, for forgery.

	THIS man for some years carried on business in an extensive way, as a tailor 
and draper, in Arundel-street, Strand, London; therein had acquired a capital, which 
he invested in a brewery, but it appears that this speculation, extending beyond the 
tailor's yard, did not succeed equal to the clipping of cloth. Hughes had been intrusted 
by his uncle, the acting executor under his father's will, with a power of attorney, to 
receive considerable sums of money, due to the estate of the deceased; and while he 
stuck to his shop-board, he performed the trust reposed in him with punctuality which 
acquired him: much credit among his country relations.
	The brewery, a concern with which he was totally unacquainted, soon brought 
him into difficulties; and to surmount which, he fixed his thoughts upon certain 
South-sea stock, possessed by this uncle, and found no peace of mind until he 
converted it to his own use. To this end, he boldly went to the South-sea House, and 
asked the proper clerk for a bank warrant of attorney, to sell stock. This is always kept 
at the office, and it was then necessary that the power of transfer should be witnessed 
by the minister, church-wardens, or overseers of the poor of the parish, in which the 
owner lives.
	All these formalities, Hughes himself soon counterfeited, and in due time 
presented the instrument at the South-sea House; and received upwards of five 
hundred pounds.
	Had this ungrateful wretch suffered his iniquity to rest here, it might have 
remained undiscovered until he could have replaced the stock, which it may 
reasonably be presumed he meant to do; but the evil genius that goads us on to the 
commission of crimes, ever leads us to a precipice from which the victim is 
annihilated. So with Hughes, who in attempting to cover the robbery, exposed himself 
to detection. No sooner had he received the money, than he determined to pay a visit 
to the man whom he had injured.
	The uncle received his nephew with much cordiality; until the latter, lulled 
into security, and now deserted by his tempter, among other ways of ingratiating 
himself farther into the old man's favours, told him that, he had "brought his interest 
on the South-sea stock." The old gentleman did not appear to take much notice of this 
at the time, probably supposing he might have empowered him for that purpose; but 
upon returning, he could find no authority vested in his nephew for that, purpose; yet 
he determined not to sift the matter while the young man remained his guest.
	No sooner had Hughes departed for London, than the uncle uncle 
communicated his suspicion to the minister of the parish, who disclaimed all 
knowledge of witnessing any instrument which could warrant a transfer of stack:
	Application was then made to the South-sea House, when the forgery was 
evident. The minister's Christian-name was mistaken, and no such persons as the other 
pretended witnesses could be found.
	This was the sum of the evidence given on his trial at the Old Bailey; and on 
which he was consequently convicted and executed.
	The prosecution was instituted by the Board of rectors of the South-sea 
Company.


WILLIAM PAGE 
A Gentleman of the Road who drove in a Phaeton and Pair, and after many 
Adventures was executed for Highway Robbery on 6th of April, 1758

  
William Page leaving his phaeton, while he robs a gentleman, near Putney

	WILLIAM PAGE was the son of a respectable farmer at Hampton, and being 
a lad of promising parts he was sent to London to be educated, under the care of his 
cousin, a haberdasher. His early life, by the superstitious believers of old sayings, 
would be adduced as proof positive of the truth of the old adage that "a man who is 
born to be hanged will never be drowned"; and, although we cannot put much faith 
generally in such notions, we cannot help in this instance pointing out some 
peculiarities in the adventures of our hero which might have been considered by him 
as a sufficient indication of his fate.
	The early chronicler of his life says that, during the hard frost in the winter of 
1739, Page was sliding with other boys on the canal in St James's Park, when the ice 
broke under him and he sank; and, the ice immediately closing over him, he would 
have perished, but just at this juncture the ice again broke with another boy near him, 
and Page arose precisely at the vacancy made by the latter, and was saved, although 
his companion was drowned. The second instance of the intervention of his good 
fortune occurred in the summer following this singular escape. Page was then trying 
to swim with corks in the Thames, when they slipped from under his arms and he 
sank; but a waterman got him up, and he soon recovered. On the third occasion he 
was going up the river on a party of pleasure, about five years after-wards, with 
several other young fellows, when the boat overset with them in Chelsea Reach, and 
every one in the boat was drowned except Page. But his fourth and last escape from a 
watery grave was even more miraculous than any of those which preceded it. About 
eighteen months after that which is last related he was on a voyage to Scotland. The 
ship in which he sailed foundered in Yarmouth Roads, and most of the people on 
board perished; but another vessel, observing their distress, sent out a long-boat, by 
the help of which Page and a few others saved their lives.
	To return, however, to the ordinary events of his life. It appeared that, his 
cousin having given him employment in his shop, his vanity prevented him from 
bestowing that attention on his business to which it was entitled; and his extravagance 
being checked by his relation, who stopped his pocket-money in order to curb his 
refined notions, he had recourse to plunder to supply his necessities. Money being 
repeatedly missed from the till, and all attempts to discover the thief among the 
servants having failed, suspicion at length rested on our hero; and, his guilt having 
been distinctly proved, he was dismissed from his situation forthwith. An effort which 
he made to conciliate his relation after this proved ineffectual; and his father, who had 
learned the nature of his irregularities, having refused to render him any assistance, he 
at length journeyed to York, and there joined a company of strolling players. His 
exertions in his new capacity were not unsuccessful; but at length, attempting to play 
Cato while in a state of intoxication, his character in the play and his condition of 
person were found to agree so badly that he was compelled to be carried from the 
stage, and was dismissed from his engagement.
	He afterwards went to Scarborough, where his necessities compelled him to 
accept a situation as livery-servant with a gentleman; but, his master having been 
robbed on his way to town, he formed a notion that highway robbery was an easy and 
profitable mode of living, and determined that so soon as he should have the means of 
starting in the profession he would become a "gentleman of the road." Quitting his 
master at the end of twelve months he became acquainted with a woman of 
abandoned character, in conjunction with whom he took lodgings near Charing Cross, 
and he then commenced as highwayman. His first expedition was on th Kentish Road, 
and meeting the Canterbury stage, near Shooter's Hill, he robbed the passengers of 
watches and money to the amount of about thirty pounds; and then, riding through a 
great part of Kent to take an observation of the cross-roads, he returned to London. He 
now took lodgings near Grosvenor Square, and, frequenting billiard-tables, won a 
little money, which, added to his former stock, prevented his having recourse to the 
highway again for a considerable time. But at length he met with a gambler who was 
more expert than himself and stripped him of all his money. He then again sought the 
road as a means of subsistence. His exertions were for some time fruitless, but at 
length meeting with a handsome booty he was emboldened by his success, and, taking 
luxurious lodgings, soon gained the friendship of some young men of fashion. His 
next object was to improve his mind and person; and, having gained some knowledge, 
by dint of impudence and through a pleasing exterior he got introduced into decent 
society.
	By this time he had drawn, from his own observation and for his private use, a 
most curious map of the roads twenty miles round London, and, driving in a phaeton 
and pair, was not suspected for a highwayman.
	In his excursions for robbery he used to dress in a laced or embroidered frock, 
and wear his hair tied behind; but when at a distance from London he would turn into 
some unfrequented place and, having disguised himself in other clothes, with a 
grizzled or black wig, and saddled one of his horses, he would ride to the main road 
and commit a robbery. This done, he would hasten back to the carriage, resume his 
former dress, and drive to town again.
	He had once an escape of a very remarkable kind. Having robbed a gentleman 
near Putney, some persons came up at the juncture and pursued him so closely that he 
was obliged to cross the Thames for his security. In the interim some haymakers, 
crossing the field where Page's carriage was left, found and carried off his gay 
apparel; and the persons who had pursued him, meeting them, charged them with 
being accomplices in the robbery. A report of this affair being soon spread, Page 
heard of it, and, throwing his clothes into a well, he went back almost naked, claimed 
the carriage as his own, and declared that the men had stripped him and thrown him 
into a ditch. All the parties now went before a justice of the Peace; and the maker of 
the carriage appearing, and declaring that it was the property of Mr Page, the poor 
haymakers were committed for trial; but obtained their liberty after the next assizes, 
as Page did not appear to prosecute.
	After this he made no further use of the phaeton as a disguise for his robberies; 
but it served him occasionally on parties of pleasure, which he sometimes took with a 
girl whom he had then in keeping.

  
Page duped at a masquerade

	Page was passionately fond of play, and his practice this way was attended 
with various turns of fortune, as must be the case with all gamblers. One night he 
went to the masquerade with only ten guineas, and won above five hundred pounds; 
and this money was no sooner in his possession, than a lady, most magnificently 
dressed, made some advances to him, on which he put the most favourible 
construction.
	After some conversation she told him that her mother was a widow, who 
would not admit of his visits; but that possibly he might prevail on her attendant, 
whose husband was a reputable tradesman, to give them admission to his house.
	Page, who had repeatedly heard the other address her by the title of 'My lady,' 
became very importunate with the good woman to grant this favour. At length all 
parties agreed; the servants were called; Page handed the lady and her attendant into a 
coach, on which was the coronet of a viscountess: two footmen with flambeaux got 
behind the carriage, and the coachman was ordered to drive home; but, when the 
carriage came into Pall Mall, fresh orders were given to proceed towards Temple Bar.
	The fine lady engaged Page's attention to such a degree, that he paid no regard 
whither they went. At length the carriage stopped in an obscure street, at a house 
which looked like a shop, and the parties went upstairs, but not before the lady had 
whispered one of the footmen (loud enough for Page to hear her) to acquaint her 
grace, in the morning, that she did not return lest she should disturb her, and therefore 
slept at Mrs. Price's.
	The good woman of the house apologized for the meanness of her 
accommodations; but Page said that all apologies were needless; and the attendant 
retiring, he paid the most earnest addresses to the presumed lady, who at length, after 
a degree of affectation, that, if he had not been blinded by his own vanity, he might 
have readily perceived, she consented to sleep with him.
	As it was late (or rather early) before they came from the masquerade, and 
much time had been lost in the courtship, it was four o'clock in the afternoon before 
they arose, and even night before a coach was called for their departure; though the 
lady pretended that her mother, the duchess, would be extremely uneasy on account of 
her absence.
	With great difficulty Page prevailed on the lady to admit of his attendance on 
her part of the way home; during which he promised every thing that a lover could 
promise; and she answered him as he could have wished.
	The coach stopping in Covent Garden, the lady went into a chair: and our hero 
offering to pay the chairman, he said that he was already paid, a circumstance that 
convinced Page of the disinterested disposition of this new acquaintance.
	Repairing now to his lodgings, he reflected with pleasure on the happy 
prospects before him; but, feeling for his pocket-book, he discovered that it was lost, 
and with it the greatest part of his treasure.
	He now began to suspect that the lady of fashion was an impostor; and when 
she failed to meet him on the following day, agreeably to an appointment that she had 
made, he saw that he had been robbed of five hundred pounds, without a probability 
of recovering it.
	He now advertised a reward to the hackney-coach man who took them up, and 
made several other endeavours to find her out; but they all proved equally fruitless.
	Thus stripped of his ill-acquired property, he came to a resolution to make the 
women pay for what a woman had stolen; and, taking the road to Bath, he robbed 
every carriage in which was a woman. If men were in the coach, he said he had no 
demands on them; but had a draft for five hundred pounds on the ladies.
	Finding that the women were possessed of little cash, he began to make his 
demands on the gentlemen, of whom be soon collected about one hundred and fifty 
pounds, which he carried to the masquerade, and lost it all at the gaming-table; and 
was no sooner stripped of his money than he determined to engage in an intrigue.
	Leaving the gaming-room, he danced with a lady, and then attended her to 
supper, during which he said some tender things, which he presumed might tend to 
promote an immediate assignation; but he soon found that the lady had no other view 
than that of marriage, which was far from being disagreeable to him as he was then 
situated.
	An appointment being agreed on for the following day, he waited on the lady 
at her house, and found that she was a widow of considerable fortune, and well 
descended. As he had the art of procuring himself to be well spoken of to her, she 
entertained no doubt of his honour. He escorted her to public places; and the expense 
of these attendances was defrayed by his usual resource, the highway.
	After one of his expeditions on the road he was followed to the inn where he 
put up his horse, and, being taken into custody, was tried at Maidstone, but acquitted 
because the party could not swear to his identity. This circumstance, however, put an 
end to his acquaintance with the lady above mentioned.
	The road and the gaming-table were his only means of support, and he found a 
fitting companion in his proceedings in the person of an old schoolfellow named 
Darwell, in conjunction with whom, in the course of three years, he committed 
upwards of three hundred robberies. At length, however, their iniquitous proceedings 
caused an active search to be made for them; and Darwell, being apprehended, 
"peached" upon his companion, and disclosed the places where it was most likely that 
he would be found.
	The consequence was that Page was apprehended at the Golden Lion, near 
Hyde Park, when three loaded pistols were found on him, with powder, balls, a wig to 
disguise himself, and the correct map of the roads round London which we have 
already mentioned.
	He was sent to Newgate, and an advertisement was inserted in the papers 
requesting such persons as had been robbed to attend his re-examination; but he 
denied all that was alleged against him, and as he was always disguised when he 
committed any robbery no person present could identify his person.
	He was tried at length on suspicion of robbing Mr Webb in Belfourd Lane, but 
acquitted for want of evidence; and after this he was tried at Hertford, but again 
acquitted for a like reason.
	From Hertford he was removed to Maidstone jail, and being tried at Rochester, 
for robbing Captain Farrington on Blackheath, he was capitally convicted, and 
received sentence of death. He suffered at Maidstone on the 6th of April, 1758.


JAMES WHITE AND WALTER WHITE 
Brothers who were executed at Kennington Common, 19th of April, 1758, 
for Robbery with Violence

	THESE brothers were natives of Surrey, and had resided in the neighbourhood 
of Guildford and Godalming. They were long accounted lazy, sottish fellows, seldom 
seen at labour, yet ever sneaking about, and tippling in public-houses. Their supply of 
money to support these low and idle debaucheries had been long suspected, yet, 
though many petty larcenies had been committed in the neighbourhood, no charge had 
been brought forward against them.
	At length, however, justice, though slow, yet sure, overtook them. They were 
apprehended on suspicion of committing a robbery and burglary in the house of Mr 
Robert Vincent, a farmer of Crawley, in the said county, in consequence of 
information being given against them by an accomplice, who in fact seduced them 
into the robbery -- a depredation of a magnitude which they had not before attempted.
	Being arraigned at the Lent Assizes held at Kingston, in the year 1758, it 
appeared in evidence on their trial that the prisoners beat Mr Vincent inhumanly, and 
threatened to burn him alive if he did not discover where his money was hidden. They 
then robbed him of four pounds eighteen shillings in silver, one Portugal piece, value 
thirty-six shillings, two guineas and a half, and various other articles. They were 
found guilty on the clearest evidence. At the place of execution they acknowledged 
the justice of their sentence.
	While these unhappy men were yet struggling for life, an infant, of about nine 
months old, was put into the hands of the executioner, who nine times passed the 
hands of each of the dying men over its face. The child had a wen on its cheek, and 
the ignorant, superstitious mother conceived it could be cured by dead men's hands!
	The elder of these unfortunate brothers was twenty-three and the other had but 
just turned twenty-one years of age.


DOCTOR FLORENCE HENSEY 
Convicted of High Treason, and sentenced to Death on the 12th 
of June, 1758; respited, and then reprieved, by King George the 
Second; but who received a free Pardon from King George the 
Third.

  

	IN the Court of King's Bench, during the reign of King Charles the First, a 
gentleman, named Arthur Chuhoggen, was attainted of high treason, viz. for saying in 
Spain, "I would kill the king of England if I could come at him;" which was testified 
by the oaths of two gentlemen, beside others that justified it, from the several relations 
of other men. For further probability of his malicious intent, the officers that 
apprehended him at his lodgings in Drury-lane, London, deposed upon oath, that 
when they told, him he was the king's prisoner, he bit his thumb, saying, "I care not 
this much for your king."
	The attorney-general observed, that in Spain, the biting of the thumb is a token 
of scorn and disdain, in the highest degree; and will bear an action of disgrace in 
Spain, as spitting in one's face will in England. After Mr. Chuhoggen was condemned, 
the judges sent the sheriff to him, to know of him, whether he could alledge any other 
colourable intent of his coming over; but he gave no satisfaction on that point. He was 
hanged, drawn, and quartered, on the 27th of November, 1617, and he then wished 
that he might never enter the kingdom Heaven; if ever he had uttered the words for 
which he was condemned
	The above is an extract from a curious manuscript letter from Mr. Justinian 
Pagitt, then a lawyer of' Lincoln's Inn, to Dr. Twysden, chancellor of the diocese of 
Lichfield and Coventry. It will present the reader with a specimen of king-craft, in the 
reign of the Monarch who lost his head!
	Such was the definition of treason formerly; and punishment inflicted on a 
man who would now have been looked upon as a madman, for no one in his senses, 
for any earthly purpose, could utter such incoherencies.
	In comparing the cases of Chuhoggen and Hensey, we are much surprised at 
the extension of royal mercy to the one; as at the barbarous punishment of the other.
	Martin Nowland, as we have already shewn, was executed for attempting to 
inlist Englishmen for the service of France; and Thomas Hemmings suffered death for 
doing the same for the king of Prussia; yet Hensey, whose crime was ten-fold greater, 
was pardoned.
	De la Motte, the particulars of whose case we shall hereafter give, was 
"hanged, drawn, and quartered," for the same kind of offence which Hensey 
committed; and in still more recent times, numbers have suffered death for similar 
treason; and yet we have to observe, without finding any especial reason for it, that 
Doctor Hensey was pardoned. If granted from political motives, it must have been in 
fear of Spain; an unworthy impulse of the ministers of a far greater and more powerful 
nation.
	Dr. Hensey was a native of the county of Kildare in Ireland, brought up a 
Roman Catholic, and taught the rudiments of grammar by a priest of that persuasion. 
Being sent to St. Omer's to study philosophy, he continued there till the degree of 
master of arts was conferred on him, and then proceeded to Leyden, where he studied 
physic. From Leyden he went through Germany and Switzerland into Italy, acquiring 
the knowledge of the respective languages during his travels.
	Embarking at Genoa, he sailed to Lisbon, and, crossing the kingdom of 
Portugal, went to Spain, and thence to France, endeavouring in his tour to make 
himself master of the Portuguese and Spanish languages. Having reached Paris, he 
practised physic in that city five years; but being unsuccessful, he repaired to London.
	His success in England was not superior to that in France. His patients were 
few, and those of the lower rank of people. From his quitting the university of 
Leyden, he had corresponded with a brother collegian, who, having settled in France, 
procured a place in the office of the secretary of state at Paris.
	When Dr. Hensey heard of his friend's promotion, he wrote him a letter of 
congratulation, in which he made a civil offer of executing any of his commands in 
London.
	This happening at the commencement of a war between Great Britain and 
France, Hensey's friend informed him, that he might be very serviceable by 
transmitting early intelligence of our warlike preparations. This hint being approved 
by the Doctor, the next post brought him instructions how to act, with an appointment 
of near twenty-five pounds per month.
	The substance of these instructions were "to send complete lists of all our men 
of war, both in and out of commission; their condition, situation, and number of men 
on board each; when they sailed, under what commanders, from what ports, and their 
destination; an account of the actual number of our troops, what regiments were 
complete, and where quartered or garrisoned."
	Dr. Hensey sent such accounts as he could procure to a gentleman at Cologne, 
who sent them to another at Berne in Switzerland, whence they were transmitted to 
Paris. Hensey's salary, ample as it was, proved unequal to the expectations he had 
formed; but he proceeded, in the hopes of an increase of it.
	His first attempt to acquire intelligence was by getting into company with the 
clerks of the public offices, but not succeeding in this, he frequented the coffee-houses 
used by the members of parliament: and his physical appearance taking off all 
suspicion of his being a spy, he frequently learned such particulars as he thought 
worth sending to his employers.
	[Note: Though this may seem an extraordinary method of procuring secret 
intelligence, it is no more than what is practised daily by the writers of the 
newspapers.]
	He never entered into political discussion if he could avoid it, and when he 
did, always spoke on the government side of the question, professing enmity to the 
French; so that, though a Catholic, he was long unsuspected.
	His letters from Paris were sent by the way of Switzerland, whence they were 
transmitted to the post-office in London, and directed to him at a coffee-house in the 
Strand, by a fictitious name. A suspicion arose that these letters and their answers, 
which appeared to contain only a few lines of compliment, (as might be seen through 
the covers,) were in fact a disguise for something of greater importance; and this 
suspicion increasing by their frequency, the secretary of the post-office at length 
opened some of those from Hensey, in one of which, dated from Twickenham, he 
read, between the lines written with ink, another epistle written with lemon-juice, 
advising the French to land on the English coast.
	The letters were read by being held to the fire, and the utmost diligence was 
used to discover the writer, and learn his real name; for which purpose a person was 
placed at the coffee-house to which they were directed, who followed him to his 
lodgings in Arundel-street, after he had received one of them.
	On the following Sunday, Hensey, on his return from the Spanish 
ambassador's chapel in Soho-square, was seized by two of the King's messengers, and 
after repeated examination before the secretary of state, was committed to Newgate 
for high-treason. The grand jury of Middlesex found a true bill against him in Easter 
term, 1758; but the trial was removed, by writ of certiorari, into the Court of King's-
bench; here he pleaded not guilty.
	A copy of his indictment was granted, and counsel directed by the court to 
plead for him. On his trial, which took place before Lord Mansfield, in Westminster-
Hall, the gentlemen of the post-office swore to the finding a number of letters in his 
bureau, and his handwriting was proved by some apothecaries who had made up his 
prescriptions.
	The doctor's counsel pleaded a defect in the indictment, because the letters 
were intercepted at the Post- office, which was in London; whereas the offence, if 
any, was committed in Middlesex; the grand jury of which county could have no right 
to find a bill for an offence committed in London.
	The counsel for the crown replied, that though the letters had been intercepted 
at the Post-office, the offence on which the indictment was founded had been 
committed at Twickenham, as appeared by the date of the letter. They further urged, 
that the solicitor of the treasury might have laid the indictment in the city of London; 
but he preferred fixing it in the county, because the letter from Twickenham was of 
the most dangerous tendency; and the other letters were to be considered only as 
collateral evidence against the prisoner.
	Dr. Hensey's counsel now objected, that the writing a treasonable letter was 
not an overt act of high-treason; except this letter was published: in answer to which it 
was insisted, that the delivery of it at the Post-office was an actual publication of it. 
The doctor's counsel farther said, that he had not corresponded with the enemies of 
the King; for we were not at war with the Dutch, and the letters were directed to 
people in Holland.
	The evidences having proved, that the letter dated at Twickenham contained 
an invitation to the French to invade this kingdom, that was considered as an overt act 
of high-treason; on which the plea of the prisoner was overruled, and the evidence 
was summed up by Lord Mansfield.
	Dr. Hensey had hitherto supported himself with courage; but, during the 
absence, of the jury, which was about three quarters of an hour, he trembled 
excessively, and gave every proof of the greatest agitation of mind. On their return, he 
had scarcely strength to hold up his hand at the bar. A verdict of guilty being 
pronounced, he was brought up to receive sentence on the Wednesday following, after 
which he begged a fortnight to make proper preparation for his death; but the court 
generously granted him a month.
	A respite was sent for him early on the morning on which he was to have been 
executed, and afterwards, a reprieve during the King's pleasure. After this he 
continued above three years in Newgate, and then embarked for France, on obtaining 
a free pardon..
	At the time Hensey was apprehended, his brother was secretary and chaplain 
to the Spanish ambassador at the Hague. To this brother he wrote an account of his 
misfortunes, in consequence of which the Spanish ambassador at London was applied 
to by the gentleman in similar office at the Hague; and such representations were 
made to the English ministry, that the reprieve above-mentioned followed; though 
King George the Second could not be prevailed on to grant him a free pardon: but 
soon after the accession of George the Third, this pardon was granted, and the 
prisoner discharged, on giving the usual security for his good behaviour.


JOSEPH HALSEY 
Ship's mate, hanged for beating two of his men to death

	JOSEPH HALSEY was born of respectable parents in New England, North 
America, who gave him an education fit for a navigator. He was, when he committed 
the murder in question, mate of the ship Amazon, commanded by Captain Gallop. 
This vessel sailed from Jamaica for London the latter end of June or the beginning of 
July, having on hoard Captain Gallop; Halsey, the mate; four men, John Father, 
Daniel Davidson, John Edwards, and Robert Green; and two boys, Thomas Symmes 
and William Mitchell.
	Mitchell was about sixteen years of age, and Symmes seems to have been 
older. About a week after the Amazon left Jamaica the captain was taken ill, and 
confined to his cabin: the command, therefore, devolved upon Halsey. About the same 
time, also, the vessel sprung a leak, so that her hands wore obliged to pump to keep 
her clear. Halsey, as soon as he took the command of the ship, began to treat the men 
with great brutality, abusing and beating them without cause or mercy. Complaint was 
frequently made to the captain, and he was repeatedly alarmed in his cabin by the cry 
of murder: but he was not able to afford the sufferers redress; only he said to Halsey, 
'Halsey, we have but few men, and, if you murder them, who will take care of the 
ship?' The captain's remonstrance, however, produced no effect, and soon after it 
became necessary to pump. Edwards and Davidson were taken ill: this afforded 
Halsey's cruelty a new subject of gratification; be compelled the sick to work as long 
as those that were well; and, perceiving that they were feeble, and not able to clear the 
same quantity of water in the same time, he compelled them to continue pumping 
double the time that was allotted to the rest: the men, indeed, compassionated the poor 
sufferers, and voluntarily offered to pump for them, or assist them while they were 
pumping; but this Halsey would not suffer.
	The captain, in the mean time, hearing the poor fellows were sick, sent them 
out some fresh provision from his table, which Halsey would not suffer them to 
partake of: neither did his diabolical barbarity stop here; for he not only beat them 
without mercy, sometimes with a board, sometimes with a mopstick, and sometimes 
with a rope, but, when their watch was over, he prohibited them the refreshment of 
shelter and sleep, and insisted upon poor Davidson's standing upon deck all night in 
the rain, at a time when be could scarcely support himself on his legs, and had a right 
to have been in his hammock.
	As the Amazon was in a fleet, and under convoy, it was often proposed to 
Halsey to send the two poor sick wretches on board a man of war, that the surgeon 
might take them under his care, and that two effective men might be sent on board in 
their stead; but this Halsey refused, though he knew, if he made the request, it would 
have been granted. When he was further urged, he said he had no clothes fit to go on 
board the man of war in; upon which both Captain Gallop and Captain Ball, captain of 
another vessel in the fleet, who happened to be on board the Amazon, offered to lend 
him some clothes; but he absolutely refused to accept them, for which it is impossible 
to assign any other reason than that be would not give up the pleasure ho took in 
tormenting the men, for it was manifestly his interest to have rather effectual men than 
sick on board, especially considering the condition of his vessel.
	After that be persisted in treating the sick men in the same manner, with this 
additional aggravation, that, though he allowed every other person in the ship three 
quarts of water a day, he allowed them only one quart, though their sickness increased 
the intolerable thirst, which, in that climate, requires more than the largest of these 
allowances to quench.
	Halsey, that he might indulge himself in contemplating the misery he 
produced, always caused the two sick men to be upon deck whenever he was upon 
deck himself, whether it was or was not their watch, and used frequently to make 
Davidson stand with a mop held out in his hands, as a soldier holds out his musket, 
for many successive hours, without intermission or refreshment
	To this astonishing barbarity poor Edwards first fell a martyr; ho died, and was 
thrown overboard.
	About the same time Davidson, considering his fellow-sufferer as having 
escaped the misery to which he was still condemned, resolved to follow him, and, 
accordingly, silently let himself down by a rope from the stern into the sea, in hopes 
that he should be drowned, and lose both his misery and his life together; but it 
happened that Halsey saw him as he rose to the surface of the water; and such was the 
inveteracy of his malice, that he seized a rope and leaped overboard to bring him 
back, declaring that he should 'not escape him so,' and that be would have the pleasure 
of tormenting him a little longer. When the poor wretch was brought on board he was, 
to appearance, dead: the good captain, however, ordered him to be rolled, that the 
water might be discharged; and, when he came to himself, directed that he should be 
dry clothed. When he was stripped, in order to fulfil these humane directions, his body 
appeared to be bruised almost from head to foot.
	Halsey, however, did not relent; he continued tormenting him by blows, 
insults, labour, and thirst: when he was so weak that he could not stand Halsey 
forcibly drew him up by his hands, and, tying him to the shrouds, first beat him, and 
then left him in that condition for more than an hour: when he was untied he fell 
down. The man that came up the next watch found him dying under the boat on the 
hare deck; about four hours after he was seen lying on a sail; and in the morning he 
was found dead.
	The captain dying at sea, and Halsey being obliged to ask the assistance of a 
man of war, which before he had refused, obtained two men in the room of Edwards 
and Davidson, and brought the ship home.
	He continued to heat the rest of the crew during the remainder of the voyage, 
notwithstanding the murders he had already committed; but when he came into port, a 
complaint being made, he was taken into custody; and the facts here reduced to a 
narrative having been proved, he was condemned, and suffered at Execution Dock, 
March the 14th, 1759, without any circumstance of pain or infamy that would not 
have been then inflicted on a petty thief who had pilfered a silk handkerchief from a 
passenger in the street.


MARY EDMONDSON 
Strongly protesting her Innocence, she was executed on Kennington 
Common, 2nd of April, 1759, for the Murder of her Aunt

	THIS unhappy girl was the daughter of a farmer near Leeds, in Yorkshire, and 
was sent to reside with her aunt, Mrs Walker, of Rotherhithe, who was a widow lady. 
With this aunt she lived two years, comporting herself in the most decent manner, and 
regularly attending the duties of religion.
	A lady, named Toucher, having spent the evening with Mrs Walker, Mary 
Edmondson lighted her across the street on her way home, and soon after her return a 
woman who cried oysters through the street observed that the door was open and 
heard the girl cry out "Help! Murder! They have killed my aunt!" Edmondson now 
ran to the house of Mrs Odell, wringing her hands and bewailing the misfortune, and, 
the neighbours being by this time alarmed, some gentlemen went from a public-house, 
where they had spent the evening, determined to inquire into the affair. They found 
Mrs Walker, with her throat cut, lying on her right side, and her head near a table, 
which was covered with linen. One of the gentlemen, named Holloway, said: "This is 
very strange; I know not what to make of it: let us examine the girl."
	Her account of the matter was that four men had entered at the back door, one 
of whom put his arms round her aunt's neck, and another, who was a tall man, dressed 
in black, swore that he would kill her if she spoke a single word.
	Mr Holloway, observing that the girl's arm was cut, asked her how it had 
happened; to which she replied that one of the men, in attempting to get out, had 
jammed it with the door. But Holloway, judging from all appearances that no men had 
been in the house, said he did not believe her, but supposed she was the murderer of 
her aunt.
	On this charge she fell into a fit and, being removed to a neighbour's house, 
was bled by a surgeon, and continued there till the following day, when the coroner's 
inquest sat on the body, and brought in a verdict of wilful murder; whereupon she was 
committed to prison, on the coroner's warrant.
	Mrs Walker's executors, anxious to discover the truth, caused the house to be 
diligently searched, and found that a variety of things, which Mary Edmondson had 
said were stolen, were not missing; nor could they discover that anything was lost. 
Mrs Walker's watch and some other articles which she said had been carried off by 
the murderers were found under the floor of the necessary-house.
	Being committed to the New Jail, Southwark, she remained there till the next 
assizes for Surrey, when she was tried at Kingston, and convicted on evidence which, 
though acknowledged to be circumstantial, was such as, in the general opinion, 
admitted little doubt of her guilt.
	She made a defence indeed; but there was not enough of probability in it to 
have any weight.
	Being condemned on Saturday, to be executed on the Monday following, she 
was lodged in the prison at Kingston, whence she wrote to her parents, most solemnly 
avowing her innocence, She likewise begged that the minister of the parish would 
preach a sermon on the occasion of her death. She asserted her innocence on the 
Sunday, when she was visited by a clergyman and several other people; yet was her 
behaviour devout, and apparently sincere.
	Being taken out of prison on the Monday morning, she got into a post-chaise 
with the keeper, and, arriving at the Peacock, in Kennington Lane, about nine o'clock, 
there drank a glass of wine; and then, being put into a cart, was conveyed to the place 
of execution, where she behaved devoutly, and made the following address to the 
surrounding multitude:--
	"It is now too late to trifle either with God or man. I solemnly declare that I am 
innocent of the crime laid to my charge. I am very easy in my mind, as I suffer with as 
much pleasure as if I was going to sleep. I freely forgive my prosecutors, and 
earnestly beg your prayers for my departing soul."
	After execution her body was conveyed to St Thomas's Hospital, Southwark, 
and there dissected, agreeably to the laws respecting murderers.


JOHN STEVENSON 
Convicted of the Manslaughter of Francis Elcock, an Attorney-at-Law, who 
had issued a Writ against him

	JOHN STEVENSON was a cheese-factor at Bickerton, and, becoming 
insolvent, fortified himself in his house, and admitted nobody within the doors for fear 
of an arrest.
	A writ was issued out against him by Elcock, at the suit of one Atkins, for 
eighteen pounds, eight shillings and tenpence; a warrant was made out upon the writ 
by one Baxter, who, by verbal appointment, acted for the under-sheriff. This warrant 
was delivered sealed to Elcock, or his agent, directed to one John Evans, a bailiff, and 
a blank left in it for the names of any other person by whom the attorney should think 
fit to have it executed, such being the custom of the place. After the warrant had been 
thus sealed and delivered, Elcock inserted the names of John James and John Jones, 
who were deemed bailiffs-extraordinary for this particular arrest; and as they had not 
given bond to the sheriff, Elcock undertook, by an endorsement on the warrant, to 
indemnify the sheriff from any injury he might suffer by the act of John James and 
John Jones, whose names he had inserted in the warrant, and to whom he had 
committed the execution of it.
	John James found means to get into Stevenson's house by stratagem, and 
arrested him upon this warrant, but Stevenson rescued himself by snapping a pistol 
three times at James, which happily missed fire, and James escaped from the house 
and left his prisoner behind him.
	When Elcock learned that Stevenson had been arrested, and rescued himself, 
he immediately sent for arms and a crow to break open the door, and retake Stevenson 
by force.
	Several persons soon after assembled armed, and with James and Jones, the 
bailiffs, beset the house. James had put an iron crow under one door of the house and 
made an attempt to force it off the hinges; but, failing, he left Elcock at that door with 
the crow lying under it, directing him to watch that Stevenson did not escape, and 
went himself to another door. When James was gone, Elcock took up the crow, and, 
while he was making another effort with it to force the door, Stevenson discharged a 
grun through the door at him, which gave him a mortal wound, of which he died in 
about ten hours.
	The facts were all incontestably proved, and that Stevenson knew the persons 
who were about to force his door were assistants to the bailiffs from whom he had 
rescued himself; but it was insisted by the counsel for the prisoner -- First, that the 
warrant was not good, because it was issued by a person who had no legal delegation 
of authority from the sheriff to grant it, verbal appointment being insufficient. To this 
it was replied, on behalf of the Crown, that it had been the custom immemorial for 
clerks to attend at the office of sheriffs and make out warrants upon writs directed to 
them, particularly at the two counters in London, and at the Middlesex office in 
Furnival's Inn. Secondly, it was insisted for the prisoner that the insertion of the 
names of the bailiffs by whom the warrant was to be executed, after the warrant was 
scaled, made it an illegal warrant; and Lord Hale was quoted, who says: "If a sheriff's 
bailiff come to execute a process, but has not a legal authority, as if the name of the 
bailiff, etc., be interlined or inserted after the sealing thereof, if such bailiff be killed it 
is but manslaughter." To this it was replied that this opinion of Lord Hale being 
omitted by Serjeant Hawkins, it might be presumed that he doubted it; that if a person 
gave a bond sealed and executed to another, with a blank for the sum, and directed 
him to insert two hundred pounds in it, and he to whom the bond was given filled it 
up, the bond was good, which was supposed to contradict Lord Hale's opinion 
concerning a warrant.
	After further points had been argued it was resolved by the Court to direct the 
jury to bring in a special verdict, which was accordingly done.
	On the 6th of May, 1759, the case of Stevenson was argued before the Hon. 
Mr Justice Noel, Chief Justice of Chester, and Thomas White, Esq., the other justice, 
who gave their opinion that the prisoner's crime, found by the special verdict, could 
amount at most to manslaughter only. Whereupon he was burned in the hand, and 
discharged from the capital part of the indictment.


EUGENE ARAM
A Self-Educated Man, with remarkable Linguistic Attainments, who was 
executed at York on 6th of August, 1759, for a Murder discovered Fourteen 
Years after its Commission.

  
Eugene Aram

	EUGENE ARAM was born in a village called Netherdale, in Yorkshire, in the 
year 1704, of an ancient family, one of his ancestors having served the office of High 
Sheriff for that county in the reign of Edward III. The vicissitudes of fortune had, 
however, reduced them, as we find the father of Eugene a poor but honest man, by 
profession a gardener, in which humble walk in life he was, nevertheless, greatly 
respected.
	The sweat of his brow alone, we must conclude, was insufficient both to rear 
and educate his offspring. From the high erudition of the unfortunate subject under 
consideration, he may be truly called a prodigy. He was self-taught. In the infancy of 
Aram his parents removed to another village, called Shelton, near Newby, in the said 
county; and when about six years of age, his father, who had laid by a small sum from 
his weekly labour, made a purchase of a little cottage in Bondgate, near Ripon.
	When he was about thirteen or fourteen years of age he went to his father in 
Newby, and attended him in the family there till the death of Sir Edward Blackett. It 
was in the house of this gentleman, to whom his father was gardener, that his 
propensity for literature first appeared. He was indeed always of a solitary disposition, 
and uncommonly fond of retirement and books; and here he enjoyed all the 
advantages of leisure and privacy. He applied himself at first chiefly to mathematical 
studies, in which he attained considerable proficiency.
	At about sixteen years of age he was sent to London, to the house of Mr 
Christopher Blackett, whom he served for some time in the capacity of book-keeper. 
After continuing here a year or more he was taken with the smallpox, and suffered 
severely under that distemper. He afterwards returned into Yorkshire, in consequence 
of an invitation from his father, and there continued to prosecute his studies, but found 
in polite literature much greater charms than in mathematics; which occasioned him 
now to apply himself chiefly to poetry, history and antiquities. After this he was 
invited to Netherdale, where he was employed in a school. He then married. But this 
marriage proved an unhappy connection; for to the misconduct of his wife he 
afterwards attributed the misfortunes that befell him. In the meanwhile, having 
perceived his deficiency in the learned languages, he applied himself to the 
grammatical study of the Latin and Greek tongues; after which he read, with great 
avidity and diligence, all the Latin classics, historians and poets. He then went 
through the Greek Testament; and lastly, ventured upon Hesiod, Homer, Theocritus, 
Herodotus and Thucydides, together with all the Greek tragedians. In 1734 William 
Norton, Esq., a gentleman who had a friendship for him, invited him to 
Knaresborough. Here he acquired a knowledge of Hebrew, and read the Pentateuch in 
that language. In 1744 he returned to London, and served the Rev. Mr Plainblanc as 
usher in Latin and writing, in Piccadilly; and, with this gentleman's assistance, 
acquired a knowledge of the French language. He was afterwards employed as an 
usher and tutor in several different parts of England, during which time he became 
acquainted with heraldry and botany. He also ventured upon Chaldee and Arabic, the 
former of which he found easy, from its near connection with the Hebrew.
	He then investigated the Celtic, as far as possible, in all its dialects; and having 
begun to form collections, and make comparisons between the Celtic, the English, the 
Latin, the Greek and the Hebrew, and found a great affinity between them, he 
resolved to proceed through all these languages, and to form a comparative lexicon. 
But, amid these learned labours and inquiries, it appears that Aram committed a crime 
which could not naturally have been expected from a man of so studious a turn, as the 
inducement that led him to it was merely gain of wealth, of which the scholar is 
seldom covetous. On the 8th of February, 1745, he, in conjunction with a man named 
Richard Houseman, murdered one Daniel Clarke, a shoemaker at Knaresborough.
	This unfortunate man, having married a woman of good family, ostentatiously 
circulated a report that his wife was entitled to a considerable fortune, which he 
should soon receive. Thereupon Aram and Richard Houseman, conceiving hopes of 
making advantage of this circumstance, persuaded Clarke to make an ostentatious 
show of his own riches, to induce his wife's relations to give him that fortune of which 
he had boasted. There was sagacity, if not honesty, in this advice, for the world in 
general are more free to assist persons in affluence than those in distress.
	Clarke was easily induced to comply with a hint so agreeable to his own 
desires; on which he borrowed, and bought on credit, a large quantity of silver plate, 
with jewels, watches, rings, etc. He told the persons of whom he purchased that a 
merchant in London had sent him an order to buy such plate for exportation; and no 
doubt was entertained of his credit till his sudden disappearance in February, 1745, 
when it was imagined that he had gone abroad, or at least to London, to dispose of his 
ill-acquired property.
	When Clarke got possession of these goods, Aram and Houseman determined 
to murder him, in order to share the booty; and on the night of the 8th of February, 
1745, they persuaded Clarke to walk with them in the fields, in order to consult with 
them on the proper method to dispose of the effects.

  
Aram murdering Daniel Clarke
	On this plan they walked into a field, at a small distance from the town, well 
known by the name of St Robert's Cave. When they came into this field, Aram and 
Clarke went over a hedge towards the cave, and, when they had got within six or 
seven yards of it, Houseman (by the light of the moon) saw Aram strike Clarke 
several times, and at length beheld him fall, but never saw him afterwards. This was 
the state of the affair, if Houseman's testimony on the trial might be credited.
	The murderers, going home, shared Clarke's ill-gotten treasure, the half of 
which Houseman concealed in his garden for a twelvemonth, and then took it to 
Scotland, where he sold it. In the meantime Aram carried his share to London, where 
he sold it to a Jew, and then engaged himself as an usher at an academy in Piccadilly, 
where, in the intervals of his duty in attending on the scholars, he made himself 
master of the French language, and acquired some knowledge of the Arabic and other 
Eastern languages.
	After this he was usher at other schools in different parts of the kingdom, but 
as he did not correspond with his friends in Yorkshire it was presumed that he was 
dead.
	Thus had nearly fourteen years passed on without the smallest clue being 
found to account for the sudden exit of Clarke.
	In the year 1758 a labourer was employed to dig for stone to supply a lime-
kiln, at a place called Thistle Hill, near Knaresborough, and, having dug about two 
feet deep, he found the bones of a human body, and the bones being still joined to 
each other by the ligatures of the joints, the body appeared to have been buried 
double. This accident immediately became the subject of general curiosity and 
inquiry. Some hints had been formerly thrown out by Aram's wife that Clarke was 
murdered, and it was well remembered that his disappearance was very sudden.
	This occasioned Aram's wife to be sent for, as was also the coroner, and an 
inquisition was entered into, it being believed that the skeleton found was that of 
Daniel Clarke. Mrs Aram declared that she believed Clarke had been murdered by her 
husband and Richard Houseman. The latter, when he was brought before the coroner, 
appeared to be in great confusion, trembling, changing colour and faltering in his 
speech during the examination. The coroner desired him to take up one of the bones, 
probably to observe what further effect that might produce; and Houseman, 
accordingly taking up one of the bones, said "This is no more Dan Clarke's bone than 
it is mine."
	These words were pronounced in such a manner as convinced those present 
that they proceeded not from Houseman's supposition that Clarke was alive but from 
his certain knowledge where his bones really lay, Accordingly, after some evasions, 
he said that Clarke was murdered by Eugene Aram, and that the body was buried in St 
Robert's Cave, near Knaresborough. He added further, that Clarke's head lay to the 
right, in the turn at the entrance of the cave; and a skeleton was accordingly found 
there exactly in the posture he described. In consequence of this confession search 
was made for Aram, and at length he was discovered in the situation of usher to an 
academy at Lynn, in Norfolk. He was brought from thence to York Castle; and on the 
13th of August, 1759, was brought to trial at the county assizes. He was found guilty 
on the testimony of Richard Houseman, who being arraigned, and acquitted, became 
an evidence against Aram; and whose testimony was corroborated by Mrs Aram, and 
strong circumstantial evidence. The plunder which Aram was supposed to have 
derived from the murder was estimated at not more than one hundred and sixty 
pounds.
	Aram's defence was both ingenious and able, and would not have disgraced 
any of the best lawyers of the day. He thus addressed the Court:
	"My Lord, I know not whether it is of right or through some indulgence of 
your Lordship that I am allowed the liberty at this bar, and at this time, to attempt a 
defence, incapable and uninstructed as I am to speak; since, while I see so many eyes 
upon me, so numerous and awful a concourse fixed with attention and filled with I 
know not what expectancy, I labour not with guilt, my Lord, but with perplexity; for, 
having never seen a court but this, being wholly unacquainted with law, the customs 
of the Bar, and all judiciary proceedings, I fear I shall be so little capable of speaking 
with propriety in this place that it exceeds my hope if I shall be able to speak at all.
	"I have heard, my Lord, the indictment read, wherein I find myself charged 
with the highest crime, with an enormity I am altogether incapable of -- a fact, to the 
commission of which there goes far more insensibility of heart, more profligacy of 
morals, than ever fell to my lot; and nothing possibly could have admitted a 
presumption of this nature but a depravity not inferior to that imputed to me. 
However, as I stand indicted at your Lordship's bar, and have heard what is called 
evidence adduced in support of such a charge, I very humbly solicit your Lordship's 
patience, and beg the hearing of this respectable audience, while I, single and 
unskilful, destitute of friends and unassisted by counsel, say something, perhaps like 
argument, in my defence. I shall consume but little of your Lordship's time. What I 
have to say will be short; and this brevity, probably, will be the best part of it. 
However it is offered with all possible regard and the greatest submission to your 
Lordship's consideration and that of this honourable Court.
	"First, my Lord, the whole tenor of my conduct in life contradicts every 
particular of the indictment: yet had I never said this, did not my present 
circumstances extort it from me, and seem to make it necessary? Permit me here, my 
Lord, to call upon malignity itself, so long and cruelly busied in this prosecution, to 
charge upon me any immorality of which prejudice was not the author. No, my Lord, 
I concerted no schemes of fraud, projected no violence, injured no man's person or 
property. My days were honestly laborious, my nights intensely studious; and I 
humbly conceive my notice of this, especially at this time, will not be thought 
impertinent or unseasonable, but at least deserving of some attention; because, my 
Lord, that any person, after a temperate use of life, a series of thinking and acting 
regularly,and without one single deviation from sobriety, should plunge into the very 
depth of profligacy precipitately and at once, is altogether improbable and 
unprecedented, absolutely inconsistent with the course of things. Mankind is never 
corrupted at once. Villainy is always progressive, and declines from right step by step, 
till every regard of probity is lost, and every sense of all moral obligation totally 
perishes.
	"'Again, my Lord, a suspicion of this kind, which nothing but malevolence 
could entertain and ignorance propagate, is violently opposed by my very situation at 
that time with respect to health; for, but a little space before, I had been confined to 
my bed, and suffered under a very long and severe disorder, and was not able, for 
half-a-year together, so much as to walk. The distemper left me indeed, yet slowly, 
and in part, but so macerated, so enfeebled, that I was reduced to crutches; and so far 
from being well about the time I am charged with this fact, I have never to this day 
perfectly recovered. Could then a person in this condition take anything into his head 
so unlikely, so extravagant? -- I, past the vigour of my age, feeble and valetudinary, 
with no inducement to engage, no ability to accomplish, no weapon wherewith to 
perpetrate such a deed, without interest, without power, without motive, without 
means. Besides, it must needs occur to everyone that an action of this atrocious nature 
is never heard of but when its springs are laid open. It appears that it was to support 
some indolence or supply some luxury; to satisfy some avarice or oblige some malice; 
to prevent some real or some imaginary want: yet I lay not under the influence of 
these. Surely, my Lord, I may, consistently with both truth and modesty, affirm thus 
much; and none who have any veracity and knew me will ever question this.
	"In the second place, the disappearance of Clarke is suggested as an argument 
of his being dead; but the uncertainty of such an inference from that, and the fallibility 
of all conclusions of such a sort from such a circumstance, are too obvious and too 
notorious to require instances; yet superseding many, permit me to produce a very 
recent one, and that afforded by this Castle.
	"In June, 1757, William Thompson, for all the vigilance of this place, in open 
daylight and double-ironed, made his escape, and, notwithstanding an immediate 
inquiry set on foot, the strictest search, and all advertisement, was never heard of 
since. If, then, Thompson got off unseen, through all these difficulties, how very easy 
it was for Clarke, when none of them opposed him! But what would be thought of a 
prosecution commenced against anyone seen last with Thompson?
	"Permit me next, my Lord, to observe a little upon the bones which have been 
discovered. It is said (which perhaps is saying very far) that these are the skeleton of a 
man. It is possible, indeed, it may be; but is there any certain known criterion which 
incontestably distinguishes the sex in human bones? Let it be considered, my Lord, 
whether the ascertaining of this point ought not to precede any attempt to identify 
them.
	"The place of their depositum, too, claims much more attention than is 
commonly bestowed upon it; for, of all places in the world, none could have 
mentioned any one wherein there was greater certainty of finding human bones than a 
hermitage, except he should point out a churchyard; hermitages, in time past, being 
not only places of religious retirement, but of burial too: and it has scarce or never 
been heard of, but that every cell now known contains or contained these relics of 
humanity, some mutilated and some entire. I do not inform, but give me leave to 
remind your Lordship that here sat solitary Sanctity, and here the hermit or the 
anchoress hoped that repose for their bones when dead they here enjoyed when living.
	"All the while, my Lord, I am sensible this is known to your Lordship, and 
many in this court, better than to me; but it seems necessary to my case that others, 
who have not at all perhaps adverted to things of this nature, and may have concern in 
my trial, should be made acquainted with it. Suffer me then, my Lord, to produce a 
few of many evidences that these cells were used as repositories of the dead, and to 
enumerate a few in which human bones have been found, as it happened in this 
question; lest to some that accident might seem extraordinary, and consequently 
occasion prejudice.
	"1. The bones, as was supposed, of the Saxon saint, Dubritius, were 
discovered buried in his cell at Guy's Cliff, near Warwick; as appears from the 
authority of Sir William Dugdale.
	"2. The bones thought to be those of the anchoress Rosia were but lately 
discovered in a cell at Royston, entire, fair and undecayed, though they must have lain 
interred for several centuries; as is proved by Dr Stukely.
	"3. But my own country -- nay, almost this neighbourhood -- supplies another 
instance; for in January, 1747, were found, by Mr Stovin, accompanied by a reverend 
gentleman, the bones, in part, of some recluse, in the cell at Lindholm, near Hatfield. 
They were believed to be those of William of Lindholm, a hermit, who had long made 
this cave his habitation.
	"4. In February, 1744, part of Woburn Abbey being pulled down, a large 
portion of a corpse appeared, even with the flesh on, and which bore cutting with a 
knife; though it is certain this had lain above two hundred years, and how much 
longer is doubtful, for this abbey was founded in 1145, and dissolved in 1538 or 1539.
	"What would have been said, what believed, if this had been an accident to the 
bones in question?
	"Further, my Lord, it is not yet out of living memory that at a little distance 
from Knaresborough, in a field, part of the manor of the worthy and patriot baronet 
who does that borough the honour to represent it in Parliament, were found, in 
digging for gravel, not one human skeleton only, but five or six, deposited side by 
side, with each an urn placed at its head, as your Lordship knows was usual in ancient 
interments.
	"About the same time, and in another field, almost close to this borough, was 
discovered also, in searching for gravel, another human skeleton; but the piety of the 
same worthy gentleman ordered both pits to be filled up again, commendably 
unwilling to disturb the dead.
	"Is the invention of these bones forgotten, then, or industriously concealed, 
that the discovery of those in question may appear the more singular and 
extraordinary, whereas, in fact, there is nothing extraordinary in it. My Lord, almost 
every place conceals such remains. In fields, in hills, in highway sides, in commons, 
lie frequent and unsuspected bones; and our present allotments for rest for the 
departed are but of some centuries.
	"Another particular seems not to claim a little of your Lordship's notice, and 
that of the gentlemen of the jury; which is, that perhaps no example occurs of more 
than one skeleton being found in one cell: and in the cell in question was found but 
one; agreeable, in this, to the peculiarity of every other known cell in Britain. Not the 
invention of one skeleton, but of two, would have appeared suspicious and 
uncommon. But it seems another skeleton has been discovered by some labourer, 
which was full as confidently averred to be Clarke's as this. My Lord, must some of 
the living, if it promotes some interest, be made answerable for all the bones that earth 
has concealed and chance exposed? And might not a place where bones lay be 
mentioned by a person by chance as well as found by a labourer by chance? Or is it 
more criminal accidentally to name where bones lie than accidentally to find where 
they lie?
	"Here, too, is a human skull produced, which is fractured; but was this the 
cause, or was it the consequence, of death? was it owing to violence, or was it the 
effect of natural decay? If it was violence, was that violence before or after death? My 
Lord, in May, 1732, the remains of William, Lord Archbishop of this province, were 
taken up, by permission, in this cathedral, and the bones of the skull were found 
broken; yet certainly he died by no violence offered to him alive that could occasion 
that fracture there.
	"Let it be considered, my Lord, that, upon the dissolution of religious houses 
and the commencement of the Reformation, the ravages of those times affected both 
the living and the dead. In search after imaginary treasures, coffins were broken up, 
graves and vaults dug open, monuments ransacked and shrines demolished; and it 
ceased about the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth. I entreat your Lordship, 
suffer not the violence, the depredations and the iniquities of those times to be 
imputed to this.
	"Moreover, what gentleman here is ignorant that Knaresborough had a castle, 
which, though now a ruin, was once considerable both for its strength and garrison. 
All know it was vigorously besieged by the arms of the Parliament; at which siege, in 
sallies, conflicts, flights, pursuits, many fell in all the places round it, and, where they 
fell, were buried, for every place, my Lord, is burial-earth in war; and many, 
questionless, of these rest yet unknown, whose bones futurity shall discover.
	"I hope, with all imaginable submission, that what has been said will not be 
thought impertinent to this indictment, and that it will be far from the wisdom, the 
learning and the integrity of this place to impute to the living what zeal in its fury may 
have done -- what nature may have taken off, and piety interred -- or what war alone 
may have destroyed, alone deposited.
	"As to the circumstances that have been raked together, I have nothing to 
observe but that all circumstances whatever are precarious, and have been but too 
frequently found lamentably fallible; even the strongest have failed. They may rise to 
the utmost degree of probability, yet they are but probability still. Why need I name to 
your Lordship the two Harrisons recorded by Dr Howel, who both suffered upon 
circumstances because of the sudden disappearance of their lodger, who was in credit, 
had contracted debts, borrowed money, and went off unseen, and returned a great 
many years after their execution? Why name the intricate affair of Jacques de Moulin, 
under King Charles II., related by a gentleman who was counsel for the Crown? And 
why the unhappy Coleman, who suffered innocently, though convicted upon positive 
evidence, and whose children perished for want, because the world uncharitably 
believed the father guilty? Why mention the perjury of Smith, incautiously admitted 
King's evidence, who, to screen himself, equally accused Faircloth and Loveday of 
the murder of Dun; the first of whom, in 1749, was executed at Winchester; and 
Loveday was about to suffer at Reading, had not Smith been proved perjured, to the 
satisfaction of the Court, by the Governor of Gosport Hospital?
	"Now, my Lord, having endeavoured to show that the whole of this process is 
altogether repugnant to every part of my life; that it is inconsistent with my condition 
of health about that time; that no rational inference can be drawn that a person is dead 
who suddenly disappears; that hermitages are the constant depositories of the bones of 
a recluse; that the proofs of this are well authenticated; that the revolutions in religion 
or the fortunes of war have mangled or buried the dead -- the conclusion remains, 
perhaps, no less reasonable than impatiently wished for. I, at last, after a year's 
confinement, equal to either fortune, put myself upon the justice, the candour and the 
humanity of your Lordship; and upon yours, my countrymen, gentlemen of the jury."
	The delivery of this address created a very considerable impression in court; 
but the learned judge having calmly and with great perspicuity summed up the 
evidence which had been produced, and having observed upon the prisoner's defence, 
which he declared to be one of the most ingenious pieces of reasoning that had ever 
fallen under his notice, the jury, with little hesitation, returned a verdict of guilty. 
Sentence of death was then passed upon the prisoner, who received the intimation of 
his fate with becoming resignation. After his conviction he confessed the justice of his 
sentence to two clergymen who were directed to attend him -- a sufficient proof of the 
fruitlessness of the efforts to prove him innocent which the morbid sentimentality of 
late writers has induced them to attempt. Upon an inquiry being made of him as to his 
reason for committing the crime, he declared that he had reason to suspect Clarke of 
having had unlawful intercourse with his wife; and that at the time of his committing 
the murder he had thought that he was acting rightly, but that he had since thought 
that his crime could not be justified or excused.
	In the hopes of avoiding the ignominious death which he was doomed to 
suffer, on the night before his execution he attempted to commit suicide by cutting his 
arm in two places with a razor, which he had concealed for that purpose. This attempt 
was not discovered until the morning, when the jailer came to lead him forth to the 
place of execution, and he was then found almost expiring from loss of blood. A 
surgeon was immediately sent for, who found that he had wounded himself severely 
on the left arm, above the elbow and near the wrist, but he had missed the artery, and 
his life was prolonged only in order that it might be taken away on the scaffold. When 
he was placed on the drop he was perfectly sensible, but was too weak to be able to 
join in devotion with the clergyman who attended him.
	He was executed at York, on the 16th of August, 1759, and his body was 
afterwards hung in chains in Knaresborough Forest.
	The following papers were afterwards found in his handwriting on the table in 
his cell. The first contained reasons for his attempt upon his life, and was as follows:
	"What am I better than my fathers? To die is natural and necessary. Perfectly 
sensible of this, I fear no more to die than I did to be born. But the manner of it is 
something which should, in my opinion, be decent and manly. I think I have regarded 
both these points. Certainly no man has a better right to dispose of a man's life than 
himself; and he, not others, should determine how. As for any indignities offered to 
my body, or silly reflections on my faith and morals, they are, as they always were, 
things indifferent to me. I think, though contrary to the common way of thinking, I 
wrong no man by this, and hope it is not offensive to that eternal Being that formed 
me and the world: and as by this I injure no man, no man can be reasonably offended. 
I solicitously recommend myself to that eternal and almighty Being, the God of 
Nature, if I have done amiss. But perhaps I have not; and I hope this thing will never 
be imputed to me. Though I am now stained by malevolence and suffer by prejudice, I 
hope to rise fair and unblemished. My life was not polluted, my morals 
irreproachable, and my opinions orthodox. I slept sound till three o'clock, awoke, and 
then wrote these lines:
Come, pleasing rest! eternal slumbers, fall! 
Seal mine, that once must seal the eyes of all. 
Calm and composed my soul her journey takes; 
No guilt that troubles, and no heart that aches. 
Adieu, thou sun! all bright, like her, arise! 
Adieu, fair friends, and all that's good and wise!
	The second was in the form of a letter, addressed to a former companion, and 
was in the following terms:--
	MY DEAR FRIEND,-- Before this reaches you I shall be no more a living 
man in this world, though at present in perfect bodily health; but who can describe the 
horrors of mind which I suffer at this instant? Guilt -- the guilt of blood shed without 
any provocation, without any cause but that of filthy lucre -- pierces my conscience 
with wounds that give the most poignant pains! 'Tis true the consciousness of my 
horrid guilt has given me frequent interruptions in the midst of my business or 
pleasures, but yet I have found means to stifle its clamours, and contrived a 
momentary remedy for the disturbance it gave me by applying to the bottle or the 
bowl, or diversions, or company, or business; sometimes one and sometimes the 
other, as opportunity offered. But now all these and all other amusements are at an 
end, and I am left forlorn, helpless and destitute of every comfort; for I have nothing 
now in view but the certain destruction both of my soul and body. My conscience will 
now no longer suffer itself to be hoodwinked or browbeat; it has now got the mastery: 
it is my accuser, judge and executioner, and the sentence it pronounceth against me is 
more dreadful than that I heard from the Bench, which only condemned my body to 
the pains of death, which are soon over. But Conscience tells me plainly that she will 
summon me before another tribunal, where I shall have neither power nor means to 
stifle the evidence she will there bring against me; and that the sentence which will 
then be denounced will not only be irreversible, but will condemn my soul to torments 
that will know no end.
	Oh! had I but hearkened to the advice which dear-bought experience has 
enabled me to give, I should not now have been plunged into that dreadful gulf of 
despair which I find it impossible to extricate myself from; and therefore my soul is 
filled with horror inconceivable. I see both God and man my enemies, and in a few 
hours shall be exposed a public spectacle for the world to gaze at. Can you conceive 
any condition more horrible than mine? Oh, no, it cannot be! I am determined, 
therefore, to put a short end to trouble I am no longer able to bear, and prevent the 
executioner by doing his business with my own hand, and shall by this means at least 
prevent the shame and disgrace of a public exposure, and leave the care of my soul in 
the hands of eternal mercy. Wishing you all health, happiness and prosperity, I am, to 
the last moment of my life, yours, with the sincerest regard, 
	EUGENE ARAM.


JOHN AYLIFFE, ESQ. 
Commissary of Musters in the War Office. Executed at Tyburn, 7th of 
November, 1759, for Forgery

	THE father of John Ayliffe lived several years as an upper servant with 
Gerrard Smith, Esq., a gentleman of large fortune near Tockenham, in Wiltshire. After 
young Ayliffe had been instructed in the first rudiments of learning he was sent to the 
celebrated academy at Harrow-on-the Hill, where he became very proficient in Latin 
and Greek. On his quitting the academy he acted in the capacity of usher to a boarding 
school at Lineham, in Wiltshire, where, unknown to her parents, he married the 
daughter of a clergyman, who had a fortune of five hundred pounds. On receipt of this 
money he became so extravagant that he spent the whole in the course of two years, 
when, being in circumstances of distress, a widow lady, named Horner, took him into 
her service as house steward.
	In a short time he was appointed land steward to another lady, who 
recommended him as a man of abilities to the Honourable Mr Fox (afterwards Lord 
Holland), who gave him the place of one of the commissaries of musters in the War 
Office; by which he acquired the right of adding the title of "Esquire" to his name.
	The profits of Ayliffe's new office were so considerable that he was induced to 
purchase an elegant house in Dorsetshire, which he furnished in a style far too 
expensive for his rank of life. In other instances he gave proofs of a strange 
extravagance of disposition, for he ran into debt to a number of people, though his 
income was sufficient to have satisfied the wishes of anY reasonable man.
	At length, when his creditors became urgent, he had recourse, for a present 
supply, to some irregular and very dangerous practices; amongst others, he forged a 
presentation to the valuable rectory of Brinkworth, in Wiltshire, which he sold to a 
young clergyman for a considerable sum. This living being in Mr Fox's gift, he forged 
his handwriting and that of two subscribing witnesses, with admirable dexterity; but, 
soon after Ayliffe's affairs became desperate, a discovery was made of this infamous 
fraud. The effect was that the clergyman took to his bed, and literally died in 
consequence of that oppression of spirits which is commonly called a broken heart; 
for the purchase of the presentation had ruined his circumstances. After his death the 
following short note was found in his drawer, directed to John Ayliffe SATAN, 
ESQ.:--
	SIR,-- 
	I am surprised you can write to me, after you have robbed and most 
barbarously murdered me. 
	O. Brinkworth.
	Ayliffe, being arrested for debts to the amount of eleven hundred pounds, took 
refuge in the Fleet Prison. Mr Fox being upon a visit to his brother, Lord Ilchester, Mr 
Calcraft called at Holland House, according to his usual custom, to inquire, before he 
wrote to his patron, whether there were any letters for him, or any other business to 
inform him of. One day, as he called, he found Fanning (whom Mr Fox had now made 
his steward) in conversation with a man who had the appearance of a farmer. Just as 
Mr Calcraft entered he heard Fanning say: "I'm sure 'tis not my master's hand; but 
here comes a gentleman who can inform you better than I can." Saying this, he 
delivered into Mr Calcraft's hand a lease. When Mr Calcraft had looked over it he 
declared that the signature was not Mr Fox's. "Nor," continued he, "can there be such 
a lease really existing, for the late Mrs Horner discharged Ayliffe from her service 
upon account of his having married a person whom she did not approve of. And it is 
not to be supposed she would grant him a lease for the life of himself, his son, and 
that very wife for the imprudent choice of whom she had dismissed him." The farmer 
no sooner heard this than he exclaimed: "Then I am undone; the villain has robbed me 
of what I had saved for my daughter's portion." Upon a further investigation of the 
affair, Mr Calcraft found that the lease given to the farmer had been forged, purposely 
to raise money upon.
	Mr Fox had made this Ayliffe a riding commissary. The income arising from 
this employment was alone more than sufficient to support such a family as his; but he 
had, in addition to it, adopted the profession of buying estates. As he was supposed to 
be a good judge of the value of land, Mr Calcraft had empowered him to purchase 
estates for him in Dorsetshire; and Ayliffe had already received the sum of eleven 
thousand pounds from him for that purpose, else, in all probability, he would have 
continued his depredations for some time longer.
	Mr Calcraft no sooner discovered, by this accident, what Ayliffe had been 
doing, than he set out in pursuit of him. He found him at Salisbury, where, under 
pretext of the forgery, he had him taken, by proper persons, into custody. This had the 
desired effect. In the first emotions of his terror he refunded the whole of the eleven 
thousand pounds. Mr Calcraft had him then immediately secured by Justice Fielding's 
men, who had come in pursuit of him, in consequence of an application from the 
farmer. They clapped a pair of handcuffs on him and brought him to town, when he 
was committed. An express was sent to Mr Fox, who still continued at Lord 
Ilchester's, to inform him of the transaction; and the first knowledge that that 
gentleman had of it was after Ayliffe stood committed for trial.
	Mr Fox was unjustly censured upon this occasion, as indeed he was upon 
many others, where his commissaries had all the emoluments and he all the odium. 
The unhappy man, solicitous for his life, wrote to Mr Fox, who was then in town, and 
greatly shocked at the affair. In his letter he requested that gentleman's forgiveness, 
and, acknowledging himself the most unworthy of men, promised, if he would but 
save him from his merited sentence, his whole life should be employed in 
endeavouring to deserve the mercy, and to atone for the enormities he had been guilty 
of. But in the very same hour he wrote to Mr Pitt, who was then Minister, to inform 
him that, if he would rescue him from his approaching fate, he would discover such 
iniquitous practices of his late employer as should fully repay the saving him. Mr Pitt, 
with a liberality of sentiment which does honour to his memory, sent the wretch's 
letter immediately to Mr Fox. That gentleman received it as he was preparing to go to 
court on purpose to solicit the prisoner's pardon; but this discovery of his baseness 
now rendered it impossible, as such an application would have carried with it a 
declaration of his being in the villain's power, and that he was apprehensive of his 
putting his threats into execution. No intercession was of course made for him, and he 
suffered the due reward of his crime.
	Ayliffe seems to have been much unprepared for death, possibly flattering 
himself with the hopes of a pardon. He was in the utmost agonies during the greater 
part of the night previous to his execution, but slept about two hours. towards the 
approach of morning. His agitation of mind, brought on a fever, producing an 
intolerable thirst, which he endeavoured to allay by drinking large and repeated 
draughts of water. After execution his body was put into a hearse and conveyed into 
Hertfordshire, for interment agreeable to his own request.


WILLIAM ANDREW HORNE, ESQ. 
Executed at Nottingham, 11th of December, 1759, in the Seventy-fifth Year 
of his Age, for Murder, concealed Twenty-five Years

  
Horne discovered hiding in a trunk

	WILLIAM ANDREW HORNE'S father was an accomplished scholar. In vain 
he endeavoured to impart knowledge to his son, who attended alone to his pleasures. 
Instead of sending him where he would have been taught some manners, the too-
indulgent parent permitted him to take his own course; allowed him horses and 
hounds, on which so many have galloped to destruction; and, in fine, he became a 
bumpkin squire. He seduced several girls, two of whom were servants to his mother, 
and one was the daughter of a farmer, which latter died in consequence of her grief. 
By one woman he had two natural daughters, one of whom lived to the age of fifteen 
years, and the other was living in 1759, and might have been reputably married, but 
that the avaricious father refused to give her a shilling as a fortune.
	He had likewise criminal connection with his own sister; which leads us to 
speak of the crime for which he suffered. This sister being delivered of a boy, in 
February, 1724, Horne told his brother Charles, three days afterwards, and at ten 
o'clock at night, that he must take a ride with him. He then put the new-born infant in 
a bag and, mounting their horses, they rode to Annesley, in Nottinghamshire, at the 
distance of five computed miles, carrying the child alternately. On their arrival near 
the village William dismounted, and inquired if the child was living, and being 
answered in the affirmative he took it, and told his brother to wait till he came back. 
On his return, Charles demanded to know how he had disposed of the infant; to which 
he said that he had placed it behind a haystack, and covered it with hay. On the 
following morning the child was found dead, through severity of the weather.
	In a short time after the transaction a quarrel happened between the brothers, 
in consequence of which Charles communicated the affair to his father, who enjoined 
him to the strictest secrecy; which was observed till the death of the old gentleman, 
who departed this life, aged one hundred and two years, in the year 1747.
	William having always behaved with great severity to his brother Charles, and 
the latter (soon after the death of the father) having some business to transact with Mr 
Cooke, an attorney at Derby, told him of the long-concealed affair, and asked his 
advice. The lawyer told him to go to a Justice of the Peace and make a full discovery 
of the whole transaction.
	Thereupon Charles went to a magistrate and acquainted him with what had 
happened; but he hesitated to take cognisance of it -- said it might hang half the 
family, and, as it had happened so many years ago, advised that it might remain a 
secret.
	In consequence thereof no further notice was taken of it till the year 1754, 
when Charles Horne, being seized with a violent fit of illness, called in the assistance 
of one Mr White, of Ripley, and, presuming that he should live but a short time, said 
he could not die in peace without disclosing his mind. When Mr White had heard the 
tale he declined giving any advice, saying it was not proper for him to interfere in the 
affair.
	Charles recovered his health in a surprising manner; and Mr White, who saw 
him again a few days after, expressing his astonishment at so speedy a recovery, the 
other said he had been better ever since he had disclosed his mind to him.
	A considerable time after this, William Horne had a quarrel with a Mr Roe, at 
a public-house, concerning the right of killing game; when Roe called Horne an 
"incestuous old dog." Thereupon Horne prosecuted him in the Ecclesiastical Court at 
Lichfield, where Roe was cast, and obliged to pay all expenses. This circumstance 
inflamed Roe with revenge, and, having learned that Charles Horne had mentioned 
something of his brother having caused his natural child to be starved to death, he 
made such inquiry of Charles as determined him how to act.
	Thereupon he went to a magistrate in Derbyshire and obtained a warrant, but 
took Charles's word for his appearance on the following day. William, hearing that 
such warrant was granted, and being apprehensive that his brother might be admitted 
evidence, sent for him and told him that he would be his friend if he would deny all 
that he had said. This the other refused; but told him that if he would give him five 
pounds he would go immediately to Liverpool, and quit the kingdom: but William's 
excessive avarice prevented his complying with this moderate request.
	Charles being examined by some magistrates in Derbyshire, they declined 
interfering in the business. On which a Justice of the Peace in Nottinghamshire was 
applied to, who issued a warrant for taking William Andrew Horne, Esq., into 
custody; and this warrant was backed by Sir John Every, a magistrate of Derbyshire.
	A constable from Annesley went with Mr Roe and some other assistants to Mr 
Horne's house. They now diligently searched the house, but could not find the party 
they wanted, and would probably have desisted, but that Roe insisted on making 
another search, during which they observed a large old chest, and Mrs Horne, on 
being asked what it contained, said it was full of sheets and table linen. Roe declared 
he would look into it, and was on the point of breaking it open when Mrs Horne 
unlocked it, and her husband suddenly started up, saying: "It is a sad thing to hang 
me; for my brother Charles is as bad as myself, and he cannot hang me without 
hanging himself."
	Thereupon he was taken into custody, and, being carried before two Justices of 
the Peace in Nottinghamshire, they committed him to take his trial at the following 
assizes.
	He had not been long in confinement when he applied to the Court of King's 
Bench for a writ of habeas corpus, which being granted, he was brought to London, 
and his counsel argued that he ought to be admitted to bail; but the judges were of a 
different opinion, and he was remanded to the jail of Nottingham.
	On the 10th of August, 1759, he was brought to trial before Lord Chief Baron 
Parker, and, after a hearing of about nine hours, the jury found him guilty, and 
sentence of death was passed. On the day appointed for his execution he had just 
completed his seventy-fourth year.


THE REVEREND MR WHEATLEY 
Sentenced to do Public Penance for Adultery

  
The Rev. Wheatley doing penance for adultery

	In the present day, adultery is degenerated into a kind of fashionable and 
expensive vice among the rich of all the polished nations of Europe; while the poor 
labourer, surrounded by the children born in wedlock, and yet crying for bread, only 
heaves a sigh at such enormities.
	A vice indulged in by the example of the great must spread like contagion, and 
every thoughtless young man become infected. When the great, though bound by the 
marriage vow, live in open and voluptuous adultery, lesser men will have their 
concubines too; and thus wives are deserted, and left either to pine under neglect, or, 
roused by their wrongs, desperately to seek retaliation.
	The number of kept women in and about the metropolis we have already 
calculated. Most of them are maintained in affluence; and, having no kind of regard 
either for the person or the property of their dupe, they launch into every kind of 
extravagance and dissipation.
	Corruption of morals in the people, though the progress be slow, will surely 
prove the downfall of their nation. When the hardy warriors of ancient Rome quitted 
"the trade of arms," and, for the martial step, substituted "Love's majesty to strut 
before a wanton ambling nymph," then commenced that degeneracy which in time 
overwhelmed their mighty empire, and left them an effeminate race, contemptible to 
those very nations they had formerly conquered.
	About the year 1759 the crime of adultery was proved, with aggravated 
circumstances, against a profligate fellow, under the mask of Puritanism, of the name 
of Wheatley. This man was a Methodist preacher, who was styled Reverend, and a 
schoolmaster at Norwich.
	He was brought to trial for adultery committed with several of his neighbours' 
wives, all professing Methodism, at the Ecclesiastical Court of the Bishop of 
Norwich.
	Sufficient proof having been adduced, the judge declared the said Wheatley to 
be a lewd, debauched, incontinent, and adulterous man; and that he had committed the 
crimes adultery, fornication, and incontinence, to the great scandal of good men, and 
pernicious to the example of others. He was then sentenced to do public penance in a 
linen cloth, in the parish church, with a paper pinned to his breast, denoting his crime; 
and condemned to pay the costs of the suit.
	Formerly adulterers were exposed to public odium and derision, in white 
sheets, in the parish church. The story in the Spectator, of the adulteress riding on a 
black ram, is founded on fact:
	"At East Bourne and West Bourne, in the county of Berks, if a customary 
tenant die, the widow shall have what the law calls her free bench in all copyhold 
land, dum sola et casta fuerit; that is, while she lives single and chaste; but, if she 
commit incontinency, she forfeits her estate: yet, if she will come into court, riding 
backward upon a black ram, with his tail in her hand, and say the following words, the 
steward is bound by the custom to re-admit her to her free bench:
"Here I am,  
Riding upon a black ram,  
Like a whore as I am;  
And for my crincum crancum  
Have lost my bincum bancum,  
And for my tail's game  
Have done this worldly shame;  
Therefore I pray you, Mr Steward,  
Let me have my land again."
	There is a like custom in the manor of Torre, in Devonshire, and other parts of 
the west.


ROBERT TILLING 
Executed at Tyburn, 28th of April, 1760 for robbing his Master

	MR LLOYD was an eminent merchant, and lived in Devonshire Square, 
Bishopsgate Street, London. He kept his carriage, and hired Tilling as his coachman.
	On the 19th of February, 1760, at four o'clock in the morning, Mr Lloyd was 
disturbed from sleep by a noise in his house; and he presently saw a man at his 
bedside, with a lantern and a pistol in his hands. He presented the latter to Mr Lloyd's 
head, and demanded the keys of his escritoire, threatening him with instant death if he 
refused. Having received them, he told the owner that, in case of his calling out, or 
even moving, he had left a guard who would dispatch him. This was the confederate 
villain, the coachman, who kept himself in the background, that his master should not 
know him.
	This singular robber then went downstairs and opened the money drawer, 
which contained a considerable sum. With this he returned to Mr Lloyd and said: 
"You see, sir, I have only taken the money out of your escritoire; your plate, watch, or 
anything else I have not meddled with; and as to the little cash in your pocket, I scorn 
to meddle with it." The thieves then made their escape. Suspicious circumstances 
being against Tilling, he was apprehended, and brought before the Lord Mayor, who 
committed him for a second examination.
	Upon being again brought up, he confessed to his lordship the robbery above 
described; and further, that he had robbed Mr Hayward and two other gentlemen, but 
denied a mail robbery, of which he was also suspected.
	He was brought to trial at the next sessions at the Old Bailey, convicted, and 
received sentence of death.


LAURENCE, EARL FERRERS
Executed at Tyburn, 5th of May, 1760, for the Murder of his Steward, after a 
Trial before his Peers

  
Earl Ferrers shooting his steward

	LAURENCE, EARL FERRERS, was descended of an ancient and noble 
family. The royal blood of the Plantagenets flowed in his veins, and the Earl gained 
his title in the following manner. The second baronet of the family, Sir Henry Shirley, 
married a daughter of the celebrated Earl of Essex, who was beheaded in the reign of 
Queen Elizabeth; and his son, Sir Robert Shirley, died in the Tower, where he was 
confined during the Protectorate, for his attachment to the cause of the Stuarts. Upon 
the Restoration, the second son of Sir Robert succeeded to the title and estates, and 
Charles, anxious to cement the bonds which attached his friends to him, summoned 
him to the Upper House of Parliament by the title of Lord Ferrers of Chartley, as the 
descendant of one of the co-heiresses of the Earl of Essex; the title, which had existed 
since the reign of Edward III., having been in abeyance since the death of that 
unfortunate nobleman. In the year 1711, Robert, Lord Ferrers, was created, by Queen 
Anne, Viscount Tamworth and Earl Ferrers; and it appears that although the estates of 
the family were very great, they were vastly diminished by the provisions which the 
Earl thought proper to make for his numerous progeny, consisting of fifteen sons and 
twelve daughters, born to him by his two wives. At the death of the first Earl his title 
descended to his second son; but he dying without issue it went in succession to the 
ninth son, who was childless, and the tenth son, who was the father of the Earl, 
Laurence, the subject of the present sketch.
	This nobleman was married in the year 1752 to the youngest daughter of Sir 
William Meredith; but although his general conduct, when sober, was not such as to 
be remarkable, yet his faculties were so much impaired by drink that, when under the 
influence of intoxication, he acted with all the wildness and brutality of a madman.
	On this occasion it may not he improper to observe on that extravagance 
which is too frequently the consequence of inebriation. If a man did but consider how 
he reduces himself even below the level of a brute by drunkenness, surely he would 
never be guilty of such a low, such a pitiful vice!
	At Derby races in the year 1756, Lord Ferrers ran his mare against Captain M-
-'s horse for L.50, and was the winner. When the race was ended, he spent the evening 
with some gentlemen, and in the course of conversation the captain (who had heard 
that his lordship's mare was with foal) proposed, in a jocose manner, to run his horse 
against her at the expiration of seven months. Lord Ferrers was so affronted by this 
circumstance, which he conceived to have arisen from a preconcerted plan to insult 
him, that he quitted Derby at three o'clock in the morning, and went immediately to 
his seat at Stanton-Harold in Leicestershire.
	He rang his bell as soon as he awaked; and a servant attending, he asked, if he 
knew how Capt. M came to be informed that his mare was with foal. The servant 
declared that he was ignorant of the matter, but the groom might have told it; and, the 
groom being called, he denied having given any information respecting the matter.
	Previous to the affront presumed to have been given on the preceding evening, 
lord Ferrers had invited the captain and the rest of the company to dine with him as on 
that day; but they all refused their attendance, though he sent a servant to remind them 
that they had promised to come. Lord Ferrers was so enraged at this disappointment, 
that he kicked and horse-whipped his servants, and threw at them such articles as lay 
within his reach.
	The following will afford a specimen of the brutality of lord Ferrers's 
behaviour. Some oysters had been sent from London, which not proving good, his 
lordship directed one of the servants to swear that the carrier had changed them; but 
the servant declining to take such an oath, the earl flew on him in a rage, stabbed him 
in the breast with a knife, cut his head with a candlestick and kicked him on the groin 
with such severity, that he was incapable of a retention of urine for several years 
afterwards.
	Lord Ferrers's brother and his wife paying a visit to him and his countess at 
Stanton-Harold, some dispute arose between the parties; and lady Ferrers being absent 
from the room, the earl ran up stairs with a large clasp-knife in his hand, and asked a 
servant whom he met, where his lady was. The man said, 'in her own room;' and being 
directed to follow him thither, lord Ferrers ordered him to load a brace of pistols with 
bullets. This order was complied with: but the servant, apprehensive of mischief, 
declined priming the pistols, which lord Ferrers discovering, swore at him, asked him 
for powder, and primed them himself. He then threatened that if he did not 
immediately go and shoot his brother the captain, he would blow his brains out. The 
servant hesitating, his lordship pulled the trigger of one of the pistols; but it missed 
fire. Hereupon the countess dropped on her knees, and begged him to appease his 
passions; but in return he swore at her, and threatened her destruction if she opposed 
him. The servant now escaped from the room, and reported what had passed to his 
lordship's brother, who immediately called his wife from her bed, and they left the 
house, though it was then two o'clock in the morning.
	For a time his wife perceived nothing which induced her to repent the step she 
had taken in being united to him, but he subsequently behaved to her with such 
unwarrantable cruelty that she was compelled to quit his protection, and, rejoining her 
father's family, to apply to Parliament for redress. An Act was in consequence passed, 
allowing her a separate maintenance, to be raised out of her husband's estate; and, 
trustees being appointed, the unfortunate Mr Johnson, who fell a sacrifice to the 
ungovernable passion of Lord Ferrers -- having been bred up in the family from his 
youth, and being distinguished for the regular manner in which he kept his accounts, 
and his fidelity as a steward -- was proposed as receiver of the rents for her use. He at 
first declined the office; but subsequently, at the desire of the Earl himself, consented 
to act, and continued in this employment for a considerable time.
	His lordship at this time lived at Stanton, a seat about two miles from Ashby-
de-la-Zouch, in Leicestershire; and his family consisted of Mrs Clifford, a lady who 
lived with him, and her four natural daughters, besides five men-servants, exclusive of 
an old man and a boy, and three maids.
	Mr Johnson lived at the house belonging to the farm, which he held under his 
lordship, called the Lount, about half-a-mile distant from Stanton. It appears that it 
was his custom to visit his noble master occasionally, to settle the accounts which 
were placed under his care; but his lordship gradually conceived a dislike for him, 
grounded upon the prejudice raised in his mind on account of his being the receiver of 
the Countess's portion, and charged him with having combined with the trustees to 
prevent his receiving a coal contract. From this time he spoke of him in opprobrious 
terms, and said he had conspired with his enemies to injure him, and that he was a 
villain; and with these sentiments he gave him warning to quit an advantageous farm 
which he held under his lordship. Finding, however, that the trustees under the Act of 
separation had already granted him a lease of it, it having been promised to him by the 
Earl or his relations, he was disappointed, and probably from that time he meditated a 
more cruel revenge.
	On Sunday, the 13th of January, 1760, Earl Ferrers went to the Lount, and, 
after some discourse with Mr Johnson, ordered him to come to him at Stanton on the 
Friday following, the 18th, at three o'clock in the afternoon. His lordship's usual 
dinner-hour was two o'clock; and soon after that meal was disposed of, on the Friday, 
he went to Mrs Clifford, who was in the still-house, and desired her to take the 
children for a walk. She accordingly prepared herself and her daughters, and, with the 
permission of the Earl, went to her father's, at a short distance, being directed to return 
at half-past five. The men-servants were next dispatched on errands by their master, 
who was thus left in the house with the three females only. In a short time afterwards 
Mr Johnson came, according to his appointment, and was admitted by one of the 
maid-servants, named Elizabeth Burgeland. He proceeded at once to his lordship's 
apartment, but was desired to wait in the still-house; and then, after the expiration of 
about ten minutes, the Earl, calling him into his own room, went in with him and 
locked the door. Being thus together, the Earl required him first to settle an account, 
and then, charging him with the villainy which he attributed to him, ordered him to 
kneel down. The unfortunate man went down on one knee; upon which the Earl, in a 
tone of voice loud enough to be heard by the maid-servants without, cried: "Down on 
your other knee! Declare that you have acted against Lord Ferrers. Your time is come 
-- you must die." Then suddenly drawing a pistol from his pocket, which was loaded, 
he presented it and immediately fired. The ball entered the body of the unfortunate 
man, but he rose up, and entreated that no further violence might be done him; and the 
female servants at that time coming to the door, being alarmed by the report, his 
lordship quitted the room. A messenger was immediately dispatched for Mr Kirkland, 
a surgeon, who lived at Ashby-de-la-Zouch; and Johnson being put to bed, his 
lordship went to him and asked him how he felt. He answered that he was dying, and 
desired that his family might be sent for. Miss Johnson soon after arrived, and Lord 
Ferrers immediately followed her into the room where her father Jay. He then pulled 
down the clothes and applied a pledget, dipped in arquebusade water, to the wound, 
and soon after left him.
	From this time it appears that his lordship applied himself to his favourite 
amusement -- drinking -- until he became exceedingly violent (for at the time of the 
commission of the murder he is reported to have been sober), and on the arrival of Mr 
Kirkland he told him that he had shot Johnson, but believed he was more frightened 
than hurt; that he had intended to shoot him dead, for that he was a villain, and 
deserved to die; "but," said he, "now that I have spared his life, I desire you would do 
what you can for him." His lordship at the same time desired that he would not suffer 
himself to be seized, and declared that if anyone should attempt it he would shoot 
him. Mr Kirkland told him that he should not be seized, and directly went to the 
wounded man. He found the ball had lodged in the body; at which his lordship 
expressed great surprise, declaring that he had tried that pistol a few days before and 
that it then carried a ball through a deal board nearly an inch and a half thick. Mr 
Kirkland then went downstairs to prepare some dressings, and my lord soon after left 
the room. From this time, in proportion as the liquor which he continued to drink took 
effect, his passions became more tumultuous, and the transient fit of compassion, 
mixed with fear for himself, which had excited him, gave way to starts of rage and the 
predominance of malice. He went up into the room where Johnson was dying and 
pulled him by the wig, calling him a villain, and threatening to shoot him through the 
head; and the last time he went to him he was with great difficulty prevented from 
tearing the clothes off the bed, that he might strike him.
	A proposal was made to him in the evening by Mrs Clifford that Mr Johnson 
should be removed to his own house; but he replied: "He shall not be removed; I will 
keep him here, to plague the villain." He afterwards spoke to Miss Johnson about her 
father, and told her that if he died he would take care of her and of the family, 
provided they did not prosecute.
	When his lordship went to bed, which was between eleven and twelve, he told 
Mr Kirkland that he knew he could, if he would, set the affair in such a light as to 
prevent his being seized, desiring that he might see him before he went away in the 
morning, and declaring that he would rise at any hour.
	Mr Kirkland, however, was very solicitous to get Mr Johnson removed, and, 
as soon as the Earl had gone, he set about carrying his object into effect. He in 
consequence went to Lount and, having fitted up an easy-chair with poles, by way of a 
sedan, and procured a guard, returned at about two o'clock and carried Mr Johnson to 
his house, where he expired at about nine o'clock on the following morning.
	The neighbours now began to take measures to secure the murderer, and a few 
of them, having armed themselves, set out for Stanton; and as they entered the yard 
they saw his lordship, partly undressed, going towards the stable, as if to take out a 
horse. One of them, named Springthorpe, then advancing towards his lordship with a 
pistol in his hand, required him to surrender; but the latter putting his hand towards 
his pocket, his assailant, imagining that he was feeling for some weapon of offence, 
stopped short, and allowed him to escape into the house. A great concourse of people 
by this time had come to the spot, and they cried out loudly that the Earl should come 
forth. Two hours elapsed, however, before anything was seen of him, and then he 
came to the garret window and called out: "How is Johnson?" He was answered that 
he was dead. But he said it was a lie, and desired that the people should disperse -- 
and then he gave orders that they should be let in and furnished with victuals and 
drink, and finally he went away from the window, swearing that no man should take 
him. The mob still remained on the spot, and in about two hours the Earl was descried 
by a collier, named Curtis, walking on the bowling-green, armed with a blunderbuss, a 
brace of pistols and a dagger. Curtis, however, so far from being intimidated by his 
bold appearance, walked up to him; and his lordship, struck with the resolution he 
displayed, immediately surrendered himself, and gave up his arms, but directly 
afterwards declared that he had killed the villain, and gloried in the act. He was 
instantly conveyed in custody to a public-house at Ashby, kept by a man named 
Kinsey; and a coroner's jury having brought in a verdict of wilful murder against him, 
he was on the following Monday committed to the custody of the keeper of the jail at 
Leicester.
	Being entitled, however, by his rank to be tried before his peers, he was, about 
a fortnight afterwards, conveyed to London, in his landau, drawn by six horses, under 
a strong guard; and, being carried before the House of Lords, he was committed to the 
custody of the Black Rod, and ordered to the Tower, where he arrived at about six 
o'clock on the evening of the 14th of February. He is reported to have behaved, during 
the whole journey and at his commitment, with great calmness and propriety. He was 
confined in the Round Tower, near the drawbridge: two wardens were constantly in 
the room with him, and one at the door; two sentinels were posted at the bottom of the 
stairs, and one upon the drawbridge, with their bayonets fixed; and from this time the 
gates were ordered to be shut an hour sooner than usual.
	During his confinement he was moderate both in eating and drinking: his 
breakfast was a half-pint basin of tea, with a small spoonful of brandy in it, and a 
muffin; with his dinner he generally drank a pint of wine and a pint of water, and 
another pint of each with his supper. In general his behaviour was decent and quiet, 
except that he would sometimes suddenly start, tear open his waistcoat, and use other 
gestures, which showed that his mind was disturbed.
	Mrs Clifford and the four young ladies, who had come up with him from 
Leicestershire, took a lodging in Tower Street, and for some time a servant was 
continually passing with letters between them; but afterwards this correspondence was 
permitted only once a day.
	Mrs Clifford came three times to the Tower to see him, but was not admitted; 
but his children were suffered to be with him some time.
	On the 16th of April, having been a prisoner in the Tower two months and two 
days, he was brought to his trial, which continued till the 18th, before the House of 
Lords, assembled for that purpose, Lord Henley, Keeper of the Great Seal, having 
been created Lord High Steward upon the occasion.
	The murder was easily proved to have been committed; and his lordship then 
proceeded to enter upon his defence. He called several witnesses, the object of whose 
testimony was to show that the Earl was not of sound mind, but none of them proved 
such an insanity as made him not accountable for his conduct. His lordship managed 
his defence himself in such a manner as showed an uncommon understanding: he 
mentioned the fact of his being reduced to the necessity of attempting to prove 
himself a lunatic, that he might not be deemed a murderer, with the most delicate and 
affecting sensibility; and, when he found that his plea could not avail him, he 
confessed that he made it only to gratify his friends; that he was always averse to it 
himself; and that it had prevented what he had proposed, and what perhaps might have 
taken off the malignity at least of the accusation.
	The Peers having in the usual form delivered their verdict, of guilty, his 
lordship received sentence to be hanged on Monday, the 21st of April, and then to be 
anatomised; but, in consideration of his rank, the execution of this sentence was 
respited till Monday, the 5th of May.
	During this interval he made a will, by which he left one thousand, three 
hundred pounds to Mr Johnson's children, one thousand pounds to each of his four 
natural daughters, and sixty pounds a year to Mrs Clifford for her life; but this 
disposition of his property, being made after his conviction, was not valid, although it 
was said that the same, or nearly the same, provision was afterwards made for the 
parties named.
	In the meantime a scaffold was erected under the gallows at Tyburn, and part 
of it, about a yard square, was raised about eighteen inches above the rest of the floor, 
with a contrivance to sink down upon a signal given, in accordance with the plan then 
invariably adopted; the whole being covered with black baize.
	On the morning of the 5th of May, at about nine o'clock, his lordship's body 
was demanded of the keeper of the Tower, by the sheriffs of London and Middlesex, 
and his lordship, being informed of it, sent a message to the sheriffs, requesting that 
he might be permitted to be conveyed to the scaffold in his own landau, in preference 
to the mourning-coach which was provided for him. This being granted, his landau, 
drawn by six horses, immediately drew up, and he entered it, accompanied by Mr 
Humphries, the Chaplain of the Tower, who had been admitted to him that morning 
for the first time. On the carriage reaching the outer gate, the Earl was delivered up to 
the sheriffs, and Mr Sheriff Vaillant entered the vehicle with him, expressing his 
concern at having so melancholy a duty to perform; but his lordship said he "was 
much obliged to him, and took it kindly that he accompanied him." The Earl was 
attired in a white suit, richly embroidered with silver; and when he put it on he said: 
"This is the suit in which I was married, and in which I will die." The procession, 
being now formed, moved forward slowly, the landau being preceded by a 
considerable body of Horse Grenadiers, and by a carriage containing Mr Sheriff 
Errington, and his under-sheriff, Mr Jackson, and being followed by the carriage of 
Mr Sheriff Vaillant, containing Mr Nichols, his under-sheriff, a mourning-coach-and-
six, containing some of his lordship's friends, a hearse-and-six for the conveyance of 
his body to Surgeons' Hall after execution, and another body of military. The pace at 
which they proceeded, in consequence of the density of the mob, was so slow that his 
lordship was two hours and three-quarters in his landau, but during that time he 
appeared perfectly easy and composed, though he often expressed his anxiety to have 
the whole affair over, saying that the apparatus of death and the passing through such 
crowds were worse than death itself, and that he supposed so large a mob had been 
collected because the people had never seen a lord hanged before. He told the sheriff 
that he had written to the King to beg that he might suffer where his ancestor, the Earl 
of Essex, had been executed, and that he had had greater hopes of obtaining that 
favour as he had the honour of quartering part of the same arms, and of being allied to 
his Majesty; but that he had refused, and he thought it hard that he must die at the 
place appointed for the execution of common felons.
	When his lordship had arrived at that part of Holborn which is near Drury 
Lane he said he was "thirsty, and should be glad of a glass of wine-and-water;" upon 
which the sheriffs, remonstrating with him, said that a stop for that purpose would 
necessarily draw a greater crowd about him, which might possibly disturb and 
incommode him, yet, if his lordship still desired it, it should be done. He most readily 
answered: "That's true --I say no more -- let us by no means stop."

  
The execution of Earl Ferrers

	When the landau advanced to the place of execution his lordship alighted from 
it, and ascended the scaffold with the same composure and fortitude of mind he had 
exhibited from the time he left the Tower. Soon after he had mounted the scaffold, Mr 
Humphries asked his lordship if he chose to say prayers, which he declined; but upon 
his asking him if he did not choose to join with him in the Lord's Prayer he readily 
answered he would, for he always thought it a very fine prayer. Upon which they 
knelt down together upon two cushions covered with black baize, and his lordship, 
with an audible voice, very devoutly repeated the Lord's Prayer, and afterwards, with 
great energy, ejaculated "Oh, God, forgive me all my errors -- pardon all my sins!"
	His lordship, then rising, took his leave of the sheriff and the chaplain; and, 
after thanking them for their many civilities, presented his watch to Mr Sheriff 
Vaillant, of which he desired his acceptance, and requested that his body might be 
buried at Breden or Stanton, in Leicestershire.
	The executioner now proceeded to do his duty, to which his lordship, with 
great resignation, submitted. His neck-cloth being taken off, and a white cap, which 
he had brought in his pocket, being put upon his head, his arms secured by a black 
sash, and the cord put round his neck, he advanced by three steps to the elevated part 
of the scaffold, and, standing under the cross-beam which went over it, which was 
also covered with black baize, he asked the executioner: "Am I right?" Then the cap 
was drawn over his face, and, upon a signal given by the sheriff (for his lordship, 
upon being before asked, declined to give one himself), that part upon which he stood 
instantly sank down from beneath his feet, and he was launched into eternity, the 5th 
of May, 1760.
	The accustomed time of one hour being past, the coffin was raised up, with the 
greatest decency, to receive the body; and, being deposited in the hearse, was 
conveyed by the sheriffs, with the same procession, to Surgeons' Hall, to undergo the 
remainder of the sentence. A large incision was then made from the neck to the 
bottom of the breast, and another across the throat; the lower part of the belly was laid 
open and the bowels taken away. It was afterwards publicly exposed to view in a 
room up one pair of stairs at the Hall; and on the evening of Thursday, the 8th of May, 
it was delivered to his friends for interment.
	The following verse is said to have been found in his apartment:--
"In doubt I lived, in doubt I die, 
Yet stand prepared the vast abyss to try, 
and, undismay'd, expect eternity."
	The case of lord Ferrers demands our serious attention. He was born to great 
hopes and high expectations, and was confessedly a man of superior abilities; but the 
unhappy indulgence of his passions led to his ruin. Hence, then, the due government 
of the passions ought to be learnt; for what is the man, who permits their unbounded 
gratification, but something lower than a brute?
	Lord Ferrers appears to have been uninfluenced by the mild doctrines of 
Christianity. If these had held their proper weight on his mind, it would have been 
impossible that he could have acted as he did: but when Religion fails to produce its 
natural, its genuine effects, the man ceases to appear as such, and becomes an object 
of compassion, if not of contempt!


FRANCIS DAVID STIRN 
Convicted of Murder, but poisoned himself in Newgate, 12th of September, 
1760, after a Hunger Strike

	FRANCIS DAVID STIRN was by birth a German. A man of erudition, he was 
born in the principality of Hesse-Cassel, about the year 1735. His father was a 
minister, and his brother a metropolitan minister at Hersfeld.
	Francis was sent to a public grammar school in Hesse-Cassel, where be made 
considerable progress, and was then removed to a college at Bremen.
	He was later taken home by his brother, who soon after placed him at the 
University of Hintelin, belonging to Hesse, where he pursued his studies from the year 
1756 till the middle of the year 1758. During this time he improved his knowledge in 
the Latin and Greek classics to an uncommon degree; he also acquired very 
considerable skill in Hebrew, and became greatly proficient in both vocal and 
instrumental music, dancing, fencing and other polite accomplishments. About this 
time, the French having made an irruption into Hesse, and impoverished the 
inhabitants by raising exorbitant contributions, his brother was no longer able to 
support him, and therefore sent him to England, with very strong recommendations, to 
a friend, who received him kindly, and promised to procure him an appointment that 
should be agreeable to his friends; but as no opportunity immediately presented itself, 
he offered himself as an assistant to Mr Crawford, who kept a school in Cross Street, 
Hatton Garden, and was received, upon the recommendation of the Rev. Mr Planta, 
who had himself lived with Mr Crawford in that station, and left him upon his having 
obtained a place in the Museum. It was also proposed that he should assist the 
German minister at the Chapel in the Savoy, where he preached several probationary 
discourses; but as he made use of notes he was not approved by his auditors.
	While he lived with Mr Crawford he became acquainted with Mr Matthews, a 
surgeon in the neighbourhood, who advertised the cure of fistulas, and other disorders 
of the like kind, and who made him a proposal to come and live with him, offering 
him an apartment ready furnished, and his board, upon condition that he should teach 
Mrs Matthews and her daughter music, and Matthews himself the classics. Stirn 
accepted Matthews's proposal, and took possession of his apartment at his house. A 
very little time, however, was sufficient to show that they could not long continue 
together. Stirn's pride and his situation in life concurred to render him so jealous of 
indignity, and so ingenious in discovering oblique reproach and insult in the 
behaviour of those about him, that, finding one evening, after he came home, some 
pieces of bread in the dining-room, which had been left there by a child of the family, 
he immediately took it into his head that they were left there as reproachful emblems 
of his poverty, which obliged him to subsist on the fragments of charity. This thought 
set him on fire in a moment, and he ran furiously upstairs and, knocking loudly and 
suddenly at Mr Matthews's chamber door, called out: "Mr Matthews!" He was 
answered by Mrs Matthews, who was in bed, that Mr Matthews was not there. But he 
still clamorously insisted on the door being opened, so that Mrs Matthews was 
obliged to rise, and, having put on her clothes, she came out and asked him what he 
wanted and what he meant by such behaviour. He answered that he wanted Mr 
Matthews, and that he knew he was in the room. It happened that at this instant Mr 
Matthews knocked at the street door, and this put an end to the dispute with his wife. 
The moment Mr Matthews entered the house, Stirn, in a furious manner, charged him 
with an intention to affront him by the crusts. Mr Matthews assured him that he meant 
no such thing, and that the bread was carried thither by the child. Mrs Matthews also 
confirmed it, and Stirn was at length pacified. He seems to have been conscious of the 
strange impropriety of his conduct as soon as he had time for reflection; for the next 
morning he went to Mr Crawford and expressed a most grateful sense of Mr and Mrs 
Matthews's patience and kindness in suffering, and passing over his fantastic 
behaviour.
	It is, however, probable that from this time they began to live together upon 
very ill terms. Matthews soon after gave him warning to quit his house, and Stirn 
refused to go. Eventually he went to the Pewter Platter, in Cross Street, Hatton 
Garden, where Matthews and other persons in the neighbourhood frequently met to 
spend the evening. Stirn, after some time, applying mself to Mr Matthews, said: "Sir, 
you have accused me of theft and adultery." Matthews denied the charge, and after 
some mutual reproaches called him a dirty fellow, and said he ought to be sent into his 
own lousy country. Stirn, after this, took two or three turns about the room, and then, 
drawing out two pistols, discharged one of them at Matthews's breast, who gave a 
sudden start and then, falling forward, died instantly, without a groan. Stirn, almost at 
the same moment, discharged the other at himself; but, by some accident, the ball 
missed him, without doing any other damage. As soon as the smoke was dissipated, 
and the company had recovered from their first astonishment and confusion, Stirn was 
seen standing, as it were, torpid with amazement and horror. As soon as he saw the 
attention of all that were in the room turned upon him he seemed to recollect himself, 
and made towards the door; but a person in the room, named Warford, seized him, 
and after some struggle pulled him to the ground. Another man, named Lowther, 
immediately went up to him, and Stirn cried out: "Shoot me! shoot me! shoot me! for 
I shall be hanged." Somebody then saying, "Matthews is dead," Stirn replied, "I am 
not sorry, but I am sorry that I did not shoot myself."
	After his commitment he obstinately refused all kinds of food, with the view 
of starving himself, that he might avoid the infamy of a public death by the hands of 
the executioner. He persisted in this abstinence till the Friday following, the 22nd of 
August, being just a week, drinking only a dish or two of coffee and a little wine. This 
conduct he endeavoured to justify, by saying that his life was forfeited by the law of 
both God and man, and that it was not lawful even for the Government to pardon him; 
"and what does it signify," says he, "by whose hands this forfeit is paid?" The 
ordinary indeed told him, in answer to this argument, that his life was not in his own 
power, and that as he did not, and could not, give it to himself, so neither had he a 
right to take it away. He was, however, urged to eat, for he was told that he would 
incur more infamy by suicide than by hanging, as his body would be dragged like that 
of a brute to a hole dug to receive it in a cross-road, and a stake would be afterwards 
driven through it, which would remain as a monument of disgrace.
	During his trial, which lasted about four hours, he was often ready to faint; he 
was therefore indulged with a seat, and several refreshments. When sentence was 
passed upon him he quite fainted away, but being recovered by the application of 
spirits he requested the Court that he might be permitted to go to the place of 
execution in the coach with the clergyman; upon which the Court told him that was in 
the sheriff's breast, but that such a favour, if granted, would be contrary to the 
intention of the law which had lately been made to distinguish murders by exemplary 
punishment. Upon that he made a profound reverence to the Court, and was taken 
back to prison.
	About six o'clock, the same evening, he was visited by the ordinary, who 
found in the press-yard a German, who said he was a minister, whom Stirn had 
desired might attend him. The ordinary therefore took him up to Stirn's chamber, he 
having been removed from the cells by the assistance of some friends. They found 
him lying on his bed; and as he expressed great uneasiness at the presence of the 
ordinary and a prisoner who had been set over him as a guard, they withdrew and left 
him alone with his countryman. Soon after this an alarm was given that Stirn was 
extremely ill, and was supposed to have taken poison. He was immediately visited by 
the sheriff and Mr Akerman, the keeper of the prison, who found him in a state of 
stupefaction, but not yet convulsed. A surgeon was procured, and several methods 
were tried to discharge his stomach of the poison, but without effect; he was then let 
blood, which apparently rendered him worse.
	About nine o'clock he was pale and speechless; his jaw had fallen, and his 
eyes were fixed; and about five minutes before eleven he expired.


PATRICK M'CARTY 
Executed at the bottom of Bow Street, Covent Garden, Westminster, 24th of 
October, 1760, for Murder

	HAD this malefactor's execution been deferred but one single day, he might, 
in all probability, have survived many years, as the day after, early in the morning, 
King George II died, and the succeeding monarch, in order that all might with joy hail 
his accession, according to ancient custom granted a general amnesty and pardon to 
criminals.
	A Marshalsea writ having been issued against M'Carty, an officer of that court, 
of the name of William Talbot, was employed to execute the warrant granted thereon. 
He met the defendant near Drury Lane, and told him that he had a warrant against 
him, to which M'Carty asked: "At whose suit?" Being informed, he requested the 
officer to step with him into the King's Head public-house, at the corner of Prince's 
Street. They had not been many minutes in the house when, without any harsh words 
having passed between them, M'Carty suddenly drew from his pocket a large knife, 
stabbed the officer to the heart, and then ran off. He was, however, pursued, and taken 
by a soldier in Vere Street, Clare Market, and carried before Sir John Fielding, who 
committed him to Newgate.
	At the next sessions he was convicted of this wanton murder, and executed at 
the time and place above mentioned.


THEODORE GARDELLE 
An Artist, who was executed in the Haymarket, 4th of April, 1761, for 
murdering a Woman

  
Gardelle disposing of Mrs King's body

	This was a murder which also considerably engaged the public mind. Though 
in the commission of the act itself, there may be some extenuation afforded to the 
unhappy man; yet the means he took to conceal it, are attended with circumstances 
horrible to relate. We have to lament that the woman might not have met her death at 
his hands, had she allotted some discretion to the limits of her tongue -- a weapon, we 
may call it, often goading a man to a frenzy of the mind, ending in horror.
	Theodore Gardelle was a foreigner, a man of education and talents in his 
profession -- the fine art of painting. That he was not a man of a bad disposition, or 
given to irregularities, appears from Mrs. King's receiving him back as an inmate, 
after he had once quitted her lodgings.
	He was born at Geneva, a city which is famed for giving birth to great men, in 
both the arts and sciences. He chose the miniature style of painting, and having 
acquired its first rudiments, went to Paris, where he made great proficiency in the art. 
He then returned to his native place, and practised his profession for some years, with 
credit and emolument; but, being unhappy in his domestic concerns, he repaired to 
London, and took lodgings at Mrs. King's, in Leicester-fields, in the year 1760.
	Some time afterwards, for the benefit of purer air, he removed to 
Knightsbridge, but finding that place too far from his business, he returned to his 
former residence, where he was pursuing his business until the fatal cause arose, 
which brought him to an ignominious death.
	The particulars of this shocking transaction, we have collected, partly from 
evidence adduced on his trial, and partly from the repentant confession of the 
malefactor.
	On Thursday the 19th of February, 1761, in the morning, the maid got up 
about seven o'clock and opened the fore parlour windows. There is a fore parlour and 
a back parlour; both have a door into the passage from the street-door, and there is 
also a door that goes out of one into the other: the back parlour was Mrs. King's bed-
chamber, and the door which entered it from the passage was secured on the inside by 
a drop-bolt, and could not be opened on the outside when locked, though the drop-bolt 
was not down, because on the outside there was no key-hole. The door into the fore 
parlour was also secured on the inside by Mrs. King when she went to bed, and the 
door of the fore parlour into the passage was left open; when the maid had entered the 
fore parlour by this door, and opened the windows, she went to the passage door of 
the back parlour where Mrs. King was in bed, and knocked, in order to get the key of 
the street-door, which Mrs. King took at night into her room. Mrs. King drew up the 
bolt, and the maid went in; she took the key of the street-door which she saw lie upon 
the table by a looking-glass; and her mistress then shut the passage door and dropped 
the bolt, and ordered the maid to open the door that communicated with the fore 
parlour, which she did, and went out; she then kindled the fire in the fore parlour that 
it might be ready when her mistress arose, and about eight o'clock went up into 
Gardelle's room, where she found him in a red and green night-gown at work. He 
gave her two letters, a snuff-box, and a guinea, and desired her to deliver the letters, 
one of which was directed to one Mozier in the Haymarket, and the other to a person 
who kept a snuff-shop at the next door, and to bring him from thence a pennyworth of 
snuff.
	The girl took the messages, and went again to her mistress, telling her what 
Gardelle had desired her to do, to which her mistress replied, "Nanny, you can't go, 
for here is nobody to answer at the street-door;" the girl being willing to oblige 
Gardelle, or being for some reason desirous to go out, answered, "that Mr. Gardelle 
would come down and sit in the parlour till she came back." She then went again to 
Gardelle, and told him what objection her mistress had made, and what she had said to 
remove it. Gardelle then said he would come down, as she had proposed, and he did 
come down accordingly.
	The girl immediately went on his errand, and left him in the parlour, shutting 
the street-door after her, and taking the key to let herself in when she came back.
	Immediately after the girl was gone out, Mrs. King hearing the tread of 
somebody in the parlour, called out, "Who is there?" and at the same time opened her 
chamber door. Gardelle was at a table, very near the door, having just then taken up a 
book that lay upon it, which happened to be a French grammar; he had some time 
before drawn Mr. King's picture, which she wanted to have made very handsome, and 
had teased him so much about it, that the effect was just contrary. It happened 
unfortunately that the first thing she said to him, when she saw it was he whom she 
had heard walking about in the room, was something reproachful about this picture: 
Gardelle was provoked at the insult; and as he spoke English very imperfectly, he, for 
want of a less improper expression, told her, with some warmth, "That she was an 
impertinent woman." This threw her into a transport of rage, and she gave him a 
violent blow with her fist on the breast, so violent, that he says he could not have 
thought such a blow could have been given by a woman; as soon as the blow was 
struck, she drew a little back, and at the same instant, he says, he laid his hand on her 
shoulder and pushed her from him, rather in contempt than anger, or with a design to 
hurt her; but her foot happening to catch in the floor-cloth, she fell backwards, and her 
head came with great force against the corner of the bedstead; the blood immediately 
gushed from her mouth, not in a continued stream, but as if by different strokes of a 
pump; he instantly ran to her and stooped to raise her, expressing his concern at the 
accident; but she pushed him away, and threatened, though in a feeble and interrupted 
voice, to punish him for what he had done; he was, he says, terrified exceedingly at 
the thought of being condemned for a criminal act upon her accusation, and again 
attempted to assist her by raising her up, as the blood still gushed from her mouth in 
great quantities; but she still exerted all her strength to keep him off, and still cried 
out, mixing threats with her screams; he then seized an ivory comb with a sharp taper 
point continued from the back, for adjusting the curls of her hair, which lay upon her 
toilet, and threatened her in his turn to prevent her crying out; but she still continued 
to cry out, though with a voice still fainter and fainter, he struck her with this 
instrument, probably in the throat, upon which the blood flowed from her mouth in 
yet greater quantities, and her voice was quite stopped: he then drew the bed-clothes 
over her, to prevent her blood from spreading on the floor, and to hide her from his 
sight; he stood, he says, some time motionless by her, and then fell down by her side 
in a swoon. When he came to himself, he perceived the maid was come in; he 
therefore went out of the room without examining the body to see if the unhappy 
wretch was quite dead, and his confusion was then so great, that he staggered against 
the wainscot, and hit his head, so as to raise a bump over his eye. As no person was in 
the house but the murdered and the murderer while the fact was committed, nothing 
can be known about it but from Gardelle's own account; the circumstances related 
above, contain the sense of what he related both in his defence, and in the account 
which he drew up in French to leave behind him, taken together as far as they are 
consistent; for there are in both several inconsistencies and absurdities, which give 
reason to suspect they are not true.
	But however that be, all was quiet when the maid returned, which, she says, 
was in a quarter of an hour. She went first into the parlour where Gardelle had 
promised to wait till she came back, and saw nobody. She had paid three shillings and 
ninepence out of the guinea at the snuff-shop, where she delivered one of the letters; 
to the other she had no answer; and she laid the change and the snuff-box with the 
snuff she had fetched in it upon the table; then she went up into Gardelle's room and 
found nobody, and by turns she went into every room in the house, except her 
mistress's chamber, whither she never went, but when called, and found nobody. She 
then made some water boil in the kitchen, made a bit of toast, and sat down to 
breakfast. In a short time she heard somebody walk over head in the parlour, or 
passage, and go up stairs, but did not go to see who it was. When she had breakfasted 
she went and stirred up the fire in the parlour against her mistress got up, and 
perceived that the snuff and change had been taken from the table; she then went up 
stairs again to Gardelle's room, to clean and set it to rights as she used to do, and it 
was now between ten and eleven o'clock. Soon after, Gardelle came down from the 
garret into his bed-chamber, which somewhat surprised her, as he could have no 
business that she knew of in the garret. When she first saw him, which was about an 
hour afterwards, she says, he looked confounded, and blushed exceedingly, and she 
perceived the bump over his eye, which had a black patch upon it as big as a shilling; 
he had also changed his dress, and had written another letter with which he sent her 
into Great Suffolk Street, and ordered her to wait for an answer; she went directly, and 
when she returned, which was in a quarter of an hour, she found him sitting in the 
parlour, and told him the gentleman would be there in the evening. He then told her 
that a gentleman had been in the room with her mistress, and that she was gone out 
with him in a hackney coach. It appears, by this, that Gardelle knew the maid was 
acquainted with his mistress's character. The maid, however, though she might have 
believed this story at another time, could not believe it now; she was not absent above 
a quarter of an hour; she had left her mistress in bed, and the time would not have 
permitted her receiving a gentleman there, her being dressed, a coach being procured, 
and her having gone out in it; besides, when she came back, she knew Gardelle was in 
her chamber. This gave her some suspicion, but it was of nothing worse than that 
Gardelle and her mistress had been in bed together. She went, however, and looked at 
the door of the chamber, which opened into the parlour, and which she had opened by 
her mistress's order, and found it again locked. About one o'clock another lodger, Mr. 
Wright's servant, Thomas Pelsey, came and told the maid at the door that the beds 
must be got ready, because his master intended to come hither in the evening, but did 
not go in. The maid still wondered that her mistress did not rise; and supposed that, 
knowing she came in from her errand while Gardelle was yet in her chamber, she was 
ashamed to see her. Gardelle, in the mean time, was often up and down stairs; and 
about three o'clock he sent her with a letter to one Broshet, at the Eagle and Pearl in 
Suffolk Street. As he knew that it would be extremely difficult to conceal the murder, 
if the maid continued in the house, he determined that he would, if possible, discharge 
her: but as the girl could not write, and as he was not sufficiently acquainted with our 
language to draw a proper receipt, he requested Mr. Broshet, in this letter, to write a 
receipt for him, and get the maid to sign it, directing her to deliver it to him when he 
paid her; he did not, however, acquaint her with his design. When Mr. Broshet had 
read the letter, he asked her if she knew that Mr. Gardelle was to discharge her; she 
said no. Why, says he, Mrs. King is gone out, and has given Mr. Gardelle orders to 
discharge you; for she is to bring a woman home with her: at this the girl was 
surprised, and smiled, telling Broshet, that she knew her mistress was at home. The 
girl was now confirmed in her first thought, that her mistress was ashamed to see her 
again; and thus she accounted for the manner of her dismissal. She returned between 
three and four to Gardelle, whom she found sitting in the parlour with a gentleman 
whose name she did not know: she continued in the house till between six and seven 
o'clock in the evening, and then Gardelle paid her six shillings for a fortnight and two 
days wages, and gave her five or six shillings over, upon which she delivered him the 
receipt that Broshet had written, took her box and went away. As she was going out, 
Mr. Wright's servant came again to the door, and she told him that she was discharged 
and going away; that her mistress had been all day in her bed-room, without either 
victuals or drink, and that if he stayed a little after she was gone, be might see her 
come out: the man, however, could not stay, and Gardelle about seven o'clock was 
thus left alone in the house.
	The first thing he did was to go into the chamber to the body, which upon 
examination, he found quite dead; he therefore took off the blankets and sheets with 
which he had covered it, stripped off the shift, and laid the body quite naked upon the 
bed; before this, he said, his linen was not stained; but it was much stained by his 
removing the body. He then took the two blankets, the sheets, the coverlet, and one of 
the curtains, and put them into the water-tub in the back wash-house, to soak, they 
being all much stained with blood; her shift he carried upstairs, and putting it in a bag, 
concealed it under his bed; his own shirt, now bloody, he pulled off, and locked it up 
in a drawer of his bureau.
	When all this was done, he went and sat down in the parlour, and soon after, it 
being about nine o'clock, Mr. Wright's servant came in without his master, who had 
changed his mind, and was gone to a gentleman's house in Castle Street. He went up 
into his room, the garret, and sat there till about seven o'clock: then he came down, 
and finding Gardelle still in the parlour, he asked if Mrs. King was come home, and 
who must sit up for her? Gardelle said she was not come home, but that he would sit 
up for her.
	In the morning, Friday, when Pelsey came down stairs, he again asked if Mrs. 
King was come home, and Gardelle told him that she had been at home, but was gone 
again. He then asked how he came by the hurt on his eye; and be said he got it by 
cutting some wood to light the fire in the morning. Pelsey then went about his master's 
business, and at night was again let in by Gardelle, who, upon being asked, said he 
would sit up for Mrs. King that night also.
	In the morning, Saturday, Pelsey enquired again after Mrs. King; and Gardelle, 
though he had professed to sit up for her but the night before, now told him she was 
gone to Bath or Bristol; yet, strange as it may seem, no suspicions of murder appear 
yet to have been conceived.
	On Saturday, Mozier, an acquaintance of Gardelle's, who had been also 
intimate with Mrs. King, and had spent the evening with her the Wednesday before 
the murder, came by appointment about two or three o'clock, having promised to go 
with her that evening to the opera. He was let in by Gardelle, who told him that Mrs. 
King was gone to Bath or Bristol, as he had told Pelsey. This man, and another of 
Gardelle's acquaintance, observing him to be chagrined and dispirited, seem to have 
imagined that Mrs. King's absence was the cause of it, and that if they could get him 
another girl they should cure him: they therefore were kind enough to procure for him 
on this occasion; and having picked up a prostitute in the Hay-market, they brought 
her that very Saturday to Gardelle at Mrs. King's. The worthy, whose name is not 
known, told her Mrs. King was gone into the country, and had discharged her servant. 
Gardelle made an apology for the confusion in which the house appeared, and Mozier 
or Muzard, as he is sometimes called, asked her if she would take care of the house: 
she readily consented; and Gardelle acquiescing, they left her with him. He asked her 
what her business was; she said she worked plain-work; he then told her he had some 
shirts to mend, and that he would satisfy her for her trouble.
	All this while the body continued as he had left it on Thursday night, nor had 
he once been into the room since that time. But this night the woman and Pelsey being 
in bed, he first conceived a design of concealing or destroying the dead body by parts, 
and went down to put it in execution; but the woman, whose name is Sarah Walker, 
getting out of bed and following him, he returned up stairs, and went to bed with her. 
In the morning, Sunday, he arose between seven and eight, and left Walker in bed, 
saying, it was too soon for her to rise; she fell asleep, and slept till ten; it is probable 
that in the mean time be was employed on the body, for when she came down 
between ten and eleven, he was but beginning to light the parlour-fire. He had spoke 
to her the night before to get him a chair-woman, and he was in so much confusion he 
did not ask her to stay to breakfast; she went out therefore and hired one Pritchard as a 
chair-woman, at one shilling a day, victuals and drink: in the afternoon she brought 
Pritchard to the house, and found with Gardelle two or three men and two women; 
Gardelle went up with her and stayed by her while she made his bed, then the 
company all went out together. The chair-woman kept house, and about ten o'clock 
they returned and supped in Gardelle's room. She was then dismissed for the night, 
and ordered to come the next morning at eight. The next morning, Monday, the chair-
woman was ordered to tell Pelsey the footman, that Walker was a relation of Mrs. 
King's, who was come to be in the house till Mrs. King returned; but Pelsey knew that 
she and Gardelle had but one bed, for when he came down on Monday morning, 
Gardelle's chamber-door stood open, and looking in, he saw some of her clothes. On 
Monday night he again enquired after Mrs. King, and Gardelle told him she was at 
Bath or Bristol, he knew not where; he differed at times in his account of her, yet no 
suspicion of murder was yet entertained. On Tuesday morning, Pelsey, who was going 
up to his master's room, smelt an offensive smell, and asked Gardelle, who was 
shoving up the sash of the window on the staircase, what it was; Gardelle replied, 
somebody had put a bone in the fire: the truth, however, was, that while Walker was 
employed in mending and making some linen in the pamlour, he had been burning 
some of Mrs. King's bones in the garret. At night, Pelsey renewed his enquiries after 
Mrs. King, and Gardelle answered with a seeming impatience, "Me know not of Mrs. 
King; she give me a great deal of trouble, but me shall hear of her Wednesday or 
Thursday;" yet he still talked of sitting up for her, and all this while nobody seems to 
have suspected a murder.
	On Tuesday night he told Mrs. Walker he would sit up till Mrs. King came 
home, though he had before told her she was out of town, and desired her to go to bed, 
to which she consented; as soon as she was in bed, he renewed his horrid employment 
of cutting the body to pieces, and disposing of it in different places; the bowels be 
threw down the necessary, and the flesh of the body and limbs cut to pieces, he 
scattered about the cock-loft, where he supposed they would dry and perish without 
putrefaction: about two o'clock in the morning, however, he was interrupted, for 
Walker having waked, and not finding him, she went down stairs, and found him 
standing upon the stairs; he then, at her solicitation, went up with her to bed.
	Wednesday passed like the preceding days, and on Thursday he told his 
female companion, that he expected Mrs. King home in the evening, and therefore 
desired that she would provide herself a lodging; giving her, at the same time, two of 
Mrs. King's shifts, and being thus dismissed she went away.
	Pritchard, the chair-woman, still continued in her office. The water having 
failed in the cistern on the Tuesday, she had recourse to that in the water-tub in the 
back kitchen; upon pulling out the spiggot a little water run out, but as there appeared 
to be more in, she got upon a ledge, and putting her hand in she felt something soft; 
she then fetched a poker, and pressing down the contents of the tub, she got water in a 
pall. This circumstance she told Pelsey, and they agreed the first opportunity to see 
what the things in the water-tub were; yet so languid was their curiosity, and so 
careless were they of the event, that it was Thursday before this tub was examined: 
they found in it the blankets, sheets, and coverlet that Gardelle had put in it to soak: 
after spreading, shaking, and looking at them, they put them again into the tub; and 
the next morning when Pelsey came down, he saw the curtain hanging on the 
banisters of the kitchen-stairs; upon looking down, he saw Gardelle just come out at 
the wash-house door, where the tub stood. When Pritchard the chair-woman came, he 
asked her if she had been taking any of the clothes out of the tub, and she said no, she 
then went and looked in the tub, and found the sheets had been wrung out. Upon this 
the first step was taken towards enquiring after the unhappy woman, who had now 
laid dead more than a week in the house. Pelsey found out the maid whom Gardelle 
had dismissed, and asked her if she had put any bed-clothes into the water; she said, 
no, and seemed frightened; Pelsey was then also alarmed and told his master.
	These particulars also came to the knowledge of Mr. Barron, an apothecary in 
the neighbourhood, who went the same day to Mrs. King's house, and enquired of 
Gardelle where she was. He trembled, and told him, with great confusion, that she 
was gone to Bath. The next day, therefore, Saturday, he carried the maid before Mr. 
Fielding, the justice, to make her deposition, and obtained a warrant to take Gardelle 
into custody. When the warrant was obtained, Mr. Barron, with the constable, and 
some others, went to the house, where they found Gardelle, and charged him with the 
murder; he denied it, but soon after dropped down in a swoon. When he recovered, 
they demanded the key of Mrs. King's chamber; but he said she had got it with her in 
the country; the constable therefore got in at the window, and opened the door that 
communicated with the parlour, and they all went in. They found upon the bed a pair 
of blankets wet, and a pair of sheets that appeared not to have been lain in; and the 
curtain also which Pelsey and the chair-woman had seen first in the water-tub, and 
then on the banisters, was found put up in its place wet. Upon taking off the clothes, 
the bed appeared bloody, the blankets also were bloody, and marks of blood appeared 
in other places; having taken his keys, they went up into his room, where they found 
the bloody shift and shirt.
	The prisoner, with all these tokens of his guilt, was then carried before 
Fielding, and though he stiffly denied the fact, was committed. On the Monday, a 
carpenter and bricklayer were sent to search the house for the body, and Mr. Barron 
went with them. In the necessary they found what he calls the contents of the bowels 
of a human body, but what were certainly the bowels themselves; and in the cock-loft 
they found one of the breasts, some other muscular parts, and some bones. They 
perceived also that there had been a fire in the garret, and some fragments of bones, 
half consumed, were found in the chimney, so large as to be known to be human. On 
the Thursday before, he had carried an oval chip-box to one Perronneau, a painter in 
enamel, who had employed him in copying, and pretending it contained colours of 
great value, desired him to keep it, saying he was uneasy to leave it at Mrs. King's 
while she was absent at Bath. Perronneau, when he heard Gardelle was taken up, 
opened the box, and found in it a gold watch and chain, a pair of bracelets, and a pair 
of ear-rings, which were known to be Mrs. King's. To this force of evidence Gardelle 
at length gave way, and confessed the fact, but signed no confession. He was sent to 
New Prison, where he attempted to destroy himself by swallowing some opium, 
which he had kept several days by him as a remedy for the tooth-ach. He took at one 
dose 40 grains, which was so far from answering his purpose, that it did not procure 
him sleep; though he declared he had not slept once since the commission of the fact, 
nor did he sleep for more than a fort night after this time. When he found the opium 
did not produce the effect he desired, he swallowed half-pence to the number of 
twelve; but neither did these bring on any fatal symptom, whatever pain or disorders 
they might cause; which is remarkable, because verdigrese, the solution of copper, is a 
very powerful and active poison, and the contents of the stomach would act as a 
dissolvent upon them.
	On the 2d of March he was brought to Newgate, and diligently watched, to 
prevent any further attempts upon his life. He shewed strong marks of penitence and 
contrition, and be haved with great humility, openness, and courtesy to those who 
visited him.
	On Thursday, the 2d of April, he was tried at the Old Bailey; and in his 
defence, he insisted only that he had no malice to the deceased, and that her death was 
the consequence of a fall. He was convicted, and sentenced to be executed on 
Saturday the 4th. The account which he wrote in prison, and which is mentioned in 
this narrative, is dated the 28th of March, though he did not communicate it till after 
his trial. The night after his condemnation his behaviour was extravagant and 
outrageous; yet the next morning he was composed and quiet, and said he had slept 
three or four hours in the night. When he was asked why he did not make his escape, 
he answered, that he feared some innocent person might then suffer in his stead. He 
declared he had no design to rob Mrs. King, but that he removed some of the things 
merely to give credit to the story of her journey to Bath; he declared too, that be never 
had any sentiments of love or jealousy with respect to Mrs. King; though it is evident, 
his friends, who prescribed for his lowness of spirits, supposed that he had.
	He affirmed, that he regarded the woman they brought him with horror, but 
that he did not dare to refuse her, lest it should produce new suspicions with respect to 
the cause of his uneasiness. It is, however, certain, that he felt the ill effects of her 
company in more ways than one to his last hour.
	He was executed amidst the shouts and hisses of an indignant populace, in the 
Haymarket, near Panton Street, to which he was led by Mrs. King's house, where the 
cart made a stop, and at which he just gave a look. His body was hanged in chains 
upon Hounslow-heath.
	One reflection, upon reading this dreadful narrative, will probably rise in the 
mind of the attentive reader; the advantages of virtue with respect to our social 
connections, and the interest that others take in what befalls us. It does not appear 
that, during all the time Mrs. King was missing, she was enquired after by one relation 
or friend; the murder was discovered by strangers, almost without solicitude or 
enquiry; the murderer was secured by strangers, and by strangers the prosecution 
against him was carried on.
	But who is there of honest reputation, however poor, that could be missing a 
day, without becoming the subject of many interesting enquiries, without exciting 
solicitude and fears, that would have no rest till the truth was discovered, and the 
crime punished?


THOMAS ANDREWS 
Convicted of an unnatural crime

	THIS miserable wretch, who had formerly lived in good credit, kept a public 
house at Pye Corner, near Smithfield, known by the sign of the Fortune of War, where 
he had as much business as enabled him to support his family in some degree of 
credit.
	John Finnimore, a servant out of place, who had been acquainted with 
Andrews when he (Finnimore) lived with Mrs. Mead, in Red Lion Court, behind Saint 
Sepulchre's church, called on Andrews, to inquire if he could help him to a service. 
Andrews's wife being now out of town, he told Finnimore that he was welcome to 
sleep at his house; but the other declined it for that night, as Mrs. Mead had given him 
permission to lodge at hers.
	On the following day Finnimore went to Andrews's with an acquaintance; and, 
after they had drank together, Finnmore hinted that Mrs. Mead had not offered him a 
lodging for the second night; on which Andrews told him that, as his wife was still out 
of town, he was welcome to a share of his bed. Here upon Finnimore went away with 
his acquaintance, and returned about nine o'clock in the evening.
	There were at that time a considerable number of people in the house; and 
when they were gone, which was not till near one o'clock in the morning, Andrews 
locked the doors, and he and Finnimore went to bed together.
	What passed, or was presumed to pass, till daylight, it is impossible to relate 
with any kind of regard to the laws of decency.
	In the morning Andrews opened the door, and Finnimore, going out without 
exchanging a word with him, went to his acquaintance, whom he found at the George, 
in Leather Lane, looking after some horses, which he drove, being coachman to a 
gentleman who put up his cattle at that place.
	The coachman asked Finnimore to carry a letter to Clapham; but he said he 
could not go, and assigned such reasons as accounted for his incapacity.
	Hereupon the coachman advised Finnimore to have Andrews taken into 
custody; and on the following day a warrant was procured for this purpose; but, when 
the constable went to take Andrews into custody, he charged him likewise with 
Finnimore, on which the constable took charge of them both.
	The constable conducted them to the Mansion-house; but the lord mayor being 
absent, they were conveyed to the houses of two aldermen, neither of whom 
happening to be at home, Finnimore was lodged for that night in Bridewell, and 
Andrews in the Compter.
	On the following day they were carried before Sir Robert Ladbroke, the sitting 
alderman at Guildhall, when Finnimore made such a charge against Andrews that he 
was committed to Newgate.
	At the ensuing sessions Andrews was brought to his trial at the Old Bailey, 
when Finnimore gave such a clear account of the horrid transaction that the jury did 
not hesitate to find the prisoner guilty, and ho received sentence of death.
	Notwithstanding this conviction on evidence the most complete that the nature 
of such a case would allow, a conviction that left no doubt of Andrews's guilt in the 
mind of the public, yet such interest was made that he was indulged with a reprieve, 
and afterwards obtained a full pardon.
	Andrews was discharged from Newgate in the month of July, 1761.
	What sort of interest it was that procured a pardon for this man, it may be 
improper, because it could hardly be decent, to say. It is a subject that the delicate pen 
scarcely knows how to touch: but pardoned he was, to the astonishment of nine 
persons in ten who knew any thing of the case.
	The writer of this narrative was well acquainted with two of the gentlemen that 
were of the jury that convicted Andrews; and he has been repeatedly assured by them 
that the strength of the evidence against him was such that no kind of doubt could 
remain of him guilt. Let the rest he buried, as it ought to be in obscurity; and we 
believe our readers will thank us that this obnoxious story is one of the shortest in our 
collection.


THOMAS DANIELS. 
Condemned for the supposed Murder of his wife but subsequently pardoned, 
1761

  
Mrs Daniels brought home intoxicated

'O Death 
Where art thou? -- Death! thou dread of guilt 
Thou wish of innocence! affliction's friend 
Tired Nature calls thee: come, in mercy, come, 
And lay me pillow'd in eternal rest.'
	THIS is an extraordinary hard case, and we think that every reader must agree 
in opinion that the accused, so far from being guilty of murder, had long submitted to 
the very worst kind of usage with which a woman can possibly treat a husband.
	The whole proof adduced against him was circumstantial; and we hope no jury 
sitting upon the life of their fellow-creature will again convict a man on such 
evidence.
	That they erred in their judgment, or, at all events, that the Privy Council of 
the realm differed from them in opinion, is evident, from the unfortunate man 
immediately receiving the king's pardon.
	But, that every one may form a judgment on the case, we shall simply narrate 
the circumstances drawn from the different publications of the day, including his own 
confession.
	Thomas Daniels was a journeyman carpenter, and about the year 1757, at 
which time he worked with his father, he became acquainted with Sarah Carridine, a 
very pretty girl, who was servant at a public house; this girl he was very desirous to 
marry, but his father and mother would not consent, because she had lived in an 
alehouse. After consulting with the girl, and the girl's mother, it was agreed they 
should live together without being married. The mother, therefore, took a lodging for 
them, to which Daniels removed. His father, however, soon found out what he had 
done, upon which a quarrel ensued, and he determined to work with his father no 
longer.
	As he was going about seeking employment else where, he met with some of 
his acquaintance, who had entered on board the Britannia privateer, and they 
persuaded him to enter also.
	When he went home, and told Carridine what he had done, she fell into violent 
fits of crying, and was, with great difficulty, pacified, by his telling her that the cruise 
was but for six months, that he hoped he should make his fortune, and that he would 
marry her when he came back, advising her, in the mean time, to go to service.
	In this situation she was naturally exposed to great danger. It is probable that 
her grief was mixed with resentment; that she considered herself as slighted and 
deserted; and that she doubted whether he would return again, and, if he did, whether 
he, who could so soon forsake her, would make good his engagement at the same 
time, having been already debauched, she was not restrained by the powerful motives 
from which women resist solicitations to the first fault, and she was under every 
possible temptation to form another connexion that was likely to be more certain and 
durable.
	Under all these disadvantages she was seduced by one John Jones, a founder, a 
wretch who had been the intimate acquaintance of Daniels, and professed great 
friendship for him. This fellow promised to marry her if Daniels did not return; that, if 
he did, he would continue his kindness to her; and that, if he should die himself, he 
would leave her all his goods, and all his interest in the capital of a box-club, to which 
he belonged.
	Not long after this connexion between Carridine and Jones, Daniels came 
home, having been absent about eight months. As soon as he came to London he went 
to Mr. Archer's, who kept the White Bear, at the corner of Barbican, in Aldersgate 
Street, whom he called his master, and sent for his father and mother, with whom he 
spent an agreeable evening. He then inquired of Mrs. Archer after Carridine; and she 
referred him to Jones. Jones took him over the water to an alehonse near the Bridge-
foot, where he saw her. At this time she lived with her mother, and Daniels took a 
lodging in the same house with Jones, who, pretending great friendship for them both, 
urged Daniels to marry, going every night with him to spend the evening with the girl, 
and offering to give her away. Daniels, without suspicion of so perfidious and base a 
conduct, fell into the snare, and fixed upon a day; but, as our laws have laid a tax upon 
marriage, which other states have encouraged by pecuniary or honorary advantages, 
Daniels could not be married, because he had not money enough to pay the fees. He 
would have borrowed a guinea of his master, but his master refused; upon which 
Jones urged him to raise it by pawning his watch: to this Daniels consented, the watch 
was pawned for him by Jones himself, and Daniels and Carridine were married.
	Daniels, at first, lived in ready-furnished lodgings, till his wife's mother 
persuaded him to live with her in Catherine-wheel Alley, Whitechapel. While they 
lived here Daniels frequently found his wife abroad when he came home from work, 
and when she did come home she was generally in liquor. The mother excused both 
her absence and her condition by saying she had been to see some young women in 
Spitalfields, and that a very little matter got into her head. It was not long, however, 
before Daniels found that she kept company with Jones; and having once followed 
them to an alehouse, when the mother pretended she was gone to see the young 
women in Spitalfields, he went to them, and, after some words, sent his wife home. 
She was then drunk, and, when he went home to her, a violent quarrel ensued, during 
which the wife and the mother both fell upon him; and the wife afterwards ran out of 
the house, and was absent all night.
	Next day, however, Daniels was persuaded to make it up; and soon after put 
her into a little shop in the Minories, to sell pork and greens, and other articles. She 
promised to mind her business, and never go into Jones's company more.
	On the next Lord Mayor's Day Daniels attended his master to the hall of his 
company, and, his master having given him a bottle of wine, he went into the kitchen, 
and got some bread and meat. He would not, however, touch either the wine or the 
victuals there, but brought both home, pleasing himself with the thought of enjoying 
them quietly with his wife. When he came home his wife was out, and soon after he 
found her and Jones together upon the stairs, Jones having taken the opportunity of 
Daniels's absence to supply his place, not suspecting that he would leave the good 
cheer of the hall, and come home so early.
	This caused a great quarrel, and Daniels would suffer his wife to keep shop no 
longer; he also removed from her mother's, and, having got a few goods of his own, 
took a room in the Little Minories. Here they lived somewhat more quiet for a little 
while; but, the wife falling again into irregularities, Daniels entered a second time on 
board the Britannia privateer, as carpenter's mate, and, without acquainting any body 
with what he had done, went down to the ship at Greenhithe; but in a few days, to his 
great surprise, he was visited on board by his wife, in company with Jones: they staid 
on board all night, and, she lamenting and behaving like a mad woman, he was at 
length persuaded to return home with her.
	Soon after he took a house, the corner of Hare Court, Aldersgate Street, and 
put his wife once more into a shop; but she soon returned to her old ways, kept 
company with Jones and several other people, and at length ran away and left him.
	Notwithstanding this conduct he was persuaded to receive her again, though 
she acknowledged her criminal intimacy with Jones, upon her promise of amendment; 
yet she not only contracted other intimacies of an infamous kind, but, when Daniels 
came home to his meals, she would be abroad, with the key of their room in her 
pocket, so that he was obliged to eat at an alehouse.
	Notwithstanding all this Daniels seems to have had a strong attachment to her, 
and to have done every thing in his power to please her, that she might make his home 
agreeable, and was solicitous to the last to unite his pleasure with hers, in which he 
was constantly disappointed. The following instance, among many others, is a 
remarkable representation of his conduct and her character.
	One Sunday, with a view to entertain her, he took her down to Ilford, that they 
might spend the day agreeably together: they dined at the White Horse there, and after 
dinner she drank freely. When the reckoning came to be paid she flew into a rage with 
the landlord, and, upon Daniels endeavouring to moderate matters, she turned all her 
resentment upon him, and carried it to such a degree, that she declared she would not 
go home with him, but would go with the first person that asked her, or even with the 
next man that went by. This threat, extravagant as it was, she made good; for a person, 
dressed like an officer, stopping in a chaise at the door, she asked him to let her ride 
home with him: he consented, and away they went.
	Daniels, though he had offered his wife a place in the stage, now walked home 
by himself; and, having sat up for his wife till it was very late, he at length gave her 
over, and went to bed. About two in the morning he was roused by a violent knocking 
at his door, where he found his wife so drunk that she could not stand, attended by her 
mother; and he quietly let her in, with the mother, whose assistance was absolutely 
necessary to put her to bed.
	The account of what happened immediately before the accident that put an end 
to her life, and of that accident itself, is added in his own words, the truth of which he 
has attested upon oath, before a magistrate, since his pardon:--
	'The night before this melancholy accident happened, I came home, to be sure, 
not entirely sober where, not finding my wife, I went directly to her mother's, where I 
found her very drunk. It being night, her mother said it was not proper to take her 
home in that condition, and therefore advised me to lie there that night, while she and 
her girl would go and sleep at my lodging. We did so.
	'In the morning, after my wife's mother came back, we all breakfasted together 
at her lodgings. After breakfast I went to Mr. Clarke, timber-merchant, in St. Mary 
Axe, to solicit for some India Company's work; from whence I went to the Mansion 
House alehouse, and drank a pint of beer. I then intended to go to work at Mr. Perry's, 
in Noble Street; but, it being near dinner-time, I stopped at the Bell, opposite his 
house, for another pint of beer, where, meeting some acquaintance eating beef-steaks, 
I dined with them. As I was eating, in came my wife and her mother: she at first 
abused me for being at the alehouse, but they afterwards, with great seeming good 
humour, drank with me, and, as they wanted money, I gave my wife two shillings, and 
lent her mother a six-and-ninepenny piece, which I had just received in change for 
half a guinea, from the master of the public house. As the day was now far spent, and 
as I was pleased with the prospect of working for the East India Company, I thought it 
not worth while to begin a day's work so late: I therefore went to Smithfield, to see 
how the horse-market went; from thence I went to Warwick Lane, to see for a young 
man whom I had promised to get to work for the Company also. I took him to Mr. 
Clarke, in St. Mary Axe, and afterward went with him to two or three places more; the 
last place was the Nag's Head, in Houndsditch and about half an hour after nine 
o'clock went home.
	'When I came there I went in at the back door, which is under the gateway, and 
which used to be only on a single latch for the conveniency of my lodgers. I went up 
to my room-door: but, finding it fast, came downstairs again.
	'There was then some disturbance over the way, in Aldersgate Street, which I 
walked over to see the meaning of, imagining my wife might chance to be engaged in 
it. Not finding her in the crowd, I returned, and went upstairs again: while I was on 
the stairs I heard my wife cough, by which I knew she was at home. Finding my door 
still fast, I knocked and called again; still she would not answer: I then said "Sally, I 
know you are at home, and I desire you will open the door; if you will not I will burst 
it open." Nobody yet answering, I set my shoulder against the door, and forced it 
open; upon this she jumped out of bed. I immediately began to undress me, by 
slipping off my coat and waistcoat, saying, at the same time, "Sally, what makes you 
use me so? you follow me wherever I go, to abuse me, and then lock me out of my 
lodging; I never served you so." On this she flew upon me, called me a scoundrel dog, 
said she supposed I had been with some of my whores, and, so saying, tore my shirt 
down from the bosom: on this I pushed her down; she then ran to the chimney-corner, 
and snatched up several things, which I successively wrested from her, and in the 
scuffle a table and a screen fell down. At length she struck me several blows with a 
hand-brush; and, while I was, struggling to get it from her, she cried out several times 
"Indeed, indeed, I will do so no more." When I got the brush from her, which I did 
with some difficulty, I gave her a blow with it, and then concluded she would be easy. 
She sat down on the floor, by the cupboard door, tearing her shift from her back, 
which had been rent in the skirmish: I sat down on the opposite side of the bed, with 
my back towards her, preparing to go into it; and, seeing her fling the remnants of her 
shift about in so mad a manner, I said "Sally, you are a silly girl; why don't you be 
easy?" On that she suddenly rose up, and with something gave me a blow on the head, 
which struck me down: I fell on the bedstead with my head against the folding doors 
of it. I imagined she was then afraid she had killed me, for I heard her cry, two or 
three times, " 0 save me, save me!" how she went out of the window it is impossible 
for we to say, in the condition she left me in; but, from her cries, I supposed her gone 
that way; and in my consternation, when I arose, I ran down one pair of stairs, where, 
not knowing how to behave, I went up again, and sat me down on the bed from 
whence I rose. In this position Mr. Clarke, the constable, and the numbers who 
followed him, found me. He said "Daniels, you have stabbed your wife, and flung her 
out at the window." I replied "No, Mr. Clarke, I have not; she threw herself out."
	'Mr. Clarke took a candle, and examined all the room in search of blood, but 
found none; and luckily it was for me that neither of our noses happened to bleed in 
the fray, though mine was subject to do so on any trifling occasion.
	'He then went to the window, where he found a piece of a saucer, and asked 
me what it was. I told him I did not know, but recollected afterwards that it was what I 
fed my squirrel in; though I knew not how it came broke; it was whole that day.
	'From thence I was taken to the Compter; and the public arc already 
acquainted with the proceedings on my trial, when I was condemned for the supposed 
fact, September the 21st, 1761.
	'I am informed that the next morning they found a pair of small pliers, bloody, 
in the window, which were then considered as a proof of my guilt. These pliers were 
what I have mended my squirrel's chain with whenever he broke loose, which was 
sometimes the case. How they should be bloody, as God is my Saviour, I cannot 
answer; but, as no wound was perceived on the body, they were not produced as 
evidence against me. however, when my wife was brought up from the street, it is said 
she was blooded, and that the basin was put in the window where these pliers were 
found. It is therefore possible that, in such confusion, a drop or two might accidentally 
be spilled upon them, more especially when we consider the tumult of a morning's 
exhibition of a dead body, for penny gratuities, by the unprincipled mother of it.'
	The following judicious remarks are added by the person who assisted Daniels 
in publishing his case, and they seem to confirm the man's declaration of his 
innocence beyond the possibility of doubt.
	The window of Daniels's room has two casements folding against each other, 
with garden-pots before them. One of these casements only used to be opened, the 
other being in general kept shut. These casements were each about sixteen or 
seventeen inches wide, and the window was about a yard and a quarter high. When 
this accident happened one casement was open, the other shut, as usual; consequently 
the opening then through the window was about sixteen or seventeen inches wide, and 
a yard and a quarter high. Through this space a man was to thrust a woman, nearly as 
strong as himself! If such a thing had been attempted, the following consequences 
must be incontestably allowed to ensue:
	I. The woman would resist the attempt.
	II. When persons struggle to avoid imminent danger, and are driven to despair, 
they are capable of a surprising degree of exertion, beyond their ordinary abilities.
	III. This woman would therefore have continued in so narrow a gap a very 
considerable while before she could have been forced through, and would all that time 
have uttered cries, entreaties, and exclamations, too expressive of her situation to have 
been mistaken by the neighbours and spectators.
	IV. Her resistance would have overturned the before-mentioned garden-pots, 
and would have shattered the glass of the casement that was shut and even forced 
open, or broke, the casement itself, which obstructed her passage.
	V. In breaking the glass of the window her skin must have been greatly 
scratched and torn, and her limbs, naked as she was, have been otherwise greatly 
maimed and bruised.
	VI. The man who undertook to force her out must have borne some very 
conspicuous marks of his attempt.
	The two first of these propositions will be universally granted.
	The third is contradicted by all the evidence on the trial, who unanimously 
agree that the moment the woman was seen she came through the window, and was 
only then heard to use such expressions, which Daniels accounts for better than any 
one else.
	In reply to the fourth -- the pots were not discomposed nor the window broken, 
except one pane; and it does not appear that even that pane might not have been 
broken before.
	In answer to the fifth -- the body, by the evidence of the surgeon, did not 
appear to have received any other damage than the natural consequences of so great a 
fall.
	As to the last -- the man was not seen at the window at all; and, as to any 
wounds or bruises sustained by him, the constable, when asked whether he saw the 
blow on his head, which he affirmed to be given him by his wife, declared he did not. 
But he was not asked whether he looked for it; a question, it may be presumed, he 
would have answered in the negative.
	In such a situation, it is to be concluded, the poor fellow was little heard, and 
less regarded, concerning whatever he might allege in his own behalf.
	A man may be stunned by a blow that might not perhaps exhibit any 
remarkable appearance; and, had it been seen, his account of it would have weighed 
but little.
	It is not even probable, had he knocked this woman on the head first, that he 
could have sent the body through the window so completely as, either by fright or 
design, she accomplished it herself. But that she came there living is past all doubt.
	To conclude:-- the evidence against this unfortunate man was only 
presumptive at most, and, upon clear scrutiny, is really productive of nothing; so that, 
as he was discharged by royal authority, so has he also a just claim to an acquittal in 
the minds of all judicious and candid people.


PETER PATTISON 
Executed at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 5th of October, 1761, for being 
concerned in a Riot at Hexham

	THE King having, by proclamation, ordered the militia of England to be 
embodied, and the deputy-lieutenants for the county of Northumberland having 
advertised that on the 9th of March, 1761, they should meet at the town of Hexham, to 
ballot for militiamen, a most dreadful riot ensued.
	A vast body of colliers, called pitmen, from Newcastle, rose, and, in a 
tumultuous manner, proceeded to Hexham, There they set up a loud cry of "No Militia 
Laws!" and attacked a detachment of the North York Militia, with clubs, stones, and 
such other weapons as they could collect.
	This enraged the soldiers to such a pitch that they fired upon the mob for the 
space of ten minutes, and forty-two were killed and forty-eight wounded. Of the 
militia, an ensign and two privates were killed, and several wounded.
	Above a score of the ringleaders of this dangerous insurrection were secured, 
but we find accounts of the execution of only one of them, Peter Pattison.


JOHN PERROTT 
A Bankrupt, who refused to make Full Disclosures of his Effects, and was 
executed in Smithfield, 11th of November, 1761

	JOHN PERROTT was born at Newport Pagnell, in Buckinghamshire, about 
sixty miles north of London, in the year 1723, being about thirty-eight years of age at 
his death. His father died when he was seven years old, and his mother about two 
years afterwards, leaving him a fortune of about fifteen hundred pounds. After the 
death of his parents he was, by the direction of a guardian, placed in the Foundation 
School of Gilsborough, in Northamptonshire, where he continued five years. He was 
then, being about fifteen years old, put apprentice to his half-brother at Hampstead, in 
Hertfordshire, where he served out his time.
	In the year 1747 he came up to London, and began to trade for himself in 
foreign white lace, but kept no shop. In the beginning of the year 1749 he took a 
house, and opened a warehouse in Blowbladder Street. About the year 1752 he 
removed from Blowbladder Street to Ludgate Hill, where he opened a linendraper's 
shop, and dealt in various other articles, styling himself "merchant." From the time of 
his opening this shop till the year 1759 he returned annually about two thousand 
pounds, and was remarkably punctual in his payments.
	Having thus established his reputation, and finding that no credit which he 
should ask would be refused him, he formed a scheme of abusing this confidence, 
which he began to put into execution by contracting for goods, of different sorts, to 
the value of thirty thousand pounds, the greater part of which, amounting to the value 
of twenty-five thousand pounds, he actually got into his possession. In pursuance of 
his project it was necessary to convert these goods into ready money as soon as 
possible; he therefore employed one Henry Thompson (who had for three or four 
years acted as his agent, or broker) to sell them for ready money. Thompson, at this 
time, kept a little house in Monkwell Street, near Wood Street, whither the goods 
were sent in the dusk of the evening, and whither he invited some of the principal 
traders to look at them, as goods consigned to him from the places where they were 
manufactured. Perrott always set a price upon them, which Thompson showed to his 
chapmen, who usually fixed another price at which they would buy; at this price 
Thompson was always ordered to sell, though it was frequently fifteen or twenty per 
cent. below prime cost.
	When he had thus converted the goods he obtained upon credit into money, 
and before the time when he was to pay for them arrived, he summoned his creditors 
together, who accordingly met, on the 17th of January, 1760, at the Half Moon tavern, 
in Cheapside, where he acquainted them that he was unable to pay the whole of what 
he owed, referring himself entirely to their pleasure, and promising to acquiesce in all 
such measures as they should propose, to pursue their own benefit and security.
	This conduct and these professions had so plausible an appearance that 
Perrott's creditors conceived a favourable opinion of him, notwithstanding the loss 
they were likely to suffer. It was however determined that a commission of 
bankruptcy should be sued out against him, and Perrott having agreed to cause 
himself to be denied the next day to a person whom his creditors were to send to 
demand money, as the common and most ready foundation of commissions of 
bankruptcy, such a commission was issued against him on the 19th of January, the 
second day after meeting, and Perrott, being found and declared a bankrupt, 
surrendered himself as such.
	The 26th of the same month, the 4th of February and the 4th of March were 
appointed for his appearance before the Commissioners, to make a full disclosure of 
his estate and effects.
	But two of Perrott's creditors found, upon an inspection of his accounts and 
affairs, such a deficiency and confusion as gave them just reason to suspect his 
integrity. He was accordingly summoned before the Commissioners on the 26th of 
February, and then, being hard pressed, he acknowledged that he had bought goods, 
since the year 1758, to the amount of twenty thousand pounds, and sold them himself, 
or by Thompson, for ready money, at fifteen or twenty per cent. under prime cost; and 
that, about five years before, he hired a house in Hide Street, near Bloomsbury 
Square, at thirty pounds per annum rent, and furnished it at the expense of about a 
hundred and thirty pounds; that it was for a lady, and that he lived in it for about a 
year and a half and then quitted it, and sold the furniture. And he swore also that he 
had not since that time any other house or lodging, or paid for the lodging of any other 
person.
	An examination which produced such proof of the bankrupt's misconduct 
greatly increased the suspicions of his creditors that more knavery was intended; and 
it appeared that, though he had kept regular books from 1752 to 1757, yet at the end 
of that time they were in some confusion, and afterwards in total disorder. Neither 
were any traces to be discovered of accounts between him and Thompson, 
notwithstanding the very large transactions between them: which was another 
reasonable cause to suspect fraudulent designs.
	On the 19th of April, 1760, Perrott appeared before the Commissioners, and 
exhibited, upon oath, an account of his effects, which, after giving him credit for all 
the money he had paid, and making him debtor for all the goods he had sold, from his 
first entering into trade to his bankruptcy, left a deficiency of no less than thirteen 
thousand, five hundred and thirteen pounds. He was therefore required to declare 
upon oath what had become of that sum, to which he replied that had he lost two 
thousand pounds on goods which he had sold in the last year; and one thousand 
pounds and upwards by mournings; and that for nine or ten years, he was sorry to say, 
he had been extremely extravagant, and spent large sums of money.
	As Perrott, during this examination, had also sworn that he never gamed, and 
as the vast sum unaccounted for came into his hands only in the last year, it appeared 
scarcely possible that it should, in that one year, be dissipated by any species of 
extravagance; if not dissipated, it was concealed and Perrott therefore was the same 
night committed to Newgate, for "not having given satisfactory answers on his 
examination."
	In Newgate he was constantly visited by Mrs Ferne, a friend, who was always 
elegantly dressed, and who came in a chariot or post-chaise, attended by a servant in 
livery or a maid-servant, or both. They used frequently to dress a chop themselves, 
and Perrott condescended to clean his own knives; yet his folly and improvidence 
were so great that at this very time he indulged himself and madam with green peas at 
five shillings a quart.
	After he had continued in Newgate six weeks he gave notice to the 
Commissioners that he would give a more satisfactory account of the deficiency in his 
estate, and being therefore brought before them on the 5th of June, 1760, he gave in, 
upon oath, the following account:--
Fitting up my warehouse in Blowbladder Street, and furnishing the same
L.100
Rent and boy's wages during my stay there
L.100
Travelling expenses during the same
L.100
My own diet during that time
L.125
Clothes, hats, wigs and other wearing necessaries
L.200
Fitting up my house on Ludgate Hill
L.100
Furnishing the same
L.200
Housekeeping, during my stay there, with rent, taxes, and servants' wages
L.2,700
Clothes, hats, wigs, shoes and other wearing apparel during my stay there
L.720
Travelling expenses during my stay on Ludgate Hill
L.360 
Horses, and keeping them, saddles, bridles and Farrier's bill, during my 
residence on Ludgate Hill and Blowbladder Street
L.575
Tavern expenses, coffee-house expenses, and places of diversion during the 
above time
L.920 
Expenses attending the connection I had with the fair sex
L.5,500
Paid Mr Thompson for selling goods by commission
L.300
Forgave him a debt in consideration of his trouble and time in getting bills 
accepted, etc. .
L.30
Lost by goods and mourning
L.3,000
Total
L.15,030
	To this account he added the most solemn asseveration upon oath that he had 
not concealed any part of his estate and effects whatsoever.
With this account the Commissioners were equally dissatisfied, so they sent him back 
to Newgate; and some time after he petitioned the Lord Keeper to be discharged. But 
his Lordship, upon hearing the last deposition which Perrott thought fit to annex to his 
petition read, thought it so infamous that he would not order any attendance upon it.
	As the creditors had now no doubt of the concealment of a great part of 
Perrott's estate, a reward of forty per cent. was offered by advertisements, often 
repeated, for the discovery of any part of such estate. It happened that Mr Hewit, one 
of Perrott's assignees, walking one morning upon the terrace in Lincoln's Inn Gardens, 
observed a woman leaning over the wall, who had something so disconsolate and 
forlorn in her appearance that he could not resist his curiosity to speak to her. Upon 
inquiring what was the cause of her present apparent distress, she told him that she 
had been turned out of her service by one Mrs Ferne, and knew not where to go. The 
name of Ferne immediately rendered his curiosity interested in a high degree, and he 
sent her to Mr Cobb, who was clerk under Perrott's commission, to get her examined.
	The examination of this woman, whose name was Mary Harris, was taken 
before Justice Fielding, on the 23rd of June, 1761, and, in consequence of this 
information, Ferne's apartments, which were very expensively furnished, were 
searched, by virtue of Fielding's warrant, and, at the same time, Perrott's room in 
Newgate, by virtue of a warrant from the Commissioners.
	In Ferne's possession were found the halves of four bank-notes, amounting in 
all to one hundred and eighty-five pounds, and the corresponding halves were found 
at the bottom of Perrott's trunk, hidden, sewed up very carefully in a piece of rag, 
together with the signed moiety of another bank-note for one thousand pounds.
	Upon this discovery, Ferne was carried before the justice, and examined 
concerning the bank-notes, when she insisted they were her own property, and 
received from gentlemen, as a gratuity, for favours; but these very notes were, by the 
indefatigable diligence of those concerned, traced back into money paid to Thompson 
for goods which he sold on Perrott's account.
	After some subsequent examinations of Mrs Ferne, and of one Martin 
Matthias, and one Pye Donkin, who acted as attorneys for Perrott -- which 
examinations all tended to prove that Perrott had deposited notes to a great value in 
Ferne's hands, and to expose the shameless perjury of Ferne -- all proceedings were 
suspended till the trial in September, 1761, when, it being proved that the notes found 
in the possession of Ferne and Perrott were the produce of Perrott's estate, he was 
convicted, and received sentence of death.
	From the time of his having been charged with a capital offence he was put 
into irons; yet he seemed healthy and cheerful. He was often urged to make a full 
disclosure of his effects, but obstinately refused, saying he was to die: that was 
atonement sufficient for the wrongs he had committed.
	He was, in consequence of his own request, visited the day before his death by 
his assignees, to whom, however, he refused to answer particular questions relating to 
his estate, giving as a reason that he had received the Sacrament. This reason for 
answering no questions seems to prove that he had secretly determined not to disclose 
his estate by answering truly; because, in this case, he avoided the crime of falsehood 
by being silent, though otherwise his answer would have coincided with every part of 
Christian duty, and his having received the Sacrament would rather have been a 
reason for his answering them than not.
	On the morning of his execution he confessed the justice of his sentence. He 
expressed great solicitude about what should become of his body, desiring it might be 
buried in the church of the place where he was born. To this he added another request, 
which was much more rational: he desired that the time might be enlarged in the 
chapel and shortened at the place of execution. He was in chapel therefore from eight 
to three-quarters after nine; the next half-hour was employed in knocking off his 
irons; about ten minutes more were spent in taking leave of his fellow-convict, one 
Lee, who was condemned for forgery; and about a quarter after ten he appeared, pale 
and trembling, at the door of the press-yard, and was immediately put into the cart. He 
was executed in Smithfield.


ROBERT GREENSTREET 
Executed at Tyburn, 14th of December, 1761, for the Murder of his Master, 
from whom he demanded an Increase of Wages

	THIS man served his apprenticeship with a Mr Souch, a fishhook-maker, in 
Crooked Lane, London, by whom he had been so kindly treated that after the 
expiration of his time he continued to work with him as a journeyman.
	Greenstreet seems to have been of a discontented mind, for he was often 
urging an increase of wages, more than that humble trade would allow. One day, 
having again introduced the subject to his old and kind master, now bending under the 
weight of many years, it led to a dispute, in which the young villain felled the poor old 
man to the ground, and there inhumanly repeated his blows. While thus prostrate the 
master faintly exclaimed: "Bob, you are a rogue to use me thus"; upon which the 
villain took a knife from his pocket and, deliberately opening it, stabbed him in 
several parts of his body, at every word calling out: "D-n your old soul!" This bloody 
work was carried on before the youth who had succeeded Greenstreet as apprentice, 
and who, in endeavouring to save his master, received a stab through his hand. The 
murderer was secured, and a surgeon sent for, who found the old man speechless, 
senseless, and bleeding to death. In a few minutes he expired.
	On his trial at the Old Bailey, Greenstreet pleaded guilty, and received 
sentence of death. He was executed along with Daniel Looney, for shooting Captain 
Shanks. The body of Greenstreet was given to the surgeons for dissection, and when 
brought into the Hall for that purpose the eyes opened, though the body was dead.


JOHN M'NAUGHTON, ESQ. 
Who was twice executed in Ireland, 15th of December, 1761, for the Murder 
of Miss Knox, whom he pretended to marry

	JOHN M'NAUGHTON, ESQ., was the son of a merchant at Derry, whose 
father had been an alderman of Dublin. To an outward form which was perfectly 
engaging he added the most genteel demeanour, so as to promise the very reverse of 
what was the real disposition of his soul, which was subject to every blast of passion. 
He was educated in Trinity College, Dublin. When of age he entered into a landed 
estate of six hundred pounds a year, in the county of Tyrone, which was left him by 
Dr M'Naughton, his uncle.
	The first vice he fell into was gaming, by which he very soon did great injury 
to his fortune; and though he continued (as most novices do who play with sharpers) 
in a constant run of ill-luck, and was soon obliged to mortgage, yet his losses made no 
visible alteration in his temper. His pride kept him within due bounds there. All was 
placid with the polite M'Naughton, and he lost his money to the very last with that 
graceful composure that became the man who had a plentiful fortune to support it. But 
strong as his passion this way might be, it was not strong enough to secure him 
against the attacks of love, and falling a victim to the charms of a young lady he very 
speedily married her.
	His very agreeable person and soft polite address assured his success with the 
ladies; but, as his character was generally known, the young lady's friends took all 
possible care to secure her effects, and the lover was too eager to gratify his passion, 
and too rash in his temper, to trouble himself about the disposition of fortune.
	The unavoidable expenses of a wife and servants in Dublin (as he pursued his 
old course of gaming) soon increased his difficulties. A sheriff's writ was taken out 
against Mr M'Naughton for some large debt; and as he suspected the danger he kept 
himself as secure at home as possible, by which means the bailiffs could get no 
admittance. The creditor, or some other persons concerned, hearing this, had influence 
enough with the High Sheriff to prevail on him to go to Mr M'Naughton's house and 
take him prisoner.
	As the sheriff went in a chair, and appeared like a gentleman, the servants 
admitted him, and showed him into a parlour, where their master was alone. The 
sheriff then told him he was his prisoner. On this M'Naughton flew into a rage, and, 
calling out for pistols, he frightened his poor listening wife to such a degree that 
(being near her time) she fell in labour, and died in childbed.
	The High Sheriff was greatly blamed for this seeming officious behaviour; but 
this dreadful consequence threw Mr M'Naughton into such distraction that he made 
several attempts upon his life, and was obliged to be attended and watched for some 
months after. On his return from the country, after eighteen months' absence, he 
appeared greatly altered -- like a wretch worn out with grief -- so very susceptible was 
that frail man of the excess of every passion. But this fatal accident, which nearly cost 
him his life, was attended with one good consequence: it immediately cut off all 
expense; and that long retirement into the country was of some service to his troubled 
fortunes, and gave him an opportunity, on his return to Dublin, to appear there like 
himself, in some degree of splendour. There he renewed his old and, no doubt, 
contracted new friendships, and kept most faithfully to his favourite vice, gaming, 
which he pursued with great spirit.
	Some few years before this, when Mr. M'Naughton had both character and 
interest in the world, he was appointed collector for the county of Coleraine; but the 
public money soon became a dangerous commodity in the hands of a gamester; and 
when there began to be a large balance against him, he not only lost that profitable 
employment, but was obliged to get one of his wife's relations to be security for him, 
and it is said that gentle man remained some time after in trouble on his account. The 
loss of that employment was the first mark of public discredit that befel this unhappy 
man.
	About the period of his reviving from his troubles, he made his addresses 
secretly to Miss Knox, daughter of Richard Knox, Esq., of Prohen, in the county of 
Derry, a gentleman possessed of an estate of about fifteen hundred pounds per annum; 
and as by the marriage settlement five thousand pounds had been settled on the 
younger children, Miss Knox, having only one brother and no sister, was entitled to 
the whole of five thousand pounds, even though she disobliged her parents by 
marriage. We must add to this bait the beauty, sweetness of temper and other 
accomplishments of the young lady, which were remarkable. She was then about 
fifteen.
	Mr M'Naughton, who was an intimate friend of her father, and a constant 
visitor, soon obtained a promise from the young lady to marry him if he could get her 
father's consent. But Mr Knox not only absolutely refused his consent, and gave his 
reasons for it, but showed his resentment by forbidding him his house.
	Mr M'Naughton then begged Mr Knox would permit him to visit as formerly 
(as he said it would look strange to the world to be forbidden to visit a family all the 
neighbours knew he had been so intimate with), and solemnly promised, upon his 
honour, never more to think of or mention this affair; and added, that as he had not 
spoken of it to the young lady, Mr Knox need never do it, and so the affair would drop 
of itself. Thus were the father's eyes and ears once more scaled up by this artful man, 
who continued his addresses to the daughter, and told her Mr Knox had promised him 
his consent; but desired, however, that no further mention might be made of the affair 
for a year or two, till some material business was decided, which he would acquaint 
him with. Thus he deceived the young lady, who now more freely gave way to his 
passion, and again promised she would marry him as soon as that consent was 
obtained. Thus he remained some time, constantly watching his opportunity to 
complete his design.
	One day, being in company with Miss Knox and a young gentleman (a very 
boy) in a retired room in the house, he pressed her to marry him, protesting he never 
could be happy till he was sure of her; and, with an air of sprightly raillery, pulling out 
a Prayer Book, he began to read the marriage service, and insisted on the young lady's 
making the responses, which she did, but to every one she always added, "provided 
my father consents."
	A short time after this, Miss Knox going to a friend's house on a week's visit, 
Mr M'Naughton, being also an intimate there, soon followed her. Here he fixed his 
scene for action; here he claimed her, and, calling her his wife, insisted on 
consummation, which the young lady absolutely refused. She left the house, and went 
directly and informed her uncle of the whole affair. On this, Mr Knox wrote a letter to 
M'Naughton, telling him what a base, dishonourable villain he was, and bade him 
avoid his sight for ever. Upon the receipt of this letter M'Naughton advertised his 
marriage in the public newspapers, cautioning every other man not to marry his lawful 
wife. This was answered by a very spirited and proper advertisement from the father, 
with an affidavit of the whole affair from the daughter annexed.
	Mr Knox then brought an action against him in the Prerogative Court to set 
aside this pretended marriage, which was found to be only a contract; for the breach 
of which the party can only be sued at common law, and condemned to pay costs and 
damages, Besides, it is probable that the young lady being under age rendered this 
contract void in itself. At this time Mr M'Naughton had absconded from his debts, and 
therefore could not appeal to the Court of Delegates, where the former decree was 
confirmed. In consequence of this decree, Judge Scott issued his warrant to apprehend 
him. When M'Naughton heard this, he wrote a most impudent, threatening letter to the 
judge, and, it is said, lay in wait to have him murdered, when he was last at the assizes 
there, but missed him, by the judge's taking another road. Upon this the judge applied 
to the Lord Chief Justice, who issued out another writ against him, that drove him to 
England.
	Mr M'Naughton returned to Ireland in the summer of 1761, and by constantly 
hovering round Mr Knox's house obliged the family to be on their guard, and the 
young lady to live like a recluse. However, about the middle of the summer, she 
ventured to a place called Swaddling Bar, to drink the mineral waters there for her 
health , thither this unhappy man followed her, and was seen sometimes in a beggar's 
habit, sometimes in a sailor's. Thus disguised he was detected, and then swore in the 
presence of several that he would murder the whole family if he did not get possession 
of his wife; and yet so infatuated were they as to suffer him to get away once more to 
England, where he was supposed to be by Mr Knox at the time this fatal event 
happened. He remained in London till the month of October, and gamed, cheated, and 
borrowed money from all his acquaintances, and imposed on many by forged letters 
and false tokens from their friends.
	It sounds something severe to speak thus harshly of a gentleman, particularly 
one under misfortune. But this truth must be observed. A man of worth and honour, 
brought to distress by unforeseen accidents, may, and often does maintain his integrity 
and good name, under a series of misfortunes; whereas the man, reduced to poverty 
and distress by gaming, or any other extravagant vice, too often descends to mean 
actions; and he who commits a mean action is in great danger of committing a base 
one.
	About the 1st of November he was seen skulking in the country of Ireland, and 
two nights prior to the murder was known to sleep with three of his accomplices at the 
house of one Mr --, a hearth-money collector. The morning of the 10th, the day the 
fact was committed, they all came with a sackful of fire-arms to a little cabin on the 
roadside, where Mr Knox was to pass in his coach-and-six. From this cabin 
M'Naughton detached one of them to go to an old woman who lived at some distance 
on the roadside, under pretence of buying some yarn of her, but really to wait the 
coming up of Mr Knox's coach, and inquire whose it was. When it appeared in sight 
he asked that question, and was answered that it was Mr Knox, who, with his family, 
was going to Dublin. He then made her point to show him how they sat, which she 
did: Mr Knox, his wife, his daughter and maid-servant. As soon as he had got this 
information he ran off to inform M'Naughton that the coach was coming, and to make 
ready; that he had looked into the coach, and that Mr Knox was attended by only one 
servant and a faithful fellow, a smith, who lived near him, and was foster-father to 
Miss Knox. The character of foster-father is not much known or regarded in England, 
but in Ireland of no small notice. This man's wife was wet nurse, and suckled Miss 
Knox, from whence those poor people generally contract a faithful affection. The 
foster-father was one whom M'Naughton could never bribe, though most of the other 
servants had suffered themselves to be tampered with, and, when discovered, had 
been discharged. As soon as the coach came near the cabin, two of the accomplices, 
armed with guns, presented them at the postilion and coachman, which stopped the 
coach, while M'Naughton fired at the smith with a blunderbuss. Upon this the faithful 
smith, who luckily escaped the shot, presented his piece, which, unfortunately, missed 
fire, and gave M'Naughton and one of his comrades an opportunity to fire at the poor 
fellow, and both wounded him. Immediately upon this two shots were fired at the 
coach, one by M'Naughton himself, and another by one of his assistants; and finding 
that the passengers had drawn up the windows he ran round and fired into the coach 
obliquely, with a gun loaded with five balls, all which entered the body of the 
unhappy Miss Knox. The maid now let down the window, and screamed out her 
mistress was murdered. On hearing this, the only livery servant that attended the 
coach, properly armed, came from behind a turf-stack, where he had hid himself, and 
firing at M'Naughton, wounded him in the back; and about the same time Mr. Knox 
fired one pistol, which was the last of eight shots fired on this strange and dreadful 
occasion. Miss Knox was carried into the cabin, where she expired in about three 
hours.
	The murderer and his accomplices fled; but the country was soon raised in 
pursuit of them, and, amongst others, some of Sir James Caldwell's Light Horse, who 
were directed to search the house and offices of one Wenslow, a farmer, not far 
distant from the scene of action. But though some of the family knew he was 
concealed there they pretended ignorance; so that M'Naughton might have escaped, 
had not the corporal, after they had searched every place, as they imagined, without 
success, and were going away, bethought himself of the following stratagem. Seeing a 
labourer digging potatoes in a piece of ground behind the stables, he said to his 
comrades in the fellow's hearing: "It is a great pity we cannot find this murderer; it 
would be a good thing for the discoverer; he would certainly get three hundred 
pounds." Upon which the fellow pointed to a hay-loft. The corporal immediately ran 
up the ladder and forced open the door; upon which M'Naughton fired at him and 
missed him. By the flash of the pistol the corporal was directed where to fire his 
piece, which, happily, wounding him, he ran in and, seizing him, dragged him out, 
when they instantly tied him on a car, and conducted him to Lifford jail. Here he 
remained in the closest confinement, entirely deserted by all his friends and 
acquaintances, as appeared on the day of his trial, which commencedon the 8th of 
December, 1761, when he was arraigned, with an accomplice, called Dunlap, before 
Baron Mountney, Mr Justice Scott and Counsellor Smith, who went down upon a 
special commission to try them.
	M'Naughton was brought into court on a bier, rolled in a blanket, with a greasy 
woollen night-cap, the shirt in which he was taken being all bloody and dirty, and a 
long beard, which made a dreadful appearance. In that horrid condition he made a 
long speech, pointedly and sensibly, and complained in the most pathetic manner of 
the hard usage he had met with since his confinement. He said, 'they had treated him 
like a man under sentence, and not like a man that was to be tried. He declared he 
never intended to kill his dear wife (at saying which he wept); that he only designed to 
take her away; that he would make such things appear upon his trial, as should 
surprise them all.' But, alas! when his trial came on, all this great expectation which 
he had raised in the mind of every one, came to nothing.
	The trial lasted five days. The first day, the 8th, was spent in pleadings to put 
off the trial, and the reply of the counsel for the crown.
	During these debates, M'Naughton often spoke with most amazing spirit and 
judgment, and much more like an eminent lawyer than any of his counsel; and the 
result of that day was, that he should prepare his affidavit, which the court would take 
into consideration. Accordingly, on the 9th, he was brought into court again, and his 
affidavit read, in which he swore, that some material witnesses for him were not to be 
had, particularly one Owens, who he said was present all the time; but the judges, 
after long debates, were of opinion, that nothing sufficient was offered to put off the 
trial; however, to shew their indulgence, they would give him that day, and part of the 
next, to see if he could strengthen his affidavit by that of others. But when the new 
affidavit was produced on the 10th, it was unanimously and peremptorily resolved by 
the court, that he had not shewn sufficient cause to postpone his trial, and accordingly 
they gave him notice to prepare for it on the 11th, at eight o'clock in the morning.
	The judges came on the bench at nine o'clock, and sat there till eleven at night, 
without stirring out of court. During the whole time of the trial, M'Naughton took his 
notes as regularly as any of the lawyers, and cross-examined all the witnesses, with 
the greatest accuracy. He was observed to behave with uncommon resolution.
	His chief defence was founded on a letter he produced, as wrote to him by 
Miss Knox, in which she desired him to intercept her on the road to Dublin, and take 
her away; but this letter was proved a forgery of his own, which after condemnation 
he confessed.
	He took great pains to exculpate himself from the last design to murder any 
one, much less his dear wife (as he always called her); he declared solemnly, that his 
intent was only to take her out of the coach, and carry her off; but as he received the 
first wound, from the first shot that was fired, the anguish of that wound, and the 
prospect of his ill success in his design, so distracted him, that being wholly involved 
in confusion and despair, he fired, he knew not at what, or whom, and had the 
misfortune to kill the only person in the world that was dear to him; that he gave the 
court that trouble, and laboured thus, not to save his own life (for death was now his 
choice), but to clear his character from such horrid guilt, as designedly to murder his 
better half, for whom alone be wished to live.
	These were his solenm declarations, but the direct contrary was proved in 
court by several witnesses, whom be crossexamined with great spirit, and seemed to 
insinuate, were brought there to destroy him. And as the jury could only form their 
opinion on the testimony of the witnesses before them, who were examined on their 
oaths with the utmost care and solemnity, they brought him in 'Guilty'.
	He heard their verdict without theleast concern, telling them, 'They had 
acquitted themselves with justice to their country'; and when Mr. Baron Mountney 
pronounced the sentence upon him and his accomplice Dunlap, who was found guilty 
with him, though he did it in so pathetic a manner, as very visibly affected every one, 
M'Naughton appeared with the same indifference as at the beginning of the trial, and 
only begged the court would have compassion on poor Dunlap. He said, 'he was his 
tenant; that he possessed a very profitable lease, which was near expiring; that he had 
promised him a renewal, if he would assist him in recovering his wife; that he had 
forced his consent to accompany him in that action. He therefore begged of the court 
to represent Dunlap as a proper object of mercy. For his own life, he said, it was not 
worth asking for; and, were he to choose, death should be his choice, since Miss 
Knox, his better half, was dead.'
	But when the unhappy man's plan for seizing the young lady, and carrying her 
off, is properly considered, what a scheme of madness does it appear; and how 
surprising it is that he should get any wretches so blindly infatuated as to aid and 
assist him in so wild and dangerous an undertaking! Was not the sack full of fire-arms 
that were carried to the cabin (and perhaps all loaded there!) enough to alarm them 
that murder might ensue? Do not most families, who travel with an equipage and 
servants, go armed? and might not this be particularly expected of a family that had 
particular fears?
	When the two armed parties met in open day, on such a desperate business, 
what but murder could be the consequence? and after the loss of two or three lives, 
suppose the assaulters had been conquerors, where must they have carried their prize? 
Would not the country have been raised? Would not they have been pursued? Besides, 
was not the young lady going to Dublin? A city that unhappy man was too well 
acquainted with. He knew it is situated near the sea; that a well-concerted plan laid 
there for carrying off the lady going home in a sedan chair from some visit, by bribing 
the chairmen, and having a boat ready on the quays, might, with some degree of 
probability, have been executed.
	But without all doubt, he made all his accomplices and assistants believe, that 
his design was only to take the young lady away, whom he declared to be his wife; 
but the contrary appeared on the trial. There it was sworn by one of the evidences, Mr. 
Ash, that this unhappy wretch had vowed long ago, to murder Mr. Knox and his 
whole family; and this fact evidently appeared, that he had not made the least 
provision for carrying her off that day, nor once demanded her at the coach side.
	Agreeable to the sentence, Mr. M'Naughton, with his accomplice Dunlap, 
were executed on Tuesday the 15th of December, 1761, near Strabane, in the county 
of Tyrone. M'Naughton walked to the place of execution, but being weak of his 
wounds, was supported between two men. He was dressed in a white flannel waistcoat 
trimmed with black buttons and holes, a diaper night cap tied with a black ribbon, 
white stockings, mourning buckles, and a crape tied on his arm. He desired the 
executioner to be speedy, and when the fellow pointed to the ladder he mounted with 
great spirit. The moment he was tied up he jumped from it with such vehemence that 
the rope snapped, and he fell to the ground, but without dislocating his neck, or doing 
himself much injury. When they had raised him on his legs again he soon recovered 
his senses. The executioner then borrowed the rope from Dunlap and fixed it round 
M'Naughton's neck; he went up the ladder a second time and, tying the rope himself to 
the gallows, jumped from it again with the same force, and appeared dead in a minute.
	Thus died the once universally admired M'Naughton in the thirty-eighth year 
of his age, deserted by all who knew him, in poverty and ignominy.
	M'Naughton not liking, he said, either the principles or doctrine of the 
clergyman who first went to prepare him for death, because it seems he made things 
too terrible to him, Mr. Burgoyne succeeded. As no carpenter could be found to make 
the gallows, the sheriff looked out for a tree proper for the purpose, and the execution 
must have been performed on it, had not the uncle of the young lady, and some other 
gentlemen, made the gallows and put it up. The sheriff was even obliged to take a 
party of soldiers and force a smith to take off his bolts; otherwise he must have been 
obliged, contrary to law, to execute him with his bolts on. The spectators, who saw 
him drop, when the rope broke, looked upon it as some contrivance for his escape, 
which they favoured all they could by running away from the place, and leaving it 
open. The populace would not probably have been so well disposed towards him, had 
they known of his horrid designs of murder; but they had been persuaded that he only 
meant to get possession of his wife.


CAPTAIN JAMES LOWRY 
Executed at Execution Dock, March 25, 1762, for murdering one of his 
Crew

	THIS cruel man was born in Scotland, and after receiving a good school 
education, was, at his own earnest request, bound apprentice to a master of a vessel, to 
whom he served the time faithfully; and from his good conduct, soon himself became 
master of a ship.
	He had just returned from Jamaica, with the charge of a West-Indian trader, 
when about the middle of the month of June, 1751, appeared in the daily papers, a 
remarkable advertisement, with ten signatures thereto, offering a reward of ten 
guineas for apprehending James Lowry, late master of the Molly, a merchant-ship, 
lately arrived from Jamaica, who was charged by ten of his crew, with the cruel 
murder of Kenith Hossack, foremast-man, in his passage home, on the 24th of 
December last, by ordering his two wrists to be tied to the main-shrouds, and then 
whipping him till he expired.
	To this captain Lowry replied, by charging his crew with depriving him of his 
command of the said ship, on the 29th of the said month, and carrying her into Lisbon, 
where the British consul re-instated him in his command, and he sent the ten 
subscribing men home prisoners; and that he was ready to surrender when a court 
should be appointed for his trial, which nothing prevented him from doing 
immediately, but the thoughts of lying in gaol under the detestable name of an 
inhuman man.
	The crew rejoined in another advertisement, that Lowry did not only murder 
the said Hossack, as appears by the affidavits of the ten subscribers, and sworn before 
John Russel, Esq., the British consul, at Lisbon, to be by him transmitted to the lords 
of the Admiralty, but in the said passage, did use Peter Bright and John Grace so 
cruelly that they died; and still continuing his barbarity, to every man in the ship, 
broke the jaw-bone and one of the fingers of William Dwight, and fractured the scull 
of William Wham.
	They admitted that they (the subscribers) had been sent from Lisbon to 
England, by the said British consul; but this was done in consequence of a pretended 
charge of piracy sworn against them by Lowry, as the only means he had to screen 
himself from justice; for the sake of which, and to deter other masters of ships from 
exercising the like barbarities at sea, they repeated their reward, which they deposited 
in proper hands for apprehending the murderer.
	These advertisements naturally excited public curiosity, and Lowry was 
apprehended and brought to trial at the Admiralty sessions at the Old Bailey, on the 
18th of February, 1752, for the wilful murder of Kenith Hossack.
	James Gatherah, mate of the vessel, deposed, that they left Jamaica on the 28th 
of October, 1750, having on board fourteen hands; that, on the 24th of December, he 
came on deck between four and five in the afternoon, and saw the deceased tied up, 
one arm to the haulyards, and the other to the main shrouds, when the prisoner was 
beating him with a rope, about an inch and a half in thickness. This deponent 
returning again in half an hour, the deceased begged to be let down on a call of nature; 
the captain being now below, Gatherah obtained his permission to release him for the 
present, but was to tie him up again; but when let down, he was unable to stand; 
which being made known to Lowry, he said, 'D--n the rascal, he shams Abraham;' and 
ordered him again to be tied up. This was done; but he was not made so fast as before, 
which the captain observing, ordered his arms to be extended to the full stretch, and 
taking the rope, beat him on the back, breast, head, shoulders, face, and temples, for 
about half an hour, occasionally walking about to take breath.
	About six o'clock he hung back his head, and appeared motionless; on which 
Lowry ordered him to be cut down, and said to Gatherah, 'I am afraid Kenny is dead.' 
Gatherah replied, 'I am sorry for it, but hope not.' Gatherah then felt his pulse; but 
finding no motion there, or at his heart, said, 'I am afraid he is dead, indeed;' on which 
the captain gave the deceased a slap on the face, and exclaimed, 'D-n him, he is only 
shamming Abraham now.'
	On this the deceased was wrapped up in a sail, and carried to the steerage, 
where Lowry whetted a penknife, and Gatherah attempted to bleed him, but without 
effect.
	Gatherah deposed further, that the deceased had been ill of a fever, but was 
then recovering, and though not well enough to go aloft, was able to do many parts of 
his duty.
	Gatherah likewise deposed to the tyranny and cruelty of the captain to the 
whole ship's company, except one James Stuart; and gave several instances of his 
inhumanity, particularly that of his beating them with a stick which he called 'the 
royal oak's foremast.'
	It was asked of Gatherah, why Lowry was not confined till the 29th of 
December, as the murder took place on the 24th? to which he answered, that the ship's 
crew had been uneasy, and proposed to confine the captain; but that he (Gatherah) 
represented the leaky condition of the ship, which made it necessary that two pumps 
should be kept going, night and day; and the ship's crew were so sickly, that not a 
hand could be conveniently spared; that he believed the captain would be warned by 
what he had done, and treat the rest of the crew better, during the remainder of the 
voyage; that Lowry could not escape while on the voyage, and that, on their arrival in 
England, he might be charged with the murder before any magistrate.
	The seamen were satisfied by these arguments; but Lowry continuing his 
severities, it was determined to deprive him of his command, and confine him to the 
cabin. At length the ship became so leaky, that they did not expect to live from night 
till morning; and the men quitted the pumps, and took a solemn farewell of each 
other: but Gatherah advised them to renew their endeavours to save the vessel, and to 
steer for the port of Lisbon.
	This advice was followed; and having arrived off the rock of Lisbon, they 
hoisted a signal for a pilot, and one coming off in a fishing-boat, found that they had 
no product, on which he declined conducting them into port; but by this pilot the 
captain sent a letter to the British consul, informing him that the crew had mutinied: 
on which the consul came on board, put ten of the seamen under arrest, and sent them 
to England.
	The account given by Gatherah to the consul corresponded with that he had 
given in evidence at the Old Bailey. During the voyage, the crew of Lowry's ship 
worked their passage; and, on their arrival in England, though they were committed to 
the keeper of the Marshalsea prison, yet they had liberty to go out when they pleased; 
and considered themselves only as evidences against Lowry.
	The rest of the crew, who were examined on the trial, gave testimony 
corresponding with that of Gatherah; and declared that the deceased was sober and 
honest. Some questions were asked, if they thought Lowry's ill treatment was the 
occasion of Hossack's death. They replied there was no doubt of it; 'that it would have 
killed him had he been in good health and strength, or the stoutest man living; and that 
be generally beat them with a thick oak stick, which he exultingly called, his royal 
oak's foremast.'
	It may be proper to mention that Lowry, having taken men on board to work 
his ship to England, arrived soon after his accusers; but they having given previous 
information to the Lords of the Admiralty, a reward was offered for apprehending 
him: he remained some time concealed; but at length he was discovered by a thief-
taker, who took him into custody, and received ten guineas from the marshal of the 
Admiralty.
	The prisoner in his defence said, that his crew were a drunken set of fellows, 
that they altered the ship's course and were mutinous, that the deceased had stolen a 
bottle of rum and drank it, whereby he became intoxicated, that he tied him up to the 
rails to sober him, and that he flourished a rope three times round, and gave him a few 
strokes which could not hurt him, that he fell through drunkenness, and he did all he 
could to recover him.
	After the evidence was recapitulated by the judge, the jury retired for about 
half an hour, and then delivered their verdict, that the prisoner was guilty; on which he 
received sentence of death, and orders were given for his being hung in chains.
	After conviction, Lowry bchaved with great apparent courage and resolution, 
till a smith came to take measure of him for his chains; when he fainted away, and fell 
on his bed, and was measured while insensible. On his recovery, he said that it was 
the disgrace of a public exposure that had affected him, and not the fear of death.
	On the 25th of March, at half past nine in the morning, the unfortunate convict 
was brought out of Newgate, to undergo the sentence of the law; on seeing the cart 
which was to convey him to the gallows, be became pale but soon recovered a degree 
of serenity of countenance. He had on a scarlet cloak over a morning gown, and a 
brown wig, of the colour of his eyebrows. His eyes were very bright and piercing, his 
features regular and agreeable, and by no means evinced the cruelty of his disposition. 
He was, in stature, about five feet seven inches, very well proportioned, and about 
forty years of age. His behaviour was quite composed and undaunted. Before the cart 
was carried a silver oar of a very antique form.
	The dreadful procession had not moved many yards, before the populace 
began to express their indignation at the culprit. Some sailors cried out, Where is your 
royal oak's foremast?' others vociferated, 'He is shamming Abraham;' and with such 
tauntings and revilings was he drawn to Execution Dock; near which a number of 
sailors being collected, they poured execrations on his devoted head.
	He was then taken out of the cart, and placed upon a scaffold under the 
gallows, where he put on a white cap. He prayed very devoutly with the ordinary of 
Newgate, about a quarter of an hour; then giving the executioner his money and 
watch, the platform fell. After hanging twenty minutes, the body was cut down, put 
into a boat, and carried to Blackwall, and there hung in chains, on the bank of the 
Thames.


JOHN PLACKETT 
Executed on the City Road, London, 28th of July, 1762, for robbing a 
Danish Gentleman, whom he treated with great Barbarity

	ALL the robberies which we have been able to trace to this man were 
committed within the circle of a mile of Islington, the place of his birth. He was 
transported for a burglary near Clerkenwell, which adjoins to Islington -- which is in 
fact a part of that village -- and he was executed near the spot where he robbed and so 
cruelly treated a stranger.
	John Plackett was the son of industrious people, living at Islington, who 
placed him at a charity school, whence he was apprenticed to Mr Pullen, wheelwright, 
of St John's Street.
	He absconded from his master before four years of his apprenticeship were 
expired, and entered on board a man-of-war. His character as a sailor was 
unexceptionable; but when the ship was paid off he contracted an acquaintance with a 
number of dissolute people, and, having soon spent his wages in scenes of riot and 
dissipation, he commenced as a footpad.
	Having subsisted some time by the commission of robberies on the highway, 
he broke into a house near Hockley-in-the-Hole and stole a quantity of kitchen 
furniture, for which offence he was tried at the Old Bailey, and sentenced to seven 
years' transportation. Soon after the expiration of the term of his exile Plackett 
returned to England, and committed several robberies between Islington and London.
	On the 10th of June Plackett was drinking with some sailors during the greater 
part of the day, at a public-house in Wapping, and about twelve at night he left them, 
with an intention of committing robbery.
	The same night Mr Fayne, a Norway merchant, was returning from the Danish 
coffee-house, in Wellclose Square, where he had spent the evening with some friends, 
to his lodgings in Shadwell, when, losing his way, he inquired of a hackney-coachman 
the road to Shadwell; but, as he spoke very indifferent English, the man could not 
understand him, and he presently applied for the same purpose to another hackney-
coachman; at which instant Plackett came up and made signs for Mr Fayne to follow 
him, saying he was going to Limehouse.
	They walked together through many streets, and obscure lanes and passages, 
till they came into the fields, when Mr Fayne observed that they could not be in the 
right road; but the other pretended not to understand him. They proceeded to the fields 
near Islington, when Mr Fayne became greatly alarmed, and expressed much 
uneasiness, for which, indeed, he had sufficient cause, for his treacherous companion, 
going behind him, struck him a violent blow on the back of his head, which 
occasioned him to fall to the ground.
	The unfortunate gentleman lay for some time in a state of total insensibility; 
but upon recovering the use of his faculties he found himself entirely naked, and 
perceived Plackett standing near him, with his clothes and his pocket-book in his 
hands. In a few minutes Plackett made off with his booty, which, exclusive of his 
clothes, did not amount to much more than a guinea and a half. Information of the 
affair was given before Mr Justice Welch, who advertised a reward for apprehending 
the offender; and in a few days Plackett was taken at his lodgings in Gray's Inn Lane. 
The shirt that Mr Fayne wore when he was robbed was found in Plackctt's room; and 
the person was traced to whom he had sold the clothes.
	At the next sessions at the Old Bailey, Plackett was sentenced to be hanged, 
and his body to be hung it chains.
	The place appointed for his execution was near the City Road, and when he 
arrived there he pointed to the spot where he had robbed Mr Fayne, saying his soul 
was struck with horror when he reflected upon his cruelty to that gentleman. After 
hanging the usual time the body was cut down and conveyed to Finchley Common, 
where it was put into irons and hung on a gibbet.
	The spot where he suffered was called, for many years afterwards, "Plackett's 
Common."


PETER ANNET 
Convicted and pilloried for Blaspheming, in Michaelmas Term, 1762

	PETER ANNET, a deist, upwards of seventy years of age, was indicted in the 
Court of King's Bench, at Westminster, in 1762, for being the author of divers 
blasphemous remarks on the five books of Moses.
	The charge being fully proved, he was sentenced to be imprisoned one month 
in Newgate, and within that time to stand twice in and upon the pillory, once at 
Charing Cross and once at the Royal Exchange; to pay a fine to the King of six 
shillings and eightpence; then to be sent to Bridewell and kept to hard labour one 
year, and at the expiration thereof to find securities for his good behaviour during the 
remainder of his life, himself in one hundred pounds, and the sureties in fifty pounds 
each.


AMES FARR, WILLIAM SPARRY AND WILLIAM 
BIDDLE 
Executed at Tyburn, 10th November, 1762 for forging a Will

AT the sessions of the Old Bailey held on the 22nd of October, 1762,the above 
prisoners were indicted for forging, and publishing as true, a certain paper instrument, 
in writing, purporting to be the last will and testament of Jeffery Henville, late of 
Charles Street, St James's, tailor, with intent to defraud Anne Ferte, housekeeper to 
the said Henville, and to whom he had bequeathed his personal estate.
	Farr was a relation of the deceased, and a tallow-chandler in the Strand. Sparry 
was a disgraceful attorney, residing at Greenwich, and son-in-law to Henville; while 
Biddle was the landlord of the Ship and Anchor tavern, without Temple Bar.
	The deceased, Henville, had bequeathed his real estate to the son of Sparry, 
and it appears the father coveted a share of the testator's personal property, to obtain 
which he contrived a spurious will in favour of himself and Farr. Biddle was to be 
rewarded for the iniquitous part he took in the transaction, which was to witness the 
forged instrument.
	The forgery was fully proved upon them, and they accordingly received 
sentence of death. On the 10th of November they were conveyed to Tyburn, in order 
for execution.
	They all behaved penitently and with resolution, but decent resignation. Farr 
fixed the knot of the halter under his left ear, and then exclaimed: "I have but a few 
moments to stay in this world. I have found it a wicked world -- a very wicked world 
indeed!" The other two malefactors declined to address the populace, and they were 
immediately launched into eternity.


DANIEL BLAKE 
Executed for the Murder of John Murcott, Butler to Lord Dacre, 28th of 
February, 1763

	BLAKE was the son of a butcher at Bunwell, in Norfolk, who brought the 
youth up to his own business. When he was about twenty years old he became 
dissatisfied with his trade and travelled to London, with an intention of hiring himself 
as a gentleman's servant; and he had been but a short time in the metropolis when he 
was engaged in the service of Lord Dacre.
	Having contracted an acquaintance with some women of abandoned character, 
Blake resolved to support the expenses subsequent thereon by robbing his fellow-
servants. He had been in the service of Lord Dacre about ten weeks when he 
determined to carry his iniquitous plan into execution; and going into the room of Mr 
Murcott, his lordship's butler, he repeatedly struck him with great violence on the 
head with a poker, and then, taking a knife from his pocket, cut his throat almost from 
ear to ear.
	After the barbarous murder of Mr Murcott, Blake took twenty guineas from 
the breeches pocket of the deceased and then returned to his bed. He rose about seven 
and went about his usual business and in about an hour he was desired to call Mr 
Murcott; on which he said he had already called him two or three times, but had not 
been able to make him answer.
	Lord Dacre's bell ringing about nine, the porter went into the chamber of the 
deceased and repeatedly called him. He then approached the bed and shook Mr 
Murcott, and, finding him still silent and motionless, exclaimed: "God bless me, I 
believe he is dead!" He then turned down the bedclothes, which the murderer had 
thrown over Mr Murcott's face, and, perceiving them bloody, he quitted the room in 
great terror and communicated his discovery to the housekeeper and Lady Dacre's 
waiting-maid, who, going into the room, turned the clothes a little farther down and 
observed a knife, which they supposed to have fallen from the hand of the deceased, 
and on attempting to move the body the head inclined backwards and gave the wound 
a most shocking appearance.
	Upon the rest of the servants being informed of Mr Murcott's unhappy death, 
Blake shed tears in great abundance, wrung his hands, and appeared to be affected in 
so extravagant a degree that he was urged to moderate his affliction, lest the nobleman 
and his lady should be alarmed. Mr Murcott's death being communicated to Lord 
Dacre, he sent for Marsden, clerk to Sir John Fielding, and kept him in the house three 
days, with the view of discovering the perpetrator of the horrid fact. During the time 
that Blake had been in the service of Lord Dacre he was known to have been in very 
indigent circumstances, but on the day after the murder he was observed to discharge 
several small debts; and hence arose a suspicion of his guilt. All the servants in the 
family being strictly examined, in the presence of Lord Dacre, the porter declared that 
he firmly believed that the knife found in the bed belonged to Blake. Being taken into 
custody, and conducted to Sir John Fielding's, he voluntarily acknowledged himself 
guilty of the horrid fact, and was committed to Newgate, in order for trial. At the 
ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey he was put on his trial; and, his own confession 
being corroborated by very strong circumstantial evidence, he was found guilty, and 
sentenced to be executed.
	While he was in Newgate he proved that he had but very imperfect ideas of his 
duty towards the Almighty, and confessed that he had not read a chapter in the Bible, 
or attended to any other religious book, since leaving school. While he was under 
sentence of death his behaviour was decent and penitential, and the day before his 
execution he said his mind was perfectly calm.


WILLIAM HARROW 
The Flying Highwayman, executed at Hertford, 28th of March, 1763

  
William Harrow and the gamekeeper

	THIS malefactor may be said to have galloped to his fate over the beaten road. 
He commenced his career in idleness, the parent vice; then he became dexterous at 
throwing at cocks and cock-fighting. These cruel and infamous acquirements led to 
robberies, adultery, and every other deadly sin. Such is the general course of 
highwaymen, and their goal -- the gallows.
	He had likewise a propensity to poaching. The gamekeeper of a gentleman 
near Hatfield having detected him in a fact of this kind, Harrow threatened his 
destruction; the consequence of which was that he was lodged in Hertford Jail; but 
before the time of holding the Quarter Sessions he broke out, and made his escape. 
Thereupon a reward of fifty pounds was offered for taking him into custody. Made 
desperate by this circumstance, he took to robbing on the highway, and the 
depredations he made were very numerous. He obtained the name of the "Flying 
Highwayman," by his horse's leaping the several turnpikes, so that he constantly 
escaped detection. His career in villainy was, however, happily but short. He laid a 
scheme for committing a burglary and robbery, for which he and two of his associates 
forfeited their lives. In company with Thomas Jones, a noted travelling rat-catcher, 
William Bosford, and another desperate villain, he went to the house of an old farmer, 
named Thomas Glasscock, who had, by a very extraordinary degree of parsimony, 
accumulated a very considerable sum, of which these abandoned men determined to 
rob him, under the pretence of being peace officers who had come to apprehend some 
deserters. The old gentleman refused them admittance; on which they forced their way 
through the window and, binding Mr Glasscock and his housekeeper, searched the 
house, and found a tea-chest which contained three hundred pounds, which they 
seized and departed.
	Having divided the booty, they separated; and Harrow, taking a girl with him 
as a companion, travelled into Gloucestershire, and put up at an ale-house in a small 
village, and, assuming the character of a sailor who had brought home prize-money to 
a considerable amount, he continued there for two months without any suspicion 
arising. At length a quarrel happened between some of the customers of the house and 
Harrow, when a scuffle ensued, and, a pistol in one of Harrow's pockets going off, a 
suspicion arose that he was a highwayman, on which he was carried before a 
magistrate for examination.
	Nothing like proof arising to incriminate him, he was dismissed; but thinking 
it not prudent to remain any longer he set out with his girl, but did not tell anyone the 
road that he intended to travel. Very near to the time that he departed, one of the 
magistrates of Gloucestershire received a letter from Sir John Fielding, requesting that 
he would order a search for one William Harrow, who stood charged with having 
committed a variety of robberies in the neighbourhood of St Albans. Thereupon the 
magistrates sent some persons in pursuit of him, and, having taken him into custody, 
he was conducted to prison at Gloucester. By a writ of habeas corpus he was removed 
to Hertford, where he lay till the assizes, when he was indicted for robbing Mr 
Glasscock, and being convicted on the clearest evidence was sentenced to die.
	A number of clergymen visited him after conviction, and laboured to convince 
him of the necessity of making an immediate preparation for eternity. He was likewise 
visited by his mother, who burst into tears at the sight of her wretched son.
	On the night before his execution he sawed off his irons, with an intent to 
make his escape, but he had not quite time enough to effect his purpose. When the 
jailer came in the morning, he said he would have saved the hangman his trouble if he 
had not come so soon, and threw at him the irons, which he had by this time got from 
his legs. Before he was put in the cart a sermon was preached on the occasion of his 
fatal exit.
	Immense numbers of people attended at the place of execution, to see the last 
of a man who had made himself dreaded through the country by the enormity of his 
conduct.
	Harrow, Jones, and Bosford, were executed at Hertford, March the 28th, 1773, 
along with John Wright, for a highway robbery on the Buntingfield road.
	The unfortunate Mr. Glasscock seems to have been a devoted prey to robbers. 
On the 7th of September, 1764, he was attacked in his own fields by a daring villain, 
at noon-time of day, who obliged him to go to his house, and deliver his money. On 
entering, the robber shut the door, knocked the old man down, and carried off 
everything valuable that was left by Harrow and his gang, with which he escaped.


ANN BEDDINGFIELD AND RICHARD RINGE 
The Woman burned for the Murder of her Husband, and the Man hanged for 
being her Accomplice, near Ipswich, 8th of April, 1763

  
Ann Beddingfield burnt at the stake

	JOHN BEDDINGFIELD, the husband of the murderess, was the son of 
respectable parents, at Sternfield, in Suffolk, and having married when he was about 
twenty-four years of age, the young couple were placed in a good farm, which was 
carefully attended by Beddingfield, who bore the character of a man of industry and 
integrity. They had two children.
	Richard Ringe, a youth of nineteen, was engaged in the service of Mr 
Beddingfield; nor had he been long in the house before his mistress became so 
enamoured of him that her husband was the object of her contempt. Her behaviour to 
Ringe was such that he could not long doubt of her favourable inclinations; nor had he 
virtue to resist the temptation.
	At length Mrs Beddingfield, having formed the horrid design of destroying her 
husband, communicated her intention to Ringe, who hesitated on the dreadful 
proposal, nor did he consent till she had promised that he should share her fortune as 
the reward of the deed.
	Mrs Beddingfield, blinded by her passion, was now so much off her guard as 
to say very indiscreet things to her servants, which led them to presume she had 
determined on the most deliberate wickedness; of which the following is given as one 
instance. As she was dressing herself one morning she said to her maid-servant: "Help 
me to put on my ear-rings; but I shall not wear them much longer, for I shall have new 
black ones. It will not be long before somebody in the house dies, and I believe it will 
be your master."
	Extravagant as this declaration was, the behaviour of Ringe was not at all 
more prudent. He purchased some poison, and told one of the servant-maids that he 
would be her constant friend if she would mix it with some rum-and-milk that her 
master drank in the morning. But the girl declined having any concern in so horrid a 
transaction; nor did she take any notice of the proposal that had been made till after 
the commission of the murder.
	Mr Beddingfield happening to be indisposed, it was recommended to him to 
take a vomit, and the water which the servant-maid brought him to drink proving to be 
too hot, Ringe was directed to bring some cold water to mix with it, and he took this 
opportunity of putting arsenic into the water; but Beddingfield, observing a white 
sediment in the basin, would not drink, though no suspicion of the liquor being 
poisoned had occurred to him.
	Henceforward the intentional murderers resolved not to think of having 
recourse to poison, but devised another scheme of dispatching the unfortunate object 
of their vengeance. Mr Beddingfield having been selling some cattle to another 
farmer, they drank a sociable glass together, but not to such a degree as to occasion 
intoxication. When Mr Beddingfield came home he found that his wife was in bed 
with one of the maid-servants, on which he desired her to come to his chamber; but 
this she refused, and mutual recriminations passed between them. It had been 
determined by Ringe to commit the murder on that night, while his master was asleep; 
whereupon, when he knew he was in bed, he quitted his own room, passed through 
that in which his mistress slept, and went to the bedchamber of his master. Ringe, 
observing that Mr Beddingfield was asleep, threw a cord round his neck to strangle 
him; but, being hurt by the weight of Ringe lying across him, he struggled, so that 
they both fell off the bed together. However, the horrid deed of murder was soon 
perpetrated.
	Mrs Beddingfield, being asleep in the next room, was awakened by the noise, 
and in her fright awakened the servant. At this instant Ringe entered the room and 
said: "I have done for him." To which the wife answered: "Then I am easy." The girl 
was greatly alarmed, and cried out: "Master!" -- supposing Mr Beddingfield was 
present, for there was no light in the room; but Mrs Beddingfield commanded her to 
be silent. Ringe asked the mistress if any one was acquainted with what had passed 
besides her and the maid; on which the girl asked, 'How came you here, Richard?' The 
villain, terrified by his guilt, replied, 'I was forced to it.' He now went to his own 
room, and laid down; and the mistress and maid getting up, the latter was charged not 
to utter a syllable of what had passed.
	Mrs Beddingfield now directed the girl to call Ringe, who seemed offended at 
being disturbed; but, when he had struck a light, his mistress told him to go into his 
master's room, for she was afraid that he was indisposed. Ringe obeyed; but, on his 
return, said, with an air of surprize, that his master was dead.
	By this time another maid-servant was got up, and the girls, going to their 
master's room, found the deceased lying on his face, and observed that part of his 
shirt-collar was torn off, and that his neck was black and swelled.
	A messenger was instantly dispatched to Mr Beddingfield's parents, who 
proposed to send for a surgeon; but the wife insisted that it was unnecessary to send 
for a doctor, as her husband was already dead. On the following day the coroner's jury 
took an inquisition into the cause of his death; but so superficial was the inquiry that it 
lasted only a few minutes, and their determination was that he died a natural death.
	The guilty commerce between the murderers now became still more evident 
than before; but so fickle was Mrs Beddingfield's disposition that in a few weeks she 
began to despise the man whom she had excited to the murder of her husband. The 
servant-maid now resolved to discover the fact, but postponed the doing so till she had 
received the wages for her quarter's service. When her mistress had paid her, she went 
to her parents and discovered all she knew of the matter; on which a warrant was 
issued for apprehending the murderers. They had an item of what was going forward, 
and therefore attempted to bribe the girl's mother to secrecy; but she rejected their 
offers; on which Mrs Beddingfield made her escape, but was apprehended at the end 
of two days. Ringe, however, seemed to disdain to consult his own safety, but 
remained in the house; and, after he was committed to prison, he confessed that he 
had deemed himself a dead man from the time of his perpetrating the murder.
	At the Lent Assizes in 1763 the prisoners were brought to trial, when the 
surgeon and coroner were examined as to what fell within their knowledge. The 
former confessed that he saw marks of violence on the body; and being asked how he 
could depose before the coroner that Mr Beddingfield had died a natural death, he 
replied that he 'did not think much about it.' A strange, and almost unaccountable 
declaration!
	The preceding part of this narrative will lead the reader to judge of the rest of 
the evidence that was given on the trial; and the prisoners, having nothing to allege in 
extenuation of their crime, were capitally convicted and sentenced to death.
	After conviction, as well as before, Ringe freely confessed his guilt; but 
expressed the utmost anxiety at the thought of being dissected. Mrs Beddingfield 
refused to make any confession till the day before her death.
	They were placed on one sledge on the morning of their execution, and 
conveyed to a place near Ipswich, called Rushmore, where Ringe made a pathetic 
address to the surrounding multitude, advising young people to be warned, by his fate, 
to avoid the delusions of wicked women, and to consider chastity as a virtue.
	After the fervent exercise of devotion he was turned off, while the body of Mrs 
Beddingfield, who had been first strangled at a stake, was burning to ashes, agreeable 
to the practice respecting women who are convicted of the murder of their husbands.
	These malefactors suffered at Rushmore on the 8th of April, 1763.


JOHN RICE 
A City Stockbroker, executed at Tyburn, 4th of May, 1763, for Forgery

	THOUGH extravagance brought this man to an untimely end, and though the 
amount of the forgery for which he suffered was immense, few criminals have excited 
more pity.
	The fatal consequences of living beyond our income, are so strongly marked in 
the life of Mr. Rice, that it must surely serve as a caution to every one. Until the 
discovery of this forgery, his character was unimpeached; and his name was good to 
any reasonable amount.
	He was the son of Mr. Rice, of Spital-square, a considerable stock-broker, 
whose behaviour had rendered him esteemed by all who knew him, and the profits of 
whose profession enabled him to support his family in a style of great gentility.
	Unhappily for himself, he lived in too gay a manner, having a country house at 
Finchley, an elegant town house in John Street, near Gray's Inn, and keeping a coach, 
chaise, chariot, and several livery-servants: yet still it is probable that he might have 
supported his credit, but that, flushed with success, he wished to grow still richer than 
he was, which led him on to that species of gaming called speculating in the stocks, 
by which he suffered so greatly at different times that he was said to be a loser to the 
amount of sixty thousand pounds.
	In the vain hope of recovering his circumstances he was tempted to the 
commission of forgery. Among others of his clients was Mrs Ann Pierce, a Yorkshire 
lady, who had a very considerable property in South Sea stock; and, in her name, Rice 
was rash enough to forge letters of attorney, by which he received upwards of 
nineteen thousand, nine hundred pounds.
	Mrs Pierce having occasion to come to town soon after these transactions, 
Rice, hearing of the intended journey, thought it necessary to consult his safety in 
flight. Thereupon he took a post-chaise for Dover, and embarked in the packet-boat 
for Calais, where he soon landed.
	Thence he travelled to Cambrai, a city in French Flanders, and the seat of an 
archbishop, which he had been taught to consider as a privileged place, where he 
could remain unmolested. It appears, however, that this was not the case, for the 
Archbishop of Cambrai, though a Prince of the Empire, was subject to the Parliament 
of Tournai, and had therefore no power to protect a criminal fugitive.
	Whether Mrs Rice knew of her husband's design previous to his departure, or 
by letter from him, is uncertain, but she determined to follow him, and taking a post-
chaise reached Harwich, where she embarked in the packet for Holland, designing to 
travel thence to Cambrai, But the wind proving contrary, the vessel was obliged to put 
back to Harwich, whence Mrs Rice returned to London, proposing to re-embark on a 
future occasion.
	It is probable that Mrs Rice now apprehended herself in security; but she had 
no sooner arrived in London than she was taken into custody, and, being carried 
before the Lord Mayor, bank-notes to the amount of four thousand, seven hundred 
pounds were found sewn up in her stays.
	On her examination she acknowledged whither her husband had retired; and 
the crime with which he was charged being thought to affect public credit, our 
Ministry dispatched a messenger to the English ambassador at Paris, desiring he 
would use his interest with the people in power in France to have the culprit delivered 
up to the justice of the laws of his native country.
	This requisition was instantly complied with; and orders being sent to Cambrai 
to secure Mr Rice, notice was transmitted to London that he was in custody; on which 
one of the clerks of the bank and another of the South Sea House went over with one 
of the King's Messengers, to bring the unhappy man to England.
	On their arrival at the prison of Cambrai they found the presumed culprit in a 
state of great dejection. They were proceeding to handcuff him, but he fell on his 
knees and, in tears, implored that they would dispense with this disgraceful 
circumstance. They generously complied; and Rice was placed in one post-chaise, 
with the Messenger, the gentlemen preceding them in another.
	Having embarked for Dover, they landed, and proceeded immediately towards 
London. The newspapers having mentioned what had happened respecting Mr Rice, 
the public curiosity was so much excited that crowds of people attended at every place 
where they stopped to take a view of the unfortunate prisoner.
	On his arrival in London he was carried before the Lord Mayor, who, 
remarking the utmost candour, even to generosity, in his answers to the questions that 
were proposed to him, committed him to the Poultry Compter instead of sending him 
to Newgate, presuming that his situation might be rendered less disagreeable in the 
former prison than in the latter.
	On his way from the compter to the Old Bailey he fainted several times, and 
when brought to the bar he sank down, without any signs of life; and it was a 
considerable time before he could be recovered. He was brought to the inner bar, and 
being languid, pale and trembling was indulged with a chair; but even then it was not 
without assistance that he was kept up while arraigned. He forged four letters of 
attorney, but was tried on only one, empowering, him to sell five thousand pounds, 
and for fraudulently selling five hundred pounds, part of that sum, to Thomas 
Brooksbank, His general appearance and extreme distress touched all present on the 
awful occasion with compassion.
	The praticulars of his trial consist chiefly of official proof of the forgery; in 
short, the unhappy man had himself acknowledged the forgery before the lord-mayor. 
When he heard the fatal verdict pronounced, he looked up to lord Mansfield, who 
presided, with a countenance which bespoke the bitterness of his heart, and with eyes 
overflowing with tears, implored the intercession of the court with his majesty to 
spare his life. In answer to this lord Mansfield advised him not to flatter himself with 
hope of that mercy which there was no probability of being extended to. him. His 
lordship farther said, 'Considering your crime, and its consequences, in a nation where 
there is so much paper credit, I must indeed tell you, I think myself bound in duty and 
conscience to acquaint his majesty that you are no object of his mercy.' His lordship 
farther observed, 'that all public companies should take warning, by the present 
instance, carefully to examine all letters of attorney, for the more effectual prevention 
of fraud.'
	After conviction as well as before, Mr. Rice gave every sign of the most 
sincere contrition. While under sentence of death, he made the most serious 
preparation for the important change that awaited him. He expected the warrant for 
his execution some days before it arrived, and when it came the fatal news was 
concealed from him till his wife, who was then present, had retired.
	It is recorded, to the credit of Mr. Rice, that before he quitted the kingdom, he 
sent for his tradesmen's bills, and discharged all those that were delivered.
	Mr. Rice's friends petitioned that he might be allowed a coach to the place of 
execution; but this favour was denied, and he was placed in a cart, and attended by a 
faithful friend, who was too generous to leave him till the last fatal moment.
	After conviction, as well as before, Mr Rice gave every sign of the most 
sincere contrition. At Tyburn, the place of execution, he attended alone to prayers, 
where he expressed himself with ardour and fervency, suffering the pains of death 
with a placid hope of a happy immortality; and, perhaps, no mn ever expiated his 
crimes at the fatal tree, more universally lmented.
	The mother of Mr Rice was living at the time his misfortunes commenced; and 
her friends, anxious to alleviate her distress, told her that her son was taken ill at 
Cambrai. They then added that his life was despaired of, and at length said that he was 
dead. The old lady lived at Stoke Newington; and when, on the day after execution, 
the criers of dying speeches made their perambulations, the inhabitants of Newington, 
with a generosity that will ever do them honour, gave the poor people money not to 
cry the speeches near the house.


PAUL LEWIS 
An Officer of the Royal Navy, who became a Highwayman, and was 
executed at Tyburn, 4th of May, 1763

	PAUL LEWIS was born at Hurstmonceaux, in Sussex, and was the son of a 
worthy clergyman, who put him to a grammar school at a very early age. He had an 
ambition to become a fine gentleman. In his spirited attempts to attain that character 
he ran into debt with his tailor, to the amount of about one hundred and fifty pounds, 
which obliged him to run away and go to sea.
	There he had for some time behaved so well that he was made first a cadet, 
then a midshipman, and finally, a lieutenant in the Royal Navy.
	He was at the taking of Senegal, the burning of the ships in Cancale Bay, the 
reduction of Cherbourg, the battle of St Cas, the siege of Guadeloupe, and the 
engagement under Sir Edward Hawke, in all which services he behaved with courage 
and activity.
	He had vices, however, not common to bravery, and very different from the 
irregular sallies of a high-spirited and strong passion. Paul was not only wicked but 
base, not only a robber but a scoundrel; of which he gave proofs while on board the 
fleet, particularly by collecting three guineas apiece from many of his brother officers, 
to lay in stores for a West India voyage, and then running away with the collection 
from the ship and commencing as highwayman.
	Having thus begun his iniquitous course of life, he went to a public-house in 
Southwark, stayed a great part of the day, and supped; and then, going to an inn, hired 
a horse, rode out between Newington Butts and Vauxhall, and stopped a gentleman 
and his son in a post-chaise and robbed them, returning to the public-house in 
Southwark. Being apprehended for this offence, he was brought to trial at Kingston, 
when, the people of the public-house swearing that he had not been absent from noon 
till midnight more than half-an-hour, he was acquitted.
	After this he committed a variety of robberies. An accomplice and he having 
robbed a gentleman and lady in a post-chaise, near Paddington, the robbers rode some 
miles together and then agreed to part, to commit their depredations separately. Not 
long had they parted when Lewis stopped a gentleman, named Brown, and demanded 
his money. Mr Brown resisted the highwayman with such determined resolution that 
Lewis fired at him, but, happily, without effect.
	At this juncture Mr Brown's horse took fright and threw him; but being little 
injured he soon recovered, and saw Lewis in the custody of Mr Pope, a constable, 
who had got him down and was kneeling on his breast -- a circumstance that arose 
from the following accident. Mr Pope, riding on the same road, met a gentleman and 
lady who told him they had been robbed by two highwaymen, and desired him to be 
cautious; but this induced him to ride on the faster, and he arrived at the critical spot a 
short time after the robbery was committed, and seized Lewis.
	Pope desired Mr Brown to ride after the other highwayman who had been on 
the road, but at this instant Lewis rose and, presenting a pistol, swore he would shoot 
Pope. The latter, however, was in no degree intimidated, but, knocking the pistol out 
of his hand, threw him down and secured him. The highwayman was conveyed to 
New Prison, where, having lain one night, he was taken before a magistrate, who 
committed him to Newgate. At an ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey he was brought 
to trial, and received sentence of death.
	Such was the baseness and unfeeling profligacy of this wretch that when his 
almost heart-broken father visited him for the last time, in Newgate, and put twelve 
guineas into his hands, to defray his expenses, he slipped one of the pieces of gold 
into the cuff of his sleeve, by a dexterous sleight, and then opening his hand showed 
the venerable and reverend old man that there were but eleven, upon which he took 
from his pocket another and gave it him, to make up the number he intended.
	Arrived at Tyburn, he looked round him with a face of inexpressible anguish, 
and then addressed himself to the multitude in the following terms -- "This dreadful 
sight will not, I believe, invite any of you to come here, by following my example; but 
rather to be warned by me. I am but twenty-three years of age, a clergyman's son, bred 
up among gentlemen -- this wounds me the deeper; for to whom much is given, of 
them more is required."


HANNAH DAGOE 
Sentenced to Death for robbing a Poor Woman. She struggled violently with 
the Executioner on the Scaffold, 4th Of May, 1763

  
Hannah Dagoe resisting execution

	WE have adduced many instances of the hardness of heart, and contempt of 
the commandments of God, in men who have undergone the last sentence of the law; 
but we are of opinion that in this female will be found a more relentless heart, in her 
last moments, than any criminal whom we have yet recorded.
	Hannah Dagoe was born in Ireland, and was of that numerous class of women 
who ply at Covent Garden Market as basket-women, to the excusion of poor 
Englishwomen. In the pursuit of her vocation she became acquainted with a poor and 
industrious woman of the name of Eleanor Hussey, who lived by herself in a small 
apartment, in which was some creditable household furniture, the remains of the 
worldly goods of her deceased husband. Seizing an opportunity, when the owner was 
from home, this daring woman broke into Hussey's room and stripped it of every 
article which it contained.
	For this burglary and robbery she was brought to trial at the Old Bailey, found 
guilty, and sentenced to death.
	She was a strong, masculine woman, the terror of her fellow-prisoners, and 
actually stabbed one of the men who had given evidence against her; but the wound 
happened not to prove dangerous.
	On the road to Tyburn she showed little concern at her miserable state, and 
paid no attention to the exhortations of the Romish priest who attended her. When the 
cart, in which she was bound, was drawn under the gallows, she got her hands and 
arms loose, seized the executioner, struggled with him, and gave him so violent a 
blow on the breast that she nearly knocked him down. She dared him to hang her; and 
in order to revenge herself upon him, and cheat him of his dues, she took off her hat, 
cloak and other parts of her dress, and disposed of them among the crowd. After much 
resistance he got the rope about her neck, which she had no sooner found 
accomplished than, pulling out a hand kerchief, she bound it round her head and over 
her face, and threw herself out of the cart, before the signal was given, with such 
violence that she broke her neck and died instantly.
	This extraordinary and unprecedented scene occurred on the 4th of May, 1763.

THE END

 
 
 
 
THE NEWGATE CALENDAR
-2-
-5-
VOLUME 3
-4-
