The Guardian Angel
A Chapter from "Zizine"
by
Paul de Kock

     Edward never passed a day without going to Madame Dolbert's;
the good lady received him as a man to whom she hoped one day to
give the name of son, and Stephanie with that sweet smile which
betrayed to all eyes the inmost secret of her heart.

     But it was not thus that the lover of Stephanie desired to be
loved. Conducting himself before the world with an extreme
reserve, it was only in private, and in low whispers, and when
removed from the vigilance of her grandmother, that Edward spoke
to the young girl of love; but then his words were burning, and
his eyes had an expression which compelled Stephanie to avert her
own; his caressing hands sought always to approach her -- to touch
the robe, the arm, or the knee of the young girl, who sometimes
found herself suddenly embraced, and pressed warmly to a heart
that was beating rapidly with the most ardent desires.

     Stephanie responded with an undisguised affection to the
transports of the man who seemed so happy by her side. But when
Edward, profiting by an unobserved interview, pressed her tenderly
to his arms, she suffered an embarrassment, an agitation, which
resembled alarm; and she disengaged herself from the embrace which
would retain her, with the question -- "But since, my friend, you
love me so fondly, why don't you tell me so before my mother? When
we are in society, you hardly look at me; you seem to fear that
our love should be suspected.  Why is this? There is no harm in
our loving -- you have yourself told me so;-- why then should it
be a secret?"

     To these questions Edward replied --"I cannot yet avow my
love -- family reasons prevent me; but, my dear Stephanie, they
need not prevent us from indulging our love. The world is a wicked
world, and as it always puts a wrong construction on the conduct
of its members, we need not admit it to the confidence of our
secret sentiments. Believe me, mystery is one of the great charms
of love. Are we not an hundred times better pleased with a good
fortune of which others know nothing? My dear Stephanie, still let
me see you in secret,-- permit me still to have with you those
sweet interviews, in which we can at least exchange the tender
caresses which the world would blame, and which make me so happy."

     Stephanie sighed, and whispered: "in secret -- how? I do not
understand." But whenever Delaberge undertook to explain, her
grandmother or Zizine appeared to interrupt the conversation.

     A residence of many months with the ladies Dolbert had
already produced a great change in the manners and language of
Zizine. She had always been a delicate little girl, pale and
thoughtful; but she no longer appeared the daughter of a water-
carrier. Apt to learn whatever pleased her benefactors, Zizine had
soon lost all the outward signs of her humble origin; but her
heart still remained the same -- she never forgot Jerome, and when
a month intervened between his visits, the little girl became
uneasy, and would hide herself to weep.

     Without understanding the cause, Zizine perceived very
plainly that Stephanie had ceased to be to her what she once was.
Her young protectress still caressed her, but she did not speak to
her so frequently. The little games -- the dolls were entirely
thrown aside. Stephanie was almost always absent and dreaming, and
sometimes did not hear the questions of her little companion, who
often asked her, "What, then, are you thinking about?"

     At length, one day, when Stephanie was even more absent than
usual, the little girl burst into tears. This sight roused
Stephanie, who ran to her, caught her in her arms, and asked --

     "Why do you weep Zizine? what have they been doing to you?
"They have been doing nothing to me; it is because you no  longer
love me." "I don't love you, Zizine! And why do you think so?"
Because I see very well you never speak to me -- you never play
with me -- you are always sad. I see that I weary you -- and I
wish to return to my father, the water-carrier." "What, leave me,
Zizine! oh no, no, I cannot think of it; I love you still --
always love you. But you see that -- when one grows up, one has
many things to think of -- one has ideas which -- in short, I
cannot explain it all to you now, because you are too young -- but
that shall not prevent me from loving you. Pardon me if I am
sometimes sad -- but do not leave me. Oh! never desert me; for at
the bottom of my heart I am always the same to you."

     Zizine was easily consoled by these kind words, and since she
was assured that her presence was still welcome to Stephanie, she
no longer feared to remain by her side, even when she did not
speak to her.

     Edward had often noticed that this child was constantly with
Stephanie, and one evening he said to her in a half whisper:

     "How annoying to see that girl forever at your side! One
would think that she was set to watch you -- a spy on your every
action."

     "Oh, it is not so," replied Stephanie, "she loves me so much,
that it is her greatest pleasure to be near me." "She loves you,
it is very possible -- but I also love you, and it seems to me
that I ought to have preference." "My dear Edward, it is of your
own choice whether or not to be near me when you visit us; it is
not Zizine who prevents you." "Pardon me, this little girl vexes
me -- annoys me. When your mother is engaged, I might be alone
with you in this little cabinet, if Zizine were not always in the
way." "But she does not prevent us from being together --
conversing." "It is not the same thing. In truth, Stephanie, I do
not understand how you, well educated, born in the world of
fashion, should have formed such an attachment for the daughter of
a poor water-carrier, who has nothing attractive about her, for
she is not even pretty." You are deceived, my friend, if you knew
Zizine as well as I do, you would see that she deserves to be
loved -- she is so good -- she has so much talent! Oh, she is not
like other children -- poor little thing, she was destitute of
everything when I found her." "Continue to provide for her -- I
would by no means blame you for that; but put her to some
boarding-school." "What, send her away from me? Oh, never -- and
if some day -- I should -- be married -- that would not prevent me
from keeping Zizine always with me."

     Stephanie blushed as she uttered these last words; but
however unconscious a young lady may be, she knows very well that
the name of wife should one day belong to her, and when she loves,
she ought still more frequently to think of marriage.

     Edward said no more. The word marriage which Stephanie had
uttered seemed to embarrass him; he saw that it was vain to
attempt to detach Zizine from her mistress; and that he must gain
his end in some other way.

     After several months Stephanie's grandmother was attacked
with a violent fever, which threatened her life. Stephanie was
always by her bed-side. She never left it for a moment. Aided by
Zizine, who did everything to make herself useful, this young girl
watched the invalid with so much assiduity and care, that in the
source of a few days she was declared to be out of danger.

     But during all this time she had not fond a moment to talk
with Edward; Stephanie would have though it wrong to waste a
single moment on anything but her grandmother's health. When M.
Delaberge presented himself at the door of the invalid's chamber,
Stephanie was content with a silent look, or as her grandmother
recovered, with a smile.

     Edward did not dare to complain; he watched and waited with
patience for the moment when he might act.

     Madame Dolbert was out of danger, but her recovery was slow,
and the physician had recommended the utmost care. She was
directed to rise late, and retire early, as repose was necessary
for her restoration. Stephanie was anxious to be ever by her
grandmother's side; but touched by the solicitude which her grand-
daughter had displayed, Madame Dolbert insisted on her taking some
recreation, and often sent her from her bed-side with the words --

     "I am no longer sick. All that is now necessary is rest; but
you, my dear child, were not directed to watch constantly by my
bed. At your age, you require an active life. return to your
piano, your drawings, go and laugh with your little protégé;
receive our friends; in short, enjoy the pleasures of life, I
command you; and you must obey my prescriptions like the
physician's."

     Stephanie yields to the desires of her grandmother, returns
to the saloon, and receives there more frequently than ever the
visits of Edward; sometimes other acquaintances of Madame Dolbert
came to pass a moment with Stephanie; but, by prolonging his
visits, Edward always found an opportunity of being alone with
her.

     Not quite alone, however, for Zizine was ever these; if she
left the saloon for a moment, she at once returned; hardly could
the lover of Stephanie raise to his lips the pretty hand which she
unreluctantly abandoned to him, when the child came running back
to seat herself by the side of her protectress.

     "What a torment!" said Edward, dropping the hand of
Stephanie, and casting an angry glance at the child; but
Stephanie, who seemed not to observe the chagrin of her lover,
drew the head of Zizine into her lap, and amused herself by
passing her fingers through her long soft locks.

     Edward observed that the child had been sad for some time,
and he soon ascertained the cause. Zizine had not seem her father
for more than a month; for Stephanie always accompanied her on her
visits, and the sickness of Madame Dolbert having prevented her
from going out, poor little Zizine had been deprived of her
accustomed pleasure.

     "We will go soon to Jerome's," said Stephanie to the child,
but I do not wish to go out till my poor grandmother is entirely
restored." "And if my father should be sick!" said Zizine in
tears. "Why fear that?" "It is so long since I have seen him -- he
has give up coming here." "You know very well that he told us he
had not time." "Yes, but he will think that I have forgotten him -
- and that will give him much pain."

     Edward had listened to this conversation without interrupting
it. Suddenly he said to Zizine, "Where does your father dwell, my
little one?" "In rue St. Honoré, sir; here is his address -- I
have been copying it for my writing lesson." "Give it me, to-
morrow I shall call and inquire about your father, and when I come
I can bring you the news." "Ah sir, you are very kind -- a
thousand thanks!"

     And Zizine in her gratitude would have leaped upon the neck
of the good gentleman, if he had not quickly turned his head to
look at Stephanie, who said to him as he extended her hand -- "It
is very obliging in you to take this trouble -- and I am much
indebted for your kindness."

     Edward soon took leave, for he was absent, pre-occupied; he
wished that the morrow had already come; he had formed his plan;
he had at length devised a pretext for ridding himself of the
little girl who had been such an obstacle to his success. As he
withdrew, he exclaimed to himself -- "yet a few hours, and
Stephanie will be mine."

     The morrow arrived, and Edward was expected at Madame
Dolbert's with more than ordinary impatience. Zizine hopes for
news from her father, and Stephanie doubts not that it will
dissipate the sadness of her little protege. But the day wanes,
and Edward does not appear.

     "He does not come," said Zizine with a sigh.

     "He will come this evening," said Stephanie; "you know he
seldom fails to come and keep us company after grandmother has
retired."

     This was indeed the time that Edward preferred, because in
the evening they seldom received any other visitors, and that
evening he came later than usual, to be certain of no obstacle to
his plans.

     Stephanie and Zizine were in the saloon; they raised a light
exclamation of as Edward entered, and Zizine cried out -- "Have
you any news of my father, sir?"

     "Pardon my being so late," said Edward, wiping his forehead,
with an air of extreme fatigue --"but I have had my hands full of
engagements -- indispensable business -- which has detained me --
or I should have been here long since."

     "Any news from my father," said Zizine, "have you not been
able to see him?"

     "Pardon me, my child, that I promised you, and I never break
my promise." I went to his lodgings, I found them without
difficulty." "Ah, sir, you are too good! You have seen him?" "No,
I have not seen him, but I found a neighbour of his who was able
to answer my inquiries." "I am sorry to tell you, my dear little
friend, that your fears were too well founded, your father is
ill." "He is ill -- good heaven! good heaven! Yes, my dear friend,
I was sure he was ill, but what is the matter with him?" I don't
know exactly -- the woman could not explain -- but it seemed that
he was a good deal troubled at not having seen his daughter."

     "He wishes to see me! My poor, dear, father! Oh yes -- and I
also wish to see him -- immediately. You will let me go and see my
father?" Zizine clasped her hands, and looked up imploringly to
her benefactress; already the big tears were coursing down her
cheeks. In her turn, Stephanie embraced her, and tried to comfort
her.

     "You shall go -- certainly -- but to-night, how can you? It
is already past nine."

     "No matter -- my father is ill -- I must go and take care of
him, as you have taken care of your grandmother -- and she was not
alone, she had domestics to provide for her; but, my poor father
is all alone; you see that he has need of me."

     There was that in the expression of the young girl which
indicated an energy beyond her years. It seemed that filial love
had given new firmness of purpose, new strength of soul to this
weak little creature.

     "But how can you go?" said Stephanie; "my grandmother is a-
bed and asleep -- I cannot wake her to ask permission to go out."

     "it is very easy to arrange that," said Edward. "my cab is at
the door with my servant; he can carry Zizine to her father --
perhaps he is not very ill after all. She can see him -- she can
stay as long as she pleases with him, and my servant can wait for
her and bring her back."

     "In that case," said Stephanie, "It would not be necessary
for me to go with her. You are not afraid, Zizine?" "Oh, no, my
dear friend; oh, sir, how much I thank you!"

     "Your servant is careful? said Stephanie, who was a little
fearful of parting with her charge.

     "I'll answer for him, as I would for myself. What are you
afraid will happen to the little girl?"

     "Zizine, you will return?" "Yes -- unless my father should be
too sick for me to leave him." "It is likely enough that the sight
of you will restore him -- that neighbour spoke so uncertainly."
"Good-bye, my dear friend;" "But wait a moment, let me get you a
shawl or something -- you will take cold." "Oh, no, I am well
enough. Will your servant, sir, let me get into the carriage?"
"Come, my child. I will go down with you, and tell you what to do;
come -- but make no noise, you must not wake up Madame Dolbert --
all this would only trouble her." "Oh yes -- you say truly -- be
careful not to wake my grandmother."

     Stephanie embraces Zizine, commits her to Edward, and he goes
down with her to the door. Zizine followed the young man with all
the swiftness of her little limbs; on reaching the door, Edward
took her in his arms, bore her to the carriage, said a few words
to his servant, and hastened back to rejoin Stephanie.

     The amiable girl was sad at the loss of her little charge;
but she tried to receive  Edward with a smile. He throws open the
door of the saloon as he enters, and seats himself by the side of 
Stephanie.

     "She is gone then," said the young lady, with a sigh.

     "Yes, I placed her in the carriage myself, and gave her in
charge of my servant; you may be assured she is perfectly safe."
"I believe you -- and yet -- it is very strange -- I am troubled,
distressed -- I am so used to having this little girl with me."
"That you cannot rest a minute without seeing her? Oh! you love
this little girl better than you love me -- I see it." "Oh! no,
what I feel for her is friendship, and for you --" "Well? and for
me?" "You know well that it is love!" "My dear Stephanie, Ah! tell
me again that you love -- repeat it." "Is it because you doubt?
Ah! I cannot deceive -- and as I cannot hide what I feel" -- "How
happy am I! and how delightful to exchange without a witness these
vows of love! Ah, Stephanie, I have long wished for this moment. I
can at last kiss these sweet hands -- this white neck -- all the
charms that I have so long desired to possess!"

     As he thus spoke, Edward drew his chair directly opposite to
Stephanie, passed his arm about her waist, and drawing her gently
towards him, imprinted his burning kisses on her neck, her arms,
her hands, and even her robe. Stephanie, alarmed by the warmth of
the caresses to which she is for the first time exposed, blushes
and trembles, gently repelling Edward with the exclamation, "but
why do you press me so closely?"

     "Dear Stephanie, I am so happy to be thus with you."  "But it
is wrong, perhaps, that you should embrace me." "Why wrong? since
we love, and shall always love? "Always?" "Oh, yes it is true,
very true." "And will you never change, Edward?" "Never -- I swear
it by this kiss."

     To the virgin lips of the young girl, the insolent Edward
presses his own; Stephanie burns with emotion; they prey of a new
passion, she has hardly power to rise and tear herself from the
arms of her lover.

     Edward, surprised at the escape of Stephanie, remained fixed
on his chair, looking after the young girl, who had fled to the
opposite side of the saloon.

     "Stephanie -- do you fly from me?" said the lover, in a tone
of gentleness.

     "No -- I do not fly from you," replied Stephanie, with
downcast eyes; "but it was -- I know not what -- it was something
like fear."

     "Fear of me, Stephanie? Indeed I am too unhappy if I have
inspired such a sentiment -- I who love you so much -- I who
breathe only for you!"

     These words were uttered in a tone so touching, that
Stephanie reproached herself for having given pain to Edward; she
turned her fine eyes towards him, they expressed no anger; the
young man left his seat, ran to her, took one of her hands which
he pressed tenderly in his own; and by his looks, endeavoured to
excite in the breast of the young girl all the desires that were
raging in his own; but Stephanie again cast down her eyes in
shame.

     "Am I guilty of a crime in loving you?" asked Edward, gently
drawing the charming girl to a divan that was near them.

     "No -- no!" said Stephanie, seating herself in great emotion
by the side of her lover; "but, it seems to me that there is no
need -- that it is not right -- that --"

     The lips of the maiden were closed -- she did not dare to
say, "You ought not to embrace me as you have done," but she
thought so; for there is always something in the depth of the
heart that teaches us to distinguish the wrong from the right.

     But Edward divines easily what Stephanie dares not utter, and
exclaims while circling her in his arms --

     "But when we love, is it not natural to show it? -- The
caresses of lovers are the dearest pleasures we are permitted to
enjoy. Stephanie, I tremble with joy in touching your hand, your
arm -- in pressing you to my heart; if you loved me with an equal
passion, you would feel as I do --"

     "Oh, I love you as well -- but -- how you press me!"

     "Stephanie, am I not he to whom you have given your heart?
Oh, let me hold you thus -- let me snatch a kiss from those lips
that have sworn to love only me!"

     Stephanie knows not what to reply, but Edward does not wait
permission for a new embrace; the young maiden melts in the ardour
of his caress; her lover becomes more confident; she wished to
repel him, but she has not the power.

     "Mercy -- mercy!" murmurs Stephanie, who now feels the extent
of her danger; but Edward does not listen; a moment only and he
will have triumphed over her feeble resistance, when footsteps are
heard in the passage leading to the apartment. Someone approaches;
Edward disengages himself form Stephanie, and the moment after the
door of the saloon opens. It is Zizine, who returns, and runs to
throw herself into the arms of Stephanie.

     "The child! so soon!" muttered Edward, striking his fists
together in his rage, "Oh -- this is my evil genius -- and the
miserable Dupré has permitted her to return!"

     "Here I am, my dear friend," said the child, throwing her
arms around the neck of Stephanie. "I have not been long? and you
did not expect me so soon?"

     "Dear Zizine, it is heaven that has sent you. Henceforth you
shall never leave me -- no, never. Oh, how happy I am that you
have returned!"

     Stephanie embraced the little girl, pressed her to her bosom,
concealing on the cheeks of Zizine the blushes of her forehead,
and the tears which moistened her eyes; while Edward, seated at
the other end of the apartment, was impatiently striking the floor
with his foot, and made no effort to conceal his chagrin and
disappointment.

     "You are surprised to see me back so soon!" said Zizine; "I
will tell you how it happened. But first of all, I am glad that I
went, for my father is not ill -- he has not been ill; it was very
malicious in that neighbour to invent that story to give me pain.
Listen -- I was in the cab; we were going along some street -- I
don't know which; I did not well know the way but the gentleman's
servant told me that he knew well where he was to carry me. All at
once, as we were passing by a shop that was very brightly lit up,
I saw my father.  I knew him instantly, and cried out, 'Papa,
papa! it is I!' and then I said to the servant, 'Stop, if you
please sir, for I have just seen my father.' But he would not hear
me; he drove on without stopping, and I was just bursting into
tears. Fortunately, my father had heard my voice -- he ran after
the cab, and at the risk of being crushed, caught the horse by the
head, and stopped him. The I told my father where I was going, and
was about getting out of the cab when the gentleman's servant
detained me, saying that he was responsible for my safe return. My
father immediately took me in his arms, replying to the servant,
'know that when I am present, no one but I has the right of
protecting her.' My poor father! he did not know what to make of
it, when he saw me riding alone in a cab. When I told him that I
heard he was sick, he blessed(?) me and thanked me. He then asked
if I wished to go home with him, but I told him that you loved me
dearly, and that I had promised to come back to you. Then the
gentleman's servant, who had waited there, offered to bring me
back, but my father said to him, I will myself return with my
daughter to her protectress;"-- and indeed he brought me quite
home -- not leaving me till he got to the square, and charging me
as he went away, never to ride alone again in a cab."

     "Little dear!" said Stephanie, once more embracing Zizine;
"Your father is right -- I ought not to have suffered you to go
out alone, and for the future you never shall, I promise you." 

     "But what happened to you, my dear friend? have you been
weeping?"

     "Ah -- nothing -- I was too warm -- I have been troubled --
it is all over now; look dear, I am quite well now. Sit down by
me, just opposite."

     Stephanie seated the child by her side. Since the return of
Zizine, she had not raised her eyes to Edward. In the arms of her
little ward she seeks to calm herself, and recover her serenity;
and Zizine, who saw on Stephanie's countenance the signs of an
unusual emotion, looks on her with an air of disquietude. For a
long time they keep silence. At length Edward determines to leave
the corner he had sought on Zizine's entrance, and approaches the
ottoman where Stephanie is still resting. The maiden cannot resist
a shudder of apprehension, and circling Zizine with her arms she
presses her closely to her heart, as if to interpose the child
against the advances of her lover.

     Edward pauses, and exclaims:

     "What is the matter, lady? You seem alarmed -- trembling  --
what has frightened you?"

     Stephanie does not reply; she continues to hold Zizine in her
arms, and does not lift her eyes upon Edward.

     The lover ventures to seat himself on the ottoman, but on the
side opposite to that of the child; and leaning towards the ear of
Stephanie, he says to her in a low voice:

     "What have I done that you should treat me thus? What? You
will not even look on me. Is it, Stephanie, that you have ceased
to love me? You see very well that we can come to no explanation
or understanding, whilst this child is here. Permit me to speak
one word with you alone -- to justify my conduct -- to ask your
pardon -- it is late -- you can send the child to bed --"

     Stephanie, who till this moment had remained silent, raises
her head, and turning it towards Edward, fastens on him a glance
that freezes the words on his lips; for it is no longer the look
of a young, timid and loving girl, but that of an insulted and
outraged woman, proud of her virtue, who sees before her the abyss
from which she has escaped, and defies the pledges and promises
that lure her to a new peril. Her look said all that, for Edward
could not endure it; and this man, so presumptuous, so habituated
in the ways of gallantry, hung his head in shame, and was struck
dumb in the presence of a maiden whom he failed to dishonour.

     Stephanie immediately turned back her face to Zizine, for she
seemed to pity the confusion of her lover. Edward walks to and fro
in the saloon, begins several sentences that he does not finish,
stops before Stephanie, wishes to take a hand which is at once
withdrawn, and finally resolves to take his leave.

     It is in a trembling voice, and with a look of despair, that
Edward said farewell to Miss Dolbert; whispering in a tone of
voice that she only could hear --"If you do not condescend to give
me one look, I shall believe that my presence is disagreeable to
you, and shall not dare to visit you again."

     Stephanie hesitates -- reflects -- but her heart is so kind!
She confides in the regrets, in the despair of Edward, and gently
raising her eyes casts on him a sweet look, in which there was as
much affection as resentment. It would have been enough for an
ordinary lover, but it was very little for one who had flattered
himself that this evening would be the witness of his triumph.

     Having left Stephanie, and no longer compelled to restrain
himself, Delaberge gave a free rein to his passion --  for he had
never before been so cruelly deceived in his hopes; and the
chagrin of being disappointed in a scheme which he had so well
conceived, exasperated and enraged him beyond measure. He had
mounted his cab, and his servant, who sat trembling by his side,
attempted in vain to vindicate himself.

     "You are a fool -- an idiot," said Edward; "I had given you
your instructions, and you ought to have detained the child, no
matter by what means, by what falsehood. You ought no to have
brought her back to Madame Dolbert's under two hours at least, and
twenty minutes had not elapsed before she returned."

     "Was it my fault, sir, that we met her father?"

     "You ought not to have stopped."

     "Then I must have killed the man who was hanging on the neck
of my horse."

     "You should have obeyed my commands at all hazards."

     "But, sir --"

     "Enough -- no more -- I give you your discharge -- you must
quit my service."

     Arrived home, Edward retires to his inner saloon, and
abandons himself to his fury; he breaks everything he can lay his
hands on; splendid articles of furniture, rich vases, a whole pile
of the beautiful nothings that are invented to adorn the
apartments of the wealthy, are broken ad trampled under the foot
of this man, who had never before met with any resistance to his
desires, and for the first time had been thwarted in their
gratification.  Like a spoiled child, who spites and breaks all
his playthings because he cannot have his own way, Edward destroys
everything within his reach; for men are but grown-up children,
especially when they have been spoiled by fortune.

     "Were it not for that child's return, Stephanie had been
mine," said Edward, throwing himself in exhaustion upon the sofa -
-"she was mine -- this girl so winning, so innocent, so loving!
How beautiful were her unresisting entreaties! And it is a child
who has thwarted all my hopes -- destroyed my good fortune -- a
child -- the daughter of a water-carrier! She has interposed
herself in my path -- the path of Edward Delaberge! I have gold to
satisfy all my passions; and since I have been old enough to know
their virtue, I have never failed with gold and with oaths, both
lavished in any profusion, to carry my point. And now I am checked
by a child -- who has deprived me of a happiness within my reach.
For now -- what's to be done? Stephanie understands her danger,
and will be on her guard against it. Cursed Zizine! I already
detested her, but now I hate her worse than ever. Why can't I
treat her as I do this glass?"

     Edward's hand adapts the action to the word, and strikes a
glass standing on a table by his side; the glass is shivered, but
his hand receives a severe cut, and bleeds profusely; this brings
Edward to his senses; he wraps his handkerchief around the wound,
and looking around him, exclaims:

     "What a fool am I! what disorder! Shall I then never be
master of myself? I have passed thirty years, and for twelve years
what faults -- what follies! Is it not time to pause?"

     Edward remains a long time plunged in his reflections; they
do not appear to be very pleasant, for his forehead darkens, and
his eyes become dull and fixed, his respiration short and
difficult; one would hardly recognize in him the dashing and
brilliant gentleman, who was the admiration of the saloon, the
idol of the women, and the envy of the men.

     At length M. Delaberge smoothes his forehead, rises, takes
several turns about his chamber, recovers his habitual expression
of face, and soliloquizes after the following fashion: "There are
a thousand other women as pretty as Stephanie -- I will forget her
-- I will occupy myself with someone else -- it is very easy --"

     During four days, Edward absents himself from Madame
Dolbert's; he tries to forget Stephanie, he returns to his old
acquaintances, he makes new ones; but in the society of the most
beautiful women, and the most expert coquettes, the image of
Stephanie perpetually haunts and pursues him -- and he feels that
while love is unsatisfied it is hard to forget.

     The fifth day he can bear it no longer; he mounts his cab,
and is set down at Madame Dolbert's.

     Since her tête-à-tête with Edward, Stephanie had been sad and
silent; and the sweet words of Zizine failed to bring a smile to
her lips. She perceived that the conduct of her lover was to be
condemned, but she loved him tenderly and was grieved that he had
taught her to fear him. She sighed and wept in secret at his
absence; in the depth of her heart she thought that Edward had
ceased to love her, since he had sought to betray her, instead of
seeking her hand in marriage.

     But because a lover has done wrong it is no reason that one
should love the less; it often happens that we love the more.
Jealousy, disquiet and tears are indispensable to love, and
without them instead of a flame, it would be nothing but smoke.

     Thus Stephanie was almost ready to faint with joy, when M.
Delaberge re-appeared at her mother's; she was then seated by the
side of the good lady, whose health was rapidly improving, and who
was now able to sit up a good potion of the time.

     Edward was extremely struck by the paleness of Stephanie. She
seemed to him more beautiful than ever.  They interchanged one
quick glance -- but how much that glance spoke to those that knew
how to interpret it! On one side there was love, hope and
repentance; on the other, fidelity, regret and forgiveness.

     The good lady assailed M. Delaberge with good-natured
reproaches for having so long neglected them; Stephanie said
nothing; she was afraid that the tones of her voice would betray
her emotion.

     Edwards profits by a moment when the young girl is passing
him to another part of the room to whisper "Do you still love me?"

     Stephanie does not reply, but two big tears escape from her
eyes, and she tries in vain to conceal them from her lover.

     It was in vain, however, that Edward seeks an opportunity for
being alone with Stephanie; this she avoids with as much
solicitude as he exhibits to effect it.

     Many weeks thus roll on; sometimes Edward is three or four
days without visiting Stephanie -- and then for successive days he
can hardly tear himself from her side. Wishing to forget, or
abandoning himself to his passion, still hoping to obtain a tête-
à-tête, and still despairing of success, Edward is quite at a loss
where to stop.

     At length, one evening, while Zizine was engaged at the
piano, Edward takes the hand of Stephanie and, pressing it with
warmth in his own, speaks to her in a tone of deep passion.

     "I cannot live thus. Stephanie, we refuse nothing to those we
love. You assure me that I am very dear to you, and yet I cannot
obtain the slightest favour. Grant me an interview -- one moment's
conversation -- if you refuse me, it is because you do not love
me, and you shall never see me again!"

     "I shall then never see you again, sir," replies Stephanie,
withdrawing her hand, "For I had rather weep the loss of your love
than mine own honour."

     Edward was struck dumb by this reply, and the tone in which
it was uttered told him that there was not the slightest hope of
success in his profligate desires. He withdrew at once, in rage
and despair; swearing that he would never again enter the house.

     Some days passed on, and  M. Delaberge did not make his
appearance at Madame Dolbert's; weeks passed on, and nothing was
heard of Edward.

     The good lady did not comprehend the conduct of M. Delaberge;
she did not doubt his attachment to her granddaughter; every day
she was expecting a declaration; but she supposed that, before
asking her consent, he had only wished to render himself agreeable
to Stephanie and when he must have become confident of having made
a favourable impression, he had ceased from his visits. This
conduct was inexplicable to Madame Dolbert.

     Stephanie suffered in silence. Edward's name never escaped
her lips, and when her grandmother spoke of him, she always tried
to turn the conversation.

     "It is very singular, however", said Madame Dolbert to her
granddaughter. "have you had any quarrel with M. Delaberge? Are 
you offended with one another? There must be some reason for the
discontinuance of his visits."

     "We have never quarrelled about any thing," replied
Stephanie, "and I know not, grandmother, why he has left off
coming here."

     The good lady shook her head, for she thought that Stephanie
still kept something back.

     Stephanie would then retire to weep, in secret; and as Zizine
had often surprised her young protectress with her eyes swimming
in tears, she was told --"if you wish that I should continue to
love you, never tell my grandmother that you have found me
weeping."

     Six weeks thus roll on, and the interval had been long enough
to a young girl who counted the hours and the days, often in
tears, but always with hope.

     At the noon of a day, which like the rest had dawned in
sadness, a visit was announced, it was M. Delaberge who presented
himself at Madame Dolbert's and reappeared to Stephanie, as she
sat by the side of her grandmother, not daring to trust her eyes
in the sight of a man who had once bidden her an eternal farewell.

     Edward's manner had something serious and earnest about it;
after the usual salutations and compliments, he advanced to Madame
Dolbert and said:

     "You have not seen me for a long time,  Madame: I have been
desirous of concluding some family arrangements before making the
request which I am now come to offer you. Madame -- I love Miss
Stephanie. You know my family -- my fortune is an income of about
one hundred thousand francs. I ask the hand of your granddaughter,
if she is willing to accept me as a husband."

     It would be difficult to paint the effect of these words upon
Stephanie; astonished, trembling, transported with joy, she weeps
and smiles at the same moment, and she extends her hand to Edward,
and exclaims --"Oh! yes -- yes -- I willingly accept you for a
husband."

     The grandmother smiled, for to her these was nothing
extraordinary in the scene; she had been long expecting this
application. Taking a hand of her granddaughter and of Edward, and
placing them one in the other -- she says to them, "be happy -- be
united -- my dear children; without speaking of it, I had already
divined this love. M. Delaberge, I give you the hand of my
Stephanie."

     Edward kisses respectfully the hand that is placed in his
own, and Stephanie, who no longer fears to avow all her love,
whispers to him --"naughty! six weeks without coming to see me!
Oh, I have been indeed wretched! but I will think no more of it.
Dear Edward, what happiness awaits me -- for I shall be your
wife!"

     "Yes," replies Edward, "yes, you shall be my wife;" and he
adds in a suppressed soliloquy --"it must needs be! for marriage
is my only hope of her possession!"


