The First Blast of the Trumpet Against the Monstrous Regiment of
Women
By
John Knox

TITLE PAGE


THE FIRST
BLAST OF THE
TRUMPET AGAINST
THE MONSTROUS
regiment of
women.

Veritas temporis filia.
M. D. LVIII.

THE PREFACE

The kingdom appertaineth to our God.

Wonder it is, that amongst so many pregnant wits as the isle of
Great Britain hath produced, so many godly and zealous preachers as
England did sometime nourish, and amongst so many learned, and men
of grave judgment, as this day by Jezebel are exiled, none is found
so stout of courage, so faithful to God, nor loving to their native
country, that they dare admonish the inhabitants of that isle, how
abominable before God is the empire or rule of a wicked woman (yea,
of a traitress and bastard); and what may a people or nation, left
destitute of a lawful head, do by the authority of God's word in
electing and appointing common rulers and magistrates. That isle
(alas!) for the contempt and horrible abuse of God's mercies
offered, and for the shameful revolting to Satan from Christ Jesus,
and from his gospel once professed, doth justly merit to be left in
the hands of their own counsel, and so to come to confusion and
bondage of strangers. But yet I fear that this universal negligence
of such as sometimes were esteemed watchmen, shall rather aggravate
our former ingratitude, than excuse this our universal and ungodly
silence in so weighty a matter. We see our country set forth for a
prey to foreign nations; we hear the blood of our brethren, the
members of Christ Jesus, most cruelly to be shed; and the monstrous
empire of a cruel woman (the secret counsel of God excepted) we
know to be the only occasion of all these miseries; and yet with
silence we pass the time, as though the matter did nothing
appertain to us. But the contrary examples of the ancient prophets
move me to doubt of this our fact. For Israel did universally
decline from God by embracing idolatry under Jeroboam. In which
they did continue even unto the destruction of their commonwealth.
And Judah, with Jerusalem, did follow the vile superstition and
open iniquity of Samaria. But yet ceased not the prophets of God to
admonish the one and the other: yea, even after God had poured
forth his plagues upon them. For Jeremiah did write to the captives
in Babylon, and did correct their errors, plainly instructing them
who did remain in the midst of that idolatrous nation. Ezekiel,
from the midst of his brethren (prisoners in Chaldea) did write his
vision to those that were in Jerusalem; and, sharply rebuking their
vices, assured them that they should not escape the vengeance of
God, by reason of their abominations committed.

The same prophets, for comfort of the afflicted and chosen saints
of God, who did lie hid amongst the reprobate of that age (as
commonly doth the corn amongst the chaff), did prophesy and before
speak the changes of kingdoms, the punishment of tyrants, and the
vengeance which God would execute upon the oppressors of his
people. The same did Daniel, and the rest of the prophets, every
one in their season. By whose examples, and by the plain precept
which is given to Ezekiel, commanding him that he shall say to the
wicked, Thou shalt die the death, we in this our miserable age are
bound to admonish the world, and the tyrants thereof, of their
sudden destruction, to assure them and to cry unto them, whether
they list to hear or not, that the blood of the saints, which by
them is shed, continually crieth and craveth the vengeance in the
presence of the Lord of Hosts. And further, it is our duty to open
the truth revealed unto us, unto the ignorant and blind world;
unless that, to our own condemnation, we list to wrap up and hide
the talent committed to our charge.

I am assured that God hath revealed to some in this our age, that
it is more than a monster in nature that a woman shall reign and
have empire above man. And yet, with us all there is such silence,
as if God therewith were nothing offended. The natural man, enemy
to God, shall find, I know, many causes why no such doctrine ought
to be published in these our dangerous days: first, for that it may
seem to tend to sedition; secondarily, it shall be dangerous, not
only to the writer or publisher, but also to all such as shall read
the writings, or favour this truth spoken; and last, it shall not
amend the chief offenders, partly because it shall never come to
their ears, and partly because they will not be admonished in such
cases.

I answer, if any of these be a sufficient reason, that a truth
known shall be concealed, then were the ancient prophets of God
very fools, who did not better provide for their own quietness,
than to hazard their lives for rebuking of vices, and for the
opening of such crimes as were not known to the world. And Christ
Jesus did injury to his apostles, commanding them to preach
repentance and remission of sins in his name to every realm and
nation. And Paul did not understand his own liberty, when he cried,
Woe be to me, if I preach not the evangel!. If fear, I say, of
persecution, of slander, or of any inconvenience before named,
might have excused and discharged the servants of God from plainly
rebuking the sins of the world, just cause had every one of them to
have ceased from their office. For suddenly their doctrine was
accused by terms of sedition, of new learning, and of treason.
Persecution and vehement trouble did shortly come upon the
professors with the preachers. Kings, princes, and worldly rulers
did conspire against God, and against his anointed Christ Jesus.

But what? Did any of these move the prophets and apostles to faint
in their vocation? No. But by the resistance (which the devil made
to them by his supporters) were they the more inflamed to publish
the truth revealed unto them, and to witness with their blood, that
grievous condemnation and God's heavy vengeance should follow the
proud contempt of graces offered. The fidelity, bold courage, and
constancy of those that are passed before us, ought to provoke us
to follow their footsteps, unless we look for another kingdom than
Christ hath promised to such as persevere in profession of his name
to the end.

If any think that the empire of women is not of such importance,
that for the suppressing of the same any man is bound to hazard his
life: I answer, that to suppress it is in the hand of God alone.
But to utter the impiety and abomination of the same, I say, it is
the duty of every true messenger of God, to whom the truth is
revealed in that behalf. For the especial duty of God's messengers
is to preach repentance, to admonish the offenders of their
offences, and to say to the wicked, Thou shalt die the death,
except thou repent. This, I trust, will no man deny to be the
proper office of all God's messengers, to preach (as I have said)
repentance and remission of sins. But neither of both can be done,
except the conscience of the offenders be accused and convicted of
transgression. But how shall any man repent, not knowing wherein he
hath offended? And where no repentance is found, there can be no
entry to grace. And therefore, I say, that of necessity it is that
this monstiferous empire of women (which amongst all enormities
that this day do abound upon the face of the whole earth, is most
detestable and damnable) be openly revealed and plainly declared to
the world, to the end that some may repent and be saved. And thus
far to the first sort.

To such as think that it will be long before such doctrine come to
the ears of the chief offenders, I answer, that the verity of God
is of that nature, that at one time or at another it will purchase
to itself audience. It is an odour and smell that cannot be
suppressed. Yea, it is a trumpet that will sound in despite of the
adversary. It will compel the very enemies, to their own confusion,
to testify and bear witness of it. For I find that the prophecy and
preaching of Elijah were declared in the hall of the king of Syria,
by the servants and flatterers of the same wicked king, making
mention that Elijah declared to the king of Israel whatsoever the
said king of Syria spoke in his most secret chamber. And the
wondrous works of Jesus Christ were notified to Herod, not in any
great praise or commendation of his doctrine, but rather to signify
that Christ called that tyrant a fox, and that he did no more
regard his authority than did John the Baptist, whom Herod before
had beheaded for the liberty of his tongue.

But whether the bearers of the rumours and tidings were favourers
of Christ, or flatterers of the tyrant, certain it is that the
fame, as well of Christ's doctrine as of his works, came to the
ears of Herod: even so may the sound of our weak trumpet, by the
support of some wind (blow it from the south, or blow it from the
north, it is no matter), come to the ears of the chief offenders.
But whether it do or not, yet dare we not cease to blow as God will
give strength. For we are debtors to more than princes: to wit, to
the multitude of our brethren, of whom, no doubt, a great number
have heretofore offended by error and ignorance, giving their
suffrages, consent, and help to establish women in their kingdoms
and empires, not understanding how abominable, odious, and
detestable is all such usurped authority in the presence of God.
And therefore must the truth be plainly spoken, that the simple and
rude multitude may be admonished.

And as concerning the danger which may hereof ensue, I am not
altogether so brutish and insensible, but that I have laid my
account, what the finishing of the work may cost me for my own
part. First, I am not ignorant how difficult and dangerous it is to
speak against a common error, especially when the ambitious minds
of men and women are called to the obedience of God's simple
commandment. For to the most part of men, lawful and godly
appeareth, whatsoever antiquity hath received. And secondarily, I
look to have more adversaries, not only of the ignorant multitude,
but also of the wise, politic, and quiet spirits of the world, so
that as well shall such as ought to maintain the truth and verity
of God become enemies to me in this case, as shall the princes and
ambitious persons who, to maintain their unjust tyranny do always
study to suppress the same. And thus I am most certainly persuaded
that my labour shall not escape reprehension of many.

But because I remember that accounts of the talents received must
be made to him ­ who neither respects the multitude, neither yet
approveth he the wisdom, policy, peace, nor antiquity, concluding
or determining anything against his eternal will, revealed to us in
his most blessed word ­ I am compelled to cover my eyes, and shut
up my ears, that I neither see the multitude that shall withstand
me in this matter, neither that I shall hear the opprobrium, nor
consider the dangers which I may incur for uttering the same. I
shall be called foolish, curious, despiteful, and a sower of
sedition; and one day, perchance (although now I be nameless) I may
be attainted of treason. But seeing that it is impossible, but that
either I shall offend God, daily calling to my conscience that I
ought to manifest the known verity; or else that I shall displease
the world for doing the same; I have determined to obey God,
notwithstanding that the world shall rage thereat.

I know that the world offended (by God's permission) may kill the
body; but God's majesty offended, hath power to punish body and
soul for ever. His majesty is offended when his precepts are
contemned and his threatenings esteemed to be of none effect. And
amongst his manifold precepts given to his prophets, and amongst
his threatenings, none is more vehement than is that which is
pronounced to Ezekiel in these words: Son of man, I have appointed
thee a watchman to the house of Israel, that thou shouldest hear
from my mouth the word; and that thou mayest admonish them plainly,
when I shall say to the wicked man, O wicked, thou shalt assuredly
die. Then if thou shalt not speak, that thou mayest plainly
admonish him, that he may leave his wicked way, the wicked man
shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require of thy
hand. But and if thou shalt plainly admonish the wicked man, and
yet he shall not turn from his way, such a one shall die in his
iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul

This precept, I say, with the threatening annexed, together with
the rest that is spoken in the same chapter, not to Ezekiel only,
but to everyone, whom God places watchman over his people and flock
(and watchmen are they, whose eyes he doth open, and whose
conscience he pricks to admonish the ungodly), compels me to utter
my conscience in this matter, notwithstanding that the whole world
should be offended with me for so doing. If any wonder why I do
conceal my name, let him be assured that the fear of corporeal
punishment is neither the only, neither the chief cause. My purpose
is thrice to blow the trumpet in the same matter, if God so permit.
Twice I intend to do it without name; but at the last blast to take
the blame upon myself, that all others may be purged.
THE FIRST BLAST TO AWAKE WOMEN DEGENERATE.


To promote a woman to bear rule, superiority, dominion, or empire
above any realm, nation, or city, is repugnant to nature; contumely
to God, a thing most contrarious to his revealed will and approved
ordinance; and finally, it is the subversion of good order, of all
equity and justice.

In the probation of this proposition, I will not be so curious as
to gather whatsoever may amplify, set forth, or decor the same; but
I am purposed, even as I have spoken my conscience in most plain
and few words, so to stand content with a simple proof of every
member, bringing in for my witness God's ordinance in nature, his
plain will revealed in his word, and the minds of such as be most
ancient amongst godly writers.

And first, where I affirm the empire of a woman to be a thing
repugnant to nature, I mean not only that God, by the order of his
creation, hath spoiled woman of authority and dominion, but also
that man hath seen, proved, and pronounced just causes why that it
so should be. Man, I say, in many other cases blind, doth in this
behalf see very clearly. For the causes are so manifest, that they
cannot be hid. For who can deny but it is repugnant to nature, that
the blind shall be appointed to lead and conduct such as do see?
That the weak, the sick, and impotent persons shall nourish and
keep the whole and strong? And finally, that the foolish, mad, and
frenetic shall govern the discreet, and give counsel to such as be
sober of mind? And such be all women, compared unto man in bearing
of authority. For their sight in civil regiment is but blindness;
their strength, weakness; their counsel, foolishness; and judgment,
frenzy, if it be rightly considered.

I except such as God, by singular privilege, and for certain causes
known only to himself, hath exempted from the common rank of women,
and do speak of women as nature and experience do this day declare
them. Nature, I say, doth paint them forth to be weak, frail,
impatient, feeble, and foolish; and experience hath declared them
to be inconstant, variable, cruel, and lacking the spirit of
counsel and regiment. And these notable faults have men in all ages
espied in that kind, for the which not only they have removed women
from rule and authority, but also some have thought that men
subject to the counsel or empire of their wives were unworthy of
public office. For thus writeth Aristotle, in the second of his
Politics. What difference shall we put, saith he, whether that
women bear authority, or the husbands that obey the empire of their
wives, be appointed to be magistrates? For what ensueth the one,
must needs follow the other: to wit, injustice, confusion, and
disorder. The same author further reasoneth, that the policy or
regiment of the Lacedemonians (who other ways amongst the Greeks
were most excellent) was not worthy to be reputed nor accounted
amongst the number of commonwealths that were well governed,
because the magistrates and rulers of the same were too much given
to please and obey their wives. What would this writer (I pray you)
have said to that realm or nation, where a woman sitteth crowned in
Parliament amongst the midst of men?

Oh fearful and terrible are thy judgments, O Lord, which thus hast
abased man for his iniquity!

I am assuredly persuaded that if any of those men, which,
illuminated only by the light of nature, did see and pronounce
[the] causes sufficient why women ought not to bear rule nor
authority, should this day live and see a woman sitting in
judgment, or riding from Parliament in the midst of men, having the
royal crown upon her head, the sword and the sceptre borne before
her, in sign that the administration of justice was in her power: I
am assuredly persuaded, I say, that such a sight should so astonish
them, that they should judge the whole world to be transformed into
the Amazons, and that such a metamorphosis and change was made of
all the men of that country, as poets do feign was made of the
companions of Ulysses; or at least, that albeit the outward form of
men remained, yet should they judge their hearts were changed from
the wisdom, understanding, and courage of men, to the foolish
fondness and cowardice of women. Yea, they further should
pronounce, that where women reign or be in authority, that there
must needs vanity be preferred to virtue, ambition and pride to
temperance and modesty; and finally, that avarice, the mother of
all mischief, must needs devour equity and justice.

But lest that we shall seem to be of this opinion alone, let us
hear what others have seen and decreed in this matter. In the Rules
of the Law thus is it written: Women are removed from all civil and
public office, so that they neither may be judges, neither may they
occupy the place of the magistrate, neither yet may they be
speakers for others. The same is repeated in the third and the
sixteenth books of the Digests, where certain persons are
forbidden, Ne pro aliis postulent, that is, that they be no
speakers nor advocates for others. And among the rest, women are
forbidden, and this cause is added, that they do not against
shamefastness intermeddle themselves with the causes of others;
neither yet that women presume to use the offices due to men. The
Law in the same place doth further declare that a natural
shamefastness ought to be in womankind, which most certainly she
loses whensoever she taketh upon her the office and estate of man.
As in Calphurnia was evidently declared, who having license to
speak before the senate, at length became so impudent and
importunate, that by her babbling she troubled the whole assembly.
And so gave occasion that this law was established.

In the first book of the Digests, it is pronounced that the
condition of the woman, in many cases, is worse than of the man: as
in jurisdiction (saith the law), in receiving of cure and tuition,
in adoption, in public accusation, in delation, in all popular
action, and in motherly power which she hath not upon her own sons.
The Law further will not permit that the woman give anything to her
husband, because it is against the nature of her kind, being the
inferior member, to presume to give anything to her head. The Law
doth moreover pronounce womankind to be most avaricious (which is a
vice intolerable in those that should rule or minister justice).
And Aristotle, as before is touched, doth plainly affirm, that
wheresoever women bear dominion, there must needs the people be
disordered, living and abounding in all intemperance, given to
pride, excess, and vanity; and finally, in the end, they must needs
come to confusion and ruin.

Would to God the examples were not so manifest, to the further
declaration of the imperfections of women, of their natural
weakness and inordinate appetites. I might adduce histories,
proving some women to have died for sudden joy; some for impatience
to have murdered themselves; some to have burned with such
inordinate lust, that for the quenching of the same, they have
betrayed to strangers their country and city; and some to have been
so desirous of dominion, that for the obtaining of the same, they
have murdered the children of their own sons, yea, and some have
killed with cruelty their own husbands and children.  But to me it
is sufficient (because this part of nature is not my most sure
foundation) to have proved, that men illuminated only by the light
of nature have seen and have determined that it is a thing most
repugnant to nature, that women rule and govern over men. For those
that will not permit a woman to have power over her own sons, will
not permit her (I am assured) to have rule over a realm; and those
that will not suffer her to speak in defence of those that be
accused (neither that will admit her accusation intended against
man) will not approve her that she shall sit in judgment, crowned
with the royal crown, usurping authority in the midst of men.


But now to the second part of nature, in the which I include the
revealed will and perfect ordinance of God; and against this part
of nature, I say, that it doth manifestly repugn that any woman
shall reign or bear dominion over man. For God, first by the order
of his creation, and after by the curse and malediction pronounced
against the woman (by reason of her rebellion) hath pronounced the
contrary.

First, I say, that woman in her greatest perfection was made to
serve and obey man, not to rule and command him. As St. Paul doth
reason in these words: Man is not of the woman, but the woman of
the man. And man was not created for the cause of the woman, but
the woman for the cause of man; and therefore ought the woman to
have a power upon her head (that is, a coverture in sign of
subjection). Of which words it is plain that the apostle means,
that woman in her greatest perfection should have known that man
was lord above her; and therefore that she should never have
pretended any kind of superiority above him, no more than do the
angels above God the Creator, or above Christ Jesus their head. So
I say, that in her greatest perfection, woman was created to be
subject to man.

But after her fall and rebellion committed against God, there was
put upon her a new necessity, and she was made subject to man by
the irrevocable sentence of God, pronounced in these words: I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception. With sorrow shalt
thou bear thy children, and thy will shall be subject to thy man;
and he shall bear dominion over thee. Hereby may such as altogether
be not blinded plainly see, that God by his sentence hath dejected
all women from empire and dominion above man. For two punishments
are laid upon her: to wit, a dolour, anguish, and pain, as oft as
ever she shall be mother; and a subjection of herself, her
appetites, and will, to her husband, and to his will. From the
former part of this malediction can neither art, nobility, policy,
nor law made by man deliver womankind; but whosoever attaineth to
that honour to be mother, proves in experience the effect and
strength of God's word. But (alas!) ignorance of God, ambition, and
tyranny have studied to abolish and destroy the second part of
God's punishment. For women are lifted up to be heads over realms,
and to rule above men at their pleasure and appetites. But horrible
is the vengeance which is prepared for the one and for the other,
for the promoters and for the persons promoted, except they
speedily repent. For they shall be dejected from the glory of the
sons of God to the slavery of the devil, and to the torment that is
prepared for all such, as do exalt themselves against God.

Against God can nothing be more manifest than that a woman shall be
exalted to reign above man; for the contrary sentence hath he
pronounced in these words: Thy will shall be subject to thy
husband, and he shall bear dominion over thee. As God should say,
Forasmuch as you have abused thy former condition, and because thy
free will hath brought yourself and mankind into the bondage of
Satan, I therefore will bring thee in bondage to man. For where
before thy obedience should have been voluntary, now it shall be by
constraint and by necessity; and that because thou hast deceived
thy man, thou shalt therefore be no longer mistress over thy own
appetites, over thine own will or desires. For in thee there is
neither reason nor discretion which are able to moderate thy
affections, and therefore they shall be subject to the desire of
thy man. He shall be lord and governor, not only over thy body, but
even over thy appetites and will. This sentence, I say, did God
pronounce against Eve and her daughters, as the rest of the
scriptures do evidently witness. So that no woman can ever presume
to reign above man, but the same she must needs do in despite of
God, and in contempt of his punishment and malediction.


I am not ignorant, that the most part of men do understand this
malediction of the subjection of the wife to her husband, and of
the dominion which he beareth above her. But the Holy Ghost giveth
to us another interpretation of this place, taking from all women
all kinds of superiority, authority, and power over man, speaking
as follows, by the mouth of St. Paul: I suffer not a woman to
teach, neither yet to usurp authority above man. Here he nameth
women in general, excepting none; affirming that she may usurp
authority above no man. And that he speaketh more plainly in
another place in these words: Let women keep silence in the
congregation, for it is not permitted to them to speak, but to be
subject, as the law saith. These two testimonies of the Holy Ghost
are sufficient to prove whatsoever we have affirmed before, and to
repress the inordinate pride of women, as also to correct the
foolishness of those that have studied to exalt women in authority
above men, against God and against his sentence pronounced.


But that the same two places of the apostle may the better be
understood: it is to be noted, that in the latter, which is written
in the first epistle to the Corinthians, the 14th chapter, before
the apostle had permitted that all persons should prophesy one
after another, adding this reason, that all may learn and all may
receive consolation; and lest that any might have judged, that
amongst a rude multitude, and the plurality of speakers, many
things little to purpose might have been affirmed, or else that
some confusion might have arisen, he addeth, The spirits of the
prophets are subject to the prophets; as he should say, God shall
always raise up some to whom the verity shall be revealed, and unto
such you shall give place, albeit they sit in the lowest seats. And
thus the apostle would have prophesying an exercise to be free to
the whole church, that everyone should communicate with the
congregation what God had revealed to them, providing that it were
orderly done. But from this general privilege he excluded all
women, saying, Let women keep silence in the congregation. And why,
I pray you? Was it because that the apostle thought no woman to
have any knowledge? No, he giveth another reason, saying, Let her
be subject, as the law saith. In which words is first to be noted,
that the apostle calls this former sentence pronounced against
woman a law: that is, the immutable decree of God, who by his own
voice hath subjected her to one member of the congregation, that is
to her husband. Whereupon the Holy Ghost concludeth, that she may
never rule nor bear empire above man; for she that is made subject
to one, may never be preferred to many. And that the Holy Ghost
doth manifestly express, saying: I suffer not that woman usurp
authority above man. He saith not, I will not that woman usurp
authority above her husband; but he nameth man in general, taking
from her all power and authority to speak, to reason, to interpret,
or to teach; but principally to rule or to judge in the assembly of
men. So that woman by the law of God, and by the interpretation of
the Holy Ghost, is utterly forbidden to occupy the place of God in
the offices aforesaid, which he hath assigned to man, whom he hath
appointed and ordained his lieutenant in earth, secluding from that
honour and dignity all women, as this short argument shall
evidently declare.

The apostle taketh power from all women to speak in the assembly.
Ergo, he permitteth no woman to rule above man. The former part is
evident, whereupon doth the conclusion of necessity follow; for he
that taketh from woman the least part of authority, dominion, or
rule, will not permit unto her that which is greatest. But greater
it is to reign above realms and nations, to publish and to make
laws, and to command men of all estates, and finally, to appoint
judges and ministers, than to speak in the congregation. For her
judgment, sentence, or opinion proposed in the congregation, may be
judged by all, may be corrected by the learned, and reformed by the
godly. But woman being promoted in sovereign authority, her laws
must be obeyed, her opinion followed, and her tyranny maintained,
supposing that it be expressly against God and the profit of the
commonwealth, as too manifest experience doth this day witness.

And therefore yet again I repeat, that which before I have
affirmed: to wit, that a woman promoted to sit in the seat of God
(that is, to teach, to judge, or to reign above man) is a monster
in nature, contumely to God, and a thing most repugnant to his will
and ordinance. For he hath deprived them, as before is proved, of
speaking in the congregation, and hath expressly forbidden them to
usurp any kind of authority above man. How then will he suffer them
to reign and have empire above realms and nations? He will never, I
say, approve it, because it is a thing most repugnant to his
perfect ordinance, as after shall be declared, and as the former
scriptures have plainly given testimony. To the which to add
anything were superfluous, were it not that the world is almost now
come to that blindness, that whatsoever pleaseth not the princes
and the multitude, the same is rejected as doctrine newly forged,
and is condemned for heresy. I have therefore thought good to
recite the minds of some ancient writers in the same matter, to the
end that such as altogether be not blinded by the devil, may
consider and understand this my judgment to be no new
interpretation of God's scriptures, but to be the uniform consent
of the most part of godly writers since the time of the apostles.

Tertullian, in his book of Women's Apparel, after he hath showed
many causes why gorgeous apparel is abominable and odious in a
woman, addeth these words, speaking as it were to every woman by
name: Dost thou not know, saith he, that thou art Eve. The sentence
of God liveth and is effectual against this kind; and in this
world, of necessity it is, that the punishment also live. Thou art
the port and gate of the devil. Thou art the first transgressor of
God's law. Thou didst persuade and easily deceive him whom the
devil durst not assault. For thy merit (that is, for thy death), it
behoved the Son of God to suffer the death; and doth it yet abide
in thy mind to deck thee above thy skin coats?

By these and many other grave sentences and quick interrogations,
did this godly writer labour to bring every woman in contemplation
of herself, to the end that every one, deeply weighing what
sentence God had pronounced against the whole race and daughters of
Eve, might not only learn daily to humble and subject themselves in
the presence of God, but also that they should avoid and abhor
whatsoever thing might exalt them or puff them up in pride, or that
might be occasion that they should forget the curse and malediction
of God. And what, I pray you, is more able to cause a woman to
forget her own condition, than if she be lifted up in authority
above man? It is a thing very difficult to a man (be he never so
constant) promoted to honours, not to be tickled somewhat with
pride (for the wind of vain glory doth easily carry up the dry dust
of the earth). But as for woman, it is no more possible that she,
being set aloft in authority above man, shall resist the motions of
pride, than it is able to the weak reed, or to the turning
weathercock, not to bow or turn at the vehemency of the inconstant
wind. And therefore the same writer expressly forbiddeth all women
to intermeddle with the office of man. For thus he writeth in his
book De Virginibus Velandis["on the veiling of virgins"]: It is not
permitted to a woman to speak in the congregation, neither to
teach, neither to baptize, neither to vindicate to herself any
office of man. The same he speaketh yet more plainly in the Preface
of his sixth book written Against Marcion, where he recounting
certain monstrous things which were to be seen at the Sea called
Euxinum, amongst the rest, he reciteth this as a great monster in
nature, that women in those parts were not tamed nor abased by
consideration of their own sex and kind, but that, all shame laid
apart, they made expenses upon weapons, and learned the feats of
war, having more pleasure to fight than to marry and be subject to
man. Thus far of Tertullian, whose words be so plain, that they
need no explanation. For he that taketh from her all office
appertaining to man, will not suffer her to reign above man: and he
that judgeth it a monster in nature that a woman shall exercise
weapons, must judge it to be a monster of monsters that a woman
shall be exalted above a whole realm and nation. Of the same mind
are Origen and divers others, whose sentences I omit to avoid
prolixity.

Yea, even till the days of Augustine, who, in his twenty-second
book written Against Faustus, proveth that a woman ought to serve
her husband as unto God, affirming that in nothing hath woman equal
power with man, saving that neither of both have power over their
own bodies. By which he would plainly conclude, that woman ought
never to pretend nor thirst for that power and authority which be
due to man. For so he doth explain himself in another place,
affirming that woman ought to be repressed and bridled betimes, if
she aspireth to any dominion; alleging that it is dangerous and
perilous to suffer her to proceed, although it be in temporal and
corporeal things. And thereto he addeth these words: God seeth not
for a time, neither is there any new thing in his sight and
knowledge: meaning thereby, that what God hath seen in one woman
(as concerning dominion and bearing of authority) the same he seeth
in all; and what he hath forbidden to one, the same he also
forbiddeth to all. And this most evidently yet in another place he
writeth, moving this question, How can woman be the image of God,
seeing (saith he) she is subject to man, and hath none authority,
neither to teach, neither to be witness, neither to judge, much
less to rule or bear empire? These be the very words of Augustine,
of which it is evident that this godly writer doth not only agree
with Tertullian, before recited, but also with the former sentence
of the Law, which taketh from woman not only all authority amongst
men, but also every office appertaining to man.

To the question how she can be the image of God, he answers as
follows: Woman, saith he, compared to other creatures, is the image
of God, for she beareth dominion over them. But compared unto man,
she may not be called the image of God, for she beareth not rule
and lordship over man, but ought to obey him, etc. And how that
woman ought to obey man, he speaketh yet more clearly in these
words, The woman shall be subject to man as unto Christ. For woman,
saith he, hath not her example from the body and from the flesh,
that so she shall be subject to man, as the flesh is unto the
Spirit, because that the flesh in the weakness and mortality of
this life lusteth and striveth against the Spirit, and therefore
would not the Holy Ghost give example of subjection to the woman of
any such thing, etc. This sentence of Augustine ought to be noted
of all women, for in it he plainly affirmeth, that woman ought to
be subject to man, that she never ought more to desire pre-eminence
him, than that she ought to desire above Christ Jesus.

With Augustine, agreeth in every point St. Ambrose, who thus
writeth in his Hexameron: Adam was deceived by Eve, and not Eve by
Adam, and therefore it is just, that woman receive and acknowledge
him for governor whom she called to sin, lest that again she slide
and fall by womanly facility. And writing upon the epistle to the
Ephesians, he saith, Let women be subject to their own husbands as
unto the Lord; for the man is head to the woman, and Christ is head
to the congregation, and he is the Saviour to the body; but the
congregation is subject to Christ, even so ought women to be to
their husbands in all things. He proceedeth further, saying, Women
are commanded to be subject to men by the law of nature, because
that man is the author or beginner of the woman: for as Christ is
the head of the church, so is man of the woman. From Christ the
church took beginning, and therefore it is subject unto him; even
so did woman take beginning from man that she should be subject.
Thus we hear the agreeing of these two writers to be such, that a
man might judge the one to have stolen the words and sentences from
the other. And yet plain it is, that during the time of their
writing, the one was far distant from the other. But the Holy
Ghost, who is the Spirit of concord and unity, did so illuminate
their hearts, and direct their tongues, and pens, that as they did
conceive and understand one truth, so did they pronounce and utter
the same, leaving a testimony of their knowledge and concord to us
their posterity.

If any think that all these former sentences be spoken only of the
subjection of the married woman to her husband: as before I have
proved the contrary by the plain words and reasoning of St. Paul,
so shall I shortly do the same by other testimonies of the foresaid
writers. The same Ambrose, writing upon the second chapter of the
first epistle to Timothy, after he hath spoken much of the simple
arrayment of women, he addeth these words: Woman ought not only to
have simple arrayment, but all authority is to be denied unto her.
For she must be in subjection to man (of whom she hath taken her
original), as well in habit as in service. And after a few words,
he saith, Because that death did enter into the world by her, there
is no boldness that ought to be permitted unto her, but she ought
to be in humility. Hereof it is plain, that from all woman, be she
married or unmarried, is all authority taken to execute any office
that appertaineth to man. Yea, it is plain, that all woman is
commanded to serve, to be in humility and subjection. Which thing
yet speaketh the same writer more plainly in these words: It is not
permitted to women to speak, but to be in silence, as the law
saith. What saith the law? 'Unto thy husband shall thy conversion
be, and he shall bear dominion over thee'. This is a special law,
saith Ambrose, whose sentence, lest it should be violated,
infirmed, or made weak, women are commanded to be in silence. Here
he includeth all women; and yet he proceedeth further in the same
place, saying, It is shame for them to presume to speak of the law,
in the house of the Lord, who hath commanded them to be subject to
their men.

But most plainly speaketh he, writing upon the 16th chapter  of the
epistle of St. Paul to the Romans, upon these words: Salute Rufus
and his mother. For this cause, saith Ambrose, did the apostle
place Rufus before his mother, for the election of the
administration of the grace of God, in the which a woman hath no
place. For he was chosen and promoted by the Lord to take care over
his business, that is, over the church, to which office could not
his mother be appointed, albeit she was a woman so holy that the
apostle called her his mother. Hereof it is plain, that the
administration of the grace of God is denied to all woman. By the
administration of God's grace, is understood not only the preaching
of the word and administration of the sacraments, by the which the
grace of God is presented and ordinarily distributed unto man, but
also the administration of civil justice, by the which, virtue
ought to be maintained, and vices punished. The execution whereof
is no less denied to woman, than is the preaching of the evangel,
or administration of the sacraments, as hereafter shall most
plainly appear.

Chrysostom, amongst the Grecian writers of no small credit,
speaking in rebuke of men, who in his days were become inferior to
some women in wit and in godliness, saith, For this cause was woman
put under thy power (he speaketh to man in general), and thou wast
pronounced lord over her, that she should obey thee, and that the
head should not follow the feet. But often it is, that we see the
contrary, that he who in his order ought to be the head, doth not
keep the order of the feet (that is, doth not rule the feet), and
that she that is in place of the foot is constitute to be the head.
He speaketh these words, as it were, in admiration that man was
become so brutish, that he did not consider it to be a thing most
monstrous that woman should be preferred to man in anything, whom
God had subjected to man in all things. He proceedeth, saying,
Nevertheless, it is the part of man, with diligent care, to repel
the woman that giveth him wicked counsel; and woman, which gave
that pestilent counsel to man, ought at all times to have the
punishment which was given to Eve sounding in her ears. And in
another place, he induceth God speaking to the woman in this sort:
Because you left him, of whose nature thou wast participant, and
for whom thou wast formed, and have had pleasure to have
familiarity with that wicked beast, and would take his counsel;
therefore I subject thee to man, and I appoint and affirm him to be
thy lord, that thou mayest acknowledge his dominion; and because
thou couldst not bear rule, learn well to be ruled. Why they should
not bear rule, he declareth in other places, saying, Womankind is
imprudent and soft (or flexible): imprudent, because she cannot
consider with wisdom and reason the things which she heareth and
seeth; and soft she is, because she is easily bowed. I know that
Chrysostom brings in these words, to declare the cause why false
prophets do commonly deceive women, because they are easily
persuaded to any opinion, especially if it be against God; and
because they lack prudence and right reason to judge the things
that bee spoken. But hereof may their nature be espied, and the
vices of the same, which in no wise ought to be in those that are
appointed to govern others. For they ought to be constant, stable,
prudent, and doing everything with discretion and reason, which
virtues women cannot have in equality with men. For that he doth
witness in another place, saying, Women have in themselves a
tickling and study of vain glory; and that they may have in common
with men. They are suddenly moved to anger; and that they have also
common with some men. But virtues in which they excel, they have
not common with man; and therefore hath the apostle removed them
from the office of teaching, which is an evident proof that in
virtue they far differ from man.

Let the reasons of this writer be marked, for further he yet
proceedeth, after that he hath in many words lamented the
effeminate manners of men, who were so far degenerate to the
weakness of women, that some might have demanded, Why may not women
teach amongst such a sort of men, who in wisdom and godliness are
become inferior unto women? He finally concludeth, That
notwithstanding that men be degenerate, yet may not women usurp any
authority above them. And in the end he addeth these words, These
things I do not speak to extol them (that is women), but to the
confusion and shame of ourselves, and to admonish us to take again
the dominion that is meet and convenient for us; not only that
power which is according to the excellency of dignity, but that
which is according to providence, and according to help and virtue;
for then is the body in best proportion when is hath the best
governor.

Oh that both man and woman should consider the profound counsel and
admonition of this father! He would not that man for appetite of
any vain glory should desire preeminence above woman. For God hath
not made man to be head for any such cause, but having respect to
that weakness and imperfection which always letteth woman to
govern. He hath ordained man to be superior; and that meaneth
Chrysostom, saying, Then is the body in best proportion when it
hath the best governor. But woman can never be the best governor,
by reason that she, being spoiled of the spirit of regiment, can
never attain to that degree to be called or judged a good governor;
because in the nature of all woman lurks such vices as in good
governors are not tolerable. Which the same writer expresseth in
these words, Womankind, saith he, is rash and foolhardy; and their
covetousness is like the gulf of hell, that is insatiable. And
therefore in another place, he wills that woman shall have nothing
to do in judgment, in common affairs, or in the regiment of the
commonwealth (because she is impatient of troubles), but that she
shall live in tranquility and quietness. And if she hath occasion
to go from the house, that yet she shall have no matter of trouble,
neither to follow her, neither to be offered unto her, as commonly
there must be to such as bear authority.

And with Chrysostom fully agreeth Basilius Magnus, in a sermon
which he maketh upon some places of scripture, wherein he reproveth
divers vices; and amongst the rest, he affirmeth woman to be a
tender creature, flexible, soft, and pitiful; which nature God hath
given unto her, that she may be apt to nourish children. The which
facility of the woman did Satan abuse, and thereby brought her from
the obedience of God. And, therefore, in divers other places doth
he conclude that she is not apt to bear rule, and that she is
forbidden to teach.

Innumerable more testimonies of all sorts of writers may be adduced
for the same purpose, but with these I stand content; judging it
sufficient, to stop the mouth of such as accuse and condemn all
doctrine as heretical which displeaseth them in any point, that I
have proved by the determinations and laws of men illuminated only
by the light of nature, by the order of God's creation, by the
curse and malediction pronounced against woman by the mouth of St.
Paul, who is the interpreter of God's sentence and law, and
finally, by the minds of those writers who, in the church of God,
have been always held in greatest reverence: that it is a thing
most repugnant to nature, to God's will and appointed ordinance
(yea, that it cannot be without contumely committed against God),
that a woman should be promoted to dominion or empire, to reign
over man, be it in realm, nation, province, or city. Now resteth it
in a few words to be shown that the same empire of women is the
subversion of good order, equity and justice.



Augustine defineth order to be that thing by the which God hath
appointed and ordained all things. Note well, reader, that
Augustine will admit no order where God's appointment is absent and
lacketh. And in another place he saith, that order is a
disposition, giving their own proper places to things that be
unequal, which he terms in Latin, parium et disparium, that is, of
things equal or like, and things unequal or unlike. Of which two
places, and of the whole disputation (which is contained in his
second book De Ordine), it is evident that whatsoever is done
either without the assurance of God's will, or else against his
will manifestly revealed in his word, is done against  order. But
such is the empire and regiment of all women (as evidently before
is declared); and therefore, I say, it is a thing plainly repugnant
to good order: yea, it is the subversion of the same.

If any list to reject the definition of Augustine, as either not
proper to this purpose, or else as insufficient to prove mine
intent, let the same man understand, that in so doing he hath
infirmed mine argument nothing. For as I depend not upon the
determinations of men, so I think my cause no weaker, albeit their
authority be denied unto me; provided that God by his  will
revealed, and manifest word, stand plain and evident on my side.

That God hath subjected womankind to man, by the order of his
creation, and by the curse that he hath pronounced against her, is
before declared . Besides these, he hath set before our eyes two
other mirrors and glasses, in which he will that we should behold
the order which he hath appointed and established in nature: the
one is the natural body of man; the other is the politic or civil
body of that commonwealth, in which God by his own word hath
appointed an order. In the natural body of man, God hath appointed
an order that the head shall occupy the uppermost place; and the
head he hath joined with the body, that from it life and motion do
flow to the rest of the members. In it hath he placed the eye to
see, the ear to hear, and the tongue to speak, which offices are
appointed to none other member of the body. The rest of the members
have every one their own place and office appointed, but none may
have neither the place nor office of the head. For who would not
judge that body to be a monster, where there was no head eminent
above the rest, but that the eyes were in the hands, the tongue and
the mouth beneath in the belly, and the ears in the feet? Men, I
say, should not only pronounce this body to be a monster, but
assuredly they might conclude that such a body could not long
endure. And no less monstrous is the body of that commonwealth
where a woman beareth empire; for either it doth lack a lawful head
(as in very deed it doth), or else there is an idol exalted in the
place of the true head.

An idol I call that which hath the form and appearance, but lacks
the virtue and strength which the name and proportion do resemble
and promise. As images have face, nose, eyes, mouth, hands, and
feet painted, but the use of the same cannot the craft and art of
man give them, as the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David teacheth us,
saying, They have eyes, but they see not; mouth, but they speak
not; nose, but they smell not; hands and feet, but they neither
touch nor have power to go. And such, I say, is every realm and
nation where a woman beareth dominion. For in despite of God (he of
his just judgment so giving them over to a reprobate mind) may a
realm, I confess, exalt up a woman to that monstriferous honour, to
be esteemed as head. But impossible it is to man and angel to give
unto her the properties and perfect offices of a lawful head; for
the same God that hath denied power to the hand to speak, to the
belly to hear, and to the feet to see, hath denied to woman power
to command man, and hath taken away wisdom to consider, and
providence to foresee, the things that be profitable to the
commonwealth: yea, finally, he hath denied to her in any case to be
head to a man, but plainly hath pronounced that man is head to
woman, even as Christ is head to all man .

If men in a blind rage should assemble together, and appoint
themselves another head than Christ Jesus (as the Papists have done
their Romish Antichrist), should Christ therefore lose his own
dignity, or should God give to that counterfeit head power to give
life to the body, to see whatsoever might endanger or hurt it, or
to speak in defence, and to hear the request of every subject? It
is certain that he would not. For that honour he hath appointed
before all times to his only Son; and the same will he give to no
creature besides. No more will he admit nor accept woman to be the
lawful head over man, although man, devil, and angel will conjure
in their favour. For seeing he hath subjected her to one (as before
is said), he will never permit her to reign over many. Seeing he
hath commanded her to hear and obey one, he will not suffer that
she speak, and with usurped authority command realms and nations.

Chrysostom, explaining these words of the apostle, The head of
woman is man, compareth God in his universal regiment to a king
sitting in his royal majesty, to whom all his subjects, commanded
to give homage and obedience, appear before him, bearing everyone
such a badge and cognizance of dignity and honour as he hath given
to them; which if they despise and contemn, then do they dishonour
their king. Even so, saith he, ought man and woman to appear before
God, bearing the ensigns of the condition which they have received
of him. Man hath received a certain glory and dignity above the
woman; and therefore ought he to appear before his high Majesty
bearing the sign of his honour, having no coverture upon his head,
to witness that in earth man hath no head. Beware Chrysostom what
thou sayest! Thou shalt be reputed a traitor if Englishmen hear
you, for they must have my sovereign lady and mistress; and
Scotland hath drunken also the enchantment and venom of Circe ­ let
it be so to their own shame and confusion.

He proceedeth in these words, But woman ought to be covered, to
witness that in earth she had a head, that is man. True it is,
Chrysostom, woman is covered in both the said realms, but it is not
with the sign of subjection, but it is with the sign of
superiority: to wit, with the royal crown. To that he answereth in
these words: What if man neglect his honour? He is no less to be
mocked, saith Chrysostom, than if a king should depose himself of
his diadem or crown and royal estate, and clothe himself in the
habit of a slave. What, I pray you, should this godly father have
said, if he had seen all the men of a realm or nation fall down
before a woman? If he had seen the crown, scepter, and sword, which
are ensigns of the royal dignity given to her, and a woman cursed
of God, and made subject to man, placed in the throne of justice to
sit as God's lieutenant? What, I say, in this behalf, should any
heart unfeignedly fearing God have judged of such men? I am assured
that not only should they have been judged foolish, but also
enraged and slaves to Satan, manifestly fighting against God and
his appointed order.

The more that I consider the subversion of God's order, which he
hath placed generally in all living things, the more I do wonder at
the blindness of man, who doth not consider himself in this case so
degenerate, that the brute beasts are to be preferred unto him in
this behalf. For nature hath in all beasts printed a certain mark
of dominion in the male, and a certain subjection in the female,
which they keep inviolate. For no man ever saw the lion make
obedience, and stoop before the lioness; neither yet can it be
proved that the hind taketh the conducting of the herd amongst the
harts. And yet (alas!) man, who by the mouth of God hath dominion
appointed to him over woman, doth not only to his own shame stoop
under the obedience of women, but also, in despite of God and of
his appointed order, rejoiceth and maintaineth that monstrous
authority, as a thing lawful and just. The insolent joy, the
bonfires and banqueting, which were in London, and elsewhere in
England, when that cursed Jezebel was proclaimed queen, did witness
to my heart that men were become more than enraged; for else how
could they have so rejoiced at their own confusion and certain
destruction? For what man was there of so base judgment (supposing
that he had any light of God), who did not see the erecting of that
monster to be the overthrow of true religion, and the assured
destruction of England, and of the ancient liberties thereof? And
yet, nevertheless, all men so triumphed, as if God had delivered
them from all calamity.

But just and righteous, terrible and fearful, are thy judgments, O
Lord! For as sometimes thou didst so punish men for unthankfulness
­ that man shamed not to commit villainy with man, and that
because, knowing thee to be God, they glorified thee not as God  ­
even so hast thou most justly now punished the proud rebellion and
horrible ingratitude of the realms of England and Scotland. For
when thou didst offer thyself most mercifully to them both,
offering the means by the which they might have been joined
together for ever in godly concord, then was the one proud and
cruel, and the other inconstant and fickle of promise.

But yet (alas!) did miserable England further rebel against thee.
For albeit thou didst not cease to heap benefit upon benefit during
the reign of an innocent and tender king, yet no man did
acknowledge thy potent hand and marvellous working. The stout
courage of captains, the wit and policy of counsellors, the
learning of bishops, did rob thee of thy glory and honour. For what
then was heard as concerning religion, but 'the king's proceedings,
the king's proceedings must be obeyed? It is enacted by Parliament,
therefore it is treason to speak in the contrary.'

But this was not the end of this miserable tragedy. For thou didst
yet proceed to offer thy favours, sending thy prophets and
messengers to call for reformation of life in all estates. For even
from the highest to the lowest, all were declined from thee (yea,
even those that should have been the lanterns to others). Some, I
am assured, did quake and tremble, and from the bottom of their
hearts thirsted amendment, and for the same purpose did earnestly
call for discipline. But then burst forth the venom which before
lurked; then might they not contain their despiteful voices, but
with open mouths did cry, 'We will not have such a one to reign
over us.' Then, I say, was every man so stout that he would not be
brought in bondage; no, not to thee, O Lord, but with disdain did
the multitude cast from them the amiable yoke of Christ Jesus. No
man would suffer his sin to be rebuked; no man would have his life
called to trial. And thus did they refuse thee, O Lord, and thy Son
Christ Jesus to be their pastor, protector, and prince. And
therefore hast thou given them over to a reprobate mind. Thou hast
taken from them the spirit of boldness, of wisdom, and of righteous
judgment. They see their own destruction, and yet they have no
grace to avoid it. Yea, they are become so blind that, knowing the
pit, they headlong cast themselves into the same, as the nobility
of England do this day, fighting in the defence of their mortal
enemy, the Spaniard.

Finally, they are so destitute of understanding and judgment, that
although they know that there is a liberty and freedom which their
predecessors have enjoyed, yet are they compelled to bow their
necks under the yoke of Satan, and of his proud ministers,
pestilent Papists and proud Spaniards. And yet they cannot
consider, that where a woman reigneth and Papists bear authority,
that there Satan must needs be president of the council. Thus hast
thou, O Lord, in thy hot displeasure, revenged the contempt of thy
graces offered.

But, O Lord, if thou shalt retain wrath to the end, what flesh is
able to sustain? We have sinned, O Lord, and are not worthy to be
relieved. But worthy art thou, O Lord, to be a true God, and worthy
is thy Son Christ Jesus to have his evangel and glory advanced,
which both are trodden under foot in this cruel murder and
persecution, which the builders of Babylon commit in their fury,
have raised against thy children for the establishing of their
kingdom. Let the sobs therefore of thy prisoners, O Lord, pass up
to thine ears; consider their affliction; and let the eyes of thy
mercy look down upon the blood of such as die for testimony of thy
eternal verity; and let not thine enemies mock thy judgment for
ever. To thee, O Lord, I turn my wretched and wicked heart; to thee
alone I direct my complaint and groans; for in that isle to thy
saints there is left no comfort.

Albeit I have thus (talking with my God in the anguish of my heart)
somewhat digressed, yet have I not utterly forgotten my former
proposition: to wit, that it is a thing repugnant to the order of
nature that any woman be exalted to rule over men. For God hath
denied unto her the office of a head. And in the treating of this
part, I remember that I have made the nobility both of England and 
Scotland inferior to brute beasts, for they do to women that which
no male amongst the common sort of beasts can be proved to do to
their female: that is, they reverence them, and quake at their
presence; they obey their commandments, and that against God.
Wherefore I judge them not only subjects to women, but slaves of
Satan, and servants of iniquity.

If any man thinks these my words sharp or vehement, let him
consider that the offence is more heinous than can be expressed by
words. For where all things be expressly concluded against the
glory and honour of God, and where the blood of the saints of God
is commanded to be shed, whom shall we judge, God or the devil, to
be president of that council? Plain it is, that God ruleth not by
his love, mercy, nor grace in the assembly of the ungodly; then it
resteth that the devil, the prince of this world, doth reign over
such tyrants. Whose servants, I pray you, shall then be judged,
such as obey and execute their tyranny? God, for his great mercies'
sake, illuminate the eyes of men, that they may perceive into what
miserable bondage they are brought by the monstiferous empire of
women!


The second glass which God hath set before the eyes of man, wherein
he may behold the order which pleaseth his wisdom (concerning
authority and dominion) is that commonwealth to which it pleased
his Majesty to appoint and give laws, statutes, rites, and
ceremonies, not only concerning religion, but also touching their
policy and regiment of the same. And against that order it doth
manifestly repugn, that any woman shall occupy the throne of God:
that is, the royal seat which he by his word hath appointed to man;
as in giving the law to Israel,  is evident, concerning the
election of a king. For thus it is written, If thou shalt say, 'I
will appoint a king above me, as the rest of the nations which are
about me;' thou shalt make thee a king, whom the Lord thy God shall
choose: one from amongst the midst of thy brethren thou shalt
appoint king above thee. Thou mayest not make a stranger, that is
not thy brother. Here expressly is a man appointed to be chosen
king, and a man native amongst themselves; by which precept are all
women and all strangers secluded.

What may be objected for the part or election of a stranger shall
be, God willing, answered in The Blast of the Second Trumpet. For
this present, I say, that the erecting of a woman to that honour is
not only to invert the order which God hath established, but also
it is to defile, pollute, and profane (so far as in man lies) the
throne and seat of God, which he hath sanctified and appointed for
man only, in the course of this wretched life, to occupy and
possess as his minister and lieutenant, secluding from the same all
women, as before is expressed.

If any think that the fore written law did bind the Jews only, let
the same man consider that the election of a king and appointing of
judges did neither appertain to the ceremonial law, neither yet was
it merely judicial; but that it did flow from the moral law, as an
ordinance having respect to the conservation of both the tables.
For the office of the magistrate ought to have the first and chief
respect to the glory of God, commanded and contained in the former
table, as is evident by that which was enjoined to Joshua by God,
what time he was accepted and admitted ruler and governor over his
people, in these words: Thou shalt divide the inheritance to this
people, the which I have sworn to their fathers to give unto them;
so that thou be valiant and strong, that thou mayest keep and do
according to that holy law, which my servant Moses hast commanded
thee. Thou shalt not decline from it, neither to the right hand,
neither to the left hand, that thou mayest do prudently in all
things that thou taketht in hand. Let not the book of this law
depart from thy mouth; but meditate in it day and night, that thou
mayest keep and do according to everything that is written in it.
For then shall thy ways prosper, and then shalt thou do prudently,
etc..

And the same precept giveth God by the mouth of Moses to kings,
after they be elected, in these words: When he shall sit in the
throne, or seat of his kingdom, he shall write to himself a copy of
this law in a book. And that shall be with him, that he may read in
it all the days of his life; that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God, to keep all the words of this law, and all these statutes,
that he may do them,etc.. Of these two places it is evident, that
principally it appertaineth to the king, or to the chief
magistrate, to know the will of God, to be instructed in his law
and statutes, and to promote his glory with his whole heart and
study, which be the chief points of the first table.

No man denieth, but that the sword is committed to the magistrate,
to the end that he should punish vice and maintain virtue. To
punish vice, I say: not only that which troubles the tranquillity
and quiet estate of the commonwealth (by adultery, theft, or murder
committed), but also such vices as openly impugn the glory of God,
as idolatry, blasphemy, and manifest heresy, taught and obstinately
maintained, as the histories and notable acts of Hezekiah,
Jehoshaphat, and Josiah do plainly teach us; whose study and care
was not only to glorify God in their own life and conversation, but
also they unfeignedly did travail to bring their subjects to the
true worshipping and honouring of God; and did destroy all
monuments of idolatry, did punish to death the teachers of it, and
removed from office and honours such as were maintainers of those
abominations. Whereby, I suppose, that it be evident, that the
office of the king, or supreme magistrate, hath respect to the law
moral, and to the conservation of both the tables.

Now, if the law moral be the constant and unchangeable will of God,
to which the Gentile is no less bound than was the Jew; and if God
will, that amongst the Gentiles the ministers and executors of his
law be now appointed, as sometimes they were appointed amongst the
Jews; further, if the execution of justice be no less requisite in
the policy of the Gentiles, than ever it was amongst the Jews; what
man can be so foolish to suppose or believe, that God will now
admit those persons to sit in judgment, or to reign over men in the
commonwealth of the Gentiles, whom he by his expressed word and
ordinance did before debar and exclude from the same? And that
women were excluded from the royal seat, the which ought to be the
sanctuary to all poor afflicted, and therefore is justly called the
seat of God (besides the place before recited of the election of a
king, and besides the places of the New Testament, which be most
evident), the order and election which were kept in Judah and
Israel doth manifestly declare. For when the males of the kingly
stock failed, as oft as it chanced in Israel, and sometimes in
Judah, it never entered into the hearts of the people to choose and
promote to honours any of the king's daughters (had he never so
many); but knowing God's vengeance to be poured forth upon the
father by the taking away of his sons, they had no further respect
to his stock, but elected such one man or other as they judged most
apt for that honour and authority. Of which premises, I conclude
(as before) that to promote a woman head over men is repugnant to
nature, and a thing most contrarious to that order which God hath
approved in that commonwealth which he did institute and rule by
his word.

But now to the last point: to wit, that the empire of a woman is a
thing repugnant to justice, and the destruction of every
commonwealth where it is received. In probation whereof, because
the matter is more than evident, I will use few words.

First, I say, if justice be a constant and perpetual will to give
to every person their own right (as the most learned in all ages
have defined it to be), then to give, or to will to give, to any
person that which is not their right, must repugn to justice. But
to reign above man can never be the right to woman, because it is a
thing denied unto her by God, as is before declared. Therefore, to
promote her to that estate or dignity can be nothing else but
repugnancy to justice. If I should speak no more, this were
sufficient. For except that either they can improve the definition
of justice, or else that they can entreat God to revoke and call
back his sentence pronounced against woman, they shall be compelled
to admit my conclusion.

If any find fault with justice as it is defined, he may well accuse
others, but me he shall not hurt, for I have the shield, the
weapon, and the warrant of him, who assuredly will defend this
quarrel; and he commandeth me to cry: Whatsoever repugneth to the
will of God, expressed in his most sacred word, repugneth to
justice; but that women have authority over men, repugneth to the
will of God expressed in his word; and therefore my Author commands
me to conclude, without fear, that all such authority repugneth to
justice. The first part of the argument, I trust, neither Jew nor
Gentile deny; for it is a principle not only universally confessed,
but also so deeply printed in the heart of man, be his nature never
so corrupted, that whether he will or not, he is compelled at one
time or other to acknowledge and confess that justice is violated
when things are done against the will of God, expressed by his
word. And to this confession are no less the reprobate co-acted and
constrained, than be the children of God, albeit to a divers end.

The elect, with displeasure of their fact, confess their offence,
having access to grace and mercy, as did Adam, David, Peter, and
all other penitent offenders. But the reprobate, notwithstanding
they are compelled to acknowledge the will of God to be just, the
which they have offended, yet are they never inwardly displeased
with their iniquity, but rage, complain, and storm against God,
whose vengeance they cannot escape ­ as did Cain, Judas, Herod,
Julian called Apostate, yea, Jezebel and Athaliah. For Cain no
doubt was convicted in conscience that he had done against justice
in murdering of his brother. Judas did openly before the high
priest confess that he had sinned in betraying innocent blood.
Herod, being stricken by the angel, did mock those his flatterers,
saying unto them, Behold thy God (meaning of himself) cannot now
preserve himself from corruption and worms. Julian was compelled in
the end to cry, O, Galilean! (so always in contempt did he name our
Saviour Jesus Christ) thou hast now overcome. And who doubts but
Jezebel and Athaliah, before their miserable end, were convicted in
their cankered consciences to acknowledge that the murder which
they had committed, and the empire which the one had six years
usurped, were repugnant to justice? Even so shall they, I doubt
not, which this day do possess and maintain that monstiferous
authority of women, shortly be compelled to acknowledge that their
studies and devices have been bent against God, and that all such
authority as women have usurped repugneth to justice; because, as I
have said, it repugneth to the will of God expressed in his sacred
word.

And if any man doubt hereof, let him mark well the words of the
apostle, saying, I permit not a woman to teach, neither yet to
usurp authority above man. No man, I trust, will deny these words
of the apostle to be the will of God expressed in his word; and he
saith openly, I permit not, etc., which is as much as I will not,
that a woman have authority, charge, or power over man; for so much
importeth the Greek word authentein in that place. Now, let man and
angel conspire against God; let them pronounce their laws, and say,
We will suffer women to bear authority: who then can depose them?
Yet shall this one word of the eternal God, spoken by the mouth of
a weak man, thrust them every one into hell. Jezebel may for a time
sleep quietly in the bed of her fornication and whoredom; she may
teach and deceive for a season; but neither shall she preserve
herself, neither yet her adulterous children, from great
affliction, and from the sword of God's vengeance, which shall
shortly apprehend such works of iniquity. The admonition I defer to
the end.

Here I might bring in the oppression and injustice which is
committed against realms and nations, which some times lived free,
and now are brought in bondage of foreign nations by the reason of
this monstiferous authority and empire of women. But that I delay
till better opportunity. And now I think it expedient to answer
such objections as carnal and worldly men, yea, men ignorant of
God, use to make for maintenance of this tyranny (authority it is
not worthy to be called) and most unjust empire of woman.

First, they do object the examples of Deborah, and of Huldah, the
prophetess, of whom the one judged Israel, and the other, by all
appearance, did teach and exhort.

Secondarily, they do object the law made by Moses for the daughters
of Zelophehad.

Thirdly, the consent of the estates of such realms as have approved
the empire and regiment of women.

And last, the long custom which hath received the regiment of
women, their valiant acts and prosperity, together with some
papistical laws which have confirmed the same.

To the first I answer, that particular examples do establish no
common law. The causes were known to God alone, why he took the
spirit of wisdom and force from all men of those ages; and did so
mightily assist women against nature, and against his ordinary
course; that the one he made a deliverer to his afflicted people
Israel, and to the other he gave not only perseverance in the true
religion, when the most part of men had declined from the same, but
also to her he gave the spirit of prophecy, to assure King Josiah
of the things which were to come. With these women, I say, did God
work potently and miraculously; yea, to them he gave most singular
grace and privilege.

But who hath commanded that a public, yea, a tyrannical and most
wicked law be established upon these examples? The men that object
the same are not altogether ignorant that examples have no strength
when the question is of law. As if I should ask, What marriage is
lawful. And it should be answered, that lawful it is to man not
only to have many wives at once, but also it is lawful to marry two
sisters, and to enjoy them both living at once, because that David,
Jacob, and Solomon, servants of God, did the same. I trust that no
man would justify the vanity of this reason. Or if the question
were demanded, if a Christian, with a good conscience, may defraud,
steal, or deceive? And answer were made, that so he might, by the
example of the Israelites, who, at God's commandment, deceived the
Egyptians, and spoiled them of their garments, gold, and silver: I
think likewise this reason should be mocked.

And what greater force, I pray you, hath the former argument:
Deborah did rule in Israel, and Huldah spoke prophecy in Judah;
ergo, it is lawful for women to reign above realms and nations, or
to teach in the presence of men. The consequent is vain, and of
none effect. For of examples, as is before declared, we may
establish no law; but we are always bound to the law written, and
to the commandment expressed in the same. And the law written and
pronounced by God forbiddeth no less that any woman reign over man,
than it forbiddeth man to take plurality of wives, to marry two
sisters living at once, to steal, to rob, to murder, or to lie. If
any of these hath been transgressed, and yet God hath not imputed
the same, it maketh not the like fact or deed lawful unto us. For
God (being free) may, for such causes as are approved by his
inscrutable wisdom, dispense with the rigour of his law, and may
use his creatures at his pleasure. But the same power is not
permitted to man, whom he hath made subject to his law, and not to
the examples of fathers. And this I think sufficient to the
reasonable and moderate spirits.

But to repress the raging of woman's madness, I will descend
somewhat deeper into the matter; and not fear to affirm, that as we 
find a contrary spirit in all these most wicked women (that this
day be exalted in to this tyrannical authority) to the spirit that
was in those godly matrons; so I fear not, I say, to affirm, that
their condition is unlike, and that their end shall be diverse. In
those matrons, we find that the spirit of mercy, truth, justice,
and of humility did reign. Under them we find that God did show
mercy to his people, delivering them from the tyranny of strangers,
and from the venom of idolatry, by the hands and counsel of those
women. But in these of our ages, we find cruelty, falsehood, pride,
covetousness, deceit, and oppression. In them we also find the
spirit of Jezebel and Athaliah; under them we find the simple
people oppressed, the true religion extinguished, and the blood of
Christ's members most cruelly shed; and, finally, by their
practices and deceit, we find ancient realms and nations given and
betrayed into the hands of strangers, the titles and liberties of
them taken from the just possessors. Which one thing is an evident
testimony, how unlike our mischievous Marys be unto Deborah, under
whom were strangers chased out of Israel, God so raising her up to
be a mother and deliverer to his oppressed people. But (alas!) he
hath raised up these Jezebels to be the uttermost of his plagues,
the which man's unthankfulness hath long deserved. But his secret
and most just judgment shall neither excuse them, neither their
maintainers, because their counsels be divers.

But to prosecute my purpose, let such as list to defend these
monsters in their tyranny prove, first, that their sovereign
mistresses be like to Deborah in godliness and piety; and
secondarily, that the same success doth follow their tyranny, which
did follow the extraordinary regiment of that godly matron. Which
thing, although they were able to do, (as they never shall be,
though they blow till they burst) yet shall her example profit them
nothing at all. For they are never able to prove that either
Deborah, or any other godly woman (having commendation of the Holy
Ghost within the scriptures), hath usurped authority above any
realm or nation by reason of their birth and blood; neither yet did
they claim it by right or inheritance; but God by his singular
privilege, favour, and grace, exempted Deborah from the common
malediction given to women in that behalf; and against nature he
made her prudent in counsel, strong in courage, happy in regiment,
and a blessed mother and deliverer to his people. The which he did,
partly to advance and notify the power of his majesty, as well to
his enemies as to his own people, in that he declared himself able
to give salvation and deliverance by means of the most weak
vessels; and partly he did it to confound and ashame all men of
that age, because they had for the most part declined from his true
obedience. And therefore was the spirit of courage, regiment, and
boldness taken from them for a time, to their confusion and further
humiliation.

But what maketh this for Mary and her match Philip? One thing I
would ask of such as depend upon the example of Deborah, whether
she was widow or wife when she judged Israel, and when God gave
that notable victory to his people under her? If they answer she
was a widow, I would lay against them the testimony of the Holy
Ghost, witnessing that she was wife to Lapidoth. And if they will
shift and allege that so she might be called, notwithstanding that
her husband was dead: I urge them further, that they are not able
to prove it to be any common phrase and manner of speech in the
scriptures, that a woman shall be called the wife of a dead man,
except that there be some note added, whereby it may be known that
her husband is departed, as is witnessed of Anna. But in this place
of the Judges, there is no note added that her husband should be
dead, but rather the contrary expressed. For the text saith, In
that time a woman named Deborah, a prophetess, wife to Lapidoth,
judged Israel. The Holy Ghost plainly speaketh, that what time she
judged Israel, she was wife to Lapidoth. If she was wife, and if
she ruled all alone in Israel, then I ask, Why did she not prefer
her husband to that honour to be captain, and to be leader to the
host of the Lord? If any think that it was her husband, the text
proveth the contrary; for it affirmeth that Barak, of the tribe of
Naphtali, was appointed to that office. If Barak had been her
husband, to what purpose should the Holy Ghost so diligently have
noted the tribe, and another name than was before expressed? Yea,
to what purpose should it be noted that she send and called him?

Whereof I doubt not but that every reasonable man doth consider,
that this Barak was not her husband; and thereof, likewise, it is
evident, that her judgment or government in Israel was no such
usurped power as our queens unjustly possess this day; but that it
was a spirit of prophecy which rested upon her, what time the
multitude of the people had wrought wickedly in the eyes of the
Lord; by the which spirit she did rebuke the idolatry and iniquity
of the people, exhort them to repentance, and, in the end, did
bring them this comfort, that God should deliver them from the
bondage and thralldom of their enemies. And this she might do,
notwithstanding that another did occupy the place of the supreme
magistrate (if any was in those days in Israel), for so I find did
Huldah, the wife of Shallum, in the days of Josiah, king of Judah,
speak prophecy and comfort the king; and yet he resigned to her
neither the scepter nor the sword.

That this our interpretation, how that Deborah did judge in Israel,
is the true meaning of the Holy Ghost, the pondering and weighing
of the history shall manifestly prove. When she sendeth for Barak,
I pray you, in whose name giveth she him his charge? Doth she speak
to him as kings and princes use to speak to their subjects in such
cases? No, but she speaketh as she that had a special revelation
from God, which neither was known to Barak, nor to the people,
saying, Hath not the Lord God of Israel commanded thee? This is her
preface, by the which she would stir up the dull senses of Barak
and of the people, willing to persuade unto them, that the time was
come when God would show himself their protector and deliverer; in
which preface, she usurpeth to herself neither power nor authority.
For she saith not, I, being thy princess, thy mistress, thy
sovereign lady and queen, command thee upon thy allegiance, and
under pain of treason, to go and gather an army. No, she spoils
herself of all power to command, attributing that authority to God,
of whom she had her revelation and certitude to appoint Barak
captain, which after appeareth more plainly. For when she had
declared to him the whole counsel of God, appointing unto him as
well the number of his soldiers, as the tribes out of which they
should be gathered; and when she had appointed the place of battle
(which she could not have done but by special revelation from God),
and had assured him of victory in the name of God; and yet that he
fainted, and openly refused to enter in to that journey, except
that the prophetess would accompany him; she did use against him no
external power, she did not threaten him with rebellion and death.
But for assurance of his faint heart and weak conscience, being
content to go with him, she pronounces, that the glory should not
be his in that journey, but that the Lord should sell Siserah into
the hand of a woman.

Such as have more pleasure in light than in darkness may clearly
perceive that Deborah did usurp no such power nor authority as our
queens do this day claim; but that she was endued with the spirit
of wisdom, of knowledge, and of the true fear of God, and by the
same she judged the facts of the rest of the people. She rebuked
their defection and idolatry, yea, and also did redress to her
power the injuries that were done by man to man. But all this, I
say, she did by the spiritual sword, that is, by the word of God,
and not by any temporal regiment or authority which she did usurp
over Israel: in which, I suppose, at that time there was no lawful
magistrate, by the reason of their great affliction. For so
witnesseth the history, saying, And Ehud being dead, the Lord sold
Israel into the hand of Jabin, king of Canaan; and he by Siserah
his captain afflicted Israel greatly the space of twenty years. And
Deborah herself, in her song of thanksgiving, confesseth that
before she did arise mother in Israel, and in the days of Jael,
there was nothing but confusion and trouble.

If any stick to the term, alleging that the Holy Ghost saith that
she judged Israel, let them understand that neither doth the Hebrew
word, neither yet the Latin, always signify civil judgment, or the
execution of the temporal sword; but most commonly is taken in the
sense which we have before expressed. For of Christ it is said, He
shall judge many nations, and that, He shall pronounce judgment to
the Gentiles  and yet it is evident that he was no minister of the
temporal sword. God commanded Jerusalem and Judah to judge betwixt
him and his vineyard, and yet he appointed not them all to be civil
magistrates.

To Ezekiel it is said, Shalt thou not judge them, son of man? And
after, Thou son of man, shalt thou not judge? Shalt thou not judge,
I say, the city of blood? And also, Behold, I shall judge betwixt
beast and beast. And such places, in great number, are to be found
throughout the holy scriptures. And yet I trust no man will be so
foolish as to think, that any of the prophets were appointed by God
to be politic judges, or to punish the sins of man by corporeal
punishment. No, the manner of their judgment is expressed in these
words: Declare to them all their abominations; and thou shalt say
to them, 'Thus saith the Lord God, A city shedding blood in the
midst of her, that her time may approach, and which hath made idols
against herself that she might be polluted; thou hast transgressed
in the blood which thou hast shed; and thou are polluted in the
idols which thou hast made'.

Thus, I say, do the prophets of God judge, pronouncing the sentence
of God against malefactors. And so I doubt not but Deborah judged,
what time Israel had declined from God, rebuking their defection,
and exhorting them to repentance, without usurpation of any civil
authority. And if the people gave unto her for a time any reverence
or honour, as her godliness and happy counsel did well deserve, yet
was it no such empire as our monsters claim; for which of her sons
or nearest kinsmen left she ruler and judge in Israel after her?
The Holy Ghost expresseth no such thing; whereof it is evident,
that by her example God offereth no occasion to establish any
regiment of women above men, realms, and nations.

But now to the second objection, in which women require (as to them
appeareth) nothing but equity and justice, whilst they, and their
patrons for them, require dominion and empire above men. For this
is their question: Is it not lawful that women have their right and
inheritance, like as the daughters of Zelophehad were commanded by
the mouth of Moses, to have their portion of ground in their tribe?

I answer, it is not only lawful that women possess their
inheritance, but I affirm also that justice and equity require that
so they do. But therewith I add that which gladly they list not
understand, that to bear rule or authority over man can never be
right nor inheritance to woman; for that can never be just
inheritance to any person which God by his word hath plainly denied
unto them. But to all women hath God denied authority above man, as
most manifestly is before declared; therefore to her it can never
be inheritance. And thus must the advocates of our ladies provide
some better example and stronger argument, for the law made in
favour of the daughters of Zelophehad will serve them nothing.

And assuredly great wonder it is, that in so great light of God's
truth, men list to grope and wander in darkness. For let them speak
of conscience, if the petition of any of these forenamed women was
to reign over any one tribe, yea, or yet over any one man within
Israel. Plain it is they did not, but only required that they might
have a portion of ground among the men of their tribe, lest that
the name of their father should be abolished. And this was granted
unto them without respect to any civil regiment. And what maketh
this, I pray you, for the establishing of this monstrous empire of
women? The question is not, if women may not succeed to possession,
substance, patrimony, or inheritance, such as fathers may leave to
their children; for that I willingly grant. But the question is, if
women may succeed to their fathers in offices, and chiefly to that
office, the executor whereof doth occupy the place and throne of
God. And that I absolutely deny, and fear not to say, that to place
a woman in authority above a realm is to pollute and profane the
royal seat, the throne of justice, which ought to be the throne of
God; and that to maintain them in the same is nothing else but
continually to rebel against God.

One thing there is yet to be noted and observed in the law made
concerning the inheritance of the daughters of Zelophehad: to wit,
that it was forbidden unto them to marry without their own tribe,
lest that such portion as fell to their lot should be transferred
from one tribe to another, and so should the tribe of Manasseh be
defrauded and spoiled of their just inheritance by their occasion.
For avoiding of which, it was commanded by Moses that they should
marry in the family or household of the tribe and kindred of their
father. Wonder it is, that the advocates and patrons of the right
of our ladies did not consider and ponder this law, before that
they counselled the blind princes and unworthy nobles of their
country to betray the liberties thereof into the hands of
strangers: England, for satisfying of the inordinate appetites of
that cruel monster Mary (unworthy, by reason of her bloody tyranny,
of the name of a woman), betrayed, alas! to the proud Spaniard; and
Scotland, by the rash madness of foolish governors, and by the
practices of a crafty dame, resigned likewise, under the title of
marriage, into the power of France.

Doth such translation of realms and nations please the justice of
God? Or is the possession, by such means obtained, lawful in his
sight? Assured I am that it is not. No otherwise, I say, than is
that possession whereunto thieves, murderers, tyrants and
oppressors do attain by theft, murder, tyranny, violence, deceit,
and oppression, which God of his secret (but yet most just)
judgment doth often permit for punishment, as well of the sufferers
as of the violent oppressors, but doth never approve the same as
lawful and godly. For if he would not permit that the inheritance
of the children of Israel should pass from one tribe to another by
the marriage of any daughter, notwithstanding that they were all
one people, all spoke one tongue, all were descended of one father,
and all did profess one God and one religion; if yet, I say, God
would not suffer that the commodity and usual fruit which might be
gathered of the portion of ground limited and assigned to one tribe
should pass to another, will he suffer that the liberties, laws,
commodities, and fruits of whole realms and nations be given into
the power and distribution of others by the reason of marriage? and
in the powers of such as besides that they are of a strange tongue,
of strange manners and laws, they are also ignorant of God, enemies
to his truth, deniers of Christ Jesus, persecutors of his true
members, and haters of all virtue? As the odious nation of
Spaniards doth manifestly declare, who for very despite which they
do bear against Christ Jesus, whom their forefathers did crucify
(for Jews they are, as histories do witness, and they themselves
confess), do this day make plain war against all true professors of
his holy gospel. And how blindly and outrageously the French king
and his pestilent prelates do fight against the verity of God, the
flaming fires which lick up the innocent blood of Christ's members
do witness, and by his cruel edicts is notified and proclaimed. And
yet to these two cruel tyrants (to France and Spain I mean) is the
right and possession of England and Scotland appointed. But just or
lawful shall that possession never be, till God do change the
statute of his former law, which he will not do for the pleasure of
man. For he hath not created the earth to satisfy the ambition of
two or three tyrants, but for the universal seed of Adam; and hath
appointed and defined the bounds of their habitation, to divers
nations assigning divers countries, as he himself confesseth,
speaking to Israel in these words: You shall pass by the bounds and
limits of thy brethren, the sons of Esau, who dwell in Mt. Seir.
They shall fear you; but take diligent heed that ye show not
yourselves cruel against them; for I will give you no part of their
land; no, not the breadth of a foot. For Mt. Seir I have given to
Esau to be possessed. And the same he doth witness to the sons of
Lot, to whom he had given Ar to be possessed.

And Moses plainly affirmeth, that when the Almighty did distribute
and divide the possessions to the Gentiles, and when he did
disperse and scatter the sons of men, that then he did appoint the
limits and bounds of peoples, for the number of the sons of Israel.
Whereof it is plain, that God hath not exposed the earth in prey to
tyrants, making all things lawful which by violence and murder they
may possess; but that he hath appointed to every several nation a
several possession, willing them to stand content (as nature did
teach an ethnic to affirm) with that portion which by lot and just
means they had enjoyed. For what causes God permitted this his
distribution to be troubled, and the realms of ancient nations to
be possessed of strangers, I delay at this time to entreat. Only
this I have recited, to give the world to understand that the
reign, empire, and authority of women have no ground within God's
scriptures. Yea, that realms or provinces possessed by their
marriage is nothing but unjust conquest; for so little doth the law
made for the daughters of Zelophehad help the cause of thy queens,
that utterly it fighteth against them, both damning their authority
and fact. But now to the third objection.

The consent, say they, of realms and laws pronounced and admitted
in this behalf, long conseutude and custom, together with the
felicity of some women in their empires, have established their
authority. To whom I answer, that neither may the tyranny of
princes, neither the foolishness of people, neither wicked laws
made against God, neither yet the felicity that in this earth may
hereof ensue, make that thing lawful which he by his word hath
manifestly condemned. For if the approbation of princes and people,
and laws made by men, or the consent of realms, may establish
anything against God and his word, then should idolatry be
preferred to the true religion; for more realms and nations, more
laws and decrees published by emperors, with common consent of
their counsels, have established the one than have approved the
other. And yet I think that no man of sound judgment will therefore
justify and defend idolatry; no more ought any man to maintain this
odious empire of women, although that it were approved of all men
by their laws. For the same God, that in plain words forbiddeth
idolatry, doth also forbid the authority of women over man, as the
words of St. Paul before rehearsed do plainly teach us. And
therefore, whether women be deposed from that unjust authority
(have they never usurped it so long), or if all such honour be
denied unto them, I fear not to affirm that they are neither
defrauded of right nor inheritance. For to woman can that honour
never be due nor lawful (much less inheritance) which God hath so
manifestly denied unto them.

I am not ignorant that the subtle wits of carnal men (which can
never be brought under the obedience of God's simple precepts), to
maintain this monstrous empire, have yet two vain shifts. First,
they allege, that albeit women may not absolutely reign by
themselves, because they may neither sit in judgment, neither
pronounce sentence, neither execute any public office; yet may they
do all such things by their lieutenants, deputies, and judges
substitute. Secondarily, say they, a woman born to rule over any
realm may choose her a husband, and to him she may transfer and
give her authority and right. To both I answer in few words.

First, that from a corrupt and venomed fountain can spring no
wholesome water. Secondarily, that no person hath power to give the
thing which doth not justly appertain to themselves. But the
authority of a woman is a corrupted fountain, and therefore from
her can never spring any lawful officer. She is not born to rule
over men, and therefore she can appoint none by her gift, nor by
her power (which she hath not), to the place of a lawful
magistrate; and therefore, who soever receiveth of a woman office
or authority are adulterous and bastard officers before God. This
may appear strange at the first affirmation, but if we will be as
indifferent and equal in the cause of God as that we can be in the
cause of man, the reason shall suddenly appear. The case supposed,
that a tyrant by conspiracy usurped the royal seat and dignity of a
king, and in the same did so establish himself, that he appointed
officers, and did what him list for a time; and in this meantime
the native king made strait inhibition of all his subjects, that
none should adhere to this traitor, neither yet receive any dignity
of him; yet, nevertheless, they would honour the same traitor as
king, and become his officers in all affairs of the realm: if after
the native prince did recover his just honour and possession,
should he repute or esteem any man of the traitor's appointment for
a lawful magistrate, or for his friend and true subject? Or should
he not rather with one sentence condemn the head with the members?
And if he so should do, who were able to accuse him of rigour, much
less condemn his sentence of injustice? And dare we deny the same
power to God in the like case? For that woman reigneth above man,
she hath obtained it by treason and conspiracy committed against
God. How can it be then, that she, being criminal and guilty of
treason against God committed, can appoint any officer pleasing in
his sight? It is a thing impossible.

Wherefore, let men that receive of women authority, honour, or
office, be most assuredly persuaded, that in so maintaining that
usurped power, they declare themselves enemies to God. If any
think, that because the realms and estates thereof have given their
consents to a woman, and have established her and her authority,
that therefore it is lawful and acceptable before God, let the same
men remember what I have said before: to wit, that God cannot
approve the doing nor consent of any multitude, concluding anything
against his word and ordinance; and therefore they must have a more
assured defence against the wrath of God than the approbation and
consent of a blinded multitude, or else they shall not be able to
stand in the presence of the consuming fire. That is, they must
acknowledge that the regiment of a woman is a thing most odious in
the presence of God. They must refuse to be her officers, because
she is a traitress and rebel against God. And finally, they must
study to repress her inordinate pride and tyranny to the uttermost
of their power.

The same is the duty of the nobility and estates, by whose
blindness a woman is promoted. First, insofar as they have most
heinously offended against God, placing in authority such as God by
his word hath removed from the same, unfeignedly they ought to call
for mercy. And, being admonished of their error and damnable fact,
in sign and token of true repentance, with common consent, they
ought to retreat that which unadvisedly and by ignorance they have
pronounced; and ought, without further delay, to remove from
authority all such persons as by usurpation, violence, or tyranny,
do possess the same. For so did Israel and Judah after they had
revolted from David, and Judah alone in the days of Athaliah. For
after that she, by murdering of her son's children, had obtained
empire over the land, and had most unhappily reigned in Judah six
years, Jehoiada the high priest called together the captains and
chief rulers of the people; and showing to them the king's son
Joash, did bind them by an oath to depose that wicked woman, and to
promote the king to his royal seat; which they faithfully did,
killing at his commandment not only that cruel and mischievous
woman, but also the people did destroy the temple of Baal, break
his altars and images, and kill Mattan, Baal's high priest, before
his altars.

The same is the duty as well of the estates as of the people that
have been blinded. First, they ought to remove from honour and
authority that monster in nature: so call I a woman clad in the
habit of a man, yea, a woman against nature reigning above man.
Secondarily, if any presume to defend that impiety, they ought not
to fear, first to pronounce, and then after to execute against them
the sentence of death. If any man be afraid to violate the oath of
obedience which they have made to such monsters, let them be most
assuredly persuaded, that as the beginning of their oaths
(proceeding from ignorance) was sin, so is the obstinate purpose to
keep the same nothing but plain rebellion against God. But of this
matter in The Second Blast, God willing, we shall speak more at
large.


And now, to put an end to The First Blast. Seeing that by the order
of nature; by the malediction and curse pronounced against woman,
by the mouth of St. Paul, the interpreter of God's sentence; by the
example of that commonwealth in which God by his word planted order
and policy; and, finally, by the judgment of the most godly
writers; God hath dejected woman from rule, dominion, empire, and
authority above man: moreover, seeing that neither the example of
Deborah, neither the law made for the daughters of Zelophehad,
neither yet the foolish consent of an ignorant multitude, be able
to justify that which God so plainly hath condemned; let all men
take heed what quarrel and cause from henceforth they do defend.

If God raise up any noble heart to vindicate the liberty of his
country, and to suppress the monstrous empire of women, let all
such as shall presume to defend them in the same most certainly
know, that in so doing they lift their hand against God, and that
one day they shall find his power to fight against their
foolishness. Let not the faithful, godly, and valiant hearts of
Christ's soldiers be utterly discouraged, neither yet let the
tyrants rejoice, albeit for a time they triumph against such as
study to repress their tyranny, and to remove them from unjust
authority. For the causes alone why he suffereth the soldiers to
fail in battle, whom nevertheless he commands to fight. As
sometimes did Israel fighting against Benjamin. The cause of the
Israelites was most just; for it was to punish that horrible
abomination of those sons of Belial, abusing the Levite's wife,
whom the Benjamites did defend; and they had God's precept to
assure them of well-doing, for he did not only command them to
fight, but also appointed Judah to be their leader and captain; and
yet fell they twice in plain battle against those most wicked
adulterers.

The secret cause of this, I say, is known to God alone. But by his
evident scriptures we may assuredly gather, that by such means doth
his wisdom sometimes beat down the pride of the flesh (for the
Israelites at the first trusted in their multitude, power, and
strength); and sometimes by such overthrows he will punish the
offences of his own children, and bring them to the unfeigned
knowledge of the same, before he will give them victory against the
manifest contemners, whom he hath appointed nevertheless to
uttermost perdition; as the end of that battle did witness. For
although with great murder the children of Israel did twice fall
before the Benjamites; yet after they had wept before the Lord,
after they had fasted and made sacrifice in sign of their unfeigned
repentance; they so prevailed against the proud tribe of Benjamin,
that after twenty-five thousand strong men of war were killed, in
battle, they destroyed man, woman, child, and beast, as well in the
fields as in the cities, which all were burned with fire; so that
only of that whole tribe six hundred men remained, who fled to the
wilderness, where they remained four months, and so were saved.

The same God who did execute this grievous punishment, even by the
hands of those whom he suffered twice to be overcome in battle,
doth this day retain his power and justice. Cursed Jezebel of
England, with the pestilent and detestable generation of Papists,
make no little brag and boast, that they have triumphed not only
against Wyatt, but also against all such as have enterprised
anything against them or their proceedings. But let her and them
consider, that yet they have not prevailed against God; his throne
is more high than that the length of their horns be able to reach.

And let them further consider, that in the beginning of this their
bloody reign, the harvest of their iniquity was not come to full 
maturity and ripeness. No! it was so green, so secret I mean, so
covered, and so hid with hypocrisy, that some men (even the
servants of God) thought it not impossible but that wolves might be
changed into lambs, and also that the viper might remove her
natural venom. But God, who doth reveal in his appointed time the
secrets of hearts, and that will have his judgments justified even
by the very wicked, hath now given open testimony of her and their
beastly cruelty. For man and woman, learned and unlearned, nobles
and men of baser sort, aged fathers and tender damsels, and
finally, the bones of the dead, as well women as men, have tasted
of their tyranny. So that now, not only the blood of father
Latimer, of the mild man of God the bishop of Canterbury, of
learned and discreet Ridley, of innocent Lady Jane Dudley, and many
godly and worthy preachers that cannot be forgotten, such as fire
hath consumed, and the sword of tyranny most unjustly hath shed, do
call for vengeance in the ears of the Lord God of hosts; but also
the sobs and tears of the poor oppressed, the groanings of the
angels (the watchmen) of the Lord, yea, and every earthly creature
abused by their tyranny, do continually cry and call for the hasty
execution of the same.

I fear not to say, that the day of vengeance, which shall apprehend
that horrible monster Jezebel of England, and such as maintain her
monstrous cruelty, is already appointed in the counsel of the
eternal. And I verily believe that it is so nigh, that she shall
not reign so long in tyranny as hitherto she hath done, when God
shall declare himself to be her enemy, when he shall pour forth
contempt upon her according to her cruelty, and shall kindle the
hearts of such as sometimes did favour her with deadly hatred
against her, that they may execute his judgments. And therefore,
let such as assist her take heed what they do; for assuredly her
empire and reign is a wall without foundation. I mean the same of
the authority of all women. It hath been underpropped this blind
time that is past, with the foolishness of people, and with the
wicked laws of ignorant and tyrannous princes. But the fire of
God's word is already laid to those rotten props (I include the
pope's law with the rest), and presently they burn, albeit we espy
not the flame. When they are consumed (as shortly they will be, for
stubble and dry timber cannot long endure the fire), that rotten
wall, the usurped and unjust empire of women, shall fall by itself
in despite of all men, to the destruction of so many as shall
labour to uphold it. And therefore let all men be advertised, for
the trumpet hath once blown.

Praise God, ye that fear him
FINIS


Source: https://archive.org/details/johnknoxfirstbla00arbe
