THE ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY 
BY
Thomas Burton ("Democritus junior")

PART 3
LOVE-MELANCHOLY AND RELIGIOUS MELANCHOLY

THE THIRD PARTITION

THE SYNOPSIS OF THE THIRD PARTITION
Love and love melancholy, Memb. 1 Sect. 1. 
   * Preface or Introduction. Subsect. 1. 
   * Love's definition, pedigree, object, fair, amiable, gracious,
     and pleasant, from which comes beauty, grace, which all
     desire and love, parts affected. 
   * Division or kinds, Subs. 2. 
      * Natural, in things without life, as love and hatred of
        elements; and with life, as vegetable, vine and elm,
        sympathy, antipathy, &c. 
      * Sensible, as of beasts, for pleasure, preservation of
        kind, mutual agreement, custom, bringing up together, &c. 
      * or Rational 
         * Simple, which hath three objects as M. 2. 
            * Profitable, Subs. 1. 
               * Health, wealth, honour, we love our benefactors:
                 nothing so amiable as profit, or that which hath
                 a show of commodity. 
            * Pleasant, Subs. 2. 
               * Things without life, made by art, pictures,
                 sports, games, sensible objects, as hawks,
                 hounds, horses; Or men themselves for similitude
                 of manners, natural affection, as to friends,
                 children, kinsmen, &c., for glory such as
                 commend us. 
               * Of women, as 
                  * Before marriage, as Heroical Mel. Sect. 2.
                    vide A.
                  * Or after marriage, as Jealousy, Sect. 3. vide B.
            * Honest, Subs. 3. 
               * Fucate in show, by some error or hypocrisy; some
                 seem and are not; or truly for virtue, honesty,
                 good parts, learning, eloquence, &c. 
         * or Mixed of all three, which extends to M. 3. 
            * Common good, our neighbour, country, friends, which 
              is charity; the defect of which is cause of much 
              discontent and melancholy. 
            * or God, Sect. 4. 
               * In excess, vide C.
               * In defect, vide D.
A. Heroical or Love-Melancholy, in which consider, 
   * Memb. 1. His pedigree, power, extent to vegetables and
     sensible creatures, as well as men, to spirits, devils, &c. 
   * His name, definition, object, part affected, tyranny. [Subs. 2.] 
      * Causes, Memb. 2. 
      * Stars, temperature, full diet, place, country, clime,
        condition, idleness, S. 1. 
      * Natural allurements, and causes of love, as beauty, its
        praise, how it allureth. 
      * Comeliness, grace, resulting from the whole or some parts,
        as face, eyes, hair, hands, &c. Subs. 2. 
      * Artificial allurements, and provocations of lust and love,
        gestures, apparel, dowry, money, &c. 
      * Quest. Whether beauty owe more to Art or Nature? Subs. 3. 
      * Opportunity of time and place, conference, discourse,
        music, singing, dancing, amorous tales, lascivious
        objects,  familiarity, gifts, promises, &c. Subs. 4. 
      * Bawds and Philters, Subs. 5. 
   * Symptoms or signs, Memb. 3. 
      * Of body 
         * Dryness, paleness, leanness, waking, sighing, &c. 
         * Quest. An detur pulsus amatorius? 
      * or Of mind. 
         * Bad, as 
            * Fear, sorrow, suspicion, anxiety, &c. 
            * A hell, torment, fire, blindness, &c. 
            * Dotage, slavery, neglect of business. 
      * or Good, as 
            * Spruceness, neatness, courage, aptness to learn
              music, singing, dancing, poetry, &c. 
   * Prognostics; despair, madness, frenzy, death, Memb. 4. 
   * Cures, Memb. 5. 
      * By labour, diet, physic, abstinence, Subs. 1. 
      * To withstand the beginnings, avoid occasions, fair and
        foul means, change of place, contrary passion, witty
        inventions, discommend the former, bring in another, Subs. 2.
      * By good counsel, persuasion, from future miseries,
        inconveniences, &c. S. 3. 
      * By philters, magical, and poetical cures, Subs. 4. 
      * To let them have their desire disputed pro and con. Impediments removed, reasons for it. Subs. 5. 
B. Jealousy, Sect. 3. 
   * His name, definition, extent, power, tyranny, Memb. 1. 
   * Division, Equivocations, kinds, Subs. 1. 
   * Improper 
   * To many beasts; as swans, cocks, bulls. 
   * To kings and princes, of their subjects, successors. 
   * To friends, parents, tutors over their children, or otherwise. 
   * or Proper 
   * Before marriage, corrivals, &c. 
   * After, as in this place our present subject. 
   * Causes, Subs. 2. 
   * In the parties themselves, 
   * Idleness, impotency in one party, melancholy, long absence. 
   * They have been naught themselves. Hard usage, unkindness, wantonness, inequality of years, persons, fortunes, &c. 
   * or from others. 
   * Outward enticements and provocations of others. 
   * Symptoms, Memb. 2. 
   * Fear, sorrow, suspicion, anguish of mind, strange actions, gestures, looks, speeches, locking up, outrages, severe laws, prodigious trials, &c. 
   * Prognostics, Memb. 3. 
   * Despair, madness, to make away themselves, and others. 
   * Cures, Memb. 4. 
   * By avoiding occasions, always busy, never to be idle. 
   * By good counsel, advice of friends, to contemn or dissemble it. Subs. 1. 
   * By prevention before marriage. Plato's communion. 
   * To marry such as are equal in years, birth, fortunes, beauty, of like conditions, &c. 
   * Of a good family, good education. To use them well. [Subs. 2.] 
   * 
   * _x264A; Religious Melancholy, Sect. 4. 
   * In excess of such as do that which is not required. Memb. 1. 
   * A proof that there is such a species of melancholy, name, object God, what his beauty is, how it allureth, part and parties affected, superstitious, idolaters, prophets, heretics, &c. Subs. 1. 
   * Causes, Subs. 2. 
   * From others 
   * The devil's allurements, false miracles, priests for their gain. Politicians to keep men in obedience, bad instructors, blind guides. 
   * or from themselves. 
   * Simplicity, fear, ignorance, solitariness, melancholy, curiosity, pride, vainglory, decayed image of God. 
   * Symptoms, Subs. 3. 
   * General 
   * Zeal without knowledge, obstinacy, superstition, strange devotion, stupidity, confidence, stiff defence of their tenets, mutual love and hate of other sects, belief of incredibilities, impossibilities. 
   * or Particular. 
   * Of heretics, pride, contumacy, contempt of others, wilfulness, vainglory, singularity, prodigious paradoxes. 
   * In superstitious blind zeal, obedience, strange works, fasting, sacrifices, oblations, prayers, vows, pseudomartyrdom, mad and ridiculous customs, ceremonies, observations. 
   * In pseudoprophets, visions, revelations, dreams, prophecies, new doctrines, &c., of Jews, Gentiles, Mahometans, &c. 
   * Prognostics, Subs. 4. 
   * New doctrines, paradoxes, blasphemies, madness, stupidity, despair, damnation. 
   * Cures, Subs. 5. 
   * By physic, if need be, conference, good counsel, persuasion, compulsion, correction, punishment. Quaeritur an cogi debent? Affir. 
   * In defect, as Memb. 2. 
   * Secure, void of grace and fears. 
   * Epicures, atheists, magicians, hypocrites, such as have cauterised consciences, or else are in a reprobate sense, worldly-secure, some philosophers, impenitent sinners, Subs. 1. 
   * or Distrustful, or too timorous, as desperate. In despair consider, 
   * Causes, Subs. 2. 
   * The devil and his allurements, rigid preachers, that wound their consciences, melancholy, contemplation, solitariness. 
   * How melancholy and despair differ. Distrust, weakness of faith. Guilty conscience for offence committed, misunderstanding, &c. 
   * Symptoms, Subs. 3. 
   * Fear, sorrow, anguish of mind, extreme tortures and horror of conscience, fearful dreams, conceits, visions, &c. 
   * Prognostics; Blasphemy, violent death, Subs. 4. 
   * Cures, Subs. 5. 
   * Physic, as occasion serves, conference, not to be idle or alone. Good counsel, good company, all comforts and contents, &c. [Subs. 6.]


THE FIRST SECTION, MEMBER, SUBSECTION.:-- The
Preface.

There will not be wanting, I presume, one or other that will much
discommend some part of this treatise of love-melancholy, and
object (which Erasmus in his preface to Sir Thomas More suspects
of his) "that it is too light for a divine, too comical a subject to
speak of love symptoms, too fantastical, and fit alone for a wanton
poet, a feeling young lovesick gallant, an effeminate courtier, or
some such idle person." And 'tis true they say: for by the
naughtiness of men it is so come to pass, as Caussinus observes, ut
castis auribus vox amoris suspecta sit, et invisa, the very name of
love is odious to chaster ears; and therefore some again, out of an
affected gravity, will dislike all for the name's sake before they read
a word; dissembling with him in Petronius, and seem to be angry
that their ears are violated with such obscene speeches, that so they
may be admired for grave philosophers and staid carriage. They
cannot abide to hear talk of love toys, or amorous discourses, vultu,
gestu, oculis in their outward actions averse, and yet in their
cogitations they are all out as bad, if not worse than others.

"Erubuit, posuitque meum Lucretia librum
Sed coram Bruto, Brute recede, legit."

 (Martial. "In Brutus' presence Lucretia blushed and laid my book
aside; when he retired, she took it up again and read.")

But let these cavillers and counterfeit Catos know, that as the Lord
John answered the Queen in that Italian Guazzo, an old, a grave
discreet man is fittest to discourse of love matters, because he hath
likely more experience, observed more, hath a more staid
judgment, can better discern, resolve, discuss, advise, give better
cautions, and more solid precepts, better inform his auditors in such
a subject, and by reason of his riper years sooner divert. Besides,
nihil in hac amoris voce subtimendum, there is nothing here to be
excepted at; love is a species of melancholy, and a necessary part
of this my treatise, which I may not omit; operi suscepto
inserviendum fuit: so Jacobus Mysillius pleadeth for himself in his
translation of Lucian's dialogues, and so do I; I must and will
perform my task. And that short excuse of Mercerus, for his edition
of Aristaenetus shall be mine, "If I have spent my time ill to write,
let not them be so idle as to read." But I am persuaded it is not so ill
spent, I ought not to excuse or repent myself of this subject; on
which many grave and worthy men have written whole volumes,
Plato, Plutarch, Plotinus, Maximus, Tyrius, Alcinous, Avicenna,
Leon Hebreus in three large dialogues, Xenophon sympos.
Theophrastus, if we may believe Athenaeus, lib. 13. cap. 9. Picus
Mirandula, Marius Aequicola, both in Italian, Kornmannus de linea
Amoris, lib. 3. Petrus Godefridus hath handled in three books, P.
Haedus, and which almost every physician, as Arnoldus,
Villanovanus, Valleriola observat. med. lib. 2. observ. 7. Aelian
Montaltus and Laurentius in their treatises of melancholy, Jason
Pratensis de morb. cap. Valescus de Taranta, Gordonius, Hercules
de Saxonia, Savanarola, Langius, &c., have treated of apart, and in
their works. I excuse myself, therefore, with Peter Godefridus,
Valleriola, Ficinus, and in Langius' words. Cadmus Milesius writ
fourteen books of love, "and why should I be ashamed to write an
epistle in favour of young men, of this subject?" A company of
stern readers dislike the second of the Aeneids, and Virgil's gravity,
for inserting such amorous passions in an heroical subject; but
Servius, his commentator, justly vindicates the poet's worth,
wisdom, and discretion in doing as he did. Castalio would not have
young men read the Canticles, because to his thinking it was too
light and amorous a tract, a ballad of ballads, as our old English
translation hath it. He might as well forbid the reading of Genesis,
because of the loves of Jacob and Rachael, the stories of Sichem
and Dinah, Judah and Thamar; reject the Book of Numbers, for the
fornications of the people of Israel with the Moabites; that of
Judges for Samson and Dalilah's embracings; that of the Kings, for
David and Bersheba's adulteries, the incest of Ammon and Thamar,
Solomon's concubines, &c. The stories of Esther, Judith, Susanna,
and many such. Dicearchus, and some other, carp at Plato's
majesty, that he would vouchsafe to indite such love toys: amongst
the rest, for that dalliance with Agatho,

"Suavia dans Agathoni, animam ipse in labra tenebam;
Aegra etenim properans tanquam abitura fuit."

For my part, saith Maximus Tyrius, a great Platonist himself, me
non tantum admiratio habet, sed etiam stupor, I do not only
admire, but stand amazed to read, that Plato and Socrates both
should expel Homer from their city, because he writ of such light
and wanton subjects, Quod Junonem cum Jove in Ida
concumbentes inducit, ab immortali nube contectos, Vulcan's net,
Mars and Venus' fopperies before all the gods, because Apollo fled,
when he was persecuted by Achilles, the gods were wounded and
ran whining away, as Mars that roared louder than Stentor, and
covered nine acres of ground with his fall; Vulcan was a summer's
day falling down from heaven, and in Lemnos Isle brake his leg,
&c., with such ridiculous passages; when, as both Socrates and
Plato, by his testimony, writ lighter themselves: quid enim tam
distat (as he follows it) quam amans a temperante, formarum
admirator a demente, what can be more absurd than for grave
philosophers to treat of such fooleries, to admire Autiloquus,
Alcibiades, for their beauties as they did, to run after, to gaze, to
dote on fair Phaedrus, delicate Agatho, young Lysis, fine
Charmides, haeccine Philosophum decent? Doth this become grave
philosophers? Thus peradventure Callias, Thrasimachus, Polus,
Aristophanes, or some of his adversaries and emulators might
object; but neither they nor Anytus and Melitus his bitter enemies,
that condemned him for teaching Critias to tyrannise, his impiety
for swearing by dogs and plain trees, for his juggling sophistry,
&c., never so much as upbraided him with impure love, writing or
speaking of that subject; and therefore without question, as he
concludes, both Socrates and Plato in this are justly to be excused.
But suppose they had been a little overseen, should divine Plato be
defamed? no, rather as he said of Cato's drunkenness, if Cato were
drunk, it should be no vice at all to be drunk. They reprove Plato
then, but without cause (as Ficinus pleads) "for all love is honest
and good, and they are worthy to be loved that speak well of love."
Being to speak of this admirable affection of love (saith Valleriola)
"there lies open a vast and philosophical field to my discourse, by
which many lovers become mad; let me leave my more serious
meditations, wander in these philosophical fields, and look into
those pleasant groves of the Muses, where with unspeakable variety
of flowers, we may make garlands to ourselves, not to adorn us
only, but with their pleasant smell and juice to nourish our souls,
and fill our minds desirous of knowledge," &c. After a harsh and
unpleasing discourse of melancholy, which hath hitherto molested
your patience, and tired the author, give him leave with Godefridus
the lawyer, and Laurentius (cap. 5.) to recreate himself in this kind
after his laborious studies, "since so many grave divines and
worthy men have without offence to manners, to help themselves
and others, voluntarily written of it." Heliodorus, a bishop, penned
a love story of Theagines and Chariclea, and when some Catos of
his time reprehended him for it, chose rather, saith Nicephorus, to
leave his bishopric than his book. Aeneas Sylvius, an ancient
divine, and past forty years of age, (as he confesseth himself, after
Pope Pius Secundus) indited that wanton history of Euryalus and
Lucretia. And how many superintendents of learning could I reckon
up that have written of light fantastical subjects? Beroaldus,
Erasmus, Alpheratius, twenty-four times printed in Spanish, &c.
Give me leave then to refresh my muse a little, and my weary
readers, to expatiate in this delightsome field, hoc deliciarum
campo, as Fonseca terms it, to season a surly discourse with a more
pleasing aspersion of love matters: Edulcare vitam convenit, as the
poet invites us, curas nugis, &c., 'tis good to sweeten our life with
some pleasing toys to relish it, and as Pliny tells us, magna pars
studiosorum amaenitates quaerimus, most of our students love
such pleasant subjects. Though Macrobius teach us otherwise, "that
those old sages banished all such light tracts from their studies, to
nurse's cradles, to please only the ear;" yet out of Apuleius I will
oppose as honourable patrons, Solon, Plato, Xenophon, Adrian, &c.
that as highly approve of these treatises. On the other side methinks
they are not to be disliked, they are not so unfit. I will not
peremptorily say as one did tam suavia dicam facinora, ut male sit
ei qui talibus non delectetur, I will tell you such pretty stories, that
foul befall him that is not pleased with them; Neque dicam ea quae
vobis usui sit audivisse, et voluptati meminisse, with that
confidence, as Beroaldus doth his enarrations on Propertius. I will
not expert or hope for that approbation, which Lipsius gives to his
Epictetus; pluris facio quum relego; semper ut novum, et quum
repetivi, repetendum, the more I read, the more shall I covet to
read. I will not press you with my pamphlets, or beg attention, but
if you like them you may. Pliny holds it expedient, and most fit,
severitatem jucunditate etiam in scriptis condire, to season our
works with some pleasant discourse; Synesius approves it, licet in
ludicris ludere, the poet admires it, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit
utile dulci; (Hor. "He has accomplished every point who has joined
the useful to the agreeable.") and there be those, without question,
that are more willing to read such toys, than I am to write: "Let me
not live," saith Aretine's Antonia, "If I had not rather hear thy
discourse, than see a play?" No doubt but there be more of her
mind, ever have been, ever will be, as Hierome bears me witness. A
far greater part had rather read Apuleius than Plato: Tully himself
confesseth he could not understand Plato's Timaeus, and therefore
cared less for it: but every schoolboy hath that famous testament of
Grunnius Corocotta Porcellus at his fingers' ends. The comical
poet,

 -- "Id sibi negoti credidit solum dari,
Populo ut placerent, quas fecissit fabulas,"

"This he took to be his only business, that the plays which he
wrote should please the people."

made this his only care and sole study to please the people, tickle
the ear, and to delight; but mine earnest intent is as much to profit
as to please; non tam ut populo placerem, quam ut populum
juvarem, and these my writings, I hope, shall take like gilded pills,
which are so composed as well to tempt the appetite, and deceive
the palate, as to help and medicinally work upon the whole body;
my lines shall not only recreate, but rectify the mind. I think I have
said enough; if not, let him that is otherwise minded, remember that
of Maudarensis, "he was in his life a philosopher" (as Ausonius
apologiseth for him) , "in his epigrams a lover, in his precepts most
severe; in his epistle to Caerellia, a wanton." Annianus, Sulpicius,
Evemus, Menander, and many old poets besides, did in scriptis
prurire, write Fescennines, Atellans, and lascivious songs; laetam
materiam; yet they had in moribus censuram, et severitatem, they
were chaste, severe, and upright livers.

"Castum esse decet pium poetam
Ipsum, versiculos nihil necesse est,
Qui tum denique habent salem et leporem."

 ("The poet himself should be chaste and pious, but his verses
need not imitate him in these respects; they may therefore contain
wit and humour.")

I am of Catullus' opinion, and make the same apology in mine own
behalf; Hoc etiam quod scribo, pendet plerumque ex aliorum
sententia et auctoritate; nec ipse forsan insanio, sed insanientes
sequor. Atqui detur hoc insanire me; Semel insanivimus omnes, et
tute ipse opinor insanis aliquando, et is, et ille, et ego, scilicet.
("This that I write depends sometimes upon the opinion and
authority of others: nor perhaps am I frantic, I only follow
madmen: But thus far I may be deranged: we have all been so at
some one time, and yourself, I think, art sometimes insane, and this
man, and that man, and I also.") Homo sum, humani a me nihil
alienum puto ("I am mortal, and think no humane action unsuited
to me.") And which he urgeth for himself, accused of the like fault,
I as justly plead, lasciva est nobis pagina, vita proba est.
Howsoever my lines err, my life is honest, vita verecunda est, musa
jocosa mihi. But I presume I need no such apologies, I need not, as
Socrates in Plato, cover his face when he spake of love, or blush
and hide mine eyes, as Pallas did in her hood, when she was
consulted by Jupiter about Mercury's marriage, quod, super nuptiis
virgo consulitur, it is no such lascivious, obscene, or wanton
discourse; I have not offended your chaster ears with anything that
is here written, as many French and Italian authors in their modern
language of late have done, nay some of our Latin pontificial
writers, Zanches, Asorius, Abulensis, Burchardus, &c., whom
Rivet accuseth to be more lascivious than Virgil in Priapeiis,
Petronius in Catalectis, Aristophanes in Lycistratae, Martialis, or
any other pagan profane writer, qui tam atrociter ( one notes) hoc
genere peccarunt ut multa ingeniosissime scripta obscaenitatum
gratia castae mentes abhorreant. 'Tis not scurrile this, but chaste,
honest, most part serious, and even of religion itself. "Incensed" (as
he said) "with the love of finding love, we have sought it, and
found it." More yet, I have augmented and added something to this
light treatise (if light) which was not in the former editions, I am
not ashamed to confess it, with a good author, quod extendi et
locupletari hoc subjectum plerique postulabant, et eorum
importunitate victus, animum utcunque renitentem eo adegi, ut jam
sexta vice calamum in manum sumerem, scriptionique longe et a
studiis et professione mea alienae, me accingerem, horas aliquas a
seriis meis occupationibus interim suffuratus, easque veluti ludo
cuidam ac recreationi destinans; (Author Coelestinae Barth.
interprete. "That, overcome by the solicitations of friends, who
requested me to enlarge and improve my volumes, I have devoted
my otherwise reluctant mind to the labour; and now for the sixth
time have I taken up my pen, and applied myself to literature very
foreign indeed to my studies and professional occupations, stealing
a few hours from serious pursuits, and devoting them, as it were, to
recreation.")

"Cogor -- retrorsum
Vela dare, atque iterare cursus
Olim reloctos" --

 (Hor. lib. 1. Ode 34. "I am compelled to reverse my sails, and
retrace my former course.")

etsi non ignorarem novos fortasse detractores novis hisce
interpolationibus meis minime defuturos. ("Although I was by no
means ignorant that new calumniators would not be wanting to
censure my new introductions.")

And thus much have I thought good to say by way of preface, lest
any man (which godefridus feared in his book) should blame in me
lightness, wantonness, rashness, in speaking of love's causes,
enticements, symptoms, remedies, lawful and unlawful loves, and
lust itself, I speak it only to tax and deter others from it, not to
teach, but to show the vanities and fopperies of this heroical or
Herculean love, and to apply remedies unto it. I will treat of this
with like liberty as of the rest.

"Sed dicam vobis, vos porro dicite multis
Millibus, et facite haec charta loquatur anus."

 (Catullus. "What I tell you, do you tell to the multitude, and
make this treatise gossip like an old woman.")

Condemn me not good reader then, or censure me hardly, if some
part of this treatise to thy thinking as yet be too light; but consider
better of it; Omnia munda mundis, a naked man to a modest woman
is no otherwise than a picture, as Augusta Livia truly said, and
mala mens, malus animus, ("Hony soit qui mal y pense.") 'tis as 'tis
taken. If in thy censure it be too light, I advise thee as Lipsius did
his reader for some places of Plautus, istos quasi Sirenum scopulos
praetervehare, if they like thee not, let them pass; or oppose that
which is good to that which is bad, and reject not therefore all. For
to invert that verse of Martial, and with Hierom Wolfius to apply it
to my present purpose, sunt mala, sunt quaedam mediocria, sunt
bona plura; some is good, some bad, some is indifferent. I say
further with him yet, I have inserted ( levicula quaedam et ridicula
ascribere non sum gravatus, circumforanea quaedam e theatris, e
plateis, etiam e popinis) some things more homely, light, or
comical, litans gratiis, &c. which I would request every man to
interpret to the best, and as Julius Caesar Scaliger besought Cardan
(si quid urbaniuscule lusum a nobis, per deos immortales te oro
Hieronyme Cardane ne me male capias) . I beseech thee, good
reader, not to mistake me, or misconstrue what is here written; Per
Musas et Charites, et omnia Poetarum numina, benigne lector, oro
te ne me male capias. 'Tis a comical subject; in sober sadness I
crave pardon of what is amiss, and desire thee to suspend thy
judgment, wink at small faults, or to be silent at least; but if thou
likest, speak well of it, and wish me good success. Extremum hunc
Arethusa mihi concede laborem.

I am resolved howsoever, velis, nolis, audacter stadium intrare, in
the Olympics, with those Aeliensian wrestlers in Philostratus,
boldly to show myself in this common stage, and in this
tragicomedy of love, to act several parts, some satirically, some
comically, some in a mixed tone, as the subject I have in hand
gives occasion, and present scene shall require, or offer itself.





SUBSECT. II.-- Love's Beginning, Object, Definition, Division.

"Love's limits are ample and great, and a spacious walk it hath,
beset with thorns," and for that cause, which Scaliger reprehends in
Cardan, "not lightly to be passed over." Lest I incur the same
censure, I will examine all the kinds of love, his nature, beginning,
difference, objects, how it is honest or dishonest, a virtue or vice, a
natural passion, or a disease, his power and effects, how far it
extends: of which, although something has been said in the first
partition, in those sections of perturbations ( "for love and hatred
are the first and most common passions, from which all the rest
arise, and are attendant," as Picolomineus holds, or as Nich.
Caussinus, the primum mobile of all other affections, which carry
them all about them) I will now more copiously dilate, through all
his parts and several branches, that so it may better appear what
love is, and how it varies with the objects, how in defect, or (which
is most ordinary and common) immoderate, and in excess, causeth
melancholy.

Love universally taken, is defined to be a desire, as a word of more
ample signification: and though Leon Hebreus, the most copious
writer of this subject, in his third dialogue make no difference, yet
in his first he distinguisheth them again, and defines love by desire.
"Love is a voluntary affection, and desire to enjoy that which is
good. Desire wisheth, love enjoys; the end of the one is the
beginning of the other; that which we love is present; that which we
desire is absent." "It is worth the labour," saith Plotinus, "to
consider well of love, whether it be a god or a devil, or passion of
the mind, or partly god, partly devil, partly passion." He concludes
love to participate of all three, to arise from desire of that which is
beautiful and fair, and defines it to be "an action of the mind
desiring that which is good." Plato calls it the great devil, for its
vehemency, and sovereignty over all other passions, and defines it
an appetite, "by which we desire some good to be present." Ficinus
in his comment adds the word fair to this definition. Love is a
desire of enjoying that which is good and fair. Austin dilates this
common definition, and will have love to be a delectation of the
heart, "for something which we seek to win, or joy to have,
coveting by desire, resting in joy." Scaliger exerc. 301. taxeth these
former definitions, and will not have love to be defined by desire or
appetite; "for when we enjoy the things we desire, there remains no
more appetite:" as he defines it, "Love is an affection by which we
are either united to the thing we love, or perpetuate our union;"
which agrees in part with Leon Hebreus.

Now this love varies as its object varies, which is always good,
amiable, fair, gracious, and pleasant. "All things desire that which
is good," as we are taught in the Ethics, or at least that which to
them seems to be good; quid enim vis mali (as Austin well infers)
dic mihi? puto nihil in omnibus actionibus; thou wilt wish no harm,
I suppose, no ill in all thine actions, thoughts or desires, nihil mali
vis; thou wilt not have bad corn, bad soil, a naughty tree, but all
good; a good servant, a good horse, a good son, a good friend, a
good neighbour, a good wife. From this goodness comes beauty;
from beauty, grace, and comeliness, which result as so many rays
from their good parts, make us to love, and so to covet it: for were
it not pleasing and gracious in our eyes, we should not seek. "No
man loves" (saith Aristotle 9. mor. cap. 5.) "but he that was first
delighted with comeliness and beauty." As this fair object varies, so
doth our love; for as Proclus holds, Omne pulchrum amabile, every
fair thing is amiable, and what we love is fair and gracious in our
eyes, or at least we do so apprehend and still esteem of it.
"Amiableness is the object of love, the scope and end is to obtain it,
for whose sake we love, and which our mind covets to enjoy." And
it seems to us especially fair and good; for good, fair, and unity,
cannot be separated. Beauty shines, Plato saith, and by reason of its
splendour and shining causeth admiration; and the fairer the object
is, the more eagerly it is sought. For as the same Plato defines it,
"Beauty is a lively, shining or glittering brightness, resulting from
effused good, by ideas, seeds, reasons, shadows, stirring up our
minds, that by this good they may be united and made one." Others
will have beauty to be the perfection of the whole composition,
"caused out of the congruous symmetry, measure, order and 
manner of parts, and that comeliness which proceeds from this
beauty is called grace, and from thence all fair things are gracious."
For grace and beauty are so wonderfully annexed, "so sweetly and
gently win our souls, and strongly allure, that they confound our
judgment and cannot be distinguished. Beauty and grace are like
those beams and shinings that come from the glorious and divine
sun," which are diverse, as they proceed from the diverse objects,
to please and affect our several senses. "As the species of beauty
are taken at our eyes, ears, or conceived in our inner soul," as Plato
disputes at large in his Dialogue de pulchro, Phaedro, Hyppias,
and after many sophistical errors confuted, concludes that beauty is
a grace in all things, delighting the eyes, ears, and soul itself; so
that, as Valesius infers hence, whatsoever pleaseth our ears, eyes,
and soul, must needs be beautiful, fair, and delightsome to us. "And
nothing can more please our ears than music, or pacify our minds."
Fair houses, pictures, orchards, gardens, fields, a fair hawk, a fair
horse is most acceptable unto us; whatsoever pleaseth our eyes and
ears, we call beautiful and fair; "Pleasure belongeth to the rest of
the senses, but grace and beauty to these two alone." As the objects
vary and are diverse, so they diversely affect our eyes, ears, and
soul itself. Which gives occasion to some to make so many several
kinds of love as there be objects. One beauty ariseth from God, of
which and divine love S. Dionysius, with many fathers and
neoterics, have written just volumes, De amore Dei, as they term it,
many paraenetical discourses; another from his creatures; there is a
beauty of the body, a beauty of the soul, a beauty from virtue,
formam martyrum, Austin calls it, quam videmus oculis animi,
which we see with the eyes of our mind; which beauty, as Tully
saith, if we could discern with these corporeal eyes, admirabili sui
amores excitaret, would cause admirable affections, and ravish our
souls. This other beauty which ariseth from those extreme parts,
and graces which proceed from gestures, speeches, several
motions, and proportions of creatures, men and women (especially
from women, which made those old poets put the three graces still
in Venus' company, as attending on her, and holding up her train)
are infinite almost, and vary their names with their objects, as love
of money, covetousness, love of beauty, lust, immoderate desire of
any pleasure, concupiscence, friendship, love, goodwill, &c. and is
either virtue or vice, honest, dishonest, in excess, defect, as shall be
showed in his place. Heroical love, religious love, &c. which may
be reduced to a twofold division, according to the principal parts
which are affected, the brain and liver. Amor et amicitia, which
Scaliger exercitat. 301. Valesius and Melancthon warrant out of
Plato f??e?? (philein) and e?a? (eran) from that speech of Pausanias
belike, that makes two Veneres and two loves. "One Venus is
ancient without a mother, and descended from heaven, whom we
call celestial; the younger, begotten of Jupiter and Dione, whom
commonly we call Venus." Ficinus, in his comment upon this
place, cap. 8. following Plato, calls these two loves, two devils, or
good and bad angels according to us, which are still hovering about
our souls. "The one rears to heaven, the other depresseth us to hell;
the one good, which stirs us up to the contemplation of that divine
beauty for whose sake we perform justice and all godly offices,
study philosophy, &c.; the other base, and though bad yet to be
respected; for indeed both are good in their own natures:
procreation of children is as necessary as that finding out of truth,
but therefore called bad, because it is abused, and withdraws our
souls from the speculation of that other to viler objects," so far
Ficinus. S. Austin, lib. 15. de civ. Dei et sup. Psal. lxiv., hath
delivered as much in effect. "Every creature is good, and may be
loved well or ill:" and "Two cities make two loves, Jerusalem and
Babylon, the love of God the one, the love of the world the other;
of these two cities we all are citizens, as by examination of
ourselves we may soon find, and of which." The one love is the
root of all mischief, the other of all good. So, in his 15. cap. lib. de
amor. Ecclesiae, he will have those four cardinal virtues to be
nought else but love rightly composed; in his 15. book de civ. Dei,
cap. 22. he calls virtue the order of love, whom Thomas following
1. part. 2. quaest. 55. art. 1. and quaest. 56. 3. quaest. 62. art. 2.
confirms as much, and amplifies in many words. Lucian, to the
same purpose, hath a division of his own, "One love was born in
the sea, which is as various and raging in young men's breasts as
the sea itself, and causeth burning lust: the other is that golden
chain which was let down from heaven, and with a divine fury
ravisheth our souls, made to the image of God, and stirs us up to
comprehend the innate and incorruptible beauty to which we were
once created." Beroaldus hath expressed all this in an epigram of
his:

"Dogmata divini memorant si vera Platonis,
Sunt geminae Veneres, et geminatus amor.
Coelestis Venus est nullo generata parente,
Quae casto sanctos nectit amore viros.
Altera sed Venus est totum vulgata per orbem,
Quae divum mentes alligat, atque hominum;
Improba, seductrix, petulans," &c.

"If divine Plato's tenets they be true,
Two Veneres, two loves there be,
The one from heaven, unbegotten still,
Which knits our souls in unity.
The other famous over all the world,
Binding the hearts of gods and men;
Dishonest, wanton, and seducing she,
Rules whom she will, both where and when."

This twofold division of love, Origen likewise follows, in his
Comment on the Canticles, one from God, the other from the devil,
as he holds (understanding it in the worse sense) which many
others repeat and imitate. Both which (to omit all subdivisions) in
excess or defect, as they are abused, or degenerate, cause
melancholy in a particular kind, as shall be shown in his place.
Austin, in another Tract, makes a threefold division of this love,
which we may use well or ill: "God, our neighbour, and the world:
God above us, our neighbour next us, the world beneath us. In the
course of our desires, God hath three things, the world one, our
neighbour two. Our desire to God, is either from God, with God, or
to God, and ordinarily so runs. From God, when it receives from
him, whence, and for which it should love him: with God, when it
contradicts his will in nothing: to God, when it seeks to him, and
rests itself in him. Our love to our neighbour may proceed from
him, and run with him, not to him: from him, as when we rejoice of
his good safety, and well doing: with him, when we desire to have
him a fellow and companion of our journey in the way of the Lord:
not in him, because there is no aid, hope, or confidence in man.
From the world our love comes, when we begin to admire the
Creator in his works, and glorify God in his creatures: with the
world it should run, if, according to the mutability of all
temporalities, it should be dejected in adversity, or over elevated in
prosperity: to the world, if it would settle itself in its vain delights
and studies." Many such partitions of love I could repeat, and
subdivisions, but least (which Scaliger objects to Cardan, Exercitat.
501.) "I confound filthy burning lust with pure and divine love," I
will follow that accurate division of Leon Hebreus, dial. 2. betwixt
Sophia and Philo, where he speaks of natural, sensible, and rational
love, and handleth each apart. Natural love or hatred, is that
sympathy or antipathy which is to be seen in animate and inanimate
creatures, in the four elements, metals, stones, gravia tendunt
deorsum, as a stone to his centre, fire upward, and rivers to the sea.
The sun, moon, and stars go still around, Amantes naturae, debita
exercere, for love of perfection. This love is manifest, I say, in
inanimate creatures. How comes a loadstone to draw iron to it? jet
chaff? the ground to covet showers, but for love? No creature, S.
Hierom concludes, is to be found, quod non aliquid amat, no stock,
no stone, that hath not some feeling of love, 'Tis more eminent in
plants, herbs, and is especially observed in vegetables; as between
the vine and elm a great sympathy, between the vine and the
cabbage, between the vine and the olive, Virgo fugit Bromium,
between the vine and bays a great antipathy, the vine loves not the
bay, "nor his smell, and will kill him, if he grow near him;" the bur
and the lentil cannot endure one another, the olive and the myrtle
embrace each other, in roots and branches if they grow near. Read
more of this in Picolomineus grad. 7. cap. 1. Crescentius lib. 5. de
agric. Baptista Porta de mag. lib. 1. cap. de plant. odio et element.
sym. Fracastorius de sym. et antip. of the love and hatred of planets,
consult with every astrologer. Leon Hebreus gives many fabulous
reasons, and moraliseth them withal.

Sensible love is that of brute beasts, of which the same Leon
Hebreus dial. 2. assigns these causes. First for the pleasure they
take in the act of generation, male and female love one another.
Secondly, for the preservation of the species, and desire of young
brood. Thirdly, for the mutual agreement, as being of the same
kind: Sus sui, canis cani, bos bovi, et asinus asino pulcherrimus
videtur, as Epicharmus held, and according to that adage of
Diogenianus, Adsidet usque graculus apud graculum, they much
delight in one another's company, Formicae grata est formica,
cicada cicadae, and birds of a feather will gather together.
Fourthly, for custom, use, and familiarity, as if a dog be trained up
with a lion and a bear, contrary to their natures, they will love each
other. Hawks, dogs, horses, love their masters and keepers: many
stories I could relate in this kind, but see Gillius de hist. anim. lib.
3. cap. 14. those two Epistles of Lipsius, of dogs and horses,
Agellius, &c. Fifthly, for bringing up, as if a bitch bring up a kid, a
hen ducklings, a hedge-sparrow a cuckoo, &c.

The third kind is Amor cognitionis, as Leon calls it, rational love,
Intellectivus amor, and is proper to men, on which I must insist.
This appears in God, angels, men. God is love itself, the fountain of
love, the disciple of love, as Plato styles him; the servant of peace,
the God of love and peace; have peace with all men and God is
with you.

 --"Quisquis veneratur Olympum,
Ipse sibi mundum subjicit atque Deum."

 "By this love" (saith Gerson) "we purchase heaven," and buy the
kingdom of God. This love is either in the Trinity itself (for the
Holy Ghost is the love of the Father and the Son, &c. John iii. 35,
and v. 20, and xiv. 31) , or towards us his creatures, as in making
the world. Amor mundum fecit, love built cities, mundi anima,
invented arts, sciences, and all good things, incites us to virtue and
humanity, combines and quickens; keeps peace on earth, quietness
by sea, mirth in the winds and elements, expels all fear, anger, and
rusticity; Circulus a bono in bonum, a round circle still from good
to good; for love is the beginner and end of all our actions, the
efficient and instrumental cause, as our poets in their symbols,
impresses, emblems of rings, squares, &c., shadow unto us,

"Si rerum quaeris fuerit quis finis et ortus,
Desine; nam causa est unica solus amor."

"If first and last of anything you wit,
Cease; love's the sole and only cause of it."

Love, saith Leo, made the world, and afterwards in redeeming of it,
"God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son for it,"
John iii. 16. "Behold what love the Father hath showed on us, that
we should be called the sons of God," 1 John iii. 1. Or by His sweet
Providence, in protecting of it; either all in general, or His saints
elect and church in particular, whom He keeps as the apple of His
eye, whom He loves freely, as Hosea xiv. 5. speaks, and dearly
respects, Charior est ipsis homo quam sibi. Not that we are fair, nor
for any merit or grace of ours, for we are most vile and base; but
out of His incomparable love and goodness, out of His Divine
Nature. And this is that Homer's golden chain, which reacheth
down from heaven to earth, by which every creature is annexed,
and depends on his Creator. He made all, saith Moses, "and it was
good;" He loves it as good.

The love of angels and living souls is mutual amongst themselves,
towards us militant in the church, and all such as love God; as the
sunbeams irradiate the earth from those celestial thrones, they by
their well wishes reflect on us, in salute hominum promovenda
alacres, et constantes administri, there is joy in heaven for every
sinner that repenteth; they pray for us, are solicitous for our good,
Casti genii.

 "Ubi regnat charitas, suave desiderium,
Laetitiaque et amor Deo conjunctus."

Love proper to mortal men is the third member of this subdivision,
and the subject of my following discourse.





MEMB. II.

SUBSECT. I.-- Love of Men, which varies as his Objects,
Profitable, Pleasant, Honest.

Valesius, lib. 3. contr. 13, defines this love which is in men, "to be
an affection of both powers, appetite and reason." The rational
resides in the brain, the other in the liver (as before hath been said
out of Plato and others) ; the heart is diversely affected of both, and
carried a thousand ways by consent. The sensitive faculty most part
overrules reason, the soul is carried hoodwinked, and the
understanding captive like a beast. "The heart is variously inclined,
sometimes they are merry, sometimes sad, and from love arise hope
and fear, jealousy, fury, desperation." Now this love of men is
diverse, and varies, as the object varies, by which they are enticed,
as virtue, wisdom, eloquence, profit, wealth, money, fame, honour,
or comeliness of person, &c. Leon Hubreus, in his first dialogue,
reduceth them all to these three, utile, jucundum, honestum,
profitable, pleasant, honest; (out of Aristotle belike 8. moral.) of
which he discourseth at large, and whatsoever is beautiful and fair,
is referred to them, or any way to be desired. "To profitable is
ascribed health, wealth, honour, &c., which is rather ambition,
desire, covetousness, than love:" friends, children, love of women,
all delightful and pleasant objects, are referred to the second. The
love of honest things consists in virtue and wisdom, and is
preferred before that which is profitable and pleasant: intellectual,
about that which is honest. St. Austin calls "profitable, worldly;
pleasant, carnal; honest, spiritual. Of and from all three, result
charity, friendship, and true love, which respects God and our
neighbour." Of each of these I will briefly dilate, and show in what
sort they cause melancholy.

Amongst all these fair enticing objects, which procure love, and
bewitch the soul of man, there is none so moving, so forcible as
profit; and that which carrieth with it a show of commodity. Health
indeed is a precious thing, to recover and preserve which we will
undergo any misery, drink bitter potions, freely give our goods:
restore a man to his health, his purse lies open to thee, bountiful he
is, thankful and beholding to thee; but give him wealth and honour,
give him gold, or what shall be for his advantage and preferment,
and thou shalt command his affections, oblige him eternally to thee,
heart, hand, life, and all is at thy service, thou art his dear and
loving friend, good and gracious lord and master, his Mecaenas; he
is thy slave, thy vassal, most devote, affectioned, and bound in all
duty: tell him good tidings in this kind, there spoke an angel, a
blessed hour that brings in gain, he is thy creature, and thou his
creator, he hugs and admires thee; he is thine for ever. No
loadstone so attractive as that of profit, none so fair an object as
this of gold; nothing wins a man sooner than a good turn, bounty
and liberality command body and soul:

"Munera (crede mihi) placant hominesque deosque;
Placatur donis Jupiter ipse datis."

"Good turns doth pacify both God and men,
And Jupiter himself is won by them."

Gold of all other is a most delicious object; a sweet light, a goodly
lustre it hath; gratius aurum quam solem intuemur, saith Austin,
and we had rather see it than the sun. Sweet and pleasant in getting,
in keeping; it seasons all our labours, intolerable pains we take for
it, base employments, endure bitter flouts and taunts, long journeys,
heavy burdens, all are made light and easy by this hope of gain: At
mihi plaudo ipse domi, simul ac nummos contemplor in arca. The
sight of gold refresheth our spirits, and ravisheth our hearts, as that
Babylonian garment and golden wedge did Achan in the camp, the
very sight and hearing sets on fire his soul with desire of it. It will
make a man run to the antipodes, or tarry at home and turn parasite,
lie, flatter, prostitute himself, swear and bear false witness; he will
venture his body, kill a king, murder his father, and damn his soul
to come at it. Formosior auri massa, as he well observed, the mass
of gold is fairer than all your Grecian pictures, that Apelles,
Phidias, or any doting painter could ever make: we are enamoured
with it,

 "Prima fere vota, et cunctis notissima templis,
Divitiae ut crescant." --

All our labours, studies, endeavours, vows, prayers and wishes, are
to get, how to compass it.

 "Haec est illa cui famulatur maximus orbis,
Diva potens rerum, domitrixque pecunia fati."

"This is the great goddess we adore and worship; this is the sole
object of our desire." If we have it, as we think, we are made for
ever, thrice happy, princes, lords, &c. If we lose it, we are dull,
heavy, dejected, discontent, miserable, desperate, and mad. Our
estate and bene esse ebbs and flows with our commodity; and as we
are endowed or enriched, so are we beloved and esteemed: it lasts
no longer than our wealth; when that is gone, and the object
removed, farewell friendship: as long as bounty, good cheer, and
rewards were to be hoped, friends enough; they were tied to thee by
the teeth, and would follow thee as crows do a carcass: but when
thy goods are gone and spent, the lamp of their love is out, and thou
shalt be contemned, scorned, hated, injured. Lucian's Timon, when
he lived in prosperity, was the sole spectacle of Greece, only
admired; who but Timon? Everybody loved, honoured, applauded
him, each man offered him his service, and sought to be kin to him;
but when his gold was spent, his fair possessions gone, farewell
Timon: none so ugly, none so deformed, so odious an object as
Timon, no man so ridiculous on a sudden, they gave him a penny to
buy a rope, no man would know him.

'Tis the general humour of the world, commodity steers our
affections throughout, we love those that are fortunate and rich, that
thrive, or by whom we may receive mutual kindness, hope for like
courtesies, get any good, gain, or profit; hate those, and abhor on
the other side, which are poor and miserable, or by whom we may
sustain loss or inconvenience. And even those that were now
familiar and dear unto us, our loving and long friends, neighbours,
kinsmen, allies, with whom we have conversed, and lived as so
many Geryons for some years past, striving still to give one another
all good content and entertainment, with mutual invitations,
feastings, disports, offices, for whom we would ride, run, spend
ourselves, and of whom we have so freely and honourably spoken,
to whom we have given all those turgent titles, and magnificent
eulogiums, most excellent and most noble, worthy, wise, grave,
learned, valiant, &c., and magnified beyond measure: if any
controversy arise between us, some trespass, injury, abuse, some
part of our goods be detained, a piece of land come to be litigious,
if they cross us in our suit, or touch the string of our commodity,
we detest and depress them upon a sudden: neither affinity,
consanguinity, or old acquaintance can contain us, but rupto jecore
exierit Caprificus. A golden apple sets altogether by the ears, as if a
marrowbone or honeycomb were flung amongst bears: father and
son, brother and sister, kinsmen are at odds: and look what malice,
deadly hatred can invent, that shall be done, Terrible, dirum,
pestilens, atrox, ferum, mutual injuries, desire of revenge, and how
to hurt them, him and his, are all our studies. If our pleasures be
interrupt, we can tolerate it: our bodies hurt, we can put it up and be
reconciled: but touch our commodities, we are most impatient: fair
becomes foul, the graces are turned to harpies, friendly salutations
to bitter imprecations, mutual feastings to plotting villainies,
minings and counterminings; good words to satires and invectives,
we revile e contra, nought but his imperfections are in our eyes, he
is a base knave, a devil, a monster, a caterpillar, a viper, a hog-
rubber, &c. Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne ("bust of a
beautiful woman with the tail of a fish.") ; the scene is altered on a
sudden, love is turned to hate, mirth to melancholy: so furiously are
we most part bent, our affections fixed upon this object of
commodity, and upon money, the desire of which in excess is
covetousness: ambition tyranniseth over our souls, as I have shown,
and in defect crucifies as much, as if a man by negligence, ill
husbandry, improvidence, prodigality, waste and consume his
goods and fortunes, beggary follows, and melancholy, he becomes
an abject, odious and "worse than an infidel, in not providing for
his family."





SUBSECT. II.-- Pleasant Objects of Love.

Pleasant objects are infinite, whether they be such as have life, or
be without life; inanimate are countries, provinces, towers, towns,
cities, as he said, Pulcherrimam insulam videmus, etiam cum non
videmus we see a fair island by description, when we see it not. The
sun never saw a fairer city, Thessala Tempe, orchards, gardens,
pleasant walks, groves, fountains, &c. The heaven itself is said to
be fair or foul: fair buildings, fair pictures, all artificial, elaborate
and curious works, clothes, give an admirable lustre: we admire,
and gaze upon them, ut pueri Junonis avem, as children do on a
peacock: a fair dog, a fair horse and hawk, &c. Thessalus amat
equum pullinum, buculum Aegyptius, Lacedaemonius Catulum,
&c., such things we love, are most gracious in our sight, acceptable
unto us, and whatsoever else may cause this passion, if it be
superfluous or immoderately loved, as Guianerius observes. These
things in themselves are pleasing and good, singular ornaments,
necessary, comely, and fit to be had; but when we fix an
immoderate eye, and dote on them over much, this pleasure may
turn to pain, bring much sorrow and discontent unto us, work our
final overthrow, and cause melancholy in the end. Many are carried
away with those bewitching sports of gaming, hawking, hunting,
and such vain pleasures, as I have said: some with immoderate
desire of fame, to be crowned in the Olympics, knighted in the
field, &c., and by these means ruinate themselves. The lascivious
dotes on his fair mistress, the glutton on his dishes, which are
infinitely varied to please the palate, the epicure on his several
pleasures, the superstitious on his idol, and fats himself with future
joys, as Turks feed themselves with an imaginary persuasion of a
sensual paradise: so several pleasant objects diversely affect
diverse men. But the fairest objects and enticings proceed from
men themselves, which most frequently captivate, allure, and make
them dote beyond all measure upon one another, and that for many
respects: first, as some suppose, by that secret force of stars, (quod
me tibi temperat astrum?) They do singularly dote on such a man,
hate such again, and can give no reason for it. Non amo te Sabidi,
&c. Alexander admired Ephestion, Adrian Antinous, Nero Sporus,
&c. The physicians refer this to their temperament, astrologers to
trine and sextile aspects, or opposite of their several ascendants,
lords of their genitures, love and hatred of planets; Cicogna, to
concord and discord of spirits; but most to outward graces. A merry
companion is welcome and acceptable to all men, and therefore,
saith Gomesius, princes and great men entertain jesters and players
commonly in their courts. But Pares cum paribus facillime
congregantur, 'tis that similitude of manners, which ties most men
in an inseparable link, as if they be addicted to the same studies or
disports, they delight in one another's companies, "birds of a
feather will gather together:" if they be of divers inclinations, or
opposite in manners, they can seldom agree. Secondly, affability,
custom, and familiarity, may convert nature many times, though
they be different in manners, as if they be countrymen, fellow-
students, colleagues, or have been fellow-soldiers, brethren in
affliction, ( acerba calamitatum societas, diversi etiam ingenii
homines conjungit) affinity, or some such accidental occasion,
though they cannot agree amongst themselves, they will stick
together like burrs, and hold against a third; so after some
discontinuance, or death, enmity ceaseth; or in a foreign place:

"Pascitur in vivis livor, post fata quiescit:
Et cecidere odia, et tristes mors obruit iras."

A third cause of love and hate, may be mutual offices, acceptum
beneficium, commend him, use him kindly, take his part in a
quarrel, relieve him in his misery, thou winnest him for ever; do the
opposite, and be sure of a perpetual enemy. Praise and dispraise of
each other, do as much, though unknown, as Schoppius by Scaliger
and Casaubonus: mulus mulum scabit; who but Scaliger with him?
what encomiums, epithets, eulogiums? Antistes sapientiae,
perpetuus dictator, literarum ornamentum, Europae miraculum,
noble Scaliger, ("The priest of wisdom, perpetual dictator,
ornament of literature, wonder of Europe.") incredibilis ingenii
praestantia, &c., diis potius quam hominibus per omnia
comparandus, scripta ejus aurea ancylia de coelo delapsa
poplitibus veneramur flexis, &c., ("Oh incredible excellence of
genius, &c., more comparable to gods' than man's, in every respect,
we venerate your writings on bended knees, as we do the shield
that fell from heaven.") but when they began to vary, none so
absurd as Scaliger, so vile and base, as his books de Burdonum
familia, and other satirical invectives may witness, Ovid, in Ibin,
Archilocus himself was not so bitter. Another great tie or cause of
love, is consanguinity: parents are dear to their children, children to
their parents, brothers and sisters, cousins of all sorts, as a hen and
chickens, all of a knot: every crow thinks her own bird fairest.
Many memorable examples are in this kind, and 'tis portenti simile,
if they do not: "a mother cannot forget her child:" Solomon so
found out the true owner; love of parents may not be concealed, 'tis
natural, descends, and they that are inhuman in this kind, are
unworthy of that air they breathe, and of the four elements; yet
many unnatural examples we have in this rank, of hard-hearted
parents, disobedient children, of disagreeing brothers, nothing so
common. The love of kinsmen is grown cold, "many kinsmen" (as
the saying is) "few friends;" if thine estate be good, and thou able,
par pari referre, to requite their kindness, there will be mutual
correspondence, otherwise thou art a burden, most odious to them
above all others. The last object that ties man and man, is
comeliness of person, and beauty alone, as men love women with a
wanton eye: which ?at e????? (chat exochen) is termed heroical, or
love-melancholy. Other loves (saith Picolomineus) are so called
with some contraction, as the love of wine, gold, &c., but this of
women is predominant in a higher strain, whose part affected is the
liver, and this love deserves a longer explication, and shall be
dilated apart in the next section.





SUBSECT. III.-- Honest Objects of Love.

Beauty is the common object of all love, "as jet draws a straw, so
doth beauty love:" virtue and honesty are great motives, and give as
fair a lustre as the rest, especially if they be sincere and right, not
fucate, but proceeding from true form, and an incorrupt judgment;
those two Venus' twins, Eros and Anteros, are then most firm and 
fast. For many times otherwise men are deceived by their flattering
gnathos, dissembling camelions, outsides, hypocrites that make a
show of great love, learning, pretend honesty, virtue, zeal, modesty,
with affected looks and counterfeit gestures: feigned protestations
often steal away the hearts and favours of men, and deceive them,
specie virtutis et umbra, when as revera and indeed, there is no
worth or honesty at all in them, no truth, but mere hypocrisy,
subtlety, knavery, and the like. As true friends they are, as he that
Coelius Secundus met by the highway side; and hard it is in this
temporising age to distinguish such companions, or to find them
out. Such gnathos as these for the most part belong to great men,
and by this glozing flattery, affability, and such like philters, so
dive and insinuate into their favours, that they are taken for men of
excellent worth, wisdom, learning, demigods, and so screw
themselves into dignities, honours, offices; but these men cause
harsh confusion often, and as many times stirs as Rehoboam's
counsellors in a commonwealth, overthrew themselves and others.
Tandlerus and some authors make a doubt, whether love and hatred
may be compelled by philters or characters; Cardan and Marbodius,
by precious stones and amulets; astrologers by election of times,
&c. as I shall elsewhere discuss. The true object of this honest love
is virtue, wisdom, honesty, real worth, Interna forma, and this love
cannot deceive or be compelled, ut ameris amabilis esto, love itself
is the most potent philtrum, virtue and wisdom, gratia gratum
faciens, the sole and only grace, not counterfeit, but open, honest,
simple, naked, "descending from heaven," as our apostle hath it, an
infused habit from God, which hath given several gifts, as wit,
learning, tongues, for which they shall be amiable and gracious,
Eph. iv. 11. as to Saul stature and a goodly presence, 1 Sam. ix. 1.
Joseph found favour in Pharaoh's court, Gen. xxxix, for his person;
and Daniel with the princes of the eunuchs, Dan. xix. 19. Christ
was gracious with God and men, Luke ii. 52. There is still some
peculiar grace, as of good discourse, eloquence, wit, honesty,
which is the primum mobile, first mover, and a most forcible
loadstone to draw the favours and good wills of men's eyes, ears,
and affections unto them. When "Jesus spake, they were all
astonished at his answers," (Luke ii. 47.) "and wondered at his
gracious words which proceeded from his mouth." An orator steals
away the hearts of men, and as another Orpheus, quo vult, unde
vult, he pulls them to him by speech alone: a sweet voice causeth
admiration; and he that can utter himself in good words, in our
ordinary phrase, is called a proper man, a divine spirit. For which
cause belike, our old poets, Senatus populusque poetarum, made
Mercury the gentleman-usher to the Graces, captain of eloquence,
and those charities to be Jupiter's and Eurymone's daughters,
descended from above. Though they be otherwise deformed,
crooked, ugly to behold, those good parts of the mind denominate
them fair. Plato commends the beauty of Socrates; yet who was
more grim of countenance, stern and ghastly to look upon? So are
and have been many great philosophers, as Gregory Nazianzen
observes, "deformed most part in that which is to be seen with the
eyes, but most elegant in that which is not to be seen." Saepe sub
attrita latitat sapientia veste. Aesop, Democritus, Aristotle,
Politianus, Melancthon, Gesner, &c. withered old men, Sileni
Alcibiadis, very harsh and impolite to the eye; but who were so
terse, polite, eloquent, generally learned, temperate and modest?
No man then living was so fair as Alcibiades, so lovely quo ad
superficiem, to the eye, as Boethius observes, but he had Corpus
turpissimum interne, a most deformed soul; honesty, virtue, fair
conditions, are great enticers to such as are well given, and much
avail to get the favour and goodwill of men. Abdolominus in
Curtius, a poor man, (but which mine author notes, "the cause of
this poverty was his honesty") for his modesty and continency from
a private person (for they found him digging in his garden) was
saluted king, and preferred before all the magnificoes of his time,
injecta ei vestis purpura auroque distincta, "a purple embroidered
garment was put upon him, and they bade him wash himself, and,
as he was worthy, take upon him the style and spirit of a king,"
continue his continency and the rest of his good parts. Titus
Pomponius Atticus, that noble citizen of Rome, was so fair
conditioned, of so sweet a carriage, that he was generally beloved
of all good men, of Caesar, Pompey, Antony, Tully, of divers sects,
&c. multas haereditates ( Cornelius Nepos writes) sola bonitate
consequutus. Operae, pretium audire, &c. It is worthy of your
attention, Livy cries, "you that scorn all but riches, and give no
esteem to virtue, except they be wealthy withal, Q. Cincinnatus had
but four acres, and by the consent of the senate was chosen dictator
of Rome." Of such account were Cato, Fabricius, Aristides,
Antonius, Probus, for their eminent worth: so Caesar, Trajan,
Alexander, admired for valour, Haephestion loved Alexander, but
Parmenio the king: Titus deliciae humani generis, and which
Aurelius Victor hath of Vespasian, the darling of his time, as Edgar
Etheling was in England, for his excellent virtues: their memory is
yet fresh, sweet, and we love them many ages after, though they be
dead: Suavem memoriam sui reliquit, saith Lipsius of his friend,
living and dead they are all one. "I have ever loved as thou
knowest" (so Tully wrote to Dolabella) "Marcus Brutus for his
great wit, singular honesty, constancy, sweet conditions; and
believe it" "there is nothing so amiable and fair as virtue." "I do
mightily love Calvisinus," (so Pliny writes to Sossius) "a most
industrious, eloquent, upright man, which is all in all with me:" the
affection came from his good parts. And as St. Austin comments on
the 84th Psalm, "there is a peculiar beauty of justice, and inward
beauty, which we see with the eyes of our hearts, love, and are
enamoured with, as in martyrs, though their bodies be torn in
pieces with wild beasts, yet this beauty shines, and we love their
virtues." The stoics are of opinion that a wise man is only fair; and
Cato in Tully 3 de Finibus contends the same, that the lineaments
of the mind are far fairer than those of the body, incomparably
beyond them: wisdom and valour according to Xenophon,
especially deserve the name of beauty, and denominate one fair, et
incomparabiliter pulchrior est (as Austin holds) veritas
Christianorum quam Helena Graecorum. "Wine is strong, the king
is strong, women are strong, but truth overcometh all things," Esd.
i. 3, 10, 11, 12. "Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom, and
getteth understanding, for the merchandise thereof is better than
silver, and the gain thereof better than gold: it is more precious than
pearls, and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compared to
her," Prov. ii. 13, 14, 15, a wise, true, just, upright, and good man, I
say it again, is only fair: it is reported of Magdalene Queen of
France, and wife to Lewis 11th, a Scottish woman by birth, that
walking forth in an evening with her ladies, she spied M. Alanus,
one of the king's chaplains, a silly, old, hard-favoured man fast
asleep in a bower, and kissed him sweetly; when the young ladies
laughed at her for it, she replied, that it was not his person that she
did embrace and reverence, but, with a platonic love, the divine
beauty of his soul. Thus in all ages virtue hath been adored,
admired, a singular lustre hath proceeded from it: and the more
virtuous he is, the more gracious, the more admired. No man so
much followed upon earth as Christ himself: and as the Psalmist
saith, xlv. 2, "He was fairer than the sons of men." Chrysostom
Hom. 8 in Mat. Bernard Ser. 1. de omnibus sanctis; Austin,
Cassiodore, Hier. in 9 Mat. interpret it of the beauty of his person;
there was a divine majesty in his looks, it shined like lightning and
drew all men to it: but Basil, Cyril, lib. 6. super. 55. Esay.
Theodoret, Arnobius, &c. of the beauty of his divinity, justice,
grace, eloquence, &c. Thomas in Psal. xliv. of both; and so doth
Baradius and Peter Morales, lib de pulchritud. Jesu et Mariae,
adding as much of Joseph and the Virgin Mary,-- haec alias forma
praecesserit omnes, ("She excelled all others in beauty.") according
to that prediction of Sibylla Cumea. Be they present or absent, near
us, or afar off, this beauty shines, and will attract men many miles
to come and visit it. Plato and Pythagoras left their country, to see
those wise Egyptian priests: Apollonius travelled into Ethiopia,
Persia, to consult with the Magi, Brachmanni, gymnosophists. The
Queen of Sheba came to visit Solomon; and "many," saith Hierom,
"went out of Spain and remote places a thousand miles, to behold
that eloquent Livy:" Multi Romam non ut urbem pulcherrimam, aut
urbis et orbis dominum Octavianum, sed ut hunc unum inviserent
audirentque, a Gadibus profecti sunt. No beauty leaves such an
impression, strikes so deep , or links the souls of men closer than
virtue.

 "Non per deos aut pictor posset,
Aut statuarius ullus fingere
Talem pulchritudinem qualem virtus habet;"

"no painter, no graver, no carver can express virtue's lustre, or
those admirable rays that come from it, those enchanting rays that
enamour posterity, those everlasting rays that continue to the
world's end." Many, saith Phavorinus, that loved and admired
Alcibiades in his youth, knew not, cared not for Alcibiades a man,
nunc intuentes quaerebant Alcibiadem; but the beauty of Socrates
is still the same; virtue's lustre never fades, is ever fresh and green,
semper viva to all succeeding ages, and a most attractive loadstone,
to draw and combine such as are present. For that reason belike,
Homer feigns the three Graces to be linked and tied hand in hand,
because the hearts of men are so firmly united with such graces. "O
sweet bands (Seneca exclaims) , which so happily combine, that
those which are bound by them love their binders, desiring withal
much more harder to be bound," and as so many Geryons to be
united into one. For the nature of true friendship is to combine, to
be like affected, of one mind,

 "Velle et nolle ambobus idem, satiataque toto
Mens aevo" --

as the poet saith, still to continue one and the same. And where this
love takes place there is peace and quietness, a true
correspondence, perfect amity, a diapason of vows and wishes, the
same opinions, as between David and Jonathan, Damon and
Pythias, Pylades and Orestes, Nysus and Euryalus, Theseus and
Pirithous, they will live and die together, and prosecute one another
with good turns. Nam vinci in amore turpissimum putant, not only
living, but when their friends are dead, with tombs and monuments,
nenias, epitaphs elegies, inscriptions, pyramids, obelisks, statues,
images, pictures, histories, poems, annals, feasts, anniversaries,
many ages after (as Plato's scholars did) they will parentare still,
omit no good office that may tend to the preservation of their
names, honours, and eternal memory. Illum coloribus, illum cera,
illum aere, &c. "He did express his friends in colours, in wax, in
brass, in ivory, marble, gold, and silver" (as Pliny reports of a
citizen in Rome) , "and in a great auditory not long since recited a
just volume of his life." In another place, speaking of an epigram
which Martial had composed in praise of him, "He gave me as
much as he might, and would have done more if he could: though
what can a man give more than honour, glory, and eternity?" But
that which he wrote peradventure will not continue, yet he wrote it
to continue. 'Tis all the recompense a poor scholar can make his
well-deserving patron, Mecaenas, friend, to mention him in his
works, to dedicate a book to his name, to write his life, &c., as all
our poets, orators, historiographers have ever done, and the greatest
revenge such men take of their adversaries, to persecute them with
satires, invectives, &c., and 'tis both ways of great moment, as
Plato gives us to understand. Paulus Jovius, in the fourth book of
the life and deeds of Pope Leo Decimus, his noble patron,
concludes in these words, "Because I cannot honour him as other
rich men do, with like endeavour, affection, and piety, I have
undertaken to write his life; since my fortunes will not give me
leave to make a more sumptuous monument, I will perform those
rites to his sacred ashes, which a small, perhaps, but a liberal wit
can afford." But I rove. Where this true love is wanting, there can
be no firm peace, friendship from teeth outward, counterfeit, or for
some by-respects, so long dissembled, till they have satisfied their
own ends, which, upon every small occasion, breaks out into
enmity, open war, defiance, heart-burnings, whispering, calumnies,
contentions, and all manner of bitter melancholy discontents. And
those men which have no other object of their love, than greatness,
wealth, authority, &c., are rather feared than beloved; nec amant
quemquam, nec amantur ab ullo: and howsoever borne with for a
time, yet for their tyranny and oppression, griping, covetousness,
currish hardness, folly, intemperance, imprudence, and such like
vices, they are generally odious, abhorred of all, both God and
men.

"Non uxor salvum te vult, non filius, omnes
Vicini oderunt," --

"wife and children, friends, neighbours, all the world forsakes
them, would feign be rid of them," and are compelled many times
to lay violent hands on them, or else God's judgments overtake
them: instead of graces, come furies. So when fair Abigail, a
woman of singular wisdom, was acceptable to David, Nabal was
churlish and evil-conditioned; and therefore Mordecai was
received, when Haman was executed, Haman the favourite, "that
had his seat above the other princes, to whom all the king's servants
that stood in the gates, bowed their knees and reverenced." Though
they flourished many times, such hypocrites, such temporising
foxes, and blear the world's eyes by flattery, bribery, dissembling
their natures, or other men's weakness, that cannot so apprehend
their tricks, yet in the end they will be discerned, and precipitated
in a moment: "surely," saith David, "thou hast set them in slippery
places," Psal. xxxvii. 5. as so many Sejani, they will come down to
the Gemonian scales; and as Eusebius in Ammianus, that was in
such authority, ad jubendum Imperatorem, be cast down headlong
on a sudden. Or put case they escape, and rest unmasked to their
lives' end, yet after their death their memory stinks as a snuff of a
candle put out, and those that durst not so much as mutter against
them in their lives, will prosecute their name with satires, libels,
and bitter imprecations, they shall male audire in all succeeding
ages, and be odious to the world's end.





MEMB. III.-- Charity composed of all three Kinds, Pleasant,
Profitable, Honest.

Besides this love that comes from profit, pleasant, honest (for one
good turn asks another in equity) , that which proceeds from the
law of nature, or from discipline and philosophy, there is yet
another love compounded of all these three, which is charity, and
includes piety, dilection, benevolence, friendship, even all those
virtuous habits; for love is the circle equant of all other affections,
of which Aristotle dilates at large in his Ethics, and is commanded
by God, which no man can well perform, but he that is a Christian,
and a true regenerate man; this is, "To love God above all, and our
neighbour as ourself;" for this love is lychnus accendens et
accensus, a communicating light, apt to illuminate itself as well as
others. All other objects are fair, and very beautiful, I confess;
kindred, alliance, friendship, the love that we owe to our country,
nature, wealth, pleasure, honour, and such moral respects, &c., of
which read copious Aristotle in his morals; a man is beloved of a
man, in that he is a man; but all these are far more eminent and
great, when they shall proceed from a sanctified spirit, that hath a
true touch of religion, and a reference to God. Nature binds all
creatures to love their young ones; a hen to preserve her brood will
run upon a lion, a hind will fight with a bull, a sow with a bear, a
silly sheep with a fox. So the same nature urgeth a man to love his
parents, ( dii me pater omnes oderint, ni te magis quam oculos
amem meos!) and this love cannot be dissolved, as Tully holds,
"without detestable offence:" but much more God's commandment,
which enjoins a filial love, and an obedience in this kind. "The love
of brethren is great, and like an arch of stones, where if one be
displaced, all comes down," no love so forcible and strong, honest,
to the combination of which, nature, fortune, virtue, happily
concur; yet this love comes short of it. Dulce et decorum pro patria
mori, ("It is sweet to die for one's country.") it cannot be expressed,
what a deal of charity that one name of country contains. Amor
laudis et patriae pro stipendio est; the Decii did se devovere,
Horatii, Curii, Scaevola, Regulus, Codrus, sacrifice themselves for
their country's peace and good.

 "Una dies Fabios ad bellum miserat omnes,
Ad bellum missos perdidit una dies."

"One day the Fabii stoutly warred,
One day the Fabii were destroyed."

Fifty thousand Englishmen lost their lives willingly near Battle
Abbey, in defence of their country. P. Aemilius l. 6. speaks of six
senators of Calais, that came with halters in their hands to the king
of England, to die for the rest. This love makes so many writers
take such pains, so many historiographers, physicians, &c., or at
least, as they pretend, for common safety, and their country's
benefit. Sanctum nomen amiciticae, sociorum communio sacra;
friendship is a holy name, and a sacred communion of friends. "As
the sun is in the firmament, so is friendship in the world," a most
divine and heavenly band. As nuptial love makes, this perfects
mankind, and is to be preferred (if you will stand to the judgment
of Cornelius Nepos) before affinity or consanguinity; plus in
amiciticia valet similitudo morum, quam affinitas, &c., the cords of
love bind faster than any other wreath whatsoever. Take this away,
and take all pleasure, joy, comfort, happiness, and true content out
of the world; 'tis the greatest tie, the surest indenture, strongest
band, and, as our modern Maro decides it, is much to be preferred
before the rest.

 "Hard is the doubt, and difficult to deem,
When all three kinds of love together meet;
And do dispart the heart with power extreme,
Whether shall weigh the balance down; to wit,
The dear affection unto kindred sweet,
Or raging fire of love to women kind,
Or zeal of friends, combin'd by virtues meet;
But of them all the band of virtuous mind,
Methinks the gentle heart should most assured bind.

For natural affection soon doth cease,
And quenched is with Cupid's greater flame;
But faithful friendship doth them both suppress,
And them with mastering discipline doth tame,
Through thoughts aspiring to eternal fame.
For as the soul doth rule the earthly mass,
And all the service of the body frame,
So love of soul doth love of body pass,
No less than perfect gold surmounts the meanest brass."

 A faithful friend is better than gold, a medicine of misery, an only
possession; yet this love of friends, nuptial, heroical, profitable,
pleasant, honest, all three loves put together, are little worth, if they
proceed not from a true Christian illuminated soul, if it be not done
in ordine ad Deum for God's sake. "Though I had the gift of
prophecy, spake with tongues of men and angels, though I feed the
poor with all my goods, give my body to be burned, and have not
this love, it profiteth me nothing," 1 Cor. xiii. 1, 3. 'tis splendidum
peccatum, without charity. This is an all-apprehending love, a
deifying love, a refined, pure, divine love, the quintessence of all
love, the true philosopher's stone, Non potest enim, as Austin
infers, veraciter amicus esse hominis, nisi fuerit ipsius primitus
veritatis, He is no true friend that loves not God's truth. And
therefore this is true love indeed, the cause of all good to mortal
men, that reconciles all creatures, and glues them together in
perpetual amity and firm league; and can no more abide bitterness,
hate, malice, than fair and foul weather, light and darkness, sterility
and plenty may be together; as the sun in the firmament (I say) , so
is love in the world; and for this cause 'tis love without an addition,
love ?at e????? (chat exochen) , love of God, and love of men.
"The love of God begets the love of man; and by this love of our
neighbour, the love of God is nourished and increased." By this
happy union of love, "all well-governed families and cities are
combined, the heavens annexed, and divine souls complicated, the
world itself composed, and all that is in it conjoined in God, and
reduced to one." "This love causeth true and absolute virtues, the
life, spirit, and root of every virtuous action, it finisheth prosperity,
easeth adversity, corrects all natural encumbrances,"
inconveniences, sustained by faith and hope, which with this our
love make an indissoluble twist, a Gordian knot, an equilateral
triangle, "and yet the greatest of them is love," 1 Cor. xiii. 13,
"which inflames our souls with a divine heat, and being so
inflamed, purged, and so purgeth, elevates to God, makes an
atonement, and reconciles us unto him." "That other love infects
the soul of man, this cleanseth; that depresses, this rears; that
causeth cares and troubles, this quietness of mind; this informs, that
deforms our life; that leads to repentance, this to heaven." For if
once we be truly linked and touched with this charity, we shall love
God above all, our neighbour as ourself, as we are enjoined, Mark
xii. 31. Matt. xix. 19. perform those duties and exercises, even all
the operations of a good Christian.

"This love suffereth long, it is bountiful, envieth not, boasteth not
itself, is not puffed up, it deceiveth not, it seeketh not his own
things, is not provoked to anger, it thinketh not evil, it rejoiceth not
in iniquity, but in truth. It suffereth all things, believeth all things,
hopeth all things," 1 Cor. xiii. 4, 5, 6, 7; "it covereth all trespasses,"
Prov, x. 12; "a multitude of sins," 1 Pet. 4, as our Saviour told the
woman in the Gospel, that washed his feet, "many sins were
forgiven her, for she loved much," Luke vii. 47; "it will defend the
fatherless and the widow," Isa. i. 17; "will seek no revenge, or be
mindful of wrong," Levit. xix. 18; "will bring home his brother's ox
if he go astray, as it is commanded," Deut. xxii. 1; "will resist evil,
give to him that asketh, and not turn from him that borroweth, bless
them that curse him, love his enemy," Matt. v; "bear his brother's
burthen," Gal. vi. 7. He that so loves will be hospitable, and
distribute to the necessities of the saints; he will, if it be possible,
have peace with all men, "feed his enemy if he be hungry, if he be
athirst give him drink;" he will perform those seven works of
mercy, "he will make himself equal to them of the lower sort,
rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with them that weep," Rom.
xii; he will speak truth to his neighbour, be courteous and tender-
hearted, "forgiving others for Christ's sake, as God forgave him,"
Eph. iv. 32; "he will be like minded," Phil. ii. 2. "Of one judgment;
be humble, meek, long-suffering," Colos. iii. "Forbear, forget and
forgive," xii. 13. 23. and what he doth shall be heartily done to
God, and not to men. "Be pitiful and courteous," 1 Pet. iii. "Seek
peace and follow it." He will love his brother, not in word and
tongue, but in deed and truth, John iii. 18. "and he that loves God,
Christ will love him that is begotten of him," John v. 1, &c. Thus
should we willingly do, if we had a true touch of this charity, of
this divine love, if we could perform this which we are enjoined,
forget and forgive, and compose ourselves to those Christian laws
of love.

 "O felix hominum genus,
Si vestros animos amor
Quo coelum regitur regat!"

"Angelical souls, how blessed, how happy should we be, so
loving, how might we triumph over the devil, and have another
heaven upon earth!"

But this we cannot do; and which is the cause of all our woes,
miseries, discontent, melancholy, want of this charity. We do
invicem angariare, contemn, consult, vex, torture, molest, and hold
one another's noses to the grindstone hard, provoke, rail, scoff,
calumniate, challenge, hate, abuse (hard-hearted, implacable,
malicious, peevish, inexorable as we are) , to satisfy our lust or
private spleen, for toys, trifles, and impertinent occasions, spend
ourselves, goods, friends, fortunes, to be revenged on our
adversary, to ruin him and his. 'Tis all our study, practice, and
business how to plot mischief, mine, countermine, defend and
offend, ward ourselves, injure others, hurt all; as if we were born to
do mischief, and that with such eagerness and bitterness, with such
rancour, malice, rage, and fury, we prosecute our intended designs,
that neither affinity or consanguinity, love or fear of God or men
can contain us: no satisfaction, no composition will be accepted, no
offices will serve, no submission; though he shall upon his knees,
as Sarpedon did to Glaucus in Homer, acknowledging his error,
yield himself with tears in his eyes, beg his pardon, we will not
relent, forgive, or forget, till we have confounded him and his,
"made dice of his bones," as they say, see him rot in prison, banish
his friends, followers, et omne invisum genus, rooted him out and
all his posterity. Monsters of men as we are, dogs, wolves, tigers,
fiends, incarnate devils, we do not only contend, oppress, and
tyrannise ourselves, but as so many firebrands, we set on, and
animate others: our whole life is a perpetual combat, a conflict, a
set battle, a snarling fit. Eris dea is settled in our tents, Omnia de
lite, opposing wit to wit, wealth to wealth, strength to strength,
fortunes to fortunes, friends to friends, as at a sea-fight, we turn our
broadsides, or two millstones with continual attrition, we fire
ourselves, or break another's backs, and both are ruined and
consumed in the end. Miserable wretches, to fat and enrich
ourselves, we care not how we get it, Quocunque modo rem; how
many thousands we undo, whom we oppress, by whose ruin and
downfall we arise, whom we injure, fatherless children, widows,
common societies, to satisfy our own private lust. Though we have
myriads, abundance of wealth and treasure, (pitiless, merciless,
remorseless, and uncharitable in the highest degree) , and our poor
brother in need, sickness, in great extremity, and now ready to be
starved for want of food, we had rather, as the fox told the ape, his
tail should sweep the ground still, than cover his buttocks; rather
spend it idly, consume it with dogs, hawks, hounds, unnecessary
buildings, in riotous apparel, ingurgitate, or let it be lost, than he
should have part of it; rather take from him that little which he
hath, than relieve him.

Like the dog in the manger, we neither use it ourselves, let others
make use of or enjoy it; part with nothing while we live: for want
of disposing our household, and setting things in order, set all the
world together by the ears after our death. Poor Lazarus lies
howling at his gates for a few crumbs, he only seeks chippings,
offals; let him roar and howl, famish, and eat his own flesh, he
respects him not. A poor decayed kinsman of his sets upon him by
the way in all his jollity, and runs begging bareheaded by him,
conjuring by those former bonds of friendship, alliance,
consanguinity, &c., uncle, cousin, brother, father,

-- "Per ego has lachrymas, dextramque tuam te,
Si quidquam de te merui, fuit aut tibi quidquam
 Dulce meum, misere mei."

"Show some pity for Christ's sake, pity a sick man, an old man,"
&c., he cares not, ride on: pretend sickness, inevitable loss of
limbs, goods, plead suretyship, or shipwreck, fires, common
calamities, show thy wants and imperfections,

"Et si per sanctum juratus dicat Osyrim,
Credite, non ludo, crudeles tollite claudum."

Swear, protest, take God and all his angels to witness, quaere
peregrinum, thou art a counterfeit crank, a cheater, he is not
touched with it, pauper ubique jacet, ride on, he takes no notice of
it. Put up a supplication to him in the name of a thousand orphans,
a hospital, a spittel, a prison, as he goes by, they cry out to him for
aid, ride on, surdo narras, he cares not, let them eat stones, devour
themselves with vermin, rot in their own dung, he cares not. Show
him a decayed haven, a bridge, a school, a fortification, etc., or
some public work, ride on; good your worship, your honour, for
God's sake, your country's sake, ride on. But show him a roll
wherein his name shall be registered in golden letters, and
commended to all posterity, his arms set up, with his devices to be
seen, then peradventure he will stay and contribute; or if thou canst
thunder upon him, as Papists do, with satisfactory and meritorious
works, or persuade him by this means he shall save his soul out of
hell, and free it from purgatory (if he be of any religion) , then in
all likelihood he will listen and stay; or that he have no children, no
near kinsman, heir, he cares for, at least, or cannot well tell
otherwise how or where to bestow his possessions (for carry them
with him he cannot) , it may be then he will build some school or
hospital in his life, or be induced to give liberally to pious uses
after his death. For I dare boldly say, vainglory, that opinion of
merit, and this enforced necessity, when they know not otherwise
how to leave, or what better to do with them, is the main cause of
most of our good works. I will not urge this to derogate from any
man's charitable devotion, or bounty in this kind, to censure any
good work; no doubt there be many sanctified, heroical, and
worthy-minded men, that in true zeal, and for virtue's sake (divine
spirits) , that out of commiseration and pity extend their liberality,
and as much as in them lies do good to all men, clothe the naked,
feed the hungry, comfort the sick and needy, relieve all, forget and
forgive injuries, as true charity requires; yet most part there is
simulatum quid, a deal of hypocrisy in this kind, much default and
defect. Cosmo de Medici, that rich citizen of Florence, ingeniously
confessed to a near friend of his, that would know of him why he
built so many public and magnificent palaces, and bestowed so
liberally on scholars, not that he loved learning more than others,
"but to eternise his own name, to be immortal by the benefit of
scholars; for when his friends were dead, walls decayed, and all
inscriptions gone, books would remain to the world's end." The
lantern in Athens was built by Zenocles, the theatre by Pericles, the
famous port Pyraeum by Musicles, Pallas Palladium by Phidias, the
Pantheon by Callicratidas; but these brave monuments are decayed
all, and ruined long since, their builders' names alone flourish by
meditation of writers. And as he said of that Marian oak, now cut
down and dead, nullius Agricolae manu vulta stirps tam diuturna,
quam quae poetae, versu seminari potest, no plant can grow so
long as that which is ingenio sata, set and manured by those ever-
living wits. Allon Backuth, that weeping oak, under which
Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died, and was buried, may not survive
the memory of such everlasting monuments. Vainglory and
emulation (as to most men) was the cause efficient, and to be a
trumpeter of his own fame, Cosmo's sole intent so to do good, that
all the world might take notice of it. Such for the most part is the
charity of our times, such our benefactors, Mecaenates and patrons.
Show me amongst so many myriads, a truly devout, a right, honest,
upright, meek, humble, a patient, innocuous, innocent, a merciful, a
loving, a charitable man! Probus quis nobiscum vivit? Show me a
Caleb or a Joshua! Dic mihi Musa virum -- show a virtuous woman,
a constant wife, a good neighbour, a trusty servant, an obedient
child, a true friend, &c. Crows in Africa are not so scant. He that
shall examine this iron age wherein we live, where love is cold, et
jam terras Astrea reliquit, justice fled with her assistants, virtue
expelled,

 --"Justitiae soror,
Incorrupta fides, nudaque veritas," --

"The sister of justice, honour inviolate, and naked truth."

all goodness gone, where vice abounds, the devil is loose, and see
one man vilify and insult over his brother, as if he were an
innocent, or a block, oppress, tyrannise, prey upon, torture him,
vex, gall, torment and crucify him, starve him, where is charity? He
that shall see men swear and forswear, lie and bear false witness, to
advantage themselves, prejudice others, hazard goods, lives,
fortunes, credit, all, to be revenged on their enemies, men so
unspeakable in their lusts, unnatural in malice, such bloody
designments, Italian blaspheming, Spanish renouncing, &c., may
well ask where is charity? He that shall observe so many lawsuits,
such endless contentions, such plotting, undermining, so much
money spent with such eagerness and fury, every man for himself,
his own ends, the devil for all: so many distressed souls, such
lamentable complaints, so many factions, conspiracies, seditions,
oppressions, abuses, injuries, such grudging, repining, discontent,
so much emulation, envy, so many brawls, quarrels, monomachies,
&c., may well require what is become of charity? when we see and
read of such cruel wars, tumults, uproars, bloody battles, so many
men slain, so many cities ruinated, &c. (for what else is the subject
of all our stones almost, but bills, bows, and guns!) so many
murders and massacres, &c., where is charity? Or see men wholly
devote to God, churchmen, professed divines, holy men, "to make
the trumpet of the gospel the trumpet of war," a company of hell-
born Jesuits, and fiery-spirited friars, facem praeferre to all
seditions: as so many firebrands set all the world by the ears (I say
nothing of their contentious and railing books, whole ages spent in
writing one against another, and that with such virulency and
bitterness, Bionaeis sermonibus et sale nigro) , and by their bloody
inquisitions, that in thirty years, Bale saith, consumed 39 princes,
148 earls, 235 barons, 14,755 commons; worse than those ten
persecutions, may justly doubt where is charity? Obsecro vos
quales hi demum Christiani! Are these Christians? I beseech you
tell me: he that shall observe and see these things, may say to them
as Cato to Caesar, credo quae de inferis dicuntur falsa existimas,
"sure I think thou art of opinion there is neither heaven nor hell."
Let them pretend religion, zeal, make what shows they will, give
alms, peace-makers, frequent sermons, if we may guess at the tree
by the fruit, they are no better than hypocrites, epicures, atheists,
with the "fool in their hearts they say there is no God." 'Tis no
marvel then if being so uncharitable, hard-hearted as we are, we
have so frequent and so many discontents, such melancholy fits, so
many bitter pangs, mutual discords, all in a combustion, often
complaints, so common grievances, general mischiefs, si tantae in
terris tragoediae, quibus labefactatur et misere laceratur humanum
genus, so many pestilences, wars, uproars, losses, deluges, fires,
inundations, God's vengeance and all the plagues of Egypt, come
upon us, since we are so currish one towards another, so respectless
of God, and our neighbours, and by our crying sins pull these
miseries upon our own heads. Nay more, 'tis justly to be feared,
which Josephus once said of his countrymen Jews, "if the Romans
had not come when they did to sack their city, surely it had been
swallowed up with some earthquake, deluge, or fired from heaven
as Sodom and Gomorrah: their desperate malice, wickedness and
peevishness was such." 'Tis to be suspected, if we continue these
wretched ways, we may look for the like heavy visitations to come
upon us. If we had any sense or feeling of these things, surely we
should not go on as we do, in such irregular courses, practise all
manner of impieties; our whole carriage would not be so averse
from God. If a man would but consider, when he is in the midst and
full career of such prodigious and uncharitable actions, how
displeasing they are in God's sight, how noxious to himself, as
Solomon told Joab, 1 Kings, ii. "The Lord shall bring this blood
upon their heads." Prov. i. 27, "sudden desolation and destruction
shall come like a whirlwind upon them: affliction, anguish, the
reward of his hand shall be given him," Isa. iii. 11, &c., "they shall
fall into the pit they have digged for others," and when they are
scraping, tyrannising, getting, wallowing in their wealth, "this
night, O fool, I will take away thy soul," what a severe account
they must make; and how gracious on the other side a charitable
man is in God's eyes, haurit sibi gratiam. Matt. v. 7, "Blessed are
the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy: he that lendeth to the
poor, gives to God," and how it shall be restored to them again;
"how by their patience and long-suffering they shall heap coals on
their enemies' heads," Rom. xii. "and he that followeth after
righteousness and mercy, shall find righteousness and glory;"
surely they would check their desires, curb in their unnatural,
inordinate affections, agree amongst themselves, abstain from
doing evil, amend their lives, and learn to do well. "Behold how
comely and good a thing it is for brethren to live together in union:
it is like the precious ointment, &c. How odious to contend one
with the other!" Miseriquid luctatiunculis hisce volumus? ecce
mors supra caput est, et supremum illud tribunal, ubi et dicta et
facta nostra examinanda sunt: Sapiamus! "Why do we contend and
vex one another? behold death is over our heads, and we must
shortly give an account of all our uncharitable words and actions:
think upon it: and be wise."





SECT. II. MEMB. I.

SUBSECT. I.-- Heroical love causeth Melancholy. His Pedigree,
Power, and Extent.

In the preceding section mention was made, amongst other pleasant
objects, of this comeliness and beauty which proceeds from
women, that causeth heroical, or love-melancholy, is more eminent
above the rest, and properly called love. The part affected in men is
the liver, and therefore called heroical, because commonly gallants.
Noblemen, and the most generous spirits are possessed with it. His
power and extent is very large, and in that twofold division of love,
f??e?? (philein) and e?a? (eran) those two veneries which Plato and
some other make mention of it is most eminent, and ?at e?????
(chat exochen) called Venus, as I have said, or love itself. Which
although it be denominated from men, and most evident in them,
yet it extends and shows itself in vegetal and sensible creatures,
those incorporeal substances (as shall be specified) , and hath a
large dominion of sovereignty over them. His pedigree is very
ancient, derived from the beginning of the world, as Phaedrus
contends, and his parentage of such antiquity, that no poet could
ever find it out. Hesiod makes Terra and Chaos to be Love's
parents, before the Gods were born: Ante deos omnes primum
generavit amorem. Some think it is the self-same fire Prometheus
fetched from heaven. Plutarch amator. libello, will have Love to be
the son of Iris and Favonius; but Socrates in that pleasant dialogue
of Plato, when it came to his turn to speak of love, (of which
subject Agatho the rhetorician, magniloquus Agatho, that chanter
Agatho, had newly given occasion) in a poetical strain, telleth this
tale: when Venus was born, all the gods were invited to a banquet,
and amongst the rest, Porus the god of bounty and wealth; Penia or
Poverty came a begging to the door; Porus well whittled with
nectar (for there was no wine in those days) walking in Jupiter's
garden, in a bower met with Penia, and in his drink got her with
child, of whom was born Love; and because he was begotten on
Venus's birthday, Venus still attends upon him. The moral of this is
in Ficinus. Another tale is there borrowed out of Aristophanes: in
the beginning of the world, men had four arms and four feet, but
for their pride, because they compared themselves with the gods,
were parted into halves, and now peradventure by love they hope to
be united again and made one. Otherwise thus, Vulcan met two
lovers, and bid them ask what they would and they should have it;
but they made answer, O Vulcane faber Deorum, &c. "O Vulcan
the gods' great smith, we beseech thee to work us anew in thy
furnace, and of two make us one; which he presently did, and ever
since true lovers are either all one, or else desire to be united."
Many such tales you shall find in Leon Hebreus, dial. 3. and their
moral to them. The reason why Love was still painted young, (as
Phornutus and others will) "is because young men are most apt to
love; soft, fair, and fat, because such folks are soonest taken:
naked, because all true affection is simple and open: he smiles,
because merry and given to delights: hath a quiver, to show his
power, none can escape: is blind, because he sees not where he
strikes, whom he hits, &c." His power and sovereignty is expressed
by the poets, in that he is held to be a god, and a great commanding
god, above Jupiter himself; Magnus Daemon, as Plato calls him,
the strongest and merriest of all the gods according to Alcinous and
Athenaeus. Amor virorum rex, amor rex et deum, as Euripides, the
god of gods and governor of men; for we must all do homage to
him, keep a holiday for his deity, adore in his temples, worship his
image, (numen enim hoc non est nudum nomen) and sacrifice to his
altar, that conquers all, and rules all:

 "Mallem cum icone, cervo et apro Aeolico,
Cum Anteo et Stymphalicis avibus luctari
Quam cum amore" --

"I had rather contend with bulls, lions, bears, and giants, than with
Love;" he is so powerful, enforceth all to pay tribute to him,
domineers over all, and can make mad and sober whom he list;
insomuch that Caecilius in Tully's Tusculans, holds him to be no
better than a fool or an idiot, that doth not acknowledge Love to be
a great god.

 "Cui in manu sit quem esse dementem velit,
Quem sapere, quam in morbum injici," &c.

That can make sick, and cure whom he list. Homer and Stesichorus
were both made blind, if you will believe Leon Hebreus, for
speaking against his godhead: and though Aristophanes degrade
him, and say that he was scornfully rejected from the council of the
gods, had his wings clipped besides, that he might come no more
amongst them, and to his farther disgrace banished heaven for ever,
and confined to dwell on earth, yet he is of that power, majesty,
omnipotency, and dominion, that no creature can withstand him.

 "Imperat Cupido etiam diis pro arbitrio,
Et ipsum arcere ne armipotens potest Jupiter."

He is more than quarter-master with the gods,

 --"Tenet Thetide aequor, umbras
Aeaco, coelum Jove:"

 ("He divides the empire of the sea with Thetis,-- of the Shades,
with Aeacus,-- of the Heaven, with Jove.")

and hath not so much possession as dominion. Jupiter himself was
turned into a satyr, shepherd, a bull, a swan, a golden shower, and
what not, for love; that as Lucian's Juno right well objected to him,
ludus amoris tu es, thou art Cupid's whirligig: how did he insult
over all the other gods, Mars, Neptune, Pan, Mercury, Bacchus, and
the rest? Lucian brings in Jupiter complaining of Cupid that he
could not be quiet for him; and the moon lamenting that she was so
impotently besotted on Endymion, even Venus herself confessing
as much, how rudely and in what sort her own son Cupid had used
her being his mother, "now drawing her to Mount Ida, for the love
of that Trojan Anchises, now to Libanus for that Assyrian youth's
sake. And although she threatened to break his bow and arrows, to
clip his wings, and whipped him besides on the bare buttocks with
her pantofle, yet all would not serve, he was too headstrong and
unruly." That monster-conquering Hercules was tamed by him:

"Quem non mille ferae, quem non Sthenelejus hostis,
Nec potuit Juno vincere, vicit amor."

"Whom neither beasts nor enemies could tame,
Nor Juno's might subdue, Love quell'd the same."

Your bravest soldiers and most generous spirits are enervated with
it, ubi mulieribus blanditiis permittunt se, et inquinantur
amplexibus. Apollo, that took upon him to cure all diseases, could
not help himself of this; and therefore Socrates calls Love a tyrant,
and brings him triumphing in a chariot, whom Petrarch imitates in
his triumph of Love, and Fracastorius, in an elegant poem
expresseth at large, Cupid riding, Mars and Apollo following his
chariot, Psyche weeping, &c.

In vegetal creatures what sovereignty love hath, by many pregnant
proofs and familiar examples may be proved, especially of palm-
trees, which are both he and she, and express not a sympathy but a
love-passion, and by many observations have been confirmed.

 "Vivunt in venerem frondes, omnisque vicissim
Felix arbor amat, nutant et mutua palmae
Foedera, populeo suspirat populus ictu,
Et platano platanus, alnoque assibilat alnus."

 (Claudian. descript. vener. aulae. "Trees are influenced by love,
and every flourishing tree in turn feels the passion: palms nod
mutual vows, poplar sighs to poplar, plane to plane, and alder
breathes to alder.")

Constantine de Agric. lib. 10. cap. 4. gives an instance out of
Florentius his Georgics, of a palm-tree that loved most fervently,
"and would not be comforted until such time her love applied
herself unto her; you might see the two trees bend, and of their own
accords stretch out their boughs to embrace and kiss each other:
they will give manifest signs of mutual love." Ammianus
Marcellinus, lib. 24, reports that they marry one another, and fall in
love if they grow in sight; and when the wind brings the smell to
them, they are marvellously affected. Philostratus in Imaginibus,
observes as much, and Galen lib. 6. de locis affectis, cap. 5. they
will be sick for love; ready to die and pine away, which the
husbandmen perceiving, saith Constantine, "stroke many palms that
grow together, and so stroking again the palm that is enamoured,
they carry kisses from the one to the other:" or tying the leaves and
branches of the one to the stem of the other, will make them both
flourish and prosper a great deal better: "which are enamoured,
they can perceive by the bending of boughs, and inclination of their
bodies." If any man think this which I say to be a tale, let him read
that story of two palm-trees in Italy, the male growing at
Brundusium, the female at Otranto (related by Jovianus Pontanus in
an excellent poem, sometimes tutor to Alphonsus junior, King of
Naples, his secretary of state, and a great philosopher) "which were
barren, and so continued a long time," till they came to see one
another growing up higher, though many stadiums asunder. Pierius
in his Hieroglyphics, and Melchior Guilandinus, Mem. 3. tract. de
papyro, cites this story of Pontanus for a truth. See more in
Salmuth Comment. in Pancirol. de Nova repert. Tit. 1. de novo
orbe Mizaldus Arcanorum lib. 2. Sand's Voyages, lib. 2. fol. 103.
&c.

If such fury be in vegetals, what shall we think of sensible
creatures, how much more violent and apparent shall it be in them!

 "Omne adeo genus in terris hominumque ferarum,
 Et genus aequoreum, pecudes, pictaeque volucres
In furias ignemque ruunt; amor omnibus idem."

"All kind of creatures in the earth,
And fishes of the sea,
And painted birds do rage alike;
This love bears equal sway."

 "Hic Deus et terras et maria alta domat."

Common experience and our sense will inform us how violently
brute beasts are carried away with this passion, horses above the
rest,-- furor est insignis equarum. "Cupid in Lucian bids Venus his
mother be of good cheer, for he was now familiar with lions, and
oftentimes did get on their backs, hold them by the mane, and ride
them about like horses, and they would fawn upon him with their
tails." Bulls, bears, and boars are so furious in this kind they kill
one another: but especially cocks, lions, and harts, which are so
fierce that you may hear them fight half a mile off, saith
Turberville, and many times kill each other, or compel them to
abandon the rut, that they may remain masters in their places; "and
when one hath driven his co-rival away, he raiseth his nose up into
the air, and looks aloft, as though he gave thanks to nature," which
affords him such great delight. How birds are affected in this kind,
appears out of Aristotle, he will have them to sing ob futuram
venerem for joy or in hope of their venery which is to come.

 "Aeeriae primum volucres te Diva tuumque
Significant initum, perculsae corda tua vi."

"Fishes pine away for love and wax lean," if Gomesius's authority
may be taken, and are rampant too, some of them: Peter Gellius,
lib. 10. de hist, animal. tells wonders of a triton in Epirus: there
was a well not far from the shore, where the country wenches
fetched water, they, tritons, stupri causa would set upon them and
carry them to the sea, and there drown them, if they would not
yield; so love tyranniseth in dumb creatures. Yet this is natural for
one beast to dote upon another of the same kind; but what strange
fury is that, when a beast shall dote upon a man? Saxo
Grammaticus, lib. 10. Dan. hist. hath a story of a bear that loved a
woman, kept her in his den a long time and begot a son of her, out
of whose loins proceeded many northern kings: this is the original
belike of that common tale of Valentine and Orson: Aelian, Pliny,
Peter Gillius, are full of such relations. A peacock in Lucadia loved
a maid, and when she died, the peacock pined. "A dolphin loved a
boy called Hernias, and when he died, the fish came on land, and so
perished." The like adds Gellius, lib. 10. cap. 22. out of Appion,
Aegypt. lib. 15. a dolphin at Puteoli loved a child, would come
often to him, let him get on his back, and carry him about, "and
when by sickness the child was taken away, the dolphin died."
"Every book is full" (saith Busbequius, the emperor's orator with
the Grand Signior, not long since, ep. 3. legat. Turc.) , "and yields
such instances, to believe which I was always afraid lest I should
be thought to give credit to fables, until I saw a lynx which I had
from Assyria, so affected towards one of my men, that it cannot be
denied but that he was in love with him. When my man was
present, the beast would use many notable enticements and pleasant
motions, and when he was going, hold him back, and look after
him when he was gone, very sad in his absence, but most jocund
when he returned: and when my man went from me, the beast
expressed his love with continual sickness, and after he had pined
away some few days, died." Such another story he hath of a crane
of Majorca, that loved a Spaniard, that would walk any way with
him, and in his absence seek about for him, make a noise that he
might hear her, and knock at his door, "and when he took his last
farewell, famished herself." Such pretty pranks can love play with
birds, fishes, beasts:

" Coelestis aestheris, ponti, terrae claves habet
Venus, Solaque istorum omnium imperium obtinet."

 (Orpheus hymno Ven. "Venus keeps the keys of the air,
earth, sea, and she alone retains the command of all.")

and if all be certain that is credibly reported, with the spirits of the
air, and devils of hell themselves, who are as much enamoured and
dote (if I may use that word) as any other creatures whatsoever. For
if those stories be true that are written of incubus and succubus, of
nymphs, lascivious fauns, satyrs, and those heathen gods which
were devils, those lascivious Telchines, of whom the Platonists tell
so many fables; or those familiar meetings in our days, and
company of witches and devils, there is some probability for it. I
know that Biarmannus, Wierus, lib. 1. cap. 19. et 24. and some
others stoutly deny it, that the devil hath any carnal copulation with
women, that the devil takes no pleasure in such facts, they be mere
fantasies, all such relations of incubi, succubi, lies and tales; but
Austin, lib. 15. de civit. Dei. doth acknowledge it: Erastus de
Lamiis, Jacobus Sprenger and his colleagues, &c. Zanchius, cap.
16. lib. 4. de oper. Dei. Dandinus, in Arist. de Anima, lib. 2. text.
29. com. 30. Bodin, lib. 2. cap. 7. and Paracelsus, a great champion
of this tenet amongst the rest, which give sundry peculiar instances,
by many testimonies, proofs, and confessions evince it. Hector
Boethius, in his Scottish history, hath three or four such examples,
which Cardan confirms out of him, lib. 16. cap. 43. of such as have
had familiar company many years with them, and that in the habit
of men and women Philostratus in his fourth book de vita
Apollonii, hath a memorable instance in this kind, which I may not
omit, of one Menippus Lycius, a young man twenty-five years of
age, that going between Cenchreas and Corinth, met such a
phantasm in the habit of a fair gentlewoman, which taking him by
the hand, carried him home to her house in the suburbs of Corinth,
and told him she was a Phoenician by birth, and if he would tarry
with her, "he should hear her sing and play, and drink such wine as
never any drank, and no man should molest him; but she being fair 
and lovely would live and die with him, that was fair and lovely to
behold." The young man a philosopher, otherwise staid and
discreet, able to moderate his passions, though not this of love,
tarried with her awhile to his great content, and at last married her,
to whose wedding, amongst other guests, came Apollonius, who,
by some probable conjectures, found her out to be a serpent, a
lamia, and that all her furniture was like Tantalus's gold described
by Homer, no substance, but mere illusions. When she saw herself
descried, she wept, and desired Apollonius to be silent, but he
would not be moved, and thereupon she, plate, house, and all that
was in it, vanished in an instant: "many thousands took notice of
this fact, for it was done in the midst of Greece." Sabine in his
Comment on the tenth of Ovid's Metamorphoses, at the tale of
Orpheus, telleth us of a gentleman of Bavaria, that for many
months together bewailed the loss of his dear wife; at length the
devil in her habit came and comforted him, and told him, because
he was so importunate for her, that she would come and live with
him again, on that condition he would be new married, never swear
and blaspheme as he used formerly to do; for if he did, she should
be gone: "he vowed it, married, and lived with her, she brought him
children, and governed his house, but was still pale and sad, and so
continued, till one day falling out with him, he fell a swearing; she
vanished thereupon, and was never after seen." "This I have heard,"
saith Sabine, "from persons of good credit, which told me that the
Duke of Bavaria did tell it for a certainty to the Duke of Saxony."
One more I will relate out of Florilegus, ad annum 1058, an honest
historian of our nation, because he telleth it so confidently, as a
thing in those days talked of all over Europe: a young gentleman of
Rome, the same day that he was married, after dinner with the bride
and his friends went a walking into the fields, and towards evening
to the tennis-court to recreate himself; whilst he played, he put his
ring upon the finger of Venus statua, which was thereby made in
brass; after he had sufficiently played, and now made an end of his
sport, he came to fetch his ring, but Venus had bowed her finger in,
and he could not get it off. Whereupon loath to make his company
tarry at present, there left it, intending to fetch it the next day, or at
some more convenient time, went thence to supper, and so to bed.
In the night, when he should come to perform those nuptial rites,
Venus steps between him and his wife (unseen or felt of her) , and
told her that she was his wife, that he had betrothed himself unto
her by that ring, which he put upon her finger: she troubled him for
some following nights. He not knowing how to help himself, made
his moan to one Palumbus, a learned magician in those days, who
gave him a letter, and bid him at such a time of the night, in such a
cross-way, at the town's end, where old Saturn would pass by with
his associates in procession, as commonly he did, deliver that script
with his own hands to Saturn himself; the young man of a bold
spirit, accordingly did it; and when the old fiend had read it, he
called Venus to him, who rode before him, and commanded her to
deliver his ring, which forthwith she did, and so the gentleman was
freed. Many such stories I find in several authors to confirm this
which I have said; as that more notable amongst the rest, of
Philinium and Machates in Phlegon's Tract, de rebus mirabilibus,
and though many be against it, yet I, for my part, will subscribe to
Lactantius, lib. 14. cap. 15. "God sent angels to the tuition of men;
but whilst they lived amongst us, that mischievous all-commander
of the earth, and hot in lust, enticed them by little and little to this
vice, and defiled them with the company of women:" and to
Anaxagoras, de resurrect. "Many of those spiritual bodies,
overcome by the love of maids, and lust, failed, of whom those
were born we call giants." Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Sulpicius Severus, Eusebius, etc., to this sense make a twofold fall
of angels, one from the beginning of the world, another a little
before the deluge, as Moses teacheth us, openly professing that
these genii can beget, and have carnal copulation with women. At
Japan in the East Indies, at this present (if we may believe the
relation of travellers) , there is an idol called Teuchedy, to whom
one of the fairest virgins in the country is monthly brought, and left
in a private room, in the fotoqui, or church, where she sits alone to
be deflowered. At certain times the Teuchedy (which is thought to
be the devil) appears to her, and knoweth her carnally. Every
month a fair virgin is taken in; but what becomes of the old, no
man can tell. In that goodly temple of Jupiter Belus in Babylon,
there was a fair chapel, saith Herodotus, an eyewitness of it, in
which was splendide stratus lectus et apposita mensa aurea, a
brave bed, a table of gold, &c., into which no creature came but
one only woman, which their god made choice of, as the Chaldean
priests told him, and that their god lay with her himself, as at
Thebes in Egypt was the like done of old. So that you see this is no
news, the devils themselves, or their juggling priests, have played
such pranks in all ages. Many divines stiffly contradict this; but I
will conclude with Lipsius, that since "examples, testimonies, and
confessions, of those unhappy women are so manifest on the other
side, and many even in this our town of Louvain, that it is likely to
be so. One thing I will add, that I suppose that in no age past, I
know not by what destiny of this unhappy time, have there ever
appeared or showed themselves so many lecherous devils, satyrs,
and genii, as in this of ours, as appears by the daily narrations, and
judicial sentences upon record." Read more of this question in
Plutarch, vit. Numae, Austin de civ. Dei. lib. 15. Wierus, lib. 3. de
praestig. Daem. Giraldus Cambrensis, itinerar. Camb. lib. 1.
Malleus malefic. quaest. 5. part. 1. Jacobus Reussus, lib. 5. cap. 6.
fol. 54. Godelman, lib. 2. cap. 4. Erastus, Valesius de sacra philo.
cap. 40. John Nider, Fornicar. lib. 5. cap. 9. Stroz. Cicogna. lib. 3.
cap. 3. Delrio, Lipsius Bodine, daemonol. lib. 2. cap. 7. Pererius in
Gen. lib. 8. in 6. cap. ver. 2. King James, &c.





SUBSECT. II.-- How Love tyranniseth over men. Love, or Heroical
Melancholy, his definition, part affected.

You have heard how this tyrant Love rageth with brute beasts and
spirits; now let us consider what passions it causeth amongst men.
Improbe amor quid non mortalia pectora cogis? How it tickles the
hearts of mortal men, Horresco referens,-- I am almost afraid to
relate, amazed, and ashamed, it hath wrought such stupendous and
prodigious effects, such foul offences. Love indeed (I may not
deny) first united provinces, built cities, and by a perpetual
generation makes and preserves mankind, propagates the church;
but if it rage it is no more love, but burning lust, a disease, frenzy,
madness, hell. Est orcus ille, vis est immedicabilis, est rabies
insana; 'tis no virtuous habit this, but a vehement perturbation of
the mind, a monster of nature, wit, and art, as Alexis in Athenaeus
sets it out, viriliter audax, muliebriter timidium, furore praeceps,
labore infractum, mel felleum, blanda percussio, &c. It subverts
kingdoms, overthrows cities, towns, families, mars, corrupts, and
makes a massacre of men; thunder and lightning, wars, fires,
plagues, have not done that mischief to mankind, as this burning
lust, this brutish passion. Let Sodom and Gomorrah, Troy, (which
Dares Phrygius, and Dictis Cretensis will make good) and I know
not how many cities bear record,-- et fuit ante Helenam, &c., all
succeeding ages will subscribe: Joanna of Naples in Italy,
Fredegunde and Brunhalt in France, all histories are full of these
basilisks. Besides those daily monomachies, murders, effusion of
blood, rapes, riot, and immoderate expense, to satisfy their lusts,
beggary, shame, loss, torture, punishment, disgrace, loathsome
diseases that proceed from thence, worse than calentures and
pestilent fevers, those often gouts, pox, arthritis, palsies, cramps,
sciatica, convulsions, aches, combustions, &c., which torment the
body, that feral melancholy which crucifies the soul in this life, and
everlastingly torments in the world to come.

Notwithstanding they know these and many such miseries, threats,
tortures, will surely come upon them, rewards, exhortations, e
contra; yet either out of their own weakness, a depraved nature, or
love's tyranny, which so furiously rageth, they suffer themselves to
be led like an ox to the slaughter: (Facilis descensus Averni) they
go down headlong to their own perdition, they will commit folly
with beasts, men "leaving the natural use of women," as Paul saith,
"burned in lust one towards another, and man with man wrought
filthiness."

Semiramis equo, Pasipha tauro, Aristo Ephesius asinae se
commiscuit, Fulvius equae, alii canibus, capris, &c., unde monstra
nascuntur aliquando, Centauri, Sylvani, et ad terrorem hominum
prodigiosa spectra: Nec cum brutis, sed ipsis hominibus rem
habent, quod peccatum Sodomiae vulgo dicitur; et frequens olim
vitium apud Orientalis illos fuit, Graecos nimirum, Italos, Afros,
Asianos: Hercules Hylam habuit, Polycletum, Dionem,
Perithoonta, Abderum et Phryga; alii et Euristium ab Hercule
amatum tradunt. Socrates pulchrorum Adolescentum causa
frequens Gymnasium adibat, flagitiosque spectaculo pascebat
oculos, quod et Philebus et Phaedon, Rivales, Charmides et reliqui
Platonis Dialogi, satis superque testatum faciunt: quod vero
Alcibiades de eodem Socrate loquatur, lubens conticesco, sed et
abhorreo; tantum incitamentum praebet libidini. At hunc
perstrinxit Theodoretus lib. de curat. graec. affect. cap. ultimo.
Quin et ipse Plato suum demiratur Agathonem, Xenophon,
Cliniam, Virgilius Alexin, Anacreon Bathyllum: Quod autem de
Nerone, Claudio, caeterorumque portentosa libidine memoriae
proditum, mallem a Petronio, Suetonio, caeterisque petatis, quando
omnem fidem excedat, quam a me expectetis; sed vetera querimur.
Apud Asianos, Turcas, Italos, nunquam frequentius hoc quam
hodierno die vitium; Diana Romanorum Sodomia; officinae horum
alicubi apud Turcas,-- "qui saxis semina mandant" -- arenas
arantes; et frequentes querelae, etiam inter ipsos conjuges hac de
re, "quae virorum concubitum illicitum calceo in oppositam partem
verso magistratui indicant"; nullum apud Italos familiare magis
peccatum, qui et post Lucianum et Tatium, scriptis voluminibis
defendunt. Johannes de la Casa, Beventinus Episcopus, divinum
opus vocat, suave scelus, adeoque jactat, se non alia, usum Venere.
Nihil usitatius apud monachos, Cardinales, sacrificulos, etiam
furor hic ad mortem, ad insaniam. Angelus Politianus, ob pueri
amorem, violentas sibi inanus injecit. Et horrendum sane dictu,
quantum apud nos patrum memoria, scelus detestandum hoc
saevierit! Quum enim Anno 1538. "prudentissimus Rex Henricus
Octavus cucullatorum coenobia, et sacrificorum collegia,
votariorum, per venerabiles legum Doctores Thomam Leum,
Richardum Laytonum visitari fecerat, &c., tanto numero reperti
sunt apud eos scortatores, cinaedi, ganeones, paedicones, puerarii,
paederastae, Sodomitae", ( Balei verbis utor) "Ganimedes, &c. ut
in unoquoque eorum novam credideris Gomorrham". Sed vide si
lubet eorundem Catalogum apud eundem Balcum; "Puellae"
(inquit) "in lectis dormire non poterant ob fratres necromanticos".
Haec si apud votarios, monachos, sanctos scilicet homunciones,
quid in foro, quid in aula factum suspiceris? quid apud nobiles,
quid inter fornices, quam non foeditatem, quam non spurcitiem?
Sileo interim turpes illas, et ne nominandas quidem monachorum
mastrupationes, masturbatores. Rodericus a Castro vocat, tum et
eos qui se invicem ad Venerem excitandam flagris caedunt,
Spintrias, Succubas, Ambubeias, et lasciviente lumbo Tribades illas
mulierculas, quae se invicem fricant, et praeter Eunuchos etiam ad
Venerem explendam, artificiosa illa veretra habent. Immo quod
magis mirere, foemina foeminam Constantinopoli non ita pridem
deperiit, ausa rem plane incredibilem, mutato cultu mentita virum
de nuptiis sermonem init, et brevi nupta est: sed authorem ipsum
consule, Busbequium. Omitto Salanarios illos Egyptiacos, qui cum
formosarum cadaveribus concumbunt; et eorum vesanam
libidinem, qui etiam idola et imagines depereunt. Nota est fabula
Pigmalionis apud Ovidium; Mundi et Paulini apud Aegesippum
belli Jud. lib. 2. cap. 4. Pontius C. Caesaris legatus, referente
Plinio, lib. 35. cap. 3. quem suspicor eum esse qui Christum
crucifixit, picturis Atalantae et Helenae adeo libidine incensus, ut
tollere eas vellet si natura tectorii permisisset, alius statuam bonae
Fortunae deperiit (Aelianus, lib. 9. cap. 37.) alius bonae deae, et
ne qua pars probro vacet. "Raptus ad stupra" (quod ait ille) "et ne
os quidem a libidine exceptum." Heliogabalus, per omnia cava
corporis libidinem recepit, Lamprid. vita ejus. Hostius quidam
specula fecit, et ita disposuit, ut quum virum ipse pateretur, aversus
omnes admissarii motus in speculo videret, ac deinde falsa
magnitudine ipsius membri tanquam vera gauderet, simul virum et
foeminam passus, quod dictu foedum et abominandum. Ut veram
plane sit, quod apud Plutarchum Gryllus Ulyssi objecit. "Ad hunc
usque diem apud nos neque mas marem, neque foemina foeminam
amavit, qualia multa apud vos memorabiles et praeclari viri
fecerunt: ut viles missos faciam, Hercules imberbem sectans
socium, amicos deseruit, &c. Vestrae libidines intra suos naturae
fines coerceri non possunt, quin instar fluvii exundantis atrocem
foeditatum, tumultum, confusionemque naturae gignant in re
Venerea: nam et capras, porcos, equos inierunt viri et foeminae,
insano bestiarum amore exarserunt, imde Minotauri, Centauri,
Sylvani, Sphinges", &c. Sed ne confutando doceam, aut ea foras
efferam, quae, non omnes scire convenit (haec enim doctis
solummodo, quod causa non absimili Rodericus, scripta velim) ne
levissomis ingentis et depravatis mentibus foedissimi sceleris
notitiam, &c., nolo quem diutius hisce sordibus inquinare.

I come at last to that heroical love which is proper to men and
women, is a frequent cause of melancholy, and deserves much
rather to be called burning lust, than by such an honourable title.
There is an honest love, I confess, which is natural, laqueus
occultus captivans corda hominum, ut a mulieribus non possint
separari, "a secret snare to captivate the hearts of men," as
Christopher Fonseca proves, a strong allurement, of a most
attractive, occult, adamantine property, and powerful virtue, and no
man living can avoid it. Et qui vim non sensit amoris, aut lapis est,
aut bellua. He is not a man but a block, a very stone, aut Numen,
aut Nebuchadnezzar, he hath a gourd for his head, a pepon for his
heart, that hath not felt the power of it, and a rare creature to be
found, one in an age, Qui nunquam visae flagravit amore puellae;
("One whom no maiden's beauty has ever affected.") for semel
insanivimus omnes, dote we either young or old, as he said, and
none are excepted but Minerva and the Muses: so Cupid in Lucian
complains to his mother Venus, that amongst all the rest his arrows
could not pierce them. But this nuptial love is a common passion,
an honest, for men to love in the way of marriage; ut materia
appetit formam, sic mulier virum. ("As matter seeks form, so
woman turns towards man.") You know marriage is honourable, a
blessed calling, appointed by God himself in Paradise; it breeds
true peace, tranquillity, content, and happiness, qua nulla est aut
fuit unquam sanctior conjunctio, as Daphnaeus in Plutarch could
well prove, et quae generi humano immortalitatem parat, when
they live without jarring, scolding, lovingly as they should do.

 "Felices ter et amplius
Quos irrupta tenet copula, nec ullis
Divulsus querimoniis
Suprema citius solvit amor die."

"Thrice happy they, and more than that,
Whom bond of love so firmly ties,
That without brawls till death them part,
'Tis undissolv'd and never dies."

As Seneca lived with his Paulina, Abraham and Sarah, Orpheus and
Eurydice, Arria and Poetus, Artemisia and Mausolus, Rubenius
Celer, that would needs have it engraven on his tomb, he had led
his life with Ennea, his dear wife, forty-three years eight months,
and never fell out. There is no pleasure in this world comparable to
it, 'tis summum mortalitatis bonum -- hominum divumque voluptas,
Alma Venus -- latet enim in muliere aliquid majus potentiusque,
omnibus aliis humanis voluptatibus, as one holds, there's something
in a woman beyond all human delight; a magnetic virtue, a
charming quality, an occult and powerful motive. The husband
rules her as head, but she again commands his heart, he is her
servant, she is only joy and content: no happiness is like unto it, no
love so great as this of man and wife, no such comfort as placens
uxor, a sweet wife: Omnis amor magnus, sed aperto in conjuge
major. When they love at last as fresh as they did at first, Charaque
charo consenescit conjugi, (Simonides, graec. "She grows old in
love and in years together.") as Homer brings Paris kissing Helen,
after they had been married ten years, protesting withal that he
loved her as dear as he did the first hour that he was betrothed. And
in their old age, when they make much of one another, saying, as
he did to his wife in the poet,

 "Uxor vivamus quod viximus, et moriamur,
Servantes nomen sumpsimus in thalamo;
Nec ferat ulla dies ut commutemur in aevo,
Quin tibi sim juvenis, tuque puella mihi."

"Dear wife, let's live in love, and die together,
As hitherto we have in all good will:
Let no day change or alter our affections.
But let's be young to one another still."

Such should conjugal love be, still the same, and as they are one
flesh, so should they be of one mind, as in an aristocratical
government, one consent, Geyron-like, coalescere in unum, have
one heart in two bodies, will and nill the same. A good wife,
according to Plutarch, should be as a looking-glass to represent her
husband's face and passion: if he be pleasant, she should be merry:
if he laugh, she should smile: if he look sad, she should participate
of his sorrow, and bear a part with him, and so should they
continue in mutual love one towards another.

 "Et me ab amore tuo deducet nulla senectus,
Sive ego Tythonus, sive ego Nestor ero."

"No age shall part my love from thee, sweet wife,
Though I live Nestor or Tithonus' life."

And she again to him, as the Bride saluted the Bridegroom of old in
Rome, Ubi tu Caius, ego semper Caia, be thou still Caius, I'll be
Caia.

'Tis a happy state this indeed, when the fountain is blessed (saith
Solomon, Prov. v. 17.) "and he rejoiceth with the wife of his youth,
and she is to him as the loving hind and pleasant roe, and he
delights in her continually." But this love of ours is immoderate,
inordinate, and not to be comprehended in any bounds. It will not
contain itself within the union of marriage, or apply to one object,
but is a wandering, extravagant, a domineering, a boundless, an
irrefragable, a destructive passion: sometimes this burning lust
rageth after marriage, and then it is properly called jealousy;
sometimes before, and then it is called heroical melancholy; it
extends sometimes to co-rivals, &c., begets rapes, incests, murders:
Marcus Antonius compressit Faustinam sororem, Caracalla Juliam
Novercam, Nero Matrem, Caligula sorores, Cyneras Myrrham
filiam, &c. But it is confined within no terms of blood, years, sex,
or whatsoever else. Some furiously rage before they come to
discretion, or age. Quartilla in Petronius never remembered she was
a maid; and the wife of Bath, in Chaucer, cracks,

Since I was twelve years old, believe,
Husbands at Kirk-door had I five.

 Aratine Lucretia sold her maidenhead a thousand times before she
was twenty-four years old, plus milies vendiderant virginitatem,
&c. neque te celabo, non deerant qui ut integram ambirent. Rahab,
that harlot, began to be a professed quean at ten years of age, and
was but fifteen when she hid the spies, as Hugh Broughton proves,
to whom Serrarius the Jesuit, quaest. 6. in cap. 2. Josue, subscribes.
Generally women begin pubescere, as they call it, or catullire, as
Julius Pollux cites, lib. 2. cap. 3. onomast out of Aristophanes, at
fourteen years old, then they do offer themselves, and some plainly
rage. Leo Afer saith, that in Africa a man shall scarce find a maid at
fourteen years of age, they are so forward, and many amongst us
after they come into the teens do not live without husbands, but
linger. What pranks in this kind the middle ages have played is not
to be recorded. Si mihi sint centum linguae, sint oraque centum, no
tongue can sufficiently declare, every story is full of men and
women's insatiable lust, Nero's, Heliogabali, Bonosi, &c. Coelius
Amphilenum, sed Quintius Amphelinam depereunt, &c. They neigh
after other men's wives (as Jeremia, cap. v. 8. complaineth) like fed
horses, or range like town bulls, raptores virginum et viduarum, as
many of our great ones do. Solomon's wisdom was extinguished in
this fire of lust, Samson's strength enervated, piety in Lot's
daughters quite forgot, gravity of priesthood in Eli's sons, reverend
old age in the Elders that would violate Susanna, filial duty in
Absalom to his stepmother, brotherly love in Ammon towards his
sister. Human, divine laws, precepts, exhortations, fear of God and
men, fair, foul means, fame, fortune, shame, disgrace, honour
cannot oppose, stave off, or withstand the fury of it, omnia vincit
amor, &c. No cord nor cable can so forcibly draw, or hold so fast,
as love can do with, a twined thread. The scorching beams under
the equinoctial, or extremity of cold within the circle arctic, where
the very seas are frozen, cold or torrid zone, cannot avoid or expel
this heat, fury, and rage of mortal men.

 "Quo fugis ab demens, nulla est fuga, tu licet usque
Ad Tanaim fugias, usque sequetur amor."

Of women's unnatural, insatiable lust, what country, what village
doth not complain? Mother and daughter sometimes dote on the
same man, father and son, master and servant, on one woman.

 " -- Sed amor, sed ineffrenata libido,
Quid castum in terris intentatumque reliquit?"

What breach of vows and oaths, fury, dotage, madness, might I
reckon up? Yet this is more tolerable in youth, and such as are still
in their hot blood; but for an old fool to dote, to see an old lecher,
what more odious, what can be more absurd? and yet what so
common? Who so furious? Amare ea aetate si occiperint, multo
insaniunt acrius. Some dote then more than ever they did in their
youth. How many decrepit, hoary, harsh, writhen, bursten-bellied,
crooked, toothless, bald, blear-eyed, impotent, rotten, old men shall
you see flickering still in every place? One gets him a young wife,
another a courtesan, and when he can scarce lift his leg over a sill,
and hath one foot already in Charon's boat, when he hath the
trembling in his joints, the gout in his feet, a perpetual rheum in his
head, "a continuate cough," his sight fails him, thick of hearing, his
breath stinks, all his moisture is dried up and gone, may not spit
from him, a very child again, that cannot dress himself, or cut his
own meat, yet he will be dreaming of, and honing after wenches,
what can be more unseemly? Worse it is in women than in men,
when she is aetate declivis, diu vidua, mater olim, parum decore
matrimonium sequi videtur, an old widow, a mother so long since (
in Pliny's opinion) , she doth very unseemly seek to marry, yet
whilst she is so old a crone, a beldam, she can neither see, nor hear,
go nor stand, a mere carcass, a witch, and scarce feel; she
caterwauls, and must have a stallion, a champion, she must and will
marry again, and betroth herself to some young man, that hates to
look on, but for her goods; abhors the sight of her, to the prejudice
of her good name, her own undoing, grief of friends, and ruin of
her children.

But to enlarge or illustrate this power and effects of love, is to set a
candle in the sun. It rageth with all sorts and conditions of men, yet
is most evident among such as are young and lusty, in the flower of
their years, nobly descended, high fed, such as live idly, and at
ease; and for that cause (which our divines call burning lust) this
ferinus insanus amor, this mad and beastly passion, as I have said,
is named by our physicians heroical love, and a more honourable
title put upon it, Amor nobilis, as Savanarola styles it, because
noble men and women make a common practice of it, and are so
ordinarily affected with it. Avicenna, lib. 3. Fen, 1. tract. 4. cap.
23. calleth this passion Ilishi, and defines it "to be a disease or
melancholy vexation, or anguish of mind, in which a man
continually meditates of the beauty, gesture, manners of his
mistress, and troubles himself about it:" desiring, (as Savanarola
adds) with all intentions and eagerness of mind, "to compass or
enjoy her, as commonly hunters trouble themselves about their
sports, the covetous about their gold and goods, so is he tormented
still about his mistress." Arnoldus Villanovanus, in his book of
heroical love, defines it, "a continual cogitation of that which he
desires, with a confidence or hope of compassing it;" which
definition his commentator cavils at. For continual cogitation is not
the genus but a symptom of love; we continually think of that
which we hate and abhor, as well as that which we love; and many
things we covet and desire, without all hope of attaining. Carolus 
Lorme, in his Questions, makes a doubt, An amor sit morbus,
whether this heroical love be a disease: Julius Pollux Onomast. lib.
6. cap. 44. determines it. They that are in love are likewise sick;
lascivus, salax, lasciviens, et qui in venerem furit, vere est
aegrotus, Arnoldus will have it improperly so called, and a malady
rather of the body than mind. Tully, in his Tusculans, defines it a
furious disease of the mind. Plato, madness itself. Ficinus, his
Commentator, cap. 12. a species of madness, "for many have run
mad for women," Esdr. iv. 26. But Rhasis "a melancholy passion:"
and most physicians make it a species or kind of melancholy (as
will appear by the symptoms) , and treat of it apart; whom I mean
to imitate, and to discuss it in all his kinds, to examine his several
causes, to show his symptoms, indications, prognostics, effect, that
so it may be with more facility cured.

The part affected in the meantime, as Arnoldus supposeth, "is the
former part of the head for want of moisture," which his
Commentator rejects. Langius, med. epist. lib. 1. cap. 24. will have
this passion seated in the liver, and to keep residence in the heart,
"to proceed first from the eyes so carried by our spirits, and kindled
with imagination in the liver and heart;" coget amare jecur, as the
saying is. Medium feret per epar, as Cupid in Anacreon. For some
such cause belike Homer feigns Titius' liver (who was enamoured
of Latona) to be still gnawed by two vultures day and night in hell,
"for that young men's bowels thus enamoured, are so continually
tormented by love." Gordonius, cap. 2. part. 2. "will have the
testicles an immediate subject or cause, the liver an antecedent."
Fracastorius agrees in this with Gordonius, inde primitus
imaginatio venerea, erectio, &c. titillatissimam partem vocat, ita ut
nisi extruso semine gestiens voluptas non cessat, nec assidua
veneris recordatio, addit Gnastivinius Comment. 4. Sect. prob. 27.
Arist. But properly it is a passion of the brain, as all other
melancholy, by reason of corrupt imagination, and so doth Jason
Pratensis, c. 19. de morb. cerebri (who writes copiously of this
erotical love) , place and reckon it amongst the affections of the
brain. Melancthon de anima confutes those that make the liver a
part affected, and Guianerius, Tract. 15. cap. 13 et 17. though
many put all the affections in the heart, refers it to the brain.
Ficinus, cap. 7. in Convivium Platonis, "will have the blood to be
the part affected." Jo. Frietagius, cap. 14. noct. med. supposeth all
four affected, heart, liver, brain, blood; but the major part concur
upon the brain, 'tis imaginatio laesa; and both imagination and
reason are misaffected;, because of his corrupt judgment, and
continual meditation of that which he desires, he may truly be said
to be melancholy. If it be violent, or his disease inveterate, as I 
have determined in the precedent partitions, both imagination and
reason are misaffected, first one, then the other.





MEMB. II.

SUBSECT. I.-- Causes of Heroical Love, Temperature, full Diet,
Idleness, Place, Climate, &c.

Of all causes the remotest are stars. Ficinus cap. 19. saith they are
most prone to this burning lust, that have Venus in Leo in their
horoscope, when the Moon and Venus be mutually aspected, or
such as be of Venus' complexion. Plutarch interprets astrologically 
that tale of Mars and Venus, "in whose genitures [Symbol: Mars]
and [Symbol: Venus] are in conjunction," they are commonly
lascivious, and if women queans; as the good wife of Bath
confessed in Chaucer;

I followed aye mine inclination,
By virtue of my constellation.

But of all those astrological aphorisms which I have ever read, that
of Cardan is most memorable, for which howsoever he is bitterly
censured by Marinus Marcennus, a malapert friar, and some others
(which he himself suspected) yet methinks it is free, downright,
plain and ingenious. In his eighth Geniture, or example, he hath
these words of himself, [Symbol: Mars] [Symbol: Venus] and
[Symbol: Mercury] in [Symbol: Mercury] dignitatibus assiduam
mihi Venereorum cogitationem praestabunt, ita ut nunquam
quiescam. Et paulo post, Cogitatio Venereorum me torquet
perpetuo, et quam facto implere non licuit, aut fecisse potentem
puduit, cogitatione assidua mentitus sum voluptatem. Et alibi, ob
[Symbol: Moon-3/4] et [Symbol: Mercury] dominium et radiorum
mixtionem, profundum fuit ingenium, sed lascivum, egoque turpi
libidini deditus et obscaenus. So far Cardan of himself, quod de se
fatetur ideo ut utilitatem adferat studiosis hujusce disciplinae, and
for this he is traduced by Marcennus, when as in effect he saith no
more than what Gregory Nazianzen of old, to Chilo his scholar,
offerebant se mihi visendae mulieres, quarum praecellenti
elegantia et decore spectabili tentabatur meae. integritas
pudicitiae. Et quidem flagitium vitavi fornicationis, at munditiae
virginalis florem arcana cordis cogitatione foedavi. Sed ad rem.
Aptiores ad masculinam venerem sunt quorum genesi Venus est in
signo masculino, et in Saturni finibus aut oppositione, &c.
Ptolomeus in quadripart. plura de his et specialia habet
aphorismata, longo proculdubio usu confirmata, et ab experientia
multa perfecta, inquit commentator ejus Cardanus. Tho.
Campanella Astrologiae lib. 4. cap. 8. articulis 4 and 5. insaniam
amatoriam remonstrantia, multa prae caeteris accumulat
aphorismata, quae qui volet, consulat. Chiromantici ex cingulo
Veneris plerumque conjecturam faciunt, et monte Veneris, de
quorum decretis, Taisnerum, Johan. de Indagine, Goclenium,
ceterosque si lubet, inspicias. Physicians divine wholly from the
temperature and complexion; phlegmatic persons are seldom taken,
according to Ficinus Comment, cap. 9; naturally melancholy less
than they, but once taken they are never freed; though many are of
opinion flatuous or hypochondriacal melancholy are most subject
of all others to this infirmity. Valescus assigns their strong
imagination for a cause, Bodine abundance of wind, Gordonius of
seed, and spirits, or atomi in the seed, which cause their violent and
furious passions. Sanguine thence are soon caught, young folks
most apt to love, and by their good wills, saith Lucian, "would have
a bout with every one they see:" the colt's evil is common to all
complexions. Theomestus a young and lusty gallant acknowledgeth
(in the said author) all this to be verified in him, "I am so
amorously given, you may sooner number the sea-sands, and snow
falling from the skies, than my several loves. Cupid had shot all his
arrows at me, I am deluded with various desires, one love succeeds
another, and that so soon, that before one is ended, I begin with a
second; she that is last is still fairest, and she that is present
pleaseth me most: as an hydra's head my loves increase, no Iolaus
can help me. Mine eyes are so moist a refuge and sanctuary of love,
that they draw all beauties to them, and are never satisfied. I am in
a doubt what fury of Venus this should be: alas, how have I
offended her so to vex me, what Hippolitus am I!" What Telchine
is my genius? or is it a natural imperfection, an hereditary passion?
Another in Anacreon confesseth that he had twenty sweethearts in
Athens at once, fifteen at Corinth, as many at Thebes, at Lesbos,
and at Rhodes, twice as many in Ionia, thrice in Caria, twenty
thousand in all: or in a word, e? f???a pa?ta [ei phylla panta], &c.

"Folia arborum omnium si
Nosti referre cuncta,
Aut computare arenas
In aequore universas,
Solum meorum amorum
Te fecero logistam?"

"Canst count the leaves in May,
Or sands i' th' ocean sea?
Then count my loves I pray."

His eyes are like a balance, apt to propend each way, and to be
weighed down with every wench's looks, his heart a weathercock,
his affection tinder, or naphthe itself, which every fair object, sweet
smile, or mistress's favour sets on fire. Guianerius tract 15. cap. 14.
refers all this to "the hot temperature of the testicles," Ferandus a
Frenchman in his Erotique Mel. (which book came first to my
hands after the third edition) to certain atomi in the seed, "such as
are very spermatic and full of seed." I find the same in Aristot. sect.
4. prob. 17. si non secernatur semen, cessare tentigines non
possunt, as Gaustavinius his commentator translates it: for which
cause these young men that be strong set, of able bodies, are so
subject to it. Hercules de Saxonia hath the same words in effect.
But most part I say, such as are aptest to love that are young and
lusty, live at ease, stall-fed, free from cares, like cattle in a rank
pasture, idle and solitary persons, they must needs hirquitullire, as
Guastavinius recites out of Censorinus.

 "Mens erit apta capi tum quum laetissima rerum.
Ut seges in pingui luxuriabit humo."

"The mind is apt to lust, and hot or cold,
As corn luxuriates in a better mould."

The place itself makes much wherein we live, the clime, air, and
discipline if they concur. In our Misnia, saith Galen, near to
Pergamus, thou shalt scarce find an adulterer, but many at Rome,
by reason of the delights of the seat. It was that plenty of all things,
which made Corinth so infamous of old, and the opportunity of the
place to entertain those foreign comers; every day strangers came
in, at each gate, from all quarters. In that one temple of Venus a
thousand whores did prostitute themselves, as Strabo writes,
besides Lais and the rest of better note: all nations resorted thither,
as to a school of Venus. Your hot and southern countries are prone
to lust, and far more incontinent than those that live in the north, as
Bodine discourseth at large, Method, hist. cap. 5. Molles Asiatici,
so are Turks, Greeks, Spaniards, Italians, even all that latitude; and
in those tracts, such as are more fruitful, plentiful, and delicious, as
Valence in Spain, Capua in Italy, domicilium luxus Tully terms it,
and (which Hannibal's soldiers can witness) Canopus in Egypt,
Sybaris, Phoeacia, Baiae, Cyprus, Lampsacus. In Naples the fruit of
the soil and pleasant air enervate their bodies, and alter
constitutions: insomuch that Florus calls it Certamen Bacchi et
Veneris, but Foliot admires it. In Italy and Spain they have their
stews in every great city, as in Rome, Venice, Florence, wherein,
some say, dwell ninety thousand inhabitants, of which ten thousand
are courtesans; and yet for all this, every gentleman almost hath a
peculiar mistress; fornications, adulteries, are nowhere so common:
urbs est jam tota lupanar; how should a man live honest amongst
so many provocations? now if vigour of youth, greatness, liberty I
mean, and that impunity of sin which grandees take unto
themselves in this kind shall meet, what a gap must it needs open to
all manner of vice, with what fury will it rage? For, as Maximus
Tyrius the Platonist observes, libido consequuta quum fuerit
materiam improbam et praeruptam licentiam, et effrenatam
audaciam, &c., what will not lust effect in such persons? For
commonly princes and great men make no scruple at all of such
matters, but with that whore in Spartian, quicquid libet licet, they
think they may do what they list, profess it publicly, and rather brag
with Proculus (that writ to a friend of his in Rome, what famous
exploits he had done in that kind) than any way be abashed at it.
Nicholas Sanders relates of Henry VIII. (I know not how truly)
Quod paucas vidit pulchriores quas non concupierit, et
paucissimas non concupierit quas non violarit, "He saw very few
maids that he did not desire, and desired fewer whom he did not
enjoy:" nothing so familiar amongst them, 'tis most of their
business: Sardanapalus, Messalina, and Joan of Naples, are not
comparable to meaner men and women; Solomon of old had a
thousand concubines; Ahasuerus his eunuchs and keepers; Nero his
Tigillinus, panders, and bawds; the Turks, Muscovites, Mogors,
Xeriffs of Barbary, and Persian Sophies, are no whit inferior to
them in our times. Delectus fit omnium puellarum toto regno forma
praestantiorum (saith Jovius) pro imperatore; et quas ille linquit,
nobiles habent; they press and muster up wenches as we do
soldiers, and have their choice of the rarest beauties their countries
can afford, and yet all this cannot keep them from adultery, incest,
sodomy, buggery, and such prodigious lusts. We may conclude,
that if they be young, fortunate, rich, high-fed, and idle withal, it is
almost impossible that they should live honest, not rage, and
precipitate themselves into these inconveniences of burning lust.

 "Otium et reges prius et beatas
Perdidit urbes."

Idleness overthrows all, Vacuo pectore regnat amor, love
tyranniseth in an idle person. Amore abundas Antiphio. If thou hast
nothing to do, Invidia vel amore miser torquebere -- Thou shalt be
haled in pieces with envy, lust, some passion or other. Homines
nihil agendo male agere discunt; 'tis Aristotle's simile, "as match or
touchwood takes fire, so doth an idle person love." Quaeritur
Aegistus quare sit factus adulter, &c., why was Aegistus a
whoremaster? You need not ask a reason of it. Ismenedora stole
Baccho, a woman forced a man, as Aurora did Cephalus: no
marvel, saith Plutarch, Luxurians opibus more hominum mulier
agit: she was rich, fortunate and jolly, and doth but as men do in
that case, as Jupiter did by Europa, Neptune by Amymone. The
poets therefore did well to feign all shepherds lovers, to give
themselves to songs and dalliances, because they lived such idle
lives. For love, as Theophrastus defines it, is otiosi animi affectus,
an affection of an idle mind, or as Seneca describes it, Juventa
gignitur, juxu nutritur, feriis alitur, otioque inter laeta fortunae
bonae; youth begets it, riot maintains it, idleness nourisheth it, &c.
which makes Gordonius the physician cap. 20. part. 2. call this
disease the proper passion of nobility. Now if a weak judgment and
a strong apprehension do concur, how, saith Hercules de Saxonia,
shall they resist? Savanarola appropriates it almost to "monks,
friars, and religious persons, because they live solitarily, fair
daintily, and do nothing:" and well he may, for how should they
otherwise choose?

Diet alone is able to cause it: a rare thing to see a young man or a
woman that lives idly and fares well, of what condition soever, not
to be in love. Alcibiades was still dallying with wanton young
women, immoderate in his expenses, effeminate in his apparel, ever
in love, but why? he was over-delicate in his diet, too frequent and
excessive in banquets, Ubicunque securitas, ibi libido dominatur;
lust and security domineer together, as St. Hierome averreth. All
which the wife of Bath in Chaucer freely justifies,

For all to sicker, as cold engendreth hail,
A liquorish tongue must have a liquorish tail.

Especially if they shall further it by choice diet, as many times
those Sybarites and Phaeaces do, feed liberally, and by their good
will eat nothing else but lascivious meats. Vinum imprimis
generosum, legumen, fabas, radices omnium generum bene
conditas, et largo pipere aspersas, carduos hortulanos, lactucas,
erucas, rapas, porros, caepas, nucem piceam, amygdalas dulces,
electuaria, syrupos, succos, cochleas, conchas, pisces optime
praeparatos, aviculas, testiculos animalium, ova, condimenta
diversorum generum, molles lectos, pulvinaria, &c. Et quicquid
fere medici impotentia rei venereae laboranti praescribunt, hoc
quasi diasatyrion habent in delitiis, et his dapes multo delicatiores;
mulsum, exquisitas et exoticas fruges, aromata, placentas,
expressos succos multis ferculis variatos, ipsumque vinum suavitate
vincentes, et quicquid culina, pharmacopaea, aut quaeque fere
officina subministrare possit. Et hoc plerumque victu quum se
ganeones infarciant, ut ille ob Chreseida suam, se bulbis et
cochleis curavit; etiam ad Venerem se parent, et ad hanc palestram
se exerceant, qui fieri possit, ut non misere depereant, ut non
penitus insaniant? Aestuans venter cito despuit in libidinem,
Hieronymus ait. Post prandia, Callyroenda. Quis enim continere se
potest? Luxuriosa res vinum, fomentum libidinis vocat Augustinus,
blandum daemonem, Bernardus; lac veneris, Aristophanes. Non
Aetna, non Vesuvius tantis ardoribus aestuant, ac juveniles
medullae vino plenae, addit Hieronymus: unde ob optimum vinum
Lamsacus olim Priapo sacer: et venerandi Bacchi socia apud
Orpheum Venus audit. Haec si vinum simplex, et per se sumptum
praestare possit, nam -- quo me Bacche rapis tui plenum? quam
non insaniam, quem non furorem a caeteris expectemus? Gomesius
salem enumerat inter ea quae intempstivam libidinem provocare
solent, et salatiores fieri foeminas ob esum salis contendit:
Venerem ideo dicunt ab Oceano ortam.

 "Unde tot in Veneta scortorum millia cur stint?
In promptu causa est, est Venus orta mari."

Et hinc foeta mater Salacea Oceani conjux, verbumque fortasse
salax a sale effluxit. Mala Bacchica tantum olim in amoribus
praevaluerunt, ut coronae ex illis statuae Bacchi ponerentur.
Cubebis in vino maceratis utuntur Indi Orientales ad Venerem
excitandum, et Surax radice Africani. Chinae radix eosdem effectus
habet, talisque herbae meminit mag. nat. lib. 2. cap. 16. Baptista
Porta ex India allatae, cujus mentionem facit et Theophrastus. Sed
infinita his similia apud Rhasin, Matthiolum, Mizaldum,
caeterosque medicos occurrunt, quorum ideo mentionem feci, ne
quis imperitior in hos scopulas impingat, sed pro virili tanquam
syrtes et cautes consulto effugiat.





SUBSECT. II.-- Other causes of Love-Melancholy, Sight, Being
from the Face, Eyes, other parts, and how it pierceth.

Many such causes may be reckoned up, but they cannot avail,
except opportunity be offered of time, place, and those other
beautiful objects, or artificial enticements, as kissing, conference,
discourse, gestures concur, with such like lascivious provocations.
Kornmannus, in his book de linea amoris, makes five degrees of
lust, out of Lucian belike, which he handles in five chapters, Visus,
Colloquium, Convictus, Oscula, Tactus. ("Sight, conference,
association, kisses, touch.") Sight, of all other, is the first step of
this unruly love, though sometime it be prevented by relation or
hearing, or rather incensed. For there be those so apt, credulous,
and facile to love, that if they hear of a proper man, or woman, they
are in love before they see them, and that merely by relation, as
Achilles Tatius observes. "Such is their intemperance and lust, that
they are as much maimed by report, as if they saw them.
Callisthenes a rich young gentleman of Byzance in Thrace, hearing
of Leucippe, Sostratus' fair daughter, was far in love with her, and,
out of fame and common rumour, so much incensed, that he would
needs have her to be his wife." And sometimes by reading they are
so affected, as he in Lucian confesseth of himself, "I never read
that place of Panthea in Xenophon, but I am as much affected as if
I were present with her." Such persons commonly feign a kind of
beauty to themselves; and so did those three gentlewomen in
Balthazar Castilio fall in love with a young man whom they never
knew, but only heard him commended: or by reading of a letter; for
there is a grace cometh from hearing, as a moral philosopher
informeth us, "as well from sight; and the species of love are
received into the fantasy by relation alone:" ut cupere ab aspectu,
sic velle ab auditu, both senses affect. Interdum et absentes
amamus, sometimes we love those that are absent, saith
Philostratus, and gives instance in his friend Athenodorus, that
loved a maid at Corinth whom he never saw; non oculi sed mens
videt, we see with the eyes of our understanding.

But the most familiar and usual cause of love is that which comes
by sight, which conveys those admirable rays of beauty and
pleasing graces to the heart. Plotinus derives love from sight, e???
(eros) quasi ??as?? (orasis) . Si nescis, oculi sunt in amore duces,
"the eyes are the harbingers of love," and the first step of love is
sight, as Lilius Giraldus proves at large, hist. deor. syntag. 13. they
as two sluices let in the influences of that divine, powerful, soul-
ravishing, and captivating beauty, which, as one saith, "is sharper
than any dart or needle, wounds deeper into the heart; and opens a
gap through our eyes to that lovely wound, which pierceth the soul
itself" (Ecclus. 18.) Through it love is kindled like a fire. This
amazing, confounding, admirable, amiable beauty, "than which in
all nature's treasure (saith Isocrates) there is nothing so majestical
and sacred, nothing so divine, lovely, precious," 'tis nature's crown,
gold and glory; bonum si non summum, de summis tamen non
infrequenter triumphans, whose power hence may be discerned; we
contemn and abhor generally such things as are foul and ugly to
behold, account them filthy, but love and covet that which is fair.
'Tis beauty in all things which pleaseth and allureth us, a fair hawk,
a fine garment, a goodly building, a fair house, &c. That Persian
Xerxes when he destroyed all those temples of the gods in Greece,
caused that of Diana, in integrum servari, to be spared alone for
that excellent beauty and magnificence of it. Inanimate beauty can
so command. 'Tis that which painters, artificers, orators, all aim at,
as Eriximachus the physician, in Plato contends, "It was beauty
first that ministered occasion to art, to find out the knowledge of
carving, painting, building, to find out models, perspectives, rich
furnitures, and so many rare inventions." Whiteness in the lily, red
in the rose, purple in the violet, a lustre in all things without life,
the clear light of the moon, the bright beams of the sun, splendour
of gold, purple, sparkling diamond, the excellent feature of the
horse, the majesty of the lion, the colour of birds, peacock's tails,
the silver scales of fish, we behold with singular delight and
admiration. "And which is rich in plants, delightful in flowers,
wonderful in beasts, but most glorious in men," doth make us affect
and earnestly desire it, as when we hear any sweet harmony, an
eloquent tongue, see any excellent quality, curious work of man,
elaborate art, or aught that is exquisite, there ariseth instantly in us
a longing for the same. We love such men, but most part for 
comeliness of person, we call them gods and goddesses, divine,
serene, happy, &c. And of all mortal men they alone ( Calcagninus
holds) are free from calumny; qui divitiis, magistratu et gloria
florent, injuria lacessimus, we backbite, wrong, hate renowned,
rich, and happy men, we repine at their felicity, they are
undeserving we think, fortune is a stepmother to us, a parent to
them. "We envy" (saith Isocrates) "wise, just, honest men, except
with mutual offices and kindnesses, some good turn or other, they
extort this love from us; only fair persons we love at first sight,
desire their acquaintance, and adore them as so many gods: we had
rather serve them than command others, and account ourselves the
more beholding to them, the more service they enjoin us:" though
they be otherwise vicious, dishonest, we love them, favour them,
and are ready to do them any good office for their beauty's sake,
though they have no other good quality beside. Dic igitur o
formose, adolescens (as that eloquent Phavorinus breaks out in
Stobeus) dic Autiloque, suavius nectare loqueris; dic o Telemache,
vehementius Ulysse dicis; dic Alcibiades utcunque ebrius, libentius
tibi licet ebrio auscultabimus. "Speak, fair youth, speak
Autiloquus, thy words are sweeter than nectar, speak O
Telemachus, thou art more powerful than Ulysses, speak
Alcibiades though drunk, we will willingly hear thee as thou art."
Faults in such are no faults: for when the said Alcibiades had stolen
Anytus his gold and silver plate, he was so far from prosecuting so
foul a fact (though every man else condemned his impudence and
insolency) that he wished it had been more, and much better (he
loved him dearly) for his sweet sake. "No worth is eminent in such
lovely persons, all imperfections hid;" non enim facile de his quos
plurimum diligimus, turpitudinem suspicamur, for hearing, sight,
touch, &c., our mind and all our senses are captivated, omnes
sensus formosus delectat. Many men have been preferred for their
person alone, chosen kings, as amongst the Indians, Persians,
Ethiopians of old; the properest man of person the country could
afford, was elected their sovereign lord; Gratior est pulchro
veniens e corpore virtus, ("Virtue appears more gracefully in a
lovely personage.") and so have many other nations thought and
done, as Curtius observes: Ingens enim in corporis majestate
veneratio est, "for there is a majestical presence in such men;" and
so far was beauty adored amongst them, that no man was thought
fit to reign, that was not in all parts complete and supereminent.
Agis, king of Lacedaemon, had like to have been deposed, because
he married a little wife, they would not have their royal issue
degenerate. Who would ever have thought that Adrian the Fourth,
an English monk's bastard (as Papirius Massovius writes in his life)
, inops a suis relectus, squalidus et miser, a poor forsaken child,
should ever come to be pope of Rome? But why was it? Erat acri
ingenio, facundia expedita eleganti corpore, facieque laeta ac
hilari, (as he follows it out of Nubrigensis, for he ploughs with his
heifer,) "he was wise, learned, eloquent, of a pleasant, a promising
countenance, a goodly, proper man; he had, in a word, a winning
look of his own," and that carried it, for that he was especially
advanced. So "Saul was a goodly person and a fair." Maximinus
elected emperor, &c. Branchus the son of Apollo, whom he begot
of Jance, Succron's daughter (saith Lactantius) , when he kept King
Admetus' herds in Thessaly, now grown a man, was an earnest
suitor to his mother to know his father; the nymph denied him,
because Apollo had conjured her to the contrary; yet overcome by
his importunity at last she sent him to his father; when he came into
Apollo's presence, malas Dei reverenter osculatus, he carried
himself so well, and was so fair a young man, that Apollo was
infinitely taken with the beauty of his person, he could scarce look
off him, and said he was worthy of such parents, gave him a crown
of gold, the spirit of divination, and in conclusion made him a
demigod. O vis superba formae, a goddess beauty is, whom the
very gods adore, nam pulchros dii amant; she is Amoris domina,
love's harbinger, love's loadstone, a witch, a charm, &c. Beauty is a
dower of itself, a sufficient patrimony, an ample commendation, an
accurate epistle, as Lucian, Apuleius, Tiraquellus, and some others
conclude. Imperio digna forma, beauty deserves a kingdom, saith
Abulensis, paradox. 2. cap. 110. immortality; and "more have got
this honour and eternity for their beauty, than for all other virtues
besides:" and such as are fair, "are worthy to be honoured of God
and men." That Idalian Ganymede was therefore fetched by Jupiter
into heaven, Hephaestion dear to Alexander, Antinous to Adrian.
Plato calls beauty for that cause a privilege of nature, Naturae
gaudentis opus, nature's masterpiece, a dumb comment;
Theophrastus, a silent fraud; still rhetoric, Carneades, that
persuades without speech, a kingdom without a guard, because
beautiful persons command as so many captains; Socrates, a
tyranny, "which tyranniseth over tyrants themselves;" which made
Diogenes belike call proper women queens, quod facerent homines
quae praeciperent, because men were so obedient to their
commands. They will adore, cringe, compliment, and bow to a
common wench (if she be fair) as if she were a noble woman, a
countess, a queen, or a goddess. Those intemperate young men of
Greece erected at Delphos a golden image with infinite cost, to the
eternal memory of Phryne the courtesan, as Aelian relates, for she
was a most beautiful woman, insomuch, saith Athenaeus, that
Apelles and Praxiteles drew Venus's picture from her. Thus young
men will adore and honour beauty; nay kings themselves I say will
do it, and voluntarily submit their sovereignty to a lovely woman.
"Wine is strong, kings are strong, but a woman strongest," 1 Esd.
iv. 10. as Zerobabel proved at large to King Darius, his princes and
noblemen. "Kings sit still and command sea and land, &c., all pay
tribute to the king; but women make kings pay tribute, and have
dominion over them. When they have got gold and silver, they
submit all to a beautiful woman, give themselves wholly to her,
gape and gaze on her, and all men desire her more than gold or
silver, or any precious thing: they will leave father and mother, and
venture their lives for her, labour and travel to get, and bring all
their gains to women, steal, fight, and spoil for their mistress's sake.
And no king so strong, but a fair woman is stronger than he is. All
things" (as he proceeds) "fear to touch the king; yet I saw him and
Apame his concubine, the daughter of the famous Bartacus, sitting
on the right hand of the king, and she took the crown off his head,
and put it on her own, and stroke him with her left hand; yet the
king gaped and gazed on her, and when she laughed he laughed,
and when she was angry he flattered to be reconciled to her." So
beauty commands even kings themselves; nay whole armies and
kingdoms are captivated together with their kings: Forma vincit
armatos, ferrum pulchritudo captivat; vincentur specie, qui non
vincentur proelio. And 'tis a great matter saith Xenophon, "and of
which all fair persons may worthily brag, that a strong man must
labour for his living if he will have aught, a valiant man must fight
and endanger himself for it, a wise man speak, show himself, and
toil; but a fair and beautiful person doth all with ease, he
compasseth his desire without any pains-taking:" God and men,
heaven and earth conspire to honour him; every one pities him
above other, if he be in need, and all the world is willing to do him
good. Chariclea fell into the hand of pirates, but when all the rest
were put to the edge of the sword, she alone was preserved for her
person. When Constantinople was sacked by the Turk, Irene
escaped, and was so far from being made a captive, that she even
captivated the Grand Signior himself. So did Rosamond insult over
King Henry the Second.

 --"I was so fair an object;
Whom fortune made my king, my love made subject;
He found by proof the privilege of beauty,
That it had power to countermand all duty."

It captivates the very gods themselves, Morosiora numina,

 --"Deus ipse deorum
Factus ob hanc formam bos, equus imber olor."

 (Stroza filius Epig. "The king of the gods on account of this
beauty became a bull, a shower, a swan.")

And those mali genii are taken with it, as I have already proved.
Formosam Barbari verentur, et ad spectum pulchrum immanis
animus mansuescit. (Heliodor. lib. 5.) The barbarians stand in awe
of a fair woman, and at a beautiful aspect a fierce spirit is pacified.
For when as Troy was taken, and the wars ended (as Clemens
Alexandrinus quotes out of Euripides) angry Menelaus with rage
and fury armed, came with his sword drawn, to have killed Helen,
with his own hands, as being the sole cause of all those wars and
miseries: but when he saw her fair face, as one amazed at her
divine beauty, he let his weapon fall, and embraced her besides, he
had no power to strike so sweet a creature. Ergo habetantur enses
pulchritudine, the edge of a sharp sword (as the saying is) is dulled
with a beautiful aspect, and severity itself is overcome. Hiperides
the orator, when Phryne his client was accused at Athens for her
lewdness, used no other defence in her cause, but tearing her upper
garment, disclosed her naked breast to the judges, with which
comeliness of her body and amiable gesture they were so moved
and astonished, that they did acquit her forthwith, and let her go. O
noble piece of justice! mine author exclaims: and who is he that
would not rather lose his seat and robes, forfeit his office, than give
sentence against the majesty of beauty? Such prerogatives have fair
persons, and they alone are free from danger. Parthenopaeus was so
lovely and fair, that when he fought in the Theban wars, if his face
had been by chance bare, no enemy would offer to strike at or hurt
him, such immunities hath beauty. Beasts themselves are moved
with it. Sinalda was a woman of such excellent feature, and a
queen, that when she was to be trodden on by wild horses for a
punishment, "the wild beasts stood in admiration of her person,"
(Saxo Grammaticus lib. 8. Dan. hist.) "and would not hurt her."
Wherefore did that royal virgin in Apuleius, when she fled from the
thieves' den, in a desert, make such an apostrophe to her ass on
whom she rode; (for what knew she to the contrary, but that he was
an ass?) Si me parentibus et proco formoso reddideris, quas, tibi
gratias, quos honores habebo, quos cibos exhibebo? ("If you will
restore me to my parents, and my beautiful lover, what thanks,
what honour shall I owe you, what provender shall I not supply
you?") She would comb him, dress him, feed him, and trick him
every day herself, and he should work no more, toil no more, but
rest and play, &c. And besides she would have a dainty picture
drawn, in perpetual remembrance, a virgin riding upon an ass's
back with this motto, Asino vectore regia virgo fugiens
captivitatem; why said she all this? why did she make such 
promises to a dumb beast? but that she perceived the poor ass to be
taken with her beauty, for he did often obliquo collo pedes puellae
decoros basiare, kiss her feet as she rode, et ad delicatulas voculas
tentabat adhinnire, offer to give consent as much as in him was to
her delicate speeches, and besides he had some feeling, as she
conceived of her misery. And why did Theogine's horse in
Heliodorus curvet, prance, and go so proudly, exultans alacriter et
superbiens, &c., but that such as mine author supposeth, he was in
love with his master? dixisses ipsum equum pulchrum intelligere
pulchram domini fomam? A fly lighted on Malthius' cheek as he
lay asleep; but why? Not to hurt him, as a parasite of his, standing
by, well perceived, non ut pungeret, sed ut oscularetur, but
certainly to kiss him, as ravished with his divine looks. Inanimate
creatures, I suppose, have a touch of this. When a drop of Psyche's
candle fell on Cupid's shoulder, I think sure it was to kiss it. When
Venus ran to meet her rose-cheeked Adonis, as an elegant poet of
ours sets her out,

 --"the bushes in the way
Some catch her neck, some kiss her face,
Some twine about her legs to make her stay,
And all did covet her for to embrace."

Aer ipse amore inficitur, as Heliodorus holds, the air itself is in
love: for when Hero plaid upon her lute,

 "The wanton air in twenty sweet forms danc't
After her fingers" --

and those lascivious winds stayed Daphne when she fled from
Apollo;

 --"nudabant corpora venti,
Obviaque adversas vibrabant flamina vestes."

Boreas Ventus loved Hyacinthus, and Orithya Ericthons's daughter
of Athens: vi rapuit, &c. he took her away by force, as she was
playing with other wenches at Ilissus, and begat Zetes and Galias
his two sons of her. That seas and waters are enamoured with this
our beauty, is all out as likely as that of the air and winds; for when
Leander swam in the Hellespont, Neptune with his trident did beat
down the waves, but

"They still mounted up intending to have kiss'd him.
And fell in drops like tears because they missed him."

The river Alpheus was in love with Arethusa, as she tells the tale
herself,

 --"viridesque manu siccata capillos,
Fluminis Alphei veteres recitavit amores;
Pars ego Nympharum," &c.

 ("And with her hand wiping off the drops from her green tresses,
thus began to relate the loves of Alpheus. I was formerly an
Achaian nymph.")

When our Thame and Isis meet

 "Oscula mille sonant, connexu brachia pallent,
Mutuaque explicitis connectunt colla lacertis."

 (Leland. "Their lips resound with thousand kisses, their arms are
pallid with the close embrace, and their necks are mutually
entwined by their fond caresses.")

Inachus and Pineus, and how many loving rivers can I reckon up,
whom beauty hath enthralled! I say nothing all this while of idols
themselves that have committed idolatry in this kind, of looking-
glasses, that have been rapt in love (if you will believe poets) ,
when their ladies and mistresses looked on to dress them.

"Et si non habeo sensum, tua gratia sensum
Exhibet, et calidi sentio amoris onus.
Dirigis huc quoties spectantia lumina, flamma
Succendunt inopi saucia membra mihi."

"Though I no sense at all of feeling have,
Yet your sweet looks do animate and save;
And when your speaking eyes do this way turn,
Methinks my wounded members live and burn."

I could tell you such another story of a spindle that was fired by a
fair lady's looks, or fingers, some say, I know not well whether, but
fired it was by report, and of a cold bath that suddenly smoked, and
was very hot when naked Coelia came into it, Miramur quis sit
tantus et unde vapor, ("We wonder how great the vapour, and
whence it comes.") &c. But of all the tales in this kind, that is the
most memorable of Death himself, when he should have strucken a
sweet young virgin with his dart, he fell in love with the object.
Many more such could I relate which are to be believed with a
poetical faith. So dumb and dead creatures dote, but men are mad,
stupefied many times at the first sight of beauty, amazed, as that
fisherman in Aristaenetus that spied a maid bathing herself by the
seaside,

 "Soluta mihi sunt omnia membra --
A capite ad calcem. sensusque omnis periit
De pectore, tam immensus stupor animam invasit mihi."

 (Stobaeus e graeco. "My limbs became relaxed, I was overcome
from head to foot, all self-possession fled, so great a stupor
overburdened my mind.")

And as Lucian, in his images, confesses of himself, that he was at
his mistress's presence void of all sense, immovable, as if he had
seen a Gorgon's head: which was no such cruel monster (as Coelius
interprets it, lib. 3. cap. 9.) , "but the very quintessence of beauty,"
some fair creature, as without doubt the poet understood in the first
fiction of it, at which the spectators were amazed. Miseri quibus
intentata nites, poor wretches are compelled at the very sight of her
ravishing looks to run mad, or make away with themselves.

 "They wait the sentence of her scornful eyes;
And whom she favours lives, the other dies."

4865]Heliodorus, lib. 1. brings in Thyamis almost besides himself,
when he saw Chariclia first, and not daring to look upon her a
second time, "for he thought it impossible for any man living to see
her and contain himself." The very fame of beauty will fetch them
to it many miles off (such an attractive power this loadstone hath) ,
and they will seem but short, they will undertake any toil or
trouble, long journeys. Penia or Atalanta shall not overgo them,
through seas, deserts, mountains, and dangerous places, as they did
to gaze on Psyche: "many mortal men came far and near to see that
glorious object of her age," Paris for Helena, Corebus to Troja.

 --"Illis Trojam qui forte diebus
Venerat insano Cassandrae insensus amore."

"who inflamed with a violent passion for Cassandra, happened then
to be in Troy." King John of France, once prisoner in England,
came to visit his old friends again, crossing the seas; but the truth
is, his coming was to see the Countess of Salisbury, the nonpareil
of those times, and his dear mistress. That infernal God Pluto came
from hell itself, to steal Proserpine; Achilles left all his friends for
Polixena's sake, his enemy's daughter; and all the Graecian gods
forsook their heavenly mansions for that fair lady, Philo Dioneus
daughter's sake, the paragon of Greece in those days; ea enim
venustate fuit, ut eam certatim omnes dii conjugem expeterent: "for
she was of such surpassing beauty, that all the gods contended for
her love." Formosa divis imperat puella. "The beautiful maid
commands the gods." They will not only come to see, but as a
falcon makes a hungry hawk hover about, follow, give attendance
and service, spend goods, lives, and all their fortunes to attain;

"Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast,
Yet love breaks through, and picks them all at last."

When fair Hero came abroad, the eyes, hearts, and affections of her
spectators were still attendant on her.

 "Et medios inter vultus supereminet omnes,
Perque urbem aspiciunt venientem numinis instar."

 "So far above the rest fair Hero shined.
And stole away the enchanted gazer's mind."

 When Peter Aretine's Lucretia came first to Rome, and that the
fame of her beauty, ad urbanarum deliciarum sectatores venerat,
nemo non ad videndam eam, &c. was spread abroad, they came in
(as they say) thick and threefold to see her, and hovered about her
gates, as they did of old to Lais of Corinth, and Phryne of Thebes,
Ad cujus jacuit Graecia tota fores, "at whose gates lay all Greece."
"Every man sought to get her love, some with gallant and costly
apparel, some with an affected pace, some with music, others with
rich gifts, pleasant discourse, multitude of followers; others with
letters, vows, and promises, to commend themselves, and to be
gracious in her eyes." Happy was he that could see her, thrice
happy that enjoyed her company. Charmides in Plato was a proper
young man in comeliness of person, "and all good qualities, far
exceeding others; whensoever fair Charmides came abroad, they
seemed all to be in love with him" (as Critias describes their
carriage) , "and were troubled at the very sight of him; many came
near him, many followed him wheresoever he went," as those
formarum spectatores did Acontius, if at any time he walked
abroad: the Athenian lasses stared on Alcibiades; Sappho and the
Mitilenean women on Phaon the fair. Such lovely sights do not
only please, entice, but ravish and amaze. Cleonimus, a delicate
and tender youth, present at a feast which Androcles his uncle
made in Piraeo at Athens, when he sacrificed to Mercury, so
stupefied the guests, Dineas, Aristippus, Agasthenes, and the rest
(as Charidemus in Lucian relates it) , that they could not eat their
meat, they sat all supper time gazing, glancing at him, stealing
looks, and admiring of his beauty. Many will condemn these men
that are so enamoured, for fools; but some again commend them for
it; many reject Paris's judgment, and yet Lucian approves of it,
admiring Paris for his choice; he would have done as much himself,
and by good desert in his mind: beauty is to be preferred "before
wealth or wisdom." Athenaeus Deipnosophist, lib. 13. cap. 7, holds
it not such indignity for the Trojans and Greeks to contend ten
years, to spend so much labour, lose so many men's lives for
Helen's sake, for so fair a lady's sake,

"Ob talem uxorem cui praestantissima forma,
Nil mortale refert."

That one woman was worth a kingdom, a hundred thousand other
women, a world itself. Well might Sterpsichores be blind for
carping at so fair a creature, and a just punishment it was. The same
testimony gives Homer of the old men of Troy, that were spectators
of that single combat between Paris and Menelaus at the Seian gate,
when Helen stood in presence; they said all, the war was worthily
prolonged and undertaken for her sake. The very gods themselves
(as Homer and Isocrates record) fought more for Helen, than they
did against the giants. When Venus lost her son Cupid, she made
proclamation by Mercury, that he that could bring tidings of him
should have seven kisses; a noble reward some say, and much
better than so many golden talents; seven such kisses to many men
were more precious than seven cities, or so many provinces. One
such a kiss alone would recover a man if he were a dying,
Suaviolum Stygia sic te de valle reducet, &c. Great Alexander
married Roxanne, a poor man's child, only for her person. 'Twas
well done of Alexander, and heroically done; I admire him for it.
Orlando was mad for Angelica, and who doth not condole his
mishap? Thisbe died for Pyramus, Dido for Aeneas; who doth not
weep, as (before his conversion) Austin did in commiseration of
her estate! she died for him; "methinks" (as he said) "I could die for
her."

But this is not the matter in hand; what prerogative this beauty
hath, of what power and sovereignty it is, and how far such persons
that so much admire, and dote upon it, are to be justified; no man
doubts of these matters; the question is, how and by what means
beauty produceth this effect? By sight: the eye betrays the soul, and
is both active and passive in this business; it wounds and is
wounded, is an especial cause and instrument, both in the subject
and in the object. "As tears, it begins in the eyes, descends to the
breast;" it conveys these beauteous rays, as I have said, unto the
heart. Ut vidi ut perii. Mars videt hanc, visamque cupit. Schechem
saw Dinah the daughter of Leah, and defiled her, Gen. xxxiv. 3.
Jacob, Rachel, xxix. 17, "for she was beautiful and fair." David
spied Bathsheba afar off, 2 Sam. xi. 2. The Elders, Susanna, as that
Orthomenian Strato saw fair Aristoclea daughter of Theophanes,
bathing herself at that Hercyne well in Lebadea, and were
captivated in an instant. Viderunt oculi, rapuerunt pectora
flammae; Ammon fell sick for Thamar's sake, 2 Sam. xiii. 2. The
beauty of Esther was such, that she found favour not only in the
sight of Ahasuerus, "but of all those that looked upon her." Gerson,
Origen, and some others, contended that Christ himself was the
fairest of the sons of men, and Joseph next unto him, speciosus
prae filiis hominum, and they will have it literally taken; his very
person was such, that he found grace and favour of all those that
looked upon him. Joseph was so fair, that, as the ordinary gloss
hath it, filiae decurrerent per murum, et ad fenestras, they ran to
the top of the walls and to the windows to gaze on him, as we do
commonly to see some great personage go by: and so Matthew
Paris describes Matilda the Empress going through Cullen. P.
Morales the Jesuit saith as much of the Virgin Mary. Antony no
sooner saw Cleopatra, but, saith Appian, lib. 1, he was enamoured
of her. Theseus at the first sight of Helen was so besotted, that he
esteemed himself the happiest man in the world if he might enjoy
her, and to that purpose kneeled down, and made his pathetical
prayers unto the gods. Charicles, by chance, espying that curious
picture of smiling Venus naked in her temple, stood a great while
gazing, as one amazed; at length, he brake into that mad passionate
speech, "O fortunate god Mars, that wast bound in chains, and
made ridiculous for her sake!" He could not contain himself, but
kissed her picture, I know not how oft, and heartily desired to be so
disgraced as Mars was. And what did he that his betters had not
done before him?

 --"atque aliquis de diis non tristibus optat
Sic fieri turpis" --

When Venus came first to heaven, her comeliness was such, that
(as mine author saith) "all the gods came flocking about, and
saluted her, each of them went to Jupiter, and desired he might
have her to be his wife." When fair Antilochus came in presence, as
a candle in the dark his beauty shined, all men's eyes (as Xenophon
describes the manner of it) "were instantly fixed on him, and
moved at the sight, insomuch that they could not conceal
themselves, but in gesture or looks it was discerned and expressed."
Those other senses, hearing, touching, may much penetrate and
affect, but none so much, none so forcible as sight. Forma Briseis
mediis in armis movit Achillem, Achilles was moved in the midst of
a battle by fair Briseis, Ajax by Tecmessa; Judith captivated that
great Captain Holofernes: Dalilah, Samson; Rosamund, Henry the
Second; Roxolana, Suleiman the Magnificent, &c.

 "???a de ?a? s?de???
?a? p?? ?a?? t?? ???a"
 (Nika de kai sideron
Kai pur kalee tis oysa.)

"A fair woman overcomes fire and sword."

 "Nought under heaven so strongly doth allure
The sense of man and all his mind possess,
As beauty's loveliest bait, that doth procure
Great warriors erst their rigour to suppress,
And mighty hands forget their manliness,
Driven with the power of an heart-burning eye,
And lapt in flowers of a golden tress,
That can with melting pleasure mollify
Their harden'd hearts inur'd to cruelty."

 Clitiphon ingenuously confesseth, that he no sooner came in
Leucippe's presence, but that he did corde tremere, et oculis
lascivius intueri; he was wounded at the first sight, his heart
panted, and he could not possibly turn his eyes from her. So doth
Calysiris in Heliodorus, lib. 2. Isis Priest, a reverend old man,
complain, who by chance at Memphis seeing that Thracian
Rodophe, might not hold his eyes off her: "I will not conceal it, she
overcame me with her presence, and quite assaulted my continency
which I had kept unto mine old age; I resisted a long time my
bodily eyes with the eyes of my understanding; at last I was
conquered, and as in a tempest carried headlong." Xenophiles, a
philosopher, railed at women downright for many years together,
scorned, hated, scoffed at them; coming at last into Daphnis a fair
maid's company (as he condoles his mishap to his friend Demaritis)
, though free before, Intactus nullis ante cupidinibus, was far in
love, and quite overcome upon a sudden. Victus sum fateor a
Daphnide, &c. I confess I am taken,

 "Sola haec inflexit sensus, animumque labentem
Impulit" --

 (Virg. Aen. 4. "She alone hath captivated my feelings, and fixed
my wavering mind.")

I could hold out no longer. Such another mishap, but worse, had
Stratocles the physician, that blear-eyed old man, muco plenus (so
Prodromus describes him) ; he was a severe woman's-hater all his
life, foeda et contumeliosa semper in foeminas profatus, a bitter
persecutor of the whole sex, humanas aspides et viperas
appellabat, he forswore them all still, and mocked them
wheresoever he came, in such vile terms, ut matrem et sorores
odisses, that if thou hadst heard him, thou wouldst have loathed
thine own mother and sisters for his word's sake. Yet this old
doting fool was taken at last with that celestial and divine look of
Myrilla, the daughter of Anticles the gardener, that smirking
wench, that he shaved off his bushy beard, painted his face, curled
his hair, wore a laurel crown to cover his bald pate, and for her love
besides was ready to run mad. For the very day that he married he
was so furious, ut solis occasum minus expectare posset (a terrible,
a monstrous long day) , he could not stay till it was night, sed
omnibus insalutatis in thalamum festinans irrupit, the meat scarce
out of his mouth, without any leave taking, he would needs go
presently to bed. What young man, therefore, if old men be so
intemperate, can secure himself? Who can say I will not be taken
with a beautiful object? I can, I will contain. No, saith Lucian of his
mistress, she is so fair, that if thou dost but see her, she will stupefy
thee, kill thee straight, and, Medusa like, turn thee to a stone; thou
canst not pull thine eyes from her, but, as an adamant doth iron, she
will carry thee bound headlong whither she will herself, infect thee
like a basilisk. It holds both in men and women. Dido was amazed
at Aeneas' presence; Obstupuit primo aspectu Sidonia Dido; and as
he feelingly verified out of his experience;

 "Quam ego postquam vidi, non ita amavi ut sani solent
Homines, sed eodem pacto ut insani solent."

"I lov'd her not as others soberly,
But as a madman rageth, so did I."

So Museus of Leander, nusquam lumen detorquet ab illa; and
Chaucer of Palamon,

He cast his eye upon Emilia,
And therewith he blent and cried ha, ha,
As though he had been stroke unto the hearta.

If you desire to know more particularly what this beauty is, how it
doth Influere, how it doth fascinate (for, as all hold, love is a
fascination) , thus in brief. "This comeliness or beauty ariseth from
the due proportion of the whole, or from each several part." For an
exact delineation of which, I refer you to poets, historiographers,
and those amorous writers, to Lucian's Images, and Charidemus,
Xenophon's description of Panthea, Petronius Catalectes,
Heliodorus Chariclia, Tacius Leucippe, Longus Sophista's Daphnis
and Chloe, Theodorus Prodromus his Rhodanthes, Aristaenetus and
Philostratus Epistles, Balthazar Castilio, lib. 4. de aulico.
Laurentius, cap. 10, de melan. Aeneas Sylvius his Lucretia, and
every poet almost, which have most accurately described a perfect
beauty, an absolute feature, and that through every member, both in
men and women. Each part must concur to the perfection of it; for
as Seneca saith, Ep. 33. lib. 4. Non est formosa mulier cujus crus
laudatur et brachium, sed illa cujus simul universa facies
admirationem singulis partibus dedit; "she is no fair woman, whose
arm, thigh, &c. are commended, except the face and all the other
parts be correspondent." And the face especially gives a lustre to
the rest: the face is it that commonly denominates a fair or foul: arx
formae facies, the face is beauty's tower; and though the other parts
be deformed, yet a good face carries it (facies non uxor amatur)
that alone is most part respected, principally valued, deliciis suis
ferox, and of itself able to captivate.

 "Urit te Glycerae nitor,
Urit grata protervitas,
Et vultus nimium lubricus aspici."

"Glycera's too fair a face was it that set him on fire, too fine to be
beheld." When Chaerea saw the singing wench's sweet looks, he
was so taken, that he cried out, O faciem pulchram, deleo omnes
dehinc ex animo mulieres, taedet quotidianarum harum formarum!
"O fair face, I'll never love any but her, look on any other hereafter 
but her; I am weary of these ordinary beauties, away with them."
The more he sees her, the worse he is,-- uritque videndo, as in a
burning-glass, the sunbeams are re-collected to a centre, the rays of
love are projected from her eyes. It was Aeneas's countenance
ravished Queen Dido, Os humerosque Deo similis, he had an
angelical face.

 "O sacros vultus Baccho vel Apolline dignos,
Quos vir, quos tuto foemina nulla videt!"

 --"O sacred looks, befitting majesty,
Which never mortal wight could safely see."

Although for the greater part this beauty be most eminent in the
face, yet many times those other members yield a most pleasing
grace, and are alone sufficient to enamour. A high brow like unto
the bright heavens, coeli pulcherrima plaga, Frons ubi vivit honor,
frons ubi ludit amor, white and smooth like the polished alabaster,
a pair of cheeks of vermilion colour, in which love lodgeth; Amor
qui mollibus genis puellae pernoctas: a coral lip, suaviorum
delubrum, in which Basia mille patent, basia mille latent, "A
thousand appear, as many are concealed;" gratiarum sedes
gratissima; a sweet-smelling flower, from which bees may gather
honey, Mellilegae volucres quid adhuc cava thyma rosasque, &c.

"Omnes ad dominae labra venite meae,
Illa rosas spirat," &c.

A white and round neck, that via lactea, dimple in the chin, black
eyebrows, Cupidinis arcus, sweet breath, white and even teeth,
which some call the salepiece, a fine soft round pap, gives an
excellent grace, Quale decus tumidis Pario de marmore mammis!
and make a pleasant valley lacteum sinum, between two chalky
hills, Sororiantes papillulas, et ad pruritum frigidos amatores solo
aspectu excitantes. Unde is, Forma papillarum quam fuit apta
premi! -- Again Urebant oculos durae stantesque mamillae. A
flaxen hair; golden hair was even in great account, for which Virgil
commends Dido, Nondum sustulerat flavum Proserpinina crinem,
Et crines nodantur in aurum. Apollonius (Argonaut. lib. 4. Jasonis
flava coma incendit cor Medeae) will have Jason's golden hair to
be the main cause of Medea's dotage on him. Castor and Pollux
were both yellow haired. Paris, Menelaus, and most amorous young
men, have been such in all ages, molles ac suaves, as Baptista Porta
infers, Physiog. lib. 2. lovely to behold. Homer so commends
Helen, makes Patroclus and Achilles both yellow haired:
Pulchricoma Venus, and Cupid himself was yellow haired, in
aurum coruscante et crispante capillo, like that neat picture of
Narcissus in Callistratus; for so Psyche spied him asleep, Briseis,
Polixena, &c. flavicomae omnes,

 --"and Hero the fair,
Whom young Apollo courted for her hair."

Leland commends Guithera, king Arthur's wife, for a flaxen hair:
so Paulus Aemilius sets out Clodeveus, that lovely king of France.
Synesius holds every effeminate fellow or adulterer is fair haired:
and Apuleius adds that Venus herself, goddess of love, cannot
delight, "though she come accompanied with the graces, and all 
Cupid's train to attend upon her, girt with her own girdle, and smell
of cinnamon and balm, yet if she be bald or badhaired, she cannot
please her Vulcan." Which belike makes our Venetian ladies at this
day to counterfeit yellow hair so much, great women to
calamistrate and curl it up, vibrantes ad gratiam crines, et tot
orbibus in captivitatem flexos, to adorn their heads with spangles,
pearls, and made-flowers; and all courtiers to effect a pleasing
grace in this kind. In a word, "the hairs are Cupid's nets, to catch all
comers, a brushy wood, in which Cupid builds his nest, and under
whose shadow all loves a thousand several ways sport themselves."

A little soft hand, pretty little mouth, small, fine, long fingers,
Gratiae quae digitis -- 'tis that which Apollo did admire in
Daphne,-- laudat digitosque manusque; a straight and slender body,
a small foot, and well-proportioned leg, hath an excellent lustre,
Cui totum incumbit corpus uti fundamento aedes. Clearchus vowed
to his friend Amyander in Aristaenetus, that the most attractive part
in his mistress, to make him love and like her first, was her pretty
leg and foot: a soft and white skin, &c. have their peculiar graces,
Nebula haud est mollior ac hujus cutis est, aedipol papillam
bellulam. Though in men these parts are not so much respected; a
grim Saracen sometimes,-- nudus membra Pyracmon, a martial
hirsute face pleaseth best; a black man is a pearl in a fair woman's
eye, and is as acceptable as lame Vulcan was to Venus; for he
being a sweaty fuliginous blacksmith, was dearly beloved of her,
when fair Apollo, nimble Mercury were rejected, and the rest of the
sweet-faced gods forsaken. Many women (as Petronius observes)
sordibus calent (as many men are more moved with kitchen
wenches, and a poor market maid, than all these illustrious court
and city dames) will sooner dote upon a slave, a servant, a dirt
dauber, a brontes, a cook, a player, if they see his naked legs or
arms, thorosaque brachia, &c., like that huntsman Meleager in
Philostratus, though he be all in rags, obscene and dirty, besmeared
like a ruddleman, a gipsy, or a chimney-sweeper, than upon a noble
gallant, Nireus, Ephestion, Alcibiades, or those embroidered
courtiers full of silk and gold. Justine's wife, a citizen of Rome, fell
in love with Pylades a player, and was ready to run mad for him,
had not Galen himself helped her by chance. Faustina the empress
doted on a fencer.

Not one of a thousand falls in love, but there is some peculiar part
or other which pleaseth most, and inflames him above the rest. A
company of young philosophers on a time fell at variance, which
part of a woman was most desirable and pleased best? some said
the forehead, some the teeth, some the eyes, cheeks, lips, neck,
chin, &c., the controversy was referred to Lais of Corinth to decide;
but she, smiling, said, they were a company of fools; for suppose
they had her where they wished, what would they first seek? Yet
this notwithstanding I do easily grant, neque quis vestrum negaverit
opinor, all parts are attractive, but especially the eyes,

 --"videt igne micantes,
Sideribus similes oculos" --

which are love's fowlers; aucupium amoris, the shoeing horns, "the
hooks of love" (as Arandus will) "the guides, touchstone, judges,
that in a moment cure mad men, and make sound folks mad, the
watchmen of the body; what do they not?" How vex they not? All
this is true, and (which Athaeneus lib. 13. dip. cap. 5. and Tatius
hold) they are the chief seats of love, and James Lernutius hath
facetely expressed in an elegant ode of his,

"Amorem ocellis flammeolis herae
Vidi insidentem, credite posteri,
Fratresque circum ludibundos
Cum pharetra volitare et arcu," &c.

"I saw Love sitting in my mistress' eyes
Sparkling, believe it all posterity,
And his attendants playing round about
With bow and arrows ready for to fly."

Scaliger calls the eyes, "Cupid's arrows; the tongue, the lightning of
love; the paps, the tents:" Balthazar Castilio, the causes, the
chariots, the lamps of love,

 --"aemula lumina stellis,
Lumina quae possent sollicitare deos."

"Eyes emulating stars in light,
Enticing gods at the first sight;"

Love's orators, Petronius.

"O blandos oculos, et o facetos,
Et quadam propria nota loquaces
Illic est Venus, et leves amores,
Atque ipsa in medio sedet voluptas."

"O sweet and pretty speaking eyes,
Where Venus, love, and pleasure lies."

Love's torches, touch-box, naphtha and matches, Tibullus.

"Illius ex oculis quum vult exurere divos,
Accendit geminas lampades acer amor."

"Tart Love when he will set the gods on fire,
Lightens the eyes as torches to desire."

Leander, at the first sight of Hero's eyes, was incensed, saith
Musaeus.

"Simul in oculorum radiis crescebat fax amorum,
Et cor fervebat invecti ignis impetu;
Pulchritudo enim celebris immaculatae foeminae,
Acutior hominibus est veloci sagitta.
Oculos vero via est, ab oculi ictibus
Vulnus dilabitur, et in praecordia viri manat."

"Love's torches 'gan to burn first in her eyes.
And set his heart on fire which never dies:
For the fair beauty of a virgin pure
Is sharper than a dart, and doth inure
A deeper wound, which pierceth to the heart
By the eyes, and causeth such a cruel smart."

 A modern poet brings in Amnon complaining of Thamar,

 --"et me fascino
Occidit ille risus et formae lepos,
Ille nitor, illa gratia, et verus decor,
Illae aemulantes purpuram, et rosas genae,
Oculique vinctaeque aureo nodo comae." --

"It was thy beauty, 'twas thy pleasing smile,
Thy grace and comeliness did me beguile;
Thy rose-like cheeks, and unto purple fair
Thy lovely eyes and golden knotted hair."

 Philostratus Lemnius cries out on his mistress's basilisk eyes,
ardentes faces, those two burning-glasses, they had so inflamed his
soul, that no water could quench it. "What a tyranny" (saith he) ,
"what a penetration of bodies is this! thou drawest with violence,
and swallowest me up, as Charybdis doth sailors with thy rocky
eyes: he that falls into this gulf of love, can never get out." Let this
be the corollary then, the strongest beams of beauty are still darted
from the eyes.

 "Nam quis lumina tanta, tanta
Posset luminibus suis tueri,
Non statim trepidansque, palpitansque,
Prae desiderii aestuantis aura?" &c.

"For who such eyes with his can see,
And not forthwith enamour'd be!"

And as men catch dotterels by putting out a leg or an arm, with
those mutual glances of the eyes they first inveigle one another.
Cynthia prima suis miserum me, cepit ocellis. Of all eyes (by the
way) black are most amiable, enticing and fairer, which the poet
observes in commending of his mistress. Spectandum nigris oculis, 
nigroque capillo, which Hesiod admires in his Alemena,

 "Cujus a vertice ac nigricantibus oculis,
Tale quiddam spiral ac ab aurea Venere."

"From her black eyes, and from her golden face
As if from Venus came a lovely grace."

and Triton in his Milaene -- nigra oculos formosa mihi. Homer
useth that epithet of ox-eyed, in describing Juno, because a round
black eye is the best, the son of beauty, and farthest from black the
worse: which Polydore Virgil taxeth in our nation: Angli ut
plurimum caesiis oculis, we have grey eyes for the most part.
Baptisma Porta, Physiognom. lib. 3. puts grey colour upon children,
they be childish eyes, dull and heavy. Many commend on the other
side Spanish ladies, and those Greek dames at this day, for the
blackness of their eyes, as Porta doth his Neapolitan young wives.
Suetonius describes Julius Caesar to have been nigris vegetisque
oculis micantibus, of a black quick sparkling eye: and although
Averroes in his Colliget will have such persons timorous, yet
without question they are most amorous.

Now last of all, I will show you by what means beauty doth
fascinate, bewitch, as some hold, and work upon the soul of a man
by the eye. For certainly I am of the poet's mind, love doth bewitch 
and strangely change us.

 "Ludit amor sensus, oculos perstringit, et aufert
Libertatem animi, mira nos fascinat arte.
Credo aliquis daemon subiens praecordia flammam
Concitat, et raptam tollit de cardine mentem."

"Love mocks our senses, curbs our liberties,
And doth bewitch us with his art and rings,
I think some devil gets into our entrails,
And kindles coals, and heaves our souls from th'hinges."

Heliodorus lib. 3. proves at large, that love is witchcraft, "it gets in
at our eyes, pores, nostrils, engenders the same qualities and
affections in us, as were in the party whence it came." The manner
of the fascination, as Ficinus 10. cap. com. in Plat. declares it, is
thus: "Mortal men are then especially bewitched, when as by often
gazing one on the other, they direct sight to sight, join eye to eye,
and so drink and suck in love between them; for the beginning of
this disease is the eye. And therefore he that hath a clear eye,
though he be otherwise deformed, by often looking upon him, will
make one mad, and tie him fast to him by the eye." Leonard.
Varius, lib. 1. cap. 2. de fascinat. telleth us, that by this interview,
"the purer spirits are infected," the one eye pierceth through the
other with his rays, which he sends forth, and many men have those
excellent piercing eyes, that, which Suetonius relates of Augustus,
their brightness is such, they compel their spectators to look off,
and can no more endure them than the sunbeams. Barradius, lib. 6.
cap. 10. de Harmonia Evangel. reports as much of our Saviour
Christ, and Peter Morales of the Virgin Mary, whom Nicephorus
describes likewise to have been yellow-haired, of a wheat colour,
but of a most amiable and piercing eye. The rays, as some think,
sent from the eyes, carry certain spiritual vapours with them, and so
infect the other party, and that in a moment. I know, they that hold
visio fit intra mittendo, will make a doubt of this; but Ficinus
proves it from blear-eyes, "That by sight alone, make others blear-
eyed; and it is more than manifest, that the vapour of the corrupt
blood doth get in together with the rays, and so by the contagion
the spectators' eyes are infected." Other arguments there are of a
basilisk, that kills afar off by sight, as that Ephesian did of whom
Philostratus speaks, of so pernicious an eye, he poisoned all he
looked steadily on: and that other argument, menstruae faminae,
out of Aristotle's Problems, morbosae Capivaccius adds, and
Septalius the commentator, that contaminate a looking-glass with
beholding it. "So the beams that come from the agent's heart, by the
eyes, infect the spirits about the patients, inwardly wound, and
thence the spirits infect the blood." To this effect she complained in
Apuleius, "Thou art the cause of my grief, thy eyes piercing
through mine eyes to mine inner parts, have set my bowels on fire,
and therefore pity me that am now ready to die for thy sake."
Ficinus illustrates this with a familiar example of that Marrhusian
Phaedrus and Theban Lycias, "Lycias he stares on Phaedrus' face,
and Phaedrus fastens the balls of his eyes upon Lycias, and with
those sparkling rays sends out his spirits. The beams of Phaedrus'
eyes are easily mingled with the beams of Lycias, and spirits are
joined to spirits. This vapour begot in Phaedrus' heart, enters into
Lycias' bowels; and that which is a greater wonder, Phaedrus' blood
is in Lycias' heart, and thence come those ordinary love-speeches,
my sweetheart Phaedrus, and mine own self, my dear bowels. And
Phaedrus again to Lycias, O my light, my joy, my soul, my life.
Phaedrus follows Lycias, because his heart would have his spirits,
and Lycias follows Phaedrus, because he loves the seat of his
spirits; both follow; but Lycias the earnester of the two: the river
hath more need of the fountain, than the fountain of the river; as
iron is drawn to that which is touched with a loadstone, but draws
not it again; so Lycias draws Phaedrus." But how comes it to pass
then, that the blind man loves, that never saw? We read in the Lives
of the Fathers, a story of a child that was brought up in the
wilderness, from his infancy, by an old hermit: now come to man's
estate, he saw by chance two comely women wandering in the
woods: he asked the old man what creatures they were, he told him
fairies; after a while talking obiter, the hermit demanded of him,
which was the pleasantest sight that ever he saw in his life? He
readily replied, the two fairies he spied in the wilderness. So that,
without doubt, there is some secret loadstone in a beautiful woman,
a magnetic power, a natural inbred affection, which moves our
concupiscence, and as he sings,

"Methinks I have a mistress yet to come,
And still I seek, I love, I know not whom."

'Tis true indeed of natural and chaste love, but not of this heroical
passion, or rather brutish burning lust of which we treat; we speak
of wandering, wanton, adulterous eyes, which, as he saith, "lie still
in wait as so many soldiers, and when they spy an innocent
spectator fixed on them, shoot him through, and presently bewitch
him: especially when they shall gaze and gloat, as wanton lovers do
one upon another, and with a pleasant eye-conflict participate each
other's souls." Hence you may perceive how easily and how
quickly we may be taken in love; since at the twinkling of an eye,
Phaedrus' spirits may so perniciously infect Lycias' blood. "Neither
is it any wonder, if we but consider how many other diseases
closely, and as suddenly are caught by infection, plague, itch,
scabs, flux," &c. The spirits taken in, will not let him rest that hath
received them, but egg him on. Idque petit corpus mens unde est
saucia amore; (Lucretius. "And the body naturally seeks whence it
is that the mind is so wounded by love.") and we may manifestly
perceive a strange eduction of spirits, by such as bleed at nose after
they be dead, at the presence of the murderer; but read more of this
in Lemnius, lib. 2. de occult. nat. mir. cap. 7. Valleriola lib. 2.
observ. cap. 7. Valesius controv. Ficinus, Cardan, Libavius de
cruentis cadaveribus, &c.





SUBSECT. III.-- Artificial allurements of Love, Causes and
Provocations to Lust; Gestures, Clothes, Dower, &c.

Natural beauty is a stronger loadstone of itself, as you have heard, a
great temptation, and pierceth to the very heart; forma verecundae,
nocuit mihi visa puellae; but much more when those artificial
enticements and provocations of gestures, clothes, jewels,
pigments, exornations, shall be annexed unto it; those other
circumstances, opportunity of time and place shall concur, which of
themselves alone were all sufficient, each one in particular to
produce this effect. It is a question much controverted by some
wise men, forma debeat plus arti an naturae? Whether natural or
artificial objects be more powerful? but not decided: for my part I
am of opinion, that though beauty itself be a great motive, and give
an excellent lustre in sordibus, in beggary, as a jewel on a dunghill
will shine and cast his rays, it cannot be suppressed, which
Heliodorus feigns of Chariclia, though she were in beggar's weeds:
yet as it is used, artificial is of more force, and much to be
preferred.

 "Sic dentata sibi videtur Aegle,
Emptis ossibus Indicoque cornu;
Sic quae nigrior est cadente moro,
Cerussata sibi placet Lychoris."

"So toothless Aegle seems a pretty one,
Set out with new-bought teeth of Indy bone:
So foul Lychoris blacker than berry
Herself admires, now finer than cherry."

John Lerius the Burgundian, cap. 8. hist. navigat. in Brazil. is
altogether on my side. For whereas (saith he) at our coming to
Brazil, we found both men and women naked as they were born,
without any covering, so much as of their privities, and could not
be persuaded, by our Frenchmen that lived a year with them, to
wear any, "Many will think that our so long commerce with naked
women, must needs be a great provocation to lust;" but he
concludes otherwise, that their nakedness did much less entice
them to lasciviousness, than our women's clothes. "And I dare
boldly affirm" (saith he) "that those glittering attires, counterfeit
colours, headgears, curled hairs, plaited coats, cloaks, gowns,
costly stomachers, guarded and loose garments, and all those other
accoutrements, wherewith our countrywomen counterfeit a beauty,
and so curiously set out themselves, cause more inconvenience in
this kind, than that barbarian homeliness, although they be no whit
inferior unto them in beauty. I could evince the truth of this by
many other arguments, but I appeal" (saith he) "to my companions
at that present, which were all of the same mind." His countryman,
Montague, in his essays, is of the same opinion, and so are many
others; out of whose assertions thus much in brief we may
conclude, that beauty is more beholden to art than nature, and
stronger provocations proceed from outward ornaments, than such
as nature hath provided. It is true that those fair sparkling eyes,
white neck, coral lips, turgent paps, rose-coloured cheeks, &c., of
themselves are potent enticers; but when a comely, artificial, well-
composed look, pleasing gesture, an affected carriage shall be
added, it must needs be far more forcible than it was, when those
curious needleworks, variety of colours, purest dyes, jewels,
spangles, pendants, lawn, lace, tiffanies, fair and fine linen,
embroideries, calamistrations, ointments, etc. shall be added, they
will make the veriest dowdy otherwise, a goddess, when nature
shall be furthered by art. For it is not the eye of itself that enticeth
to lust, but an "adulterous eye," as Peter terms it, 2. ii. 14. a
wanton, a rolling, lascivious eye: a wandering eye, which Isaiah
taxeth, iii. 16. Christ himself, and the Virgin Mary, had most
beautiful eyes, as amiable eyes as any persons, saith Baradius, that
ever lived, but withal so modest, so chaste, that whosoever looked
on them was freed from that passion of burning lust, if we may
believe Gerson and Bonaventure: there was no such antidote
against it, as the Virgin Mary's face; 'tis not the eye, but carriage of
it, as they use it, that causeth such effects. When Pallas, Juno,
Venus, were to win Paris' favour for the golden apple, as it is
elegantly described in that pleasant interlude of Apuleius, Juno
came with majesty upon the stage, Minerva gravity, but Venus
dulce subridens, constitit amaene; et gratissimae, Graticae deam
propitiantes, &c. came in smiling with her gracious graces and
exquisite music, as if she had danced, et nonnunquam saltare solis
oculis, and which was the main matter of all, she danced with her
rolling eyes: they were the brokers and harbingers of her suite. So
she makes her brags in a modern poet,

 "Soon could I make my brow to tyrannise,
And force the world do homage to mine eyes."

The eye is a secret orator, the first bawd, Amoris porta, and with
private looks, winking, glances and smiles, as so many dialogues
they make up the match many times, and understand one another's
meanings, before they come to speak a word. Euryalus and Lucretia
were so mutually enamoured by the eye, and prepared to give each
other entertainment, before ever they had conference: he asked her
good will with his eyes; she did suffragari, and gave consent with a
pleasant look. That Thracian Rodolphe was so excellent at this
dumb rhetoric, "that if she had but looked upon any one almost"
(saith Calisiris) "she would have bewitched him, and he could not
possibly escape it." For as Salvianus observes, "the eyes are the
windows of our souls, by which as so many channels, all dishonest
concupiscence gets into our hearts." They reveal our thoughts, and
as they say, frons animi index, but the eye of the countenance, Quid
procacibus intuere ocellis? &c. I may say the same of smiling, gait,
nakedness of parts, plausible gestures, &c. To laugh is the proper
passion of a man, an ordinary thing to smile; but those counterfeit,
composed, affected, artificial and reciprocal, those counter-smiles
are the dumb shows and prognostics of greater matters, which they
most part use, to inveigle and deceive; though many fond lovers
again are so frequently mistaken, and led into a fool's paradise. For
if they see but a fair maid laugh, or show a pleasant countenance,
use some gracious words or gestures, they apply it all to
themselves, as done in their favour; sure she loves them, she is
willing, coming, &c.

"Stultus quando videt quod pulchra puellula ridet,
Tum fatuus credit se quod amare velit:"

"When a fool sees a fair maid for to smile,
He thinks she loves him, 'tis but to beguile."

They make an art of it, as the poet telleth us,

 "Quis credat? discunt etiam ridere puellae,
Quaeritur atque illis hac quoque parte decor."

"Who can believe? to laugh maids make an art,
And seek a pleasant grace to that same part."

And 'tis as great an enticement as any of the rest,

 --"subrisit molle puella,
Cor tibi rite salit."

"She makes thine heart leap with a pleasing gentle smile of hers."

 "Dulce ridentem Lalagen amabo,
Dulce loquentem,"

"I love Lalage as much for smiling, as for discoursing," delectata
illa risit tam blandum, as he said in Petronius of his mistress, being
well pleased, she gave so sweet a smile. It won Ismenias, as he
confesseth, Ismene subrisit amatorium, Ismene smiled so lovingly
the second time I saw her, that I could not choose but admire her:
and Galla's sweet smile quite overcame Faustus the shepherd, Me
aspiciens motis blande subrisit ocellis. All other gestures of the
body will enforce as much. Daphnis in Lucian was a poor tattered
wench when I knew her first, said Corbile, pannosa et Zacera, but
now she is a stately piece indeed, hath her maids to attend her,
brave attires, money in her purse, &c., and will you know how this
came to pass? "by setting out herself after the best fashion, by her
pleasant carriage, affability, sweet smiling upon all," &c. Many
women dote upon a man for his compliment only, and good
behaviour, they are won in an instant; too credulous to believe that
every light wanton suitor, who sees or makes love to them, is
instantly enamoured, he certainly dotes on, admires them, will
surely marry, when as he means nothing less, 'tis his ordinary
carriage in all such companies. So both delude each other by such
outward shows; and amongst the rest, an upright, a comely grace,
courtesies, gentle salutations, cringes, a mincing gait, a decent and
an affected pace, are most powerful enticers, and which the prophet
Isaiah, a courtier himself, and a great observer, objected to the
daughters of Zion, iii. 16. "they minced as they went, and made a
tinkling with their feet." To say the truth, what can they not effect
by such means?

"Whilst nature decks them in their best attires
Of youth and beauty which the world admires."

 Urit -- voce, manu, gressu, pectore, fronte, oculis. When art shall
be annexed to beauty, when wiles and guiles shall concur; for to
speak as it is, love is a kind of legerdemain; mere juggling, a
fascination. When they show their fair hand, fine foot and leg
withal, magnum sui desiderium nobis relinquunt, saith Balthazar
Castilio, lib. 1. they set us a longing, "and so when they pull up
their petticoats, and outward garments," as usually they do to show
their fine stockings, and those of purest silken dye, gold fringes,
laces, embroiderings, (it shall go hard but when they go to church,
or to any other place, all shall be seen) 'tis but a springe to catch
woodcocks; and as Chrysostom telleth them downright, "though
they say nothing with their mouths, they speak in their gait, they
speak with their eyes, they speak in the carriage of their bodies."
And what shall we say otherwise of that baring of their necks,
shoulders, naked breasts, arms and wrists, to what end are they but
only to tempt men to lust!

 "Nam quid lacteolus sinus, et ipsas
Prae te fers sine linteo papillas?
Hoc est dicere, posce, posce, trado;
Hoc est ad Venerem vocare amantes."

 (Jovianus Pontanus Baiar. lib. 1. ad Hermionem. "For why do
you exhibit your 'milky way,' your uncovered bosoms? What else
is it but to say plainly. Ask me, ask me, I will surrender; and what
is that but love's call?")

There needs no more, as Fredericus Matenesius well observes, but
a crier to go before them so dressed, to bid us look out, a trumpet to
sound, or for defect a sow-gelder to blow,

 "Look out, look out and see
What object this may be
That doth perstringe mine eye;
A gallant lady goes
In rich and gaudy clothes,
But whither away God knows,--look out, &c., et quae sequuntur,"

or to what end and purpose? But to leave all these fantastical
raptures, I'll prosecute my intended theme. Nakedness, as I have
said, is an odious thing of itself, remedium amoris; yet it may be so
used, in part, and at set times, that there can be no such enticement
as it is;

 "Nec mihi cincta Diana placet, nec nuda
Cythere, Illa voluptatis nil habet, haec nimium."

David so espied Bathsheba, the elders Susanna: Apelles was
enamoured with Campaspe, when he was to paint her naked.
Tiberius in Suet. cap. 42. supped with Sestius Gallus an old lecher,
libidinoso sene, ea lege ut nudae puellae administrarent; some say
as much of Nero, and Pontus Huter of Carolus Pugnax. Amongst
the Babylonians, it was the custom of some lascivious queans to
dance frisking in that fashion, saith Curtius lib. 5. and Sardus de
mor. gent. lib. 1. writes of others to that effect. The Tuscans at
some set banquets had naked women to attend upon them, which
Leonicus de Varia hist. lib. 3. cap. 96. confirms of such other
bawdy nations. Nero would have filthy pictures still hanging in his
chamber, which is too commonly used in our times, and
Heliogabalus, etiam coram agentes, ut ad venerem incitarent: So
things may be abused. A servant maid in Aristaenetus spied her
master and mistress through the key-hole merrily disposed; upon
the sight she fell in love with her master. Antoninus Caracalla
observed his mother-in-law with her breasts amorously laid open,
he was so much moved, that he said, Ah si liceret, O that I might;
which she by chance overhearing, replied as impudently, Quicquid
libet licet, thou mayst do what thou wilt: and upon that temptation
he married her: this object was not in cause, not the thing itself, but
that unseemly, indecent carriage of it.

When you have all done, veniunt a veste sagittae, the greatest
provocations of lust are from our apparel; God makes, they say,
man shapes, and there is no motive like unto it;

 "Which doth even beauty beautify,
And most bewitch a wretched eye,"

a filthy knave, a deformed quean, a crooked carcass, a maukin, a
witch, a rotten post, a hedgestake may be so set out and tricked up,
that it shall make as fair a show, as much enamour as the rest:
many a silly fellow is so taken. Primum luxuriae, aucupium, one
calls it, the first snare of lust; Bossus aucupium animarum, lethalem
arundinem, a fatal reed, the greatest bawd, forte lenocinium,
sanguineis lachrymis deplorandum, saith Matenesius, and with
tears of blood to be deplored. Not that comeliness of clothes is
therefore to be condemned, and those usual ornaments: there is a
decency and decorum in this as well as in other things, fit to be
used, becoming several persons, and befitting their estates; he is
only fantastical that is not in fashion, and like an old image in arras
hangings, when a manner of attire is generally received; but when
they are so new-fangled, so unstaid, so prodigious in their attires,
beyond their means and fortunes, unbefitting their age, place,
quality, condition, what should we otherwise think of them? Why
do they adorn themselves with so many colours of herbs, fictitious
flowers, curious needleworks, quaint devices, sweet-smelling
odours, with those inestimable riches of precious stones, pearls,
rubies, diamonds, emeralds, &c.? Why do they crown themselves
with gold and silver, use coronets and tires of several fashions,
deck themselves with pendants, bracelets, earrings, chains, girdles,
rings, pins, spangles, embroideries, shadows, rebatoes, versicolour
ribands? why do they make such glorious shows with their scarves,
feathers, fans, masks, furs, laces, tiffanies, ruffs, falls, calls, cuffs,
damasks, velvets, tinsels, cloth of gold, silver, tissue? with colours
of heavens, stars, planets: the strength of metals, stones, odours,
flowers, birds, beasts, fishes, and whatsoever Africa, Asia,
America, sea, land, art, and industry of man can afford? Why do
they use and covet such novelty of inventions; such new-fangled
tires, and spend such inestimable sums on them? "To what end are
those crisped, false hairs, painted faces," as the satirist observes,
"such a composed gait, not a step awry?" Why are they like so
many Sybarites, or Nero's Poppaea, Ahasuerus' concubines, so
costly, so long a dressing, as Caesar was marshalling his army, or a
hawk in pruning? Dum moliuntur, dum comuntur annus est: (Ter.
"They take a year to deck and comb themselves.") a gardener takes
not so much delight and pains in his garden, a horseman to dress
his horse, scour his armour, a mariner about his ship, a merchant
his shop and shop-book, as they do about their faces, and all those
other parts: such setting up with corks, straightening with
whalebones; why is it, but as a day-net catcheth larks, to make
young men stoop unto them? Philocharus, a gallant in Aristenaetus,
advised his friend Poliaenus to take heed of such enticements, "for
it was the sweet sound and motion of his mistress's spangles and
bracelets, the smell of her ointments, that captivated him first," Illa
fuit mentis prima ruina meae. Quid sibi vult pixidum turba, saith
Lucian, "to what use are pins, pots, glasses, ointments, irons,
combs, bodkins, setting-sticks? why bestow they all their
patrimonies and husbands' yearly revenues on such fooleries?" bina
patrimonia singulis auribus; "why use they dragons, wasps, snakes,
for chains, enamelled jewels on their necks, ears?" dignum potius
foret ferro manus istas religari, atque utinam monilia vere
dracones essent; they had more need some of them be tied in
bedlam with iron chains, have a whip for a fan, and hair-cloths next
to their skins, and instead of wrought smocks, have their cheeks
stigmatised with a hot iron: I say, some of our Jezebels, instead of
painting, if they were well served. But why is all this labour, all this
cost, preparation, riding, running, far-fetched, and dear bought
stuff? "Because forsooth they would be fair and fine, and where
nature, is defective, supply it by art." Sanguine quae vero non
rubet, arte rubet, (Ovid) ; and to that purpose they anoint and paint
their faces, to make Helen of Hecuba -- parvamque exortamque
puellam -- Europen. ("A distorted dwarf, an Europa.") To this
intent they crush in their feet and bodies, hurt and crucify
themselves, sometimes in lax-clothes, a hundred yards I think in a
gown, a sleeve; and sometimes again so close, ut nudos exprimant
artus. Now long tails and trains, and then short, up, down, high,
low, thick, thin, &c.; now little or no bands, then as big as cart
wheels; now loose bodies, then great farthingales and close girt,
&c. Why is all this, but with the whore in the Proverbs, to
intoxicate some or other? oculorum decipulam, one therefore calls
it, et indicem libidinis, the trap of lust, and sure token, as an ivy-
bush is to a tavern.

"Quod pulchros Glycere sumas de pixide vultus,
Quod tibi compositae nec sine lege comae:
Quod niteat digitis adamas, Beryllus in aure,
Non sum divinus, sed scio quid cupias."

"O Glycere, in that you paint so much,
Your hair is so bedeckt in order such.
With rings on fingers, bracelets in your ear,
Although no prophet, tell I can, I fear."

To be admired, to be gazed on, to circumvent some novice; as
many times they do, that instead of a lady he loves a cap and a
feather, instead of a maid that should have verum colorem, corpus
solidum et succi plenum (as Chaerea describes his mistress in the
poet) , a painted face, a ruff-band, fair and fine linen, a coronet, a
flower, ( Naturaeque putat quod fuit artificis,) a wrought waistcoat
he dotes on, or a pied petticoat, a pure dye instead of a proper
woman. For generally, as with rich-furred conies, their cases are far
better than their bodies, and like the bark of a cinnamon, tree,
which is dearer than the whole bulk, their outward accoutrements
are far more precious than their inward endowments. 'Tis too
commonly so.

 "Auferimur cultu, et gemmis, auroque teguntur
Omnia; pars minima est ipsa puella sui."

"With gold and jewels all is covered,
And with a strange tire we are won,
 (While she's the least part of herself)
And with such baubles quite undone."

Why do they keep in so long together, a whole winter sometimes,
and will not be seen but by torch or candlelight, and come abroad
with all the preparation may be, when they have no business, but
only to show themselves? Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut
ipsae.

 "For what is beauty if it be not seen,
Or what is't to be seen if not admir'd,
And though admir'd, unless in love desir'd?"

why do they go with such counterfeit gait, which Philo Judeus
reprehends them for, and use (I say it again) such gestures, apish,
ridiculous, indecent attires, sybaritical tricks, fucos genis,
purpurissam venis, cerussam fronti, leges occulis, &c. use those
sweet perfumes, powders and ointments in public; flock to hear
sermons so frequent, is it for devotion? or rather, as Basil tells
them, to meet their sweethearts, and see fashions; for, as he saith,
commonly they come so provided to that place, with such curious
compliments, with such gestures and tires, as if they should go to a
dancing-school, a stage-play, or bawdy-house, fitter than a church.

"When such a she-priest comes her mass to say,
Twenty to one they all forget to pray."

"They make those holy temples, consecrated to godly martyrs and
religious uses, the shops of impudence, dens of whores and thieves,
and little better than brothel houses." When we shall see these
things daily done, their husbands bankrupts, if not cornutos, their
wives light housewives, daughters dishonest; and hear of such
dissolute acts, as daily we do, how should we think otherwise?
what is their end, but to deceive and inveigle young men? As tow
takes fire, such enticing objects produce their effect, how can it be
altered? When Venus stood before Anchises (as Homer feigns in
one of his hymns) in her costly robes, he was instantly taken,

"Cum ante ipsum staret Jovis filia, videns eam
Anchises, admirabatur formam, et stupendas vestes;
Erat enim induta peplo, igneis radiis spiendidiore;
Habebat quoque torques fulgidos, flexiles haelices,
Tenerum collum ambiebant monilia pulchra, Aurea, variegata." --

"When Venus stood before Anchises first,
He was amaz'd to see her in her tires;
For she had on a hood as red as fire,
And glittering chains, and ivy-twisted spires,
About her tender neck were costly brooches,
And necklaces of gold, enamell'd ouches."

So when Medea came in presence of Jason first, attended by her
nymphs and ladies, as she is described by Apollonius,

"Cunctas vero ignis instar sequebatur splendor,
Tantum ab aureis fimbriis resplendebat jubar,
Accenditque in oculis dulce desiderium."

"A lustre followed them like flaming fire,
And from their golden borders came such beams,
Which in his eyes provok'd a sweet desire."

Such a relation we have in Plutarch, when the queens came and
offered themselves to Antony, "with diverse presents, and enticing
ornaments, Asiatic allurements, with such wonderful joy and
festivity, they did so inveigle the Romans, that no man could
contain himself, all was turned to delight and pleasure. The women
transformed themselves to Bacchus shapes, the men-children to
Satyrs and Pans; but Antony himself was quite besotted with
Cleopatra's sweet speeches, philters, beauty, pleasing tires: for
when she sailed along the river Cydnus, with such incredible pomp
in a gilded ship, herself dressed like Venus, her maids like the
Graces, her pages like so many Cupids, Antony was amazed, and
rapt beyond himself." Heliodorus, lib. 1. brings in Dameneta,
stepmother to Cnemon, "whom she saw in his scarves, rings, robes,
and coronet, quite mad for the love of him." It was Judith's
pantofles that ravished the eyes of Holofernes. And Cardan is not
ashamed to confess, that seeing his wife the first time all in white,
he did admire and instantly love her. If these outward ornaments
were not of such force, why doth Naomi give Ruth counsel how to
please Boaz? and Judith, seeking to captivate Holofernes, washed
and anointed herself with sweet ointments, dressed her hair, and put
on costly attires. The riot in this kind hath been excessive in times
past; no man almost came abroad, but curled and anointed,

 "Et matutino suadans Crispinus amomo.
Quantum vix redolent duo funera."

"one spent as much as two funerals at once, and with perfumed
hairs," et rosa canos odorati capillos Assyriaque nardo. What
strange thing doth Sueton. relate in this matter of Caligula's riot?
And Pliny, lib. 12. & 13. Read more in Dioscorides, Ulmus,
Arnoldus, Randoletius de fuco et decoratione; for it is now an art,
as it was of old, (so Seneca records) officinae, sunt adores
coquentium. Women are bad and men worse, no difference at all
between their and our times; "good manners" (as Seneca
complains) "are extinct with wantonness, in tricking up themselves
men go beyond women, they wear harlots' colours, and do not
walk, but jet and dance," hic mulier, haec vir, more like players,
butterflies, baboons, apes, antics, than men. So ridiculous,
moreover, we are in our attires, and for cost so excessive, that as
Hierome said of old, Uno filio villarum insunt pretia, uno lino
decies sestertium inseritur; 'tis an ordinary thing to put a thousand
oaks and a hundred oxen into a suit of apparel, to wear a whole
manor on his back. What with shoe-ties, hangers, points, caps and
feathers, scarves, bands, curls, &c., in a short space their whole
patrimonies are consumed. Heliogabalus is taxed by Lampridius,
and admired in his age for wearing jewels in his shoes, a common
thing in our times, not for emperors and princes, but almost for
serving men and tailors; all the flowers, stars, constellations, gold
and precious stones do condescend to set out their shoes. To repress
the luxury of those Roman matrons, there was Lex Valeria and
Oppia, and a Cato to contradict; but no laws will serve to repress
the pride and insolency of our days, the prodigious riot in this kind.
Lucullus's wardrobe is put down by our ordinary citizens; and a
cobbler's wife in Venice, a courtesan in Florence, is no whit
inferior to a queen, if our geographers say true: and why is all this?
"Why do they glory in their jewels" (as he saith) "or exult and
triumph in the beauty of clothes? why is all this cost? to incite men
the sooner to burning lust." They pretend decency and ornament;
but let them take heed, that while they set out their bodies they do
not damn their souls; 'tis Bernard's counsel: "shine in jewels, stink
in conditions; have purple robes, and a torn conscience." Let them
take heed of Isaiah's prophecy, that their slippers and attires be not
taken from them, sweet balls, bracelets, earrings, veils, wimples,
crisping-pins, glasses, fine linen, hoods, lawns, and sweet savours,
they become not bald, burned, and stink upon a sudden. And let
maids beware, as Cyprian adviseth, "that while they wander too
loosely abroad, they lose not their virginities:" and like Egyptian
temples, seem fair without, but prove rotten carcases within. How
much better were it for them to follow that good counsel of
Tertullian? "To have their eyes painted with chastity, the Word of
God inserted into their ears, Christ's yoke tied to the hair, to subject
themselves to their husbands. If they would do so, they should be
comely enough, clothe themselves with the silk of sanctity, damask
of devotion, purple of piety and chastity, and so painted, they shall
have God himself to be a suitor: let whores and queans prank up
themselves, let them paint their faces with minion and ceruse, they
are but fuels of lust, and signs of a corrupt soul: if ye be good,
honest, virtuous, and religious matrons, let sobriety, modesty and
chastity be your honour, and God himself your love and desire."
Mulier recte olet, ubi nihil olet, then a woman smells best, when
she hath no perfume at all; no crown, chain, or jewel (Guivarra
adds) is such an ornament to a virgin, or virtuous woman, quam
virgini pudor, as chastity is: more credit in a wise man's eye and
judgment they get by their plainness, and seem fairer than they that
are set out with baubles, as a butcher's meat is with pricks, puffed
up, and adorned like so many jays with variety of colours. It is
reported of Cornelia, that virtuous Roman lady, great Scipio's
daughter, Titus Sempronius' wife, and the mother of the Gracchi,
that being by chance in company with a companion, a strange
gentlewoman (some light housewife belike, that was dressed like a
May lady, and, as most of our gentlewomen are, "was more
solicitous of her head-tire than of her health, that spent her time
between a comb and a glass, and had rather be fair than honest" (as
Cato said) , "and have the commonwealth turned topsy-turvy than
her tires marred;") and she did nought but brag of her fine robes
and jewels, and provoked the Roman matron to show hers:
Cornelia kept her in talk till her children came from school, and
these, said she, are my jewels, and so deluded and put off a proud,
vain, fantastical, housewife. How much better were it for our
matrons to do as she did, to go civilly and decently, Honestae
mulieris instar quae utitur auro pro eo quod est, ad ea tantum
quibus opus est, to use gold as it is gold, and for that use it serves,
and when they need it, than to consume it in riot, beggar their
husbands, prostitute themselves, inveigle others, and peradventure
damn their own souls? How much more would it be for their
honour and credit? Thus doing, as Hierom said of Blesilla, "Furius
did not so triumph over the Gauls, Papyrius of the Samnites, Scipio
of Numantia, as she did by her temperance;" pulla semper veste,
&c., they should insult and domineer over lust, folly, vainglory, all
such inordinate, furious and unruly passions.

But I am over tedious, I confess, and whilst I stand gaping after
fine clothes, there is another great allurement, (in the world's eye at
least) which had like to have stolen out of sight, and that is money,
veniunt a dote sagittae, money makes the match; ????? a??????
?ep??s?? (Monon argyron blepoysin) : 'tis like sauce to their meat,
cum carne condimentum, a good dowry with a wife. Many men if
they do hear but of a great portion, a rich heir, are more mad than if
they had all the beauteous ornaments, and those good parts art and
nature can afford, they care not for honesty, bringing up, birth,
beauty, person, but for money.

 "Canes et equos (o Cyrne) quaerimus
Nobiles, et a bona progenie;
Malam vero uxorem, malique patris filiam
Ducere non curat vir bonus,
Modo ei magnam dotem afferat,"

"Our dogs and horses still from the best breed
We carefully seek, and well may they speed:
But for our wives, so they prove wealthy,
Fair or foul, we care not what they be."

If she be rich, then she is fair, fine, absolute and perfect, then they
burn like fire, they love her dearly, like pig and pie, and are ready
to hang themselves if they may not have her. Nothing so familiar in
these days, as for a young man to marry an old wife, as they say,
for a piece of gold; asinum auro onustum; and though she be an old
crone, and have never a tooth in her head, neither good conditions,
nor a good face, a natural fool, but only rich, she shall have twenty
young gallants to be suitors in an instant. As she said in Suetonius,
non me, sed mea ambiunt, 'tis not for her sake, but for her lands or
money; and an excellent match it were (as he added) if she were
away. So on the other side, many a young lovely maid will cast
away herself upon an old, doting, decrepit dizzard,

 "Bis puer effoeto quamvis balbutiat ore,
Prima legit rarae tam culta roseta puellae,"

that is rheumatic and gouty, hath some twenty diseases, perhaps but
one eye, one leg, never a nose, no hair on his head, wit in his
brains, nor honesty, if he have land or money, she will have him
before all other suitors, Dummodo sit dives barbarus ille placet. "If
he be rich, he is the man," a fine man, and a proper man, she will
go to Jacaktres or Tidore with him; Galesimus de monte aureo. Sir
Giles Goosecap, Sir Amorous La-Fool, shall have her. And as
Philemasium in Aristaenetus told Emmusus, absque argento omnia
vana, hang him that hath no money, "'tis to no purpose to talk of
marriage without means," trouble me not with such motions; let
others do as they will, "I'll be sure to have one shall maintain me
fine and brave." Most are of her mind, De moribus ultima fiet
questio, for his conditions, she shall inquire after them another
time, or when all is done, the match made, and everybody gone
home. Lucian's Lycia was a proper young maid, and had many fine
gentlemen to her suitors; Ethecles, a senator's son, Melissus, a
merchant, &c.; but she forsook them all for one Passius, a base,
hirsute, bald-pated knave; but why was it? "His father lately died
and left him sole heir of his goods and lands." This is not amongst
your dust-worms alone, poor snakes that will prostitute their souls
for money, but with this bait you may catch our most potent,
puissant, and illustrious princes. That proud upstart domineering
Bishop of Ely, in the time of Richard the First, viceroy in his
absence, as Nubergensis relates it, to fortify himself, and maintain
his greatness, propinquarum suarum connubiis, plurimos sibi
potentes et nobiles devincire curavit, married his poor kinswomen
(which came forth of Normandy by droves) to the chiefest nobles
of the land, and they were glad to accept of such matches, fair or
foul, for themselves, their sons, nephews, &c. Et quis tam
praeclaram affinitatem sub spe magnae promotionis non optaret?
Who would not have done as much for money and preferment? as
mine author adds. Vortiger, King of Britain, married Rowena the
daughter of Hengist the Saxon prince, his mortal enemy; but
wherefore? she had Kent for her dowry. Iagello the great Duke of
Lithuania, 1386, was mightily enamoured on Hedenga, insomuch
that he turned Christian from a Pagan, and was baptised himself by
the name of Uladislaus, and all his subjects for her sake: but why
was it? she was daughter and heir of Poland, and his desire was to
have both kingdoms incorporated into one. Charles the Great was
an earnest suitor to Irene the Empress, but, saith Zonarus, ob
regnum, to annex the empire of the East to that of the West. Yet
what is the event of all such matches, that are so made for money,
goods, by deceit, or for burning lust, quos foeda libido conjunxit,
what follows? they are almost mad at first, but 'tis a mere flash; as
chaff and straw soon fired, burn vehemently for a while, yet out in
a moment; so are all such matches made by those allurements of
burning lust; where there is no respect of honesty, parentage,
virtue, religion, education, and the like, they are extinguished in an
instant, and instead of love comes hate; for joy, repentance and
desperation itself. Franciscus Barbarus in his first book de re
uxoria, c. 5, hath a story of one Philip of Padua that fell in love
with a common whore, and was now ready to run mad for her; his
father having no more sons let him enjoy her; "but after a few days,
the young man began to loath, could not so much as endure the
sight of her, and from one madness fell into another." Such event
commonly have all these lovers; and he that so marries, or for such
respects, let them look for no better success than Menelaus had
with Helen, Vulcan with Venus, Theseus with Phaedra, Minos with
Pasipha, and Claudius with Messalina; shame, sorrow, misery,
melancholy, discontent.





SUBSECT. IV.-- Importunity and Opportunity of Time, Place,
Conference, Discourse, Singing, Dancing, Music, Amorous Tales,
Objects, Kissing, Familiarity, Tokens, Presents, Bribes, Promises,
Protestations, Tears, &c.

All these allurements hitherto are afar off, and at a distance; I will
come nearer to those other degrees of love, which are conference,
kissing, dalliance, discourse, singing, dancing, amorous tales,
objects, presents, &c., which as so many sirens steal away the
hearts of men and women. For, as Tacitus observes, l. 2, "It is no
sufficient trial of a maid's affection by her eyes alone, but you must
say something that shall be more available, and use such other
forcible engines; therefore take her by the hand, wring her fingers
hard, and sigh withal; if she accept this in good part, and seem not
to be much averse, then call her mistress, take her about the neck
and kiss her," &c. But this cannot be done except they first get
opportunity of living, or coming together, ingress, egress, and
regress; letters and commendations may do much, outward gestures
and actions: but when they come to live near one another, in the
same street, village, or together in a house, love is kindled on a
sudden. Many a serving-man by reason of this opportunity and
importunity inveigles his master's daughter, many a gallant loves a
dowdy, many a gentleman runs upon his wife's maids; many ladies
dote upon their men, as the queen in Ariosto did upon the dwarf,
many matches are so made in haste, and they are compelled as it
were by necessity so to love, which had they been free, come in
company of others, seen that variety which many places afford, or
compared them to a third, would never have looked one upon
another. Or had not that opportunity of discourse and familiarity
been offered, they would have loathed and contemned those whom,
for want of better choice and other objects, they are fatally driven
on, and by reason of their hot blood, idle life, full diet, &c., are
forced to dote upon them that come next. And many times those
which at the first sight cannot fancy or affect each other, but are
harsh and ready to disagree, offended with each other's carriage,
like Benedict and Beatrice in the comedy, and in whom they find
many faults, by this living together in a house, conference, kissing,
colling, and such like allurements, begin at last to dote insensibly
one upon another.

It was the greatest motive that Potiphar's wife had to dote upon
Joseph, and Clitiphon upon Leucippe his uncle's daughter, because
the plague being at Bizance, it was his fortune for a time to sojourn
with her, to sit next her at the table, as he tells the tale himself in
Tatius, lib. 2. (which, though it be but a fiction, is grounded upon
good observation, and doth well express the passions of lovers) , he
had opportunity to take her by the hand, and after a while to kiss,
and handle her paps, &c., which made him almost mad. Ismenias
the orator makes the like confession in Eustathius, lib. 1, when he
came first to Sosthene's house, and sat at table with Cratistes his
friend, Ismene, Sosthene's daughter, waiting on them "with her
breasts open, arms half bare," Nuda pedem, discincta sinum,
spoliata lacertos; after the Greek fashion in those times,-- nudos
media plus parte lacertos, as Daphne was when she fled from
Phoebus (which moved him much) , was ever ready to give
attendance on him, to fill him drink, her eyes were never off him,
rogabundi oculi, those speaking eyes, courting eyes, enchanting
eyes; but she was still smiling on him, and when they were risen,
that she had got a little opportunity, "she came and drank to him,
and withal trod upon his toes, and would come and go, and when
she could not speak for the company, she would wring his hand,"
and blush when she met him: and by this means first she overcame
him (bibens amorem hauriebam simul) , she would kiss the cup and
drink to him, and smile, "and drink where he drank on that side of
the cup," by which mutual compressions, kissings, wringing of
hands, treading of feet, &c. Ipsam mihi videbar sorbillare
virginem, I sipped and sipped so long, till at length I was drunk in
love upon a sudden. Philocharinus, in Aristaenetus, met a fair maid
by chance, a mere stranger to him, he looked back at her, she
looked back at him again, and smiled withal.

 "Ille dies lethi primus, primusque malorum
Causa fuit." --

 (Vir. Aen. 4. "That was the first hour of destruction, and the first
beginning of my miseries.")

It was the sole cause of his farther acquaintance, and love that
undid him. O nullis tutum credere blanditiis.

This opportunity of time and place, with their circumstances, are so
forcible motives, that it is impossible almost for two young folks
equal in years to live together, and not be in love, especially in
great houses, princes' courts, where they are idle in summo gradu,
fare well, live at ease, and cannot tell otherwise how to spend their
time. Illic Hippolitum pone, Priapus erit. Achilles was sent by his
mother Thetis to the island of Scyros in the Aegean sea (where
Lycomedes then reigned) in his nonage to be brought up; to avoid
that hard destiny of the oracle (he should be slain at the siege of
Troy) : and for that cause was nurtured in Genesco, amongst the
king's children in a woman's habit; but see the event: he
compressed Deidamia, the king's fair daughter, and had a fine son,
called Pyrrhus by her. Peter Abelard the philosopher, as he tells the
tale himself, being set by Fulbertus her uncle to teach Heloise his
lovely niece, and to that purpose sojourned in his house, and had
committed agnam tenellam famelico lupo, I use his own words, he
soon got her good will, plura erant oscula quam sententiae and he
read more of love than any other lecture; such pretty feats can
opportunity plea; primum domo conjuncti, inde animis, &c. But
when as I say, nox, vinum, et adolescentia, youth, wine, and night,
shall concur, nox amoris et quietis conscia, 'tis a wonder they be
not all plunged over head and ears in love; for youth is benigna in
amorem, et prona materies, a very combustible matter, naphtha
itself, the fuel of love's fire, and most apt to kindle it. If there be
seven servants in an ordinary house, you shall have three couple in
some good liking at least, and amongst idle persons how should it
be otherwise? "Living at Rome," saith Aretine's Lucretia, "in the
flower of my fortunes, rich, fair, young, and so well brought up, my
conversation, age, beauty, fortune, made all the world admire and
love me." Night alone, that one occasion, is enough to set all on
fire, and they are so cunning in great houses, that they make their
best advantage of it: Many a gentlewoman, that is guilty to herself
of her imperfections, paintings, impostures, will not willingly be
seen by day, but as Castilio noteth, in the night, Diem ut glis odit,
taedarum lucem super omnia mavult, she hateth the day like a
dormouse, and above all things loves torches and candlelight, and if
she must come abroad in the day, she covets, as in a mercer's shop,
a very obfuscate and obscure sight. And good reason she hath for
it: Nocte latent mendae, and many an amorous gull is fetched over
by that means. Gomesius lib. 3. de sale gen. c. 22. gives instance in
a Florentine gentleman, that was so deceived with a wife, she was
so radiantly set out with rings and jewels, lawns, scarves, laces,
gold, spangles, and gaudy devices, that the young man took her to
be a goddess (for he never saw her but by torchlight) ; but after the
wedding solemnities, when as he viewed her the next morning
without her tires, and in a clear day, she was so deformed, a lean,
yellow, shrivelled, &c., such a beastly creature in his eyes, that he
could not endure to look upon her. Such matches are frequently
made in Italy, where they have no other opportunity to woo but
when they go to church, or, as in Turkey, see them at a distance,
they must interchange few or no words, till such time they come to
be married, and then as Sardus lib. 1. cap. 3. de morb. gent. and
Bohemus relate of those old Lacedaemonians, "the bride is brought
into the chamber, with her hair girt about her, the bridegroom
comes in and unties the knot, and must not see her at all by
daylight, till such time as he is made a father by her." In those
hotter countries these are ordinary practices at this day; but in our
northern parts, amongst Germans, Danes, French, and Britons, the
continent of Scandia and the rest, we assume more liberty in such
cases; we allow them, as Bohemus saith, to kiss coming and going,
et modo absit lascivia, in cauponem ducere, to talk merrily, sport,
play, sing, and dance so that it be modestly done, go to the alehouse
and tavern together. And 'tis not amiss, though Chrysostom,
Cyprian, Hierome, and some other of the fathers speak bitterly
against it: but that is the abuse which is commonly seen at some
drunken matches, dissolute meetings, or great unruly feasts. "A
young, pittivanted, trim-bearded fellow," saith Hierome, "will come
with a company of compliments, and hold you up by the arm as
you go, and wringing your fingers, will so be enticed, or entice: one
drinks to you, another embraceth, a third kisseth, and all this while
the fiddler plays or sings a lascivious song; a fourth singles you out
to dance, one speaks by beck and signs, and that which he dares not
say, signifies by passions; amongst so many and so great
provocations of pleasure, lust conquers the most hard and crabbed
minds, and scarce can a man live honest amongst feastings, and
sports, or at such great meetings." For as he goes on, "she walks
along and with the ruffling of her clothes, makes men look at her,
her shoes creak, her paps tied up, her waist pulled in to make her
look small, she is straight girded, her hairs hang loose about her
ears, her upper garment sometimes falls, and sometimes tarries to
show her naked shoulders, and as if she would not be seen, she
covers that in all haste, which voluntarily she showed." And not at
feasts, plays, pageants, and such assemblies, but as Chrysostom
objects, these tricks are put in practice "at service time in churches,
and at the communion itself." If such dumb shows, signs, and more
obscure significations of love can so move, what shall they do that
have full liberty to sing, dance, kiss, coll, to use all manner of
discourse and dalliance! What shall he do that is beleaguered of all
sides?

 "Quem tot, tam roseae petunt puellae,
Quem cultae cupiunt nurus, amorque
Omnis undique et undecunque et usque,
Omnis ambit Amor, Venusque Hymenque."

"After whom so many rosy maids inquire,
Whom dainty dames and loving wights desire,
 In every place, still, and at all times sue,
Whom gods and gentle goddesses do woo."

How shall he contain? The very tone of some of their voices, a
pretty pleasing speech, an affected tone they use, is able of itself to
captivate a young man; but when a good wit shall concur, art and
eloquence, fascinating speech, pleasant discourse, sweet gestures,
the Sirens themselves cannot so enchant. P. Jovius commends his
Italian countrywomen, to have an excellent faculty in this kind,
above all other nations, and amongst them the Florentine ladies:
some prefer Roman and Venetian courtesans, they have such
pleasing tongues, and such elegancy of speech, that they are able to
overcome a saint, Pro facie multis vox sua lena fuit. Tanta gratia
vocis famam conciliabat, saith Petronius in his fragment of pure
impurities, I mean his Satyricon, tam dulcis sonus permulcebat
aera, ut putares inter auras cantare Syrenum concordiam; she sang
so sweetly that she charmed the air, and thou wouldst have thought
thou hadst heard a concert of Sirens. "O good God, when Lais
speaks, how sweet it is!" Philocolus exclaims in Aristenaetus, to
hear a fair young gentlewoman play upon the virginals, lute, viol,
and sing to it, which as Gellius observes, lib. 1. cap. 11. are
lascivientium delicicae, the chief delight of lovers, must needs be a
great enticement. Parthenis was so taken. Mi vox ista avida haurit
ab aure animam: ("The sweet sound of his voice reanimates my
soul through my covetous ears.") O sister Harpedona (she laments)
I am undone, "how sweetly he sings, I'll speak a bold word, he is
the properest man that ever I saw in my life: O how sweetly he
sings, I die for his sake, O that he would love me again!" If thou
didst but hear her sing, saith Lucian, "thou wouldst forget father
and mother, forsake all thy friends, and follow her." Helena is
highly commended by Theocritus the poet for her sweet voice and
music; none could play so well as she, and Daphnis in the same
Edyllion,

"Quam tibi os dulce est, et vox amabilis o Daphni,
Jucundius est audire te canentem, quam mel lingere!"

"How sweet a face hath Daphne, how lovely a voice!
Honey itself is not so pleasant in my choice."

A sweet voice and music are powerful enticers. Those Samian
singing wenches, Aristonica, Onanthe and Agathocleia, regiis
diadematibus insultarunt, insulted over kings themselves, as
Plutarch contends. Centum luminibus cinctum caput Argus
habebat, Argus had a hundred eyes, all so charmed by one silly
pipe, that he lost his head. Clitiphon complains in Tatius of
Leucippe's sweet tunes, "he heard her play by chance upon the lute,
and sing a pretty song to it in commendations of a rose," out of old
Anacreon belike;

"Rosa honor decusque florum,
Rosa flos odorque divum,
Hominum rosa est voluptas,
Decus illa Gratiarum,
Florente amoris hora,
Rosa suavium Diones," &c.

"Rose the fairest of all flowers,
Rose delight of higher powers,
Rose the joy of mortal men,
Rose the pleasure of fine women,
Rose the Graces' ornament,
Rose Dione's sweet content."

To this effect the lovely virgin with a melodious air upon her
golden wired harp or lute, I know not well whether, played and
sang, and that transported him beyond himself, "and that ravished
his heart." It was Jason's discourse as much as his beauty, or any
other of his good parts, which delighted Medea so much.

 --"Delectabatur enim
Animus simul forma dulcibusque verbis."

 (Apollonius, Argonaut. l. 3 "The mind is delighted as much by
eloquence as beauty.")

It was Cleopatra's sweet voice and pleasant speech which inveigled
Antony, above the rest of her enticements. Verba ligant hominem,
ut taurorum cornua funes, "as bulls' horns are bound with ropes, so
are men's hearts with pleasant words." "Her words burn as fire,"
Eccles. ix. 10. Roxalana bewitched Suleiman the Magnificent, and
Shore's wife by this engine overcame Edward the Fourth, Omnibus
una omnes surripuit Veneres. The wife of Bath in Chaucer
confesseth all this out of her experience.

Some folk desire us for riches.
Some for shape, some for fairness,
Some for that she can sing or dance.
Some for gentleness, or for dalliance.

 Peter Aretine's Lucretia telleth as much and more of herself, "I
counterfeited honesty, as if I had been virgo virginissima, more
than a vestal virgin, I looked like a wife, I was so demure and
chaste, I did add such gestures, tunes, speeches, signs and motions
upon all occasions, that my spectators and auditors were stupefied,
enchanted, fastened all to their places, like so many stocks and
stones." Many silly gentlewomen are fetched over in like sort, by a
company of gulls and swaggering companions, that frequently belie
noblemen's favours, rhyming Coribantiasmi, Thrasonean
Rhadomantes or Bombomachides, that have nothing in them but a
few player's ends and compliments, vain braggadocians, impudent
intruders, that can discourse at table of knights and lords' combats,
like Lucian's Leonitiscus, of other men's travels, brave adventures,
and such common trivial news, ride, dance, sing old ballad tunes,
and wear their clothes in fashion, with a good grace; a fine sweet
gentleman, a proper man, who could not love him! She will have
him though all her friends say no, though she beg with him. Some
again are incensed by reading amorous toys, Amadis de Gaul,
Palmerin de Oliva, the Knight of the Sun, &c., or hearing such tales
of lovers, descriptions of their persons, lascivious discourses, such
as Astyanassa, Helen's waiting-woman, by the report of Suidas,
writ of old, de variis concubitus modis, and after her Philenis and
Elephantine; or those light tracts of Aristides Milesius (mentioned
by Plutarch) and found by the Persians in Crassus' army amongst
the spoils, Aretine's dialogues, with ditties, love songs, &c., must
needs set them on fire, with such like pictures, as those of Aretine,
or wanton objects of what kind soever; "no stronger engine than to
hear or read of love toys, fables and discourses" ( one saith) "and
many by this means are quite mad." At Abdera in Thrace
(Andromeda one of Euripides' tragedies being played) the
spectators were so much moved with the object, and those
pathetical love speeches of Perseus, amongst the rest, "O Cupid,
Prince of Gods and men," &c. that every man almost a good while
after spake pure iambics, and raved still on Perseus' speech, "O
Cupid, Prince of Gods and men." As carmen, boys and apprentices,
when a new song is published with us, go singing that new tune
still in the streets, they continually acted that tragical part of
Perseus, and in every man's mouth was "O Cupid," in every street,
"O Cupid," in every house almost, "O Cupid, Prince of Gods and
men," pronouncing still like stage-players, "O Cupid;" they were so
possessed all with that rapture, and thought of that pathetical love
speech, they could not a long time after forget, or drive it out of
their minds, but "O Cupid, Prince of Gods and men," was ever in
their mouths. This belike made Aristotle, Polit. lib. 7. cap. 18.
forbid young men to see comedies, or to hear amorous tales.

 "Haec igitur juvenes nequam facilesque puellae
Inspiciant" --

"let not young folks meddle at all with such matters." And this
made the Romans, as Vitruvius relates, put Venus' temple in the
suburbs, extra murum, ne adolescentes venereis insuescant, to
avoid all occasions and objects. For what will not such an object
do? Ismenias, as he walked in Sosthene's garden, being now in
love, when he saw so many lascivious pictures, Thetis' marriage,
and I know not what, was almost beside himself. And to say truth,
with a lascivious object who is not moved, to see others dally, kiss,
dance? And much more when he shall come to be an actor himself.

To kiss and be kissed, which, amongst other lascivious
provocations, is as a burden in a song, and a most forcible battery,
as infectious, Xenophon thinks, as the poison of a spider; a great
allurement, a fire itself, prooemium aut anticoenium, the prologue
of burning lust (as Apuleius adds) , lust itself, Venus quinta parte
sui nectaris imbuit, (Hor. "Venus hath imbued with the
quintessence of her nectar.") a strong assault, that conquers
captains, and those all commanding forces, ( Domasque ferro sed
domaris osculo (Heinsius. "You may conquer with the sword, but
you are conquered by a kiss.") . Aretine's Lucretia, when she would
in kindness overcome a suitor of hers, and have her desire of him,
"took him about the neck, and kissed him again and again," and to
that, which she could not otherwise effect, she made him so
speedily and willingly condescend. And 'tis a continual assault,--
hoc non deficit incipitque semper, always fresh, and ready to begin
as at first, basium nullo fine terminatur, sed semper recens est, and
hath a fiery touch with it.

 --"Tenta modo tangere corpus,
Jam tua mellifluo membra calore fluent."

 (Petronius. "Only attempt to touch her person, and immediately
your members will be filled with a glow of delicious warmth.")

Especially when they shall be lasciviously given, as he feelingly
said, et me praessulum deosculata Fotis, Catenatis lacertis,
Obtorto valgiter labello.

 "Valgiis suaviis,
 Dum semiulco suavio
 Meam puellam suavior,
Anima tunc aegra et saucia
Concurrit ad labia mihi."

The soul and all is moved; Jam pluribus osculis labra crepitabant,
animarum quoque mixturam facientes, inter mutuos complexus
animas anhelantes,

 "Haesimus calentes,
Et transfudimus hinc et hinc labellis
Errantes animas, valete curae."

"They breathe out their souls and spirits together with their kisses,"
saith Balthazar Castilio, "change hearts and spirits, and mingle
affections as they do kisses, and it is rather a connection of the
mind than of the body." And although these kisses be delightsome
and pleasant, Ambrosial kisses, Suaviolum dulci dulcius Ambrosia,
such as Ganymede gave Jupiter, Nectare suavius, sweeter than
nectar, balsam, honey, Oscula merum amorem stillantia, love-
dropping kisses; for

"The gilliflower, the rose is not so sweet,
As sugared kisses be when lovers meet;"

Yet they leave an irksome impression, like that of aloes or gall,

 "Ut mi ex Ambrosia, mutatum jam foret illud
Suaviolum tristi tristius helleboro."

"At first Ambrose itself was not sweeter,
At last black hellebore was not so bitter."

They are deceitful kisses,

 "Quid me mollibus implicas lacertis?
Quid fallacibus osculis inescas?&c."

"Why dost within thine arms me lap,
And with false kisses me entrap."

They are destructive, and the more the worse: Et quae me perdunt,
oscula mille dabat, they are the bane of these miserable lovers.
There be honest kisses, I deny not, osculum charitatis, friendly
kisses, modest kisses, vestal-virgin kisses, officious and ceremonial
kisses, &c. Osculi sensus, brachiorum amplexus, kissing and
embracing are proper gifts of Nature to a man; but these are too
lascivious kisses, Implicuitque suos circum mea colla lacertos,
(Ovid. "She folded her arms around my neck.") &c. too continuate
and too violent, Brachia non hederae, non vincunt oscula conchae;
they cling like ivy, close as an oyster, bill as doves, meretricious
kisses, biting of lips, cum additamento: Tam impresso ore (saith
Lucian) ut vix labia detrahant, inter deosculandum mordicantes,
tum et os aperientes quoque et mammas attrectantes, &c. such
kisses as she gave to Gyton, innumera oscula dedit non repugnanti
puero, cervicem invadens, innumerable kisses, &c. More than
kisses, or too homely kisses: as those that he spake of, Accepturus
ab ipsa venere 7, suavia, &c. with such other obscenities that vain
lovers use, which are abominable and pernicious. If, as Peter de
Ledesmo cas. cons. holds, every kiss a man gives his wife after
marriage, be mortale peccatum, a mortal sin, or that of Hierome,
Adulter est quisquis in uxorem suam ardentior est amator; or that
of Thomas Secund. quaest. 154. artic. 4. contactus et osculum sit
mortale peccatum, or that of Durand. Rational. lib. 1. cap. 10.
abstinere debent conjuges a complexu, toto tempore quo solennitas
nuptiarum interdicitur, what shall become of all such immodest
kisses and obscene actions, the forerunners of brutish lust, if not
lust itself! What shall become of them that often abuse their own
wives? But what have I to do with this?

That which I aim at, is to show you the progress of this burning
lust; to epitomise therefore all this which I have hitherto said, with
a familiar example out of that elegant Musaeus, observe but with
me those amorous proceedings of Leander and Hero: they began
first to look one on another with a lascivious look,

"Oblique intuens inde nutibus,--
Nutibus mutuis inducens in errorem mentem puellae.
Et illa e contra nutibus mutuis juvenis
Leandri quod amorem non renuit, &c.
Inde Adibat in tenebris tacite quidem stringens
Roseos puellae digitos, ex imo suspirabat
Vehementer -- Inde
Virginis autem bene olens collum osculatus.
Tale verbum ait amoris ictus stimulo,
Preces audi et amoris miserere mei, &c.
Sic fatus recusantis persuasit mentem puellae."

"With becks and nods he first began
To try the wench's mind.
With becks and nods and smiles again
An answer he did find.
And in the dark he took her by the hand,
And wrung it hard, and sighed grievously,
And kiss'd her too, and woo'd her as he might,
With pity me, sweetheart, or else I die,
And with such words and gestures as there past,
He won his mistress' favour at the last."

The same proceeding is elegantly described by Apollonius in his
Argonautics, between Jason and Medea, by Eustathius in the ten
books of the loves of Ismenias and Ismene, Achilles Tatius
between his Clitophon and Leucippe, Chaucer's neat poem of
Troilus and Cresseide; and in that notable tale in Petronius of a
soldier and a gentlewoman of Ephesus, that was so famous all over
Asia for her chastity, and that mourned for her husband: the soldier
wooed her with such rhetoric as lovers use to do,-- placitone etiam
pugnabis amori? &c. at last, frangi pertinaciam passa est, he got
her good will, not only to satisfy his lust, but to hang her dead
husband's body on the cross (which he watched instead of the
thief's that was newly stolen away) , whilst he wooed her in her
cabin. These are tales, you will say, but they have most significant
morals, and do well express those ordinary proceedings of doting
lovers.

Many such allurements there are, nods, jests, winks, smiles,
wrestlings, tokens, favours, symbols, letters, valentines, &c. For
which cause belike, Godfridus lib. 2. de amor. would not have
women learn to write. Many such provocations are used when they
come in presence, they will and will not,

"Malo me Galatea petit lasciva puella,
Et fugit ad salices, et se cupit ante videri."

"My mistress with an apple woos me,
And hastily to covert goes
To hide herself, but would be seen
With all her heart before, God knows."

Hero so tripped away from Leander as one displeased,

 "Yet as she went full often look'd behind,
And many poor excuses did she find
To linger by the way," --

but if he chance to overtake her, she is most averse, nice and coy,

"Denegat et pugnat, sed vult super omnia vinci."

"She seems not won, but won she is at length,
In such wars women use but half their strength."

Sometimes they lie open and are most tractable and coming, apt,
yielding, and willing to embrace, to take a green gown, with that
shepherdess in Theocritus, Edyl. 27. to let their coats, &c., to play
and dally, at such seasons, and to some, as they spy their
advantage; and then coy, close again, so nice, so surly, so demure,
you had much better tame a colt, catch or ride a wild horse, than get
her favour, or win her love, not a look, not a smile, not a kiss for a
kingdom. Aretine's Lucretia was an excellent artisan in this kind, as
she tells her own tale, "Though I was by nature and art most
beautiful and fair, yet by these tricks I seemed to be far more
amiable than I was, for that which men earnestly seek and cannot
attain, draws on their affection with a most furious desire. I had a
suitor loved me dearly" (said she) , "and the more he gave me, the
more eagerly he wooed me, the more I seemed to neglect, to scorn
him, and which I commonly gave others, I would not let him see
me, converse with me, no, not have a kiss." To gull him the more,
and fetch him over (for him only I aimed at) I personated mine own
servant to bring in a present from a Spanish count, whilst he was in
my company, as if he had been the count's servant, which he did
excellently well perform: Comes de monte Turco, "my lord and
master hath sent your ladyship a small present, and part of his
hunting, a piece of venison, a pheasant, a few partridges, &c. (all
which she bought with her own money) , commends his love and
service to you, desiring you to accept of it in good part, and he
means very shortly to come and see you." Withal she showed him
rings, gloves, scarves, coronets which others had sent her, when
there was no such matter, but only to circumvent him. By these
means (as she concludes) "I made the poor gentleman so mad, that
he was ready to spend himself, and venture his dearest blood for
my sake." Philinna, in Lucian, practised all this long before, as it
shall appear unto you by her discourse; for when Diphilus her
sweetheart came to see her (as his daily custom was) she frowned
upon him, would not vouchsafe him her company, but kissed
Lamprius his co-rival, at the same time before his face: but why
was it? To make him (as she telleth her mother that chid her for it)
more jealous; to whet his love, to come with a greater appetite, and
to know that her favour was not so easy to be had. Many other
tricks she used besides this (as she there confesseth) , for she would
fall out with, and anger him of set purpose, pick quarrels upon no
occasion, because she would be reconciled to him again. Amantium
irae amoris redintegratio, as the old saying is, the falling out of
lovers is the renewing of love; and according to that of Aristenaetis,
jucundiores amorum post injurias deliciae, love is increased by
injuries, as the sunbeams are more gracious after a cloud. And
surely this aphorism is most true; for as Ampelis informs Crisis in
the said Lucian, "If a lover be not jealous, angry, waspish, apt to
fall out, sigh and swear, he is no true lover." To kiss and coll, hang
about her neck, protest, swear and wish, are but ordinary
symptoms, incipientis adhuc et crescentis amoris signa; but if he
be jealous, angry, apt to mistake, &c., bene speres licet, sweet
sister he is thine own; yet if you let him alone, humour him, please
him, &c., and that he perceive once he hath you sure, without any
co-rival, his love will languish, and he will not care so much for
you. Hitherto (saith she) can I speak out of experience;
Demophantus a rich fellow was a suitor of mine, I seemed to
neglect him, and gave better entertainment to Calliades the painter
before his face, principio abiit, verbis me insectatus, at first he
went away all in a chafe, cursing and swearing, but at last he came
submitting himself, vowing and protesting he loved me most
dearly, I should have all he had, and that he would kill himself for
my sake. Therefore I advise thee (dear sister Crisis) and all maids,
not to use your suitors over kindly; insolentes enim sunt hoc cum
sentiunt, 'twill make them proud and insolent; but now and then
reject them, estrange thyself, et si me audies semel atque iterum
exclude, shut him out of doors once or twice, let him dance
attendance; follow my counsel, and by this means you shall make
him mad, come off roundly, stand to any conditions, and do
whatsoever you will have him. These are the ordinary practices; yet
in the said Lucian, Melissa methinks had a trick beyond all this; for
when her suitor came coldly on, to stir him up, she writ one of his
co-rival's names and her own in a paper, Melissa amat
Hermotimum, Hermotimus Mellissam, causing it to be stuck upon a
post, for all gazers to behold, and lost it in the way where he used
to walk; which when the silly novice perceived, statim ut legit
credidit, instantly apprehended it was so, came raving to me, &c.
"and so when I was in despair of his love, four months after I
recovered him again." Eugenia drew Timocles for her valentine,
and wore his name a long time after in her bosom: Camaena
singled out Pamphilus to dance, at Myson's wedding (some say) ,
for there she saw him first; Felicianus overtook Coelia by the
highway side, offered his service, thence came further
acquaintance, and thence came love. But who can repeat half their
devices? What Aretine experienced, what conceited Lucian, or
wanton Aristenaetus? They will deny and take, stiffly refuse, and
yet earnestly seek the same, repel to make them come with more
eagerness, fly from if you follow, but if averse, as a shadow they
will follow you again, fugientem sequitur, sequentem fugit; with a
regaining retreat, a gentle reluctancy, a smiling threat, a pretty
pleasant peevishness they will put you off, and have a thousand
such several enticements. For as he saith,

 "Non est forma satis, nec quae vult bella videri,
Debet vulgari more placere suis.
Dicta, sales, lusus, sermones, gratia, risus,
Vincunt naturae candidioris opus."

"'Tis not enough though she be fair of hue,
For her to use this vulgar compliment:
But pretty toys and jests, and saws and smiles,
As far beyond what beauty can attempt."

 For this cause belike Philostratus, in his images, makes diverse
loves, "some young, some of one age, some of another, some
winged, some of one sex, some of another, some with torches,
some with golden apples, some with darts, gins, snares, and other
engines in their hands," as Propertius hath prettily painted them
out, lib. 2. et 29. and which some interpret, diverse enticements, or
diverse affections of lovers, which if not alone, yet jointly may
batter and overcome the strongest constitutions.

It is reported of Decius, and Valerianus, those two notorious
persecutors of the church, that when they could enforce a young
Christian by no means (as Hierome records) to sacrifice to their
idols, by no torments or promises, they took another course to
tempt him: they put him into a fair garden, and set a young
courtesan to dally with him, "took him about the neck and kissed
him, and that which is not to be named," manibusque attrectare,
&c., and all those enticements which might be used, that whom
torments could not, love might batter and beleaguer. But such was
his constancy, she could not overcome, and when this last engine
would take no place, they left him to his own ways. At Berkley in
Gloucestershire, there was in times past a nunnery (saith Gualterus
Mapes, an old historiographer, that lived 400 years since) , "of
which there was a noble and a fair lady abbess: Godwin, that
subtile Earl of Kent, travelling that way, (seeking not her but hers)
leaves a nephew of his, a proper young gallant (as if he had been
sick) with her, till he came back again, and gives the young man
charge so long to counterfeit, till he had deflowered the abbess, and
as many besides of the nuns as he could, and leaves him withal
rings, jewels, girdles, and such toys to give them still, when they
came to visit him. The young man, willing to undergo such a
business, played his part so well, that in short space he got up most
of their bellies, and when he had done, told his lord how he had
sped: his lord made instantly to the court, tells the king how such a
nunnery was become a bawdy-house, procures a visitation, gets
them to be turned out, and begs the lands to his own use." This
story I do therefore repeat, that you may see of what force these
enticements are, if they be opportunely used, and how hard it is
even for the most averse and sanctified souls to resist such
allurements. John Major in the life of John the monk, that lived in
the days of Theodosius, commends the hermit to have been a man
of singular continency, and of a most austere life; but one night by
chance the devil came to his cell in the habit of a young market
wench that had lost her way, and desired for God's sake some
lodging with him. "The old man let her in, and after some common
conference of her mishap, she began to inveigle him with
lascivious talk and jests, to play with his beard, to kiss him, and do
worse, till at last she overcame him. As he went to address himself
to that business, she vanished on a sudden, and the devils in the air
laughed him to scorn." Whether this be a true story, or a tale, I will
not much contend, it serves to illustrate this which I have said.

Yet were it so, that these of which I have hitherto spoken, and such
like enticing baits, be not sufficient, there be many others, which
will of themselves intend this passion of burning lust, amongst
which, dancing is none of the least; and it is an engine of such
force, I may not omit it. Incitamentum libidinis, Petrarch calls it,
the spur of lust. "A circle of which the devil himself is the centre.
Many women that use it, have come dishonest home, most
indifferent, none better." Another terms it "the companion of all
filthy delights and enticements, and 'tis not easily told what
inconveniences come by it, what scurrile talk, obscene actions,"
and many times such monstrous gestures, such lascivious motions,
such wanton tunes, meretricious kisses, homely embracings.

 --" (ut Gaditana canoro
Incipiat prurire choro, plausuque probatae
Ad terram tremula descendant clune puellae,
Irritamentum Veneris languentis) " --

 (Juv. Sat. 11. "Perhaps you may expect that a Gaditanian with a
tuneful company may begin to wanton, and girls approved with
applause lower themselves to the ground in a lascivious manner,
a provocative of languishing desire.")

that it will make the spectators mad. When that epitomiser of
Trogus had to the full described and set out King Ptolemy's riot as a
chief engine and instrument of his overthrow, he adds, tympanum et
tripudium, fiddling and dancing: "the king was not a spectator only,
but a principal actor himself." A thing nevertheless frequently used,
and part of a gentlewoman's bringing up, to sing, dance, and play
on the lute, or some such instrument, before she can say her
paternoster, or ten commandments. 'Tis the next way their parents
think to get them husbands, they are compelled to learn, and by that
means, Incoestos amores de tenero meditantur ungue; 'tis a great
allurement as it is often used, and many are undone by it. Thais, in
Lucian, inveigled Lamprias in a dance, Herodias so far pleased
Herod, that she made him swear to give her what she would ask,
John Baptist's head in a platter. Robert, Duke of Normandy, riding
by Falais, spied Arlette, a fair maid, as she danced on a green, and
was so much enamoured with the object, that she must needs lie
with her that night. Owen Tudor won Queen Catherine's affection
in. a dance, falling by chance with his head in her lap. Who cannot
parallel these stories out of his experience? Speusippas a noble
gallant in that Greek Aristenaetus, seeing Panareta a fair young
gentlewoman dancing by accident, was so far in love with her, that
for a long time after he could think of nothing but Panareta: he
came raving home full of Panareta: "Who would not admire her,
who would not love her, that should but see her dance as I did? O
admirable, O divine Panareta! I have seen old and new Rome,
many fair cities, many proper women, but never any like to
Panareta, they are dross, dowdies all to Panareta! O how she
danced, how she tripped, how she turned, with what a grace! happy
is that man that shall enjoy her. O most incomparable, only,
Panareta!" When Xenophon, in Symposio, or Banquet, had
discoursed of love, and used all the engines that might be devised,
to move Socrates, amongst the rest, to stir him the more, he shuts
up all with a pleasant interlude or dance of Dionysius and Ariadne.
"First Ariadne dressed like a bride came in and took her place; by
and by Dionysius entered, dancing to the music. The spectators did
all admire the young man's carriage; and Ariadne herself was so
much affected with the sight, that she could scarce sit. After a while
Dionysius beholding Ariadne, and incensed with love, bowing to
her knees, embraced her first, and kissed her with a grace; she
embraced him again, and kissed him with like affection, &c., as the
dance required; but they that stood by, and saw this, did much
applaud and commend them both for it. And when Dionysius rose
up, he raised her up with him, and many pretty gestures, embraces,
kisses, and love compliments passed between them: which when
they saw fair Bacchus and beautiful Ariadne so sweetly and so
unfeignedly kissing each other, so really embracing, they swore
they loved indeed, and were so inflamed with the object, that they
began to rouse up themselves, as if they would have flown. At the
last when they saw them still, so willingly embracing, and now
ready to go to the bride-chamber, they were so ravished, with it,
that they that were unmarried, swore they would forthwith marry,
and those that were married called instantly for their horses, and
galloped home to their wives." What greater motive can there be
than this burning lust? what so violent an oppugner? Not without
good cause therefore so many general councils condemn it, so
many fathers abhor it, so many grave men speak against it; "Use
not the company of a woman," saith Siracides, 8. 4. "that is a
singer, or a dancer; neither hear, lest thou be taken in her
craftiness." In circo non tam cernitur quam discitur libido. Haedus
holds, lust in theatres is not seen, but learned. Gregory Nazianzen
that eloquent divine, ( as he relates the story himself,) when a noble
friend of his solemnly invited him with other bishops, to his
daughter Olympia's wedding, refused to come: "For it is absurd to
see an old gouty bishop sit amongst dancers;" he held it unfit to be
a spectator, much less an actor. Nemo saltat sobrius, Tully writes,
he is not a sober man that danceth; for some such reason (belike)
Domitian forbade the Roman senators to dance, and for that fact
removed many of them from the senate. But these, you will say, are
lascivious and Pagan dances, 'tis the abuse that causeth such
inconvenience, and I do not well therefore to condemn, speak
against, or "innocently to accuse the best and pleasantest thing (so
Lucian calls it) that belongs to mortal men." You misinterpret, I
condemn it not; I hold it notwithstanding an honest disport, a
lawful recreation, if it be opportune, moderately and soberly used: I
am of Plutarch's mind, "that which respects pleasure alone, honest
recreation, or bodily exercise, ought not to be rejected and
contemned:" I subscribe to Lucian, "'tis an elegant thing, which
cheereth up the mind, exerciseth the body, delights the spectators,
which teacheth many comely gestures, equally affecting the ears,
eyes, and soul itself." Sallust discommends singing and dancing in
Sempronia, not that she did sing or dance, but that she did it in
excess, 'tis the abuse of it; and Gregory's refusal doth not simply
condemn it, but in some folks. Many will not allow men and
women to dance together, because it is a provocation to lust: they
may as well, with Lycurgus and Mahomet, cut down all vines,
forbid the drinking of wine, for that it makes some men drunk.

 "Nihil prodest quod non laedere posset idem;
Igne quid utilius?" --

I say of this as of all other honest recreations, they are like fire, 
good and bad, and I see no such inconvenience, but that they may
so dance, if it be done at due times, and by fit persons: and
conclude with Wolfungus Hider, and most of our modern divines:
Si decorae, graves, verecundae, plena luce bonorum virorum et
matronarum honestarum, tempestive fiant, probari possunt, et
debent. "There is a time to mourn, a time to dance," Eccles. iii. 4.
Let them take their pleasures then, and as he said of old, "young
men and maids flourishing in their age, fair and lovely to behold,
well attired, and of comely carriage, dancing a Greek galliard, and
as their dance required, kept their time, now turning, now tracing,
now apart now altogether, now a courtesy then a caper," &c., and it
was a pleasant sight to see those pretty knots, and swimming
figures. The sun and moon (some say) dance about the earth, the
three upper planets about the sun as their centre, now stationary,
now direct, now retrograde, now in apogee, then in perigee, now
swift then slow, occidental, oriental, they turn round, jump and
trace, [Symbol: Venuss] and [Symbol: Mercury] about the sun with
those thirty-three Maculae or Bourbonian planet, circa Solem
saltantes Cytharedum, saith Fromundus. Four Medicean stars
dance about Jupiter, two Austrian about Saturn, &c., and all
(belike) to the music of the spheres. Our greatest counsellors, and
staid senators, at some times dance, as David before the ark, 2 Sam.
vi. 14. Miriam, Exod. xv. 20. Judith, xv. 13. (though the devil
hence perhaps hath brought in those bawdy bacchanals) , and well
may they do it. The greatest soldiers, as Quintilianus, Aemilius
Probus, Coelius Rhodiginus, have proved at large, still use it in
Greece, Rome, and the most worthy senators, cantare, saltare.
Lucian, Macrobius, Libanus, Plutarch, Julius, Pollux, Athenaeus,
have written just tracts in commendation of it. In this our age it is
in much request in those countries, as in all civil commonwealths,
as Alexander ab Alexandro, lib. 4. cap. 10. et lib. 2. cap. 25. hath
proved at large, amongst the barbarians themselves none so
precious; all the world allows it.

 "Divitias contemno tuas, rex Craese, tuamque
Vendo Asiam, unguentis, flore, mero, choreis."

 Plato, in his Commonwealth, will have dancing-schools to be
maintained, "that young folks might meet, be acquainted, see one
another, and be seen;" nay more, he would have them dance naked;
and scoffs at them that laugh at it. But Eusebius praepar. Evangel.
lib. 1. cap. 11. and Theodoret lib. 9. curat. graec. affect. worthily
lash him for it; and well they might: for as one saith, "the very sight
of naked parts causeth enormous, exceeding concupiscences, and
stirs up both men and women to burning lust." There is a mean in
all things: this is my censure in brief; dancing is a pleasant
recreation of body and mind, if sober and modest (such as our
Christian dances are) ; if tempestively used, a furious motive to
burning lust; if as by Pagans heretofore, unchastely abused. But I
proceed.

If these allurements do not take place, for Simierus, that great
master of dalliance, shall not behave himself better, the more
effectually to move others, and satisfy their lust, they will swear
and lie, promise, protest, forge, counterfeit, brag, bribe, flatter and
dissemble of all sides. 'Twas Lucretia's counsel in Aretine, Si vis
amica frui, promitte, finge, jura, perjura, jacta, simula, mentire;
and they put it well in practice, as Apollo to Daphne,

 --"mihi Delphica tellus
Et Claros et Tenedos, patareaque regia servit,
Jupiter est genitor" --

"Delphos, Claros, and Tenedos serve me,
And Jupiter is known my sire to be."

 The poorest swains will do as much, Mille pecus nivei sunt et mihi
vallibus agni; "I have a thousand sheep, good store of cattle, and
they are all at her command,"

 --"Tibi nos, tibi nostra supellex,
Ruraque servierint" --

"house, land, goods, are at her service," as he is himself.
Dinomachus, a senator's son in Lucian, in love with a wench
inferior to him in birth and fortunes, the sooner to accomplish his
desire, wept unto her, and swore he loved her with all his heart, and
her alone, and that as soon as ever his father died (a very rich man
and almost decrepit) he would make her his wife. The maid by
chance made her mother acquainted with the business, who being
an old fox, well experienced in such matters, told her daughter,
now ready to yield to his desire, that he meant nothing less, for dost
thou think he will ever care for thee, being a poor wench, that may
have his choice of all the beauties in the city, one noble by birth,
with so many talents, as young, better qualified, and fairer than
thyself? daughter believe him not: the maid was abashed, and so
the matter broke off. When Jupiter wooed Juno first (Lilius
Giraldus relates it out of an old comment on Theocritus) the better
to effect his suit, he turned himself into a cuckoo, and spying her
one day walking alone, separated from the other goddesses, caused
a tempest suddenly to arise, for fear of which she fled to shelter;
Jupiter to avoid the storm likewise flew into her lap, in virginis
Junonis gremium devolavit, whom Juno for pity covered in her
apron. But he turned himself forthwith into his own shape, began to
embrace and offer violence unto her, sed illa matris metu abnuebat,
but she by no means would yield, donec pollicitus connubium
obtinuit, till he vowed and swore to marry her, and then she gave
consent. This fact was done at Thornax hill, which ever after was
called Cuckoo hill, and in perpetual remembrance there was a
temple erected to Telia Juno in the same place. So powerful are fair
promises, vows, oaths and protestations. It is an ordinary thing too
in this case to belie their age, which widows usually do, that mean
to marry again, and bachelors too sometimes,

 "Cujus octavum trepidavit aetas,
	cernere lustrum;"

to say they are younger than they are. Carmides in the said Lucian
loved Philematium, an old maid of forty-five years; she swore to
him she was but thirty-two next December. But to dissemble in this
kind, is familiar of all sides, and often it takes. Fallere credentem
res est operosa puellam, 'tis soon done, no such great mastery,
Egregiam vero laudem, et spolia ampla,-- and nothing so frequent
as to belie their estates, to prefer their suits, and to advance
themselves. Many men to fetch over a young woman, widows, or
whom they love, will not stick to crack, forge and feign any thing
comes next, bid his boy fetch his cloak, rapier, gloves, jewels, &c.
in such a chest, scarlet-golden-tissue breeches, &c. when there is
no such matter; or make any scruple to give out, as he did in
Petronius, that he was master of a ship, kept so many servants, and
to personate their part the better take upon them to be gentlemen of
good houses, well descended and allied, hire apparel at brokers,
some scavenger or prick-louse tailors to attend upon them for the
time, swear they have great possessions, bribe, lie, cog, and foist
how dearly they love, how bravely they will maintain her, like any
lady, countess, duchess, or queen; they shall have gowns, tiers,
jewels, coaches, and caroches, choice diet,

"The heads of parrots, tongues of nightingales,
The brains of peacocks, and of ostriches,
Their bath shall be the juice of gilliflowers,
Spirit of roses and of violets,
The milk of unicorns," &c.

as old Volpone courted Coelia in the comedy, when as they are no
such men, not worth a groat, but mere sharkers, to make a fortune,
to get their desire, or else pretend love to spend their idle hours, to
be more welcome, and for better entertainment. The conclusion is,
they mean nothing less,

 "Nil metuunt jurare, nihil promittere curant:
Sed simul accupidae mentis satiata libido est,
Dicta nihil metuere, nihil perjuria curant;"

"Oaths, vows, promises, are much protested;
But when their mind and lust is satisfied,
Oaths, vows, promises, are quite neglected;"

though he solemnly swear by the genius of Caesar, by Venus'
shrine, Hymen's deity, by Jupiter, and all the other gods, give no
credit to his words. For when lovers swear, Venus laughs, Venus
haec perjuria ridet, Jupiter himself smiles, and pardons it withal, as
grave Plato gives out; of all perjury, that alone for love matters is
forgiven by the gods. If promises, lies, oaths, and protestations will
not avail, they fall to bribes, tokens, gifts, and such like feats.
Plurimus auro conciliatur amor: as Jupiter corrupted Dana with a
golden shower, and Liber Ariadne with a lovely crown, (which was
afterwards translated into the heavens, and there for ever shines;)
they will rain chickens, florins, crowns, angels, all manner of coins
and stamps in her lap. And so must he certainly do that will speed,
make many feasts, banquets, invitations, send her some present or
other every foot. Summo studio parentur epulae (saith Haedus) et
crebrae fiant largitiones, he must be very bountiful and liberal,
seek and sue, not to her only, but to all her followers, friends,
familiars, fiddlers, panders, parasites, and household servants; he
must insinuate himself, and surely will, to all, of all sorts,
messengers, porters, carriers; no man must be unrewarded, or
unrespected. I had a suitor (saith Aretine's Lucretia) that when he
came to my house, flung gold and silver about, as if it had been
chaff. Another suitor I had was a very choleric fellow; but I so
handled him, that for all his fuming, I brought him upon his knees.
If there had been an excellent bit in the market, any novelty, fish,
fruit, or fowl, muscatel, or malmsey, or a cup of neat wine in all the
city, it was presented presently to me; though never so dear, hard to
come by, yet I had it: the poor fellow was so fond at last, that I
think if I would I might have had one of his eyes out of his head. A
third suitor was a merchant of Rome, and his manner of wooing
was with exquisite music, costly banquets, poems, &c. I held him
off till at length he protested, promised, and swore pro virginitate
regno me donaturum, I should have all he had, house, goods, and
lauds, pro concubitu solo; neither was there ever any conjuror, I
think, to charm his spirits that used such attention, or mighty
words, as he did exquisite phrases, or general of any army so many
stratagems to win a city, as he did tricks and devices to get the love
of me. Thus men are active and passive, and women not far behind
them in this kind: Audax ad omnia foemina, quae vel amat, vel odit.

 For half so boldly there can non
Swear and lye as women can.

 They will crack, counterfeit, and collogue as well as the best, with
handkerchiefs, and wrought nightcaps, purses, posies, and such
toys: as he justly complained,

 "Cur mittis violas? nempe ut violentius uret;
Quid violas violis me violenta tuis?" &c.

"Why dost thou send me violets, my dear?
To make me burn more violent, I fear,
With violets too violent thou art,
To violate and wound my gentle heart."

When nothing else will serve, the last refuge is their tears. Haec
scripsi (testor amorem) mixta lachrymis et suspiriis, 'twixt tears
and sighs, I write this (I take love to witness) , saith Chelidonia to
Philonius. Lumina quae modo fulmina, jam flumina lachrymarum,
those burning torches are now turned to floods of tears. Aretine's
Lucretia, when her sweetheart came to town, wept in his bosom,
"that he might be persuaded those tears were shed for joy of his
return." Quartilla in Petronius, when nought would move, fell a
weeping, and as Balthazar Castilio paints them out, "To these
crocodile's tears they will add sobs, fiery sighs, and sorrowful
countenance, pale colour, leanness, and if you do but stir abroad,
these fiends are ready to meet you at every turn, with such a sluttish
neglected habit, dejected look, as if they were now ready to die for
your sake; and how, saith he, shall a young novice thus beset,
escape?" But believe them not.

 --"animam ne crede puellis,
Namque est foeminea tutior unda fide."

 (Petronius. "Trust not your heart to women, for the wave is less
treacherous than their fidelity.")

Thou thinkest, peradventure, because of her vows, tears, smiles,
and protestations, she is solely thine, thou hast her heart, hand, and
affection, when as indeed there is no such matter, as the Spanish
bawd said, gaudet illa habere unum in lecto, alterum in porta,
tertium qui domi suspiret, she will have one sweetheart in bed,
another in the gate, a third sighing at home, a fourth, &c. Every
young man she sees and likes hath as much interest, and shall as
soon enjoy her as thyself. On the other side, which I have said, men
are as false, let them swear, protest, and lie; Quod vobis dicunt,
dixerunt mille puellis. (Ovid. "They have made the same promises
to a thousand girls that they make to you.") They love some of
them those eleven thousand virgins at once, and make them
believe, each particular, he is besotted on her, or love one till they
see another, and then her alone; like Milo's wife in Apuleius, lib. 2.
Si quem conspexerit speciosae formae invenem, venustate ejus
sumitur, et in eum animum intorquet. 'Tis their common
compliment in that case, they care not what they swear, say or do:
One while they slight them, care not for them, rail downright and
scoff at them, and then again they will run mad, hang themselves,
stab and kill, if they may not enjoy them. Henceforth, therefore,--
nulla viro juranti foemina credat, let not maids believe them. These
tricks and counterfeit passions are more familiar with women,
finem hic dolori faciet aut vitae dies, miserere amantis, quoth
Phaedra to Hippolitus. Joessa, in Lucian, told Pythias, a young 
man, to move him the more, that if he would not have her, she was
resolved to make away herself. "There is a Nemesis, and it cannot
choose but grieve and trouble thee, to hear that I have either
strangled or drowned myself for thy sake." Nothing so common to
this sex as oaths, vows, and protestations, and as I have already
said, tears, which they have at command; for they can so weep, that
one would think their very hearts were dissolved within them, and
would come out in tears; their eyes are like rocks, which still drop
water, diariae lachrymae et sudoris in modum lurgeri promptae,
saith Aristaenetus, they wipe away their tears like sweat, weep with
one eye, laugh with the other; or as children weep and cry, they can
both together.

 "Neve puellarum lachrymis moveare memento,
 Ut flerent oculos erudiere suos."

"Care not for women's tears, I counsel thee,
They teach their eyes as much to weep as see."

And as much pity is to be taken of a woman weeping, as of a goose
going barefoot. When Venus lost her son Cupid, she sent a crier
about, to bid every one that met him take heed.

 "Si fleatam aspicias, ne mox fallare, caveto;
Sin arridebit, magis effuge; et oscula si fors
Ferre volet, fugito; sunt oscula noxia, in ipsis
Suntque venena labris" &c.

"Take heed of Cupid's tears, if cautious.
And of his smiles and kisses I thee tell,
If that he offer't, for they be noxious,
And very poison in his lips doth dwell."

 A thousand years, as Castilio conceives, "will scarce serve to
reckon up those allurements and guiles, that men and women use to
deceive one another with."





SUBSECT. V.-- Bawds, Philters, Causes.

When all other engines fail, that they can proceed no farther of
themselves, their last refuge is to fly to bawds, panders, magical
philters, and receipts; rather than fail, to the devil himself. Flectere
si nequeunt superos, Acheronta movebunt. And by those indirect
means many a man is overcome, and precipitated into this malady,
if he take not good heed. For these bawds, first, they are
everywhere so common, and so many, that, as he said of old
Croton, omnes hic aut captantur, aut captant, either inveigle or be
inveigled, we may say of most of our cities, there be so many
professed, cunning bawds in them. Besides, bawdry is become an
art, or a liberal science, as Lucian calls it; and there be such tricks
and subtleties, so many nurses, old women, panders, letter carriers,
beggars, physicians, friars, confessors, employed about it, that
nullus tradere stilus sufficiat, one saith,

 --"trecentis versibus
Suas impuritias traloqui nemo potest."

 (Plautus Tritemius. "Three hundred verses would not comprise
their indecencies.")

Such occult notes, stenography, polygraphy, Nuntius animatus, or
magnetical telling of their minds, which Cabeus the Jesuit, by the
way, counts fabulous and false; cunning conveyances in this kind,
that neither Juno's jealousy, nor Dana's custody, nor Argo's
vigilancy can keep them safe. 'Tis the last and common refuge to
use an assistant, such as that Catanean Philippa was to Joan Queen
of Naples, a bawd's help, an old woman in the business, as Myrrha
did when she doted on Cyniras, and could not compass her desire,
the old jade her nurse was ready at a pinch, dic inquit, opemque me
sine ferre tibi -- et in hac mea (pone timorem) Sedulitas erit apta
libi, fear it not, if it be possible to be done, I will effect it: non est
mulieri mulier insuperabilis, Coelestina said, let him or her be
never so honest, watched and reserved, 'tis hard but one of these
old women will get access: and scarce shall you find, as Austin
observes, in a nunnery a maid alone, "if she cannot have egress,
before her window you shall have an old woman, or some prating
gossip, tell her some tales of this clerk, and that monk, describing
or commending some young gentleman or other unto her." "As I
was walking in the street" (saith a good fellow in Petronius) "to see
the town served one evening, I spied an old woman in a corner
selling of cabbages and roots" (as our hucksters do plums, apples,
and such like fruits) ; "mother" (quoth he) "can you tell where I can
dwell? she, being well pleased with my foolish urbanity, replied,
and why, sir, should I not tell? With that she rose up and went
before me. I took her for a wise woman, and by-and-by she led me
into a by-lane, and told me there I should dwell. I replied again, I
knew not the house; but I perceived, on a sudden, by the naked
queans, that I was now come into a bawdy-house, and then too late
I began to curse the treachery of this old jade." Such tricks you
shall have in many places, and amongst the rest it is ordinary in
Venice, and in the island of Zante, for a man to be bawd to his own
wife. No sooner shall you land or come on shore, but, as the
Comical Poet hath it,

 "Morem hunc meretrices habent,
Ad portum mittunt servulos, ancillulas,
Si qua peregrina navis in portum aderit,
Rogant cujatis sit, quod ei nomen siet,
Post illae extemplo sese adplicent."

Plautus Menech. "These harlots send little maidens down to the
quays to ascertain the name and nation of every ship that arrives,
after which they themselves hasten to address the new-comers."

These white devils have their panders, bawds, and factors in every
place to seek about, and bring in customers, to tempt and waylay
novices, and silly travellers. And when they have them once within
their clutches, as Aegidius Mascrius in his comment upon Valerius
Flaccus describes them, "with promises and pleasant discourse,
with gifts, tokens, and taking their opportunities, they lay nets
which Lucretia cannot avoid, and baits that Hippolitus himself
would swallow; they make such strong assaults and batteries, that
the goddess of virginity cannot withstand them: give gifts and
bribes to move Penelope, and with threats able to terrify Susanna.
How many Proserpinas, with those catchpoles, doth Pluto take?
These are the sleepy rods with which their souls touched descend to
hell; this the glue or lime with which the wings of the mind once
taken cannot fly away; the devil's ministers to allure, entice," &c.
Many young men and maids, without all question, are inveigled by
these Eumenides and their associates. But these are trivial and well
known. The most sly, dangerous, and cunning bawds, are your
knavish physicians, empirics, mass-priests, monks, Jesuits, and
friars. Though it be against Hippocrates' oath, some of them will
give a dram, promise to restore maidenheads, and do it without
danger, make an abortion if need be, keep down their paps, hinder
conception, procure lust, make them able with Satyrions, and now
and then step in themselves. No monastery so close, house so
private, or prison so well kept, but these honest men are admitted to
censure and ask questions, to feel their pulse beat at their bedside,
and all under pretence of giving physic. Now as for monks,
confessors, and friars, as he said,

 "Non audet Stygius Pluto tentare quod audet
Effrenis monachus, plenaque fraudis anus;"

"That Stygian Pluto dares not tempt or do,
What an old hag or monk will undergo;"

either for himself to satisfy his own lust; for another, if he be hired
thereto, or both at once, having such excellent means. For under
colour of visitation, auricular confession, comfort and penance,
they have free egress and regress, and corrupt, God knows, how
many. They can such trades, some of them, practise physic, use
exorcisms, &c.

 That whereas was wont to walk and Elf,
There now walks the Limiter himself,
In every bush and under every tree,
There needs no other Incubus but he.

 In the mountains between Dauphin and Savoy, the friars
persuaded the good wives to counterfeit themselves possessed, that
their husbands might give them free access, and were so familiar in
those days with some of them, that, as one observes, "wenches
could not sleep in their beds for necromantic friars:" and the good
abbess in Boccaccio may in some sort witness, that rising betimes,
mistook and put on the friar's breeches instead of her veil or hat.
You have heard the story, I presume, of Paulina, a chaste matron in
Aegesippus, whom one of Isis's priests did prostitute to Mundus, a
young knight, and made her believe it was their god Anubis. Many
such pranks are played by our Jesuits, sometimes in their own
habits, sometimes in others, like soldiers, courtiers, citizens,
scholars, gallants, and women themselves. Proteus-like, in all forms
and disguises, that go abroad in the night, to inescate and beguile
young women, or to have their pleasure of other men's wives; and,
if we may believe some relations, they have wardrobes of several
suits in the colleges for that purpose. Howsoever in public they
pretend much zeal, seem to be very holy men, and bitterly preach
against adultery, fornication, there are no verier bawds or
whoremasters in a country; "whose soul they should gain to God,
they sacrifice to the devil." But I spare these men for the present.

The last battering engines are philters, amulets, spells, charms,
images, and such unlawful means: if they cannot prevail of
themselves by the help of bawds, panders, and their adherents, they
will fly for succour to the devil himself. I know there be those that
deny the devil can do any such thing (Crato epist. 2. lib. med.) , and
many divines, there is no other fascination than that which comes
by the eyes, of which I have formerly spoken, and if you desire to
be better informed, read Camerarius, oper subcis. cent. 2. c. 5. It
was given out of old, that a Thessalian wench had bewitched King
Philip to dote upon her, and by philters enforced his love; but when
Olympia, the Queen, saw the maid of an excellent beauty, well
brought up, and qualified -- these, quoth she, were the philters
which inveigled King Philip; those the true charms, as Henry to
Rosamond,

 "One accent from thy lips the blood more warms,
Than all their philters, exorcisms, and charms."

With this alone Lucretia brags in Aretine, she could do more than
all philosophers, astrologers, alchemists, necromancers, witches,
and the rest of the crew. As for herbs and philters, I could never
skill of them, "The sole philter that ever I used was kissing and
embracing, by which alone I made men rave like beasts stupefied,
and compelled them to worship me like an idol." In our times it is a
common thing, saith Erastus, in his book de Lamiis, for witches to
take upon them the making of these philters, "to force men and
women to love and hate whom they will, to cause tempests,
diseases," &c., by charms, spells, characters, knots.-- hic Thessala
vendit Philtra. St. Hierome proves that they can do it (as in
Hilarius' life, epist. lib. 3) ; he hath a story of a young man, that
with a philter made a maid mad for the love of him, which maid
was after cured by Hilarion. Such instances I find in John Nider,
Formicar. lib. 5. cap. 5. Plutarch records of Lucullus that he died
of a philter; and that Cleopatra used philters to inveigle Antony,
amongst other allurements. Eusebius reports as much of Lucretia
the poet. Panormitan, lib. 4. de gest. Aphonsi, hath a story of one
Stephan, a Neapolitan knight, that by a philter was forced to run
mad for love. But of all others, that which Petrarch, epist. famil. lib.
1. ep. 5, relates of Charles the Great (Charlemagne) is most
memorable. He foolishly doted upon a woman of mean favour and
condition, many years together, wholly delighting in her company,
to the great grief and indignation of his friends and followers.
When she was dead, he did embrace her corpse, as Apollo did the
bay-tree for his Daphne, and caused her coffin (richly embalmed
and decked with jewels) to be carried about with him, over which
he still lamented. At last a venerable bishop, that followed his
court, prayed earnestly to God (commiserating his lord and master's
case) to know the true cause of this mad passion, and whence it
proceeded; it was revealed to him, in fine, "that the cause of the
emperor's mad love lay under the dead woman's tongue." The
bishop went hastily to the carcass, and took a small ring thence;
upon the removal the emperor abhorred the corpse, and, instead of
it, fell as furiously in love with the bishop, he would not suffer him
to be out of his presence; which when the bishop perceived, he
flung the ring into the midst of a great lake, where the king then
was. From that hour the emperor neglected all his other houses,
dwelt at Ache, built a fair house in the midst of the marsh, to his
infinite expense, and a temple by it, where after he was buried, and
in which city all his posterity ever since use to be crowned. Marcus 
the heretic is accused by Irenaeus, to have inveigled a young maid
by this means; and some writers speak hardly of the Lady
Katharine Cobham, that by the same art she circumvented
Humphrey Duke of Gloucester to be her husband. Sycinius
Aemilianus summoned Apuleius to come before Cneius Maximus,
proconsul of Africa, that he being a poor fellow, "had bewitched by
philters Pudentilla, an ancient rich matron, to love him," and, being
worth so many thousand sesterces, to be his wife. Agrippa, lib. 1.
cap. 48. occult. philos. attributes much in this kind to philters,
amulets, images: and Salmutz com. in Pancirol. Tit. 10. de Horol.
Leo Afer, lib. 3, saith, 'tis an ordinary practice at Fez in Africa,
Praestigiatores ibi plures, qui cogunt amores et concubitus: as
skilful all out as that hyperborean magician, of whom Cleodemus,
in Lucian, tells so many fine feats performed in this kind. But
Erastus, Wierus, and others are against it; they grant indeed such
things may be done, but (as Wierus discourseth, lib. 3. de Lamiis.
cap. 37.) not by charms, incantations, philters, but the devil
himself; lib. 5. cap. 2. he contends as much; so doth Freitagius,
noc. med. cap. 74. Andreas Cisalpinus, cap. 5; and so much
Sigismundus Scheretzius, cap. 9. de hirco nocturno, proves at
large. "Unchaste women by the help of these witches, the devil's
kitchen maids, have their loves brought to them in the night, and
carried back again by a phantasm flying in the air in the likeness of
a goat. I have heard" (saith he) "divers confess, that they have been
so carried on a goat's back to their sweethearts, many miles in a
night." Others are of opinion that these feats, which most suppose
to be done by charms and philters, are merely effected by natural
causes, as by man's blood chemically prepared, which much avails,
saith Ernestus Burgravius, in Lucerna vitae et mortis Indice, ad
amorem conciliandum et odium, (so huntsmen make their dogs love
them, and farmers their pullen,) 'tis an excellent philter, as he holds,
sed vulgo prodere grande nefas, but not fit to be made common:
and so be Mala insana, mandrake roots, mandrake apples, precious
stones, dead men's clothes, candles, mala Bacchica, panis porcinus,
Hyppomanes, a certain hair in a wolf's tail, &c., of which Rhasis,
Dioscorides, Porta, Wecker, Rubeus, Mizaldus, Albertus, treat: a
swallow's heart, dust of a dove's heart, multum valent linguae
viperarum, cerebella asinorum, tela equina, palliola quibus
infantes obvoluti nascuntur, funis strangulati hominis, lapis de nido
Aquilae, &c. See more in Sckenkius observat. medicinal, lib. 4.
&c., which are as forcible and of as much virtue as that fountain
Salmacis in Vitruvius, Ovid, Strabo, that made all such mad for
love that drank of it, or that hot bath at Aix in Germany, wherein
Cupid once dipped his arrows, which ever since hath a peculiar
virtue to make them lovers all that wash in it. But hear the poet's
own description of it,

 "Unde hic fervor aquis terra erumpentibus uda?
Tela olim hic ludens ignea tinxit amor;
Et gaudens stridore novo, fervete perennes
Inquit, et haec pharetrae sint monumenta meae.
Ex illo fervet, rarusque hic mergitur hospes,
Cui non titillet pectora blandus amor."

 (Baltheus Veneris, in quo suavitas, et dulcia colloquia,
benevolentiae, et blanditiae, suasiones, fraudes et veneficia
includebantur. "Whence that heat to waters bubbling from the
cold moist earth? Cupid, once upon a time, playfully dipped
herein his arrows of steel, and delighted with the hissing sound,
he said, boil on for ever, and retain the memory of my quiver.
From that time it is a thermal spring, in which few venture to
bathe, but whosoever does, his heart is instantly touched with
love.")

These above-named remedies have happily as much power as that
bath of Aix, or Venus' enchanted girdle, in which, saith Natales
Comes, "Love toys and dalliance, pleasantness, sweetness,
persuasions, subtleties, gentle speeches, and all witchcraft to
enforce love, was contained." Read more of these in Agrippa de
occult. Philos. lib. 1. cap. 50. et 45. Malleus malefic. part. 1.
quaest. 7. Delrio tom. 2. quest. 3. lib. 3. Wierus, Pomponatis, cap.
8. de incantat. Ficinus, lib. 13. Theol. Plat. Calcagninus, &c.





MEMB. III.-- Symptoms or signs of Love Melancholy, in Body,
Mind, good, bad, &c.

Symptoms are either of body or mind; of body, paleness, leanness,
dryness, &c. Pallidus omnis amans, color hic est aptus amanti, as
the poet describes lovers: fecit amor maciem, love causeth
leanness. Avicenna de Ilishi, c. 33. "makes hollow eyes, dryness,
symptoms of this disease, to go smiling to themselves, or acting as
if they saw or heard some delectable object." Valleriola, lib. 3.
observat. cap. 7. Laurentius, cap. 10. Aelianus Montaltus de Her.
amore. Langius, epist. 24. lib. 1. epist. med. deliver as much,
corpus exangue pallet, corpus gracile, oculi cavi, lean, pale,-- ut
nudis qui pressit calcibus anguem, "as one who trod with naked
foot upon a snake," hollow-eyed, their eyes are hidden in their
heads,-- Tenerque nitidi corposis cecidit decor, they pine away, and
look ill with waking, cares, sighs.

"Et qui tenebant signa Phoebeae facis
Oculi, nihil gentile nec patrium micant."

"And eyes that once rivalled the locks of Phoebus, lose the patrial
and paternal lustre." With groans, griefs, sadness, dullness,

 --"Nulla jam Cereris subi
Cura aut salutis" --

want of appetite, &c. A reason of all this, Jason Pratensis gives,
"because of the distraction of the spirits the liver doth not perform
his part, nor turns the aliment into blood as it ought, and for that
cause the members are weak for want of sustenance, they are lean
and pine, as the herbs of my garden do this month of May, for want
of rain." The green sickness therefore often happeneth to young
women, a cachexia or an evil habit to men, besides their ordinary
sighs, complaints, and lamentations, which are too frequent. As
drops from a still,-- ut occluso stillat ab igne liquor, doth Cupid's
fire provoke tears from a true lover's eyes,

 "The mighty Mars did oft for Venus shriek,
Privily moistening his horrid cheek
With womanish tears," --

 --"ignis distillat in undas,
Testis erit largus qui rigat ora liquor,"

with many such like passions. When Chariclia was enamoured of
Theagines, as Heliodorus sets her out, "she was half distracted, and
spake she knew not what, sighed to herself, lay much awake, and
was lean upon a sudden:" and when she was besotted on her son-in-
law, pallor deformis, marcentes oculi, &c., she had ugly paleness,
hollow eyes, restless thoughts, short wind, &c. Euryalus, in an
epistle sent to Lucretia, his mistress, complains amongst other
grievances, tu mihi et somni et cibi usum abstulisti, thou hast taken
my stomach and my sleep from me. So he describes it aright:

 His sleep, his meat, his drink, in him bereft,
That lean he waxeth, and dry as a shaft,
His eyes hollow and grisly to behold,
His hew pale and ashen to unfold,
And solitary he was ever alone,
And waking all the night making moan.

Theocritus Edyl. 2. makes a fair maid of Delphos, in love with a
young man of Minda, confess as much,

"Ut vidi ut insanii, ut animus mihi male affectiis est,
Miserae mihi forma tabescebat, neque amplius pompam
Ullum curabam, aut quando domum redieram
Novi, sed me ardens quidam morbus consumebat,
Decubui in lecto dies decem, et noctes decem,
Defluebant capite capilli, ipsaque sola reliqua
Ossa et cutis" --

"No sooner seen I had, but mad I was.
My beauty fail'd, and I no more did care
For any pomp, I knew not where I was,
But sick I was, and evil I did fare;
I lay upon my bed ten days and nights,
A skeleton I was in all men's sights."

All these passions are well expressed by that heroical poet in the
person of Dido:

"At non infelix animi Phaenissa, nec unquam
Solvitur in somnos, oculisque ac pectore amores
Accipit; ingeminant curae, rursusque resurgens
Saevit amor," &c.--

"Unhappy Dido could not sleep at all,
But lies awake, and takes no rest:
And up she gets again, whilst care and grief,
And raging love torment her breast."

Accius Sanazarius Egloga 2. de Galatea, in the same manner feigns
his Lychoris tormenting herself for want of sleep, sighing, sobbing,
and lamenting; and Eustathius in his Ismenias much troubled, and
"panting at heart, at the sight of his mistress," he could not sleep,
his bed was thorns. All make leanness, want of appetite, want of
sleep ordinary symptoms, and by that means they are brought often
so low, so much altered and changed, that as he jested in the
comedy, "one scarce know them to be the same men."

"Attenuant juvenum vigilatae corpora noctes,
Curaque et immenso qui fit amore dolor."

Many such symptoms there are of the body to discern lovers by,--
quis enim bene celet amorem? Can a man, saith Solomon, Prov. vi.
27, carry fire in his bosom and not burn? it will hardly be hid;
though they do all they can to hide it, it must out, plus quam mille
notis -- it may be described, quoque magis tegitur, tectus magis
aestuat ignis. 'Twas Antiphanes the comedian's observation of old,
Love and drunkenness cannot be concealed, Celare alia possis,
haec praeter duo, vini potum, &c. words, looks, gestures, all will
betray them; but two of the most notable signs are observed by the
pulse and countenance. When Antiochus, the son of Seleucus, was
sick for Stratonice, his mother-in-law, and would not confess his
grief, or the cause of his disease, Erasistratus, the physician, found
him by his pulse and countenance to be in love with her, "because
that when she came in presence, or was named, his pulse varied,
and he blushed besides." In this very sort was the love of Callices,
the son of Polycles, discovered by Panacaeas the physician, as you
may read the story at large in Aristenaetus. By the same signs
Galen brags that he found out Justa, Boethius the consul's wife, to
dote on Pylades the player, because at his name still she both
altered pulse and countenance, as Polyarchus did at the name of
Argenis. Franciscus Valesius, l. 3. controv. 13. med. contr. denies
there is any such pulsus amatorius, or that love may be so
discerned; but Avicenna confirms this of Galen out of his
experience, lib. 3. Fen. 1. and Gordonius, cap. 20. "Their pulse, he
saith, is ordinate and swift, if she go by whom he loves," Langius,
epist. 24. lib. 1. med. epist. Neviscanus, lib. 4. numer. 66. syl.
nuptialis, Valescus de Taranta, Guianerius, Tract. 15. Valleriola
sets down this for a symptom, "Difference of pulse, neglect of
business, want of sleep, often sighs, blushings, when there is any
speech of their mistress, are manifest signs." But amongst the rest,
Josephus Struthis, that Polonian, in the fifth book, cap. 17. of his
Doctrine of Pulses, holds that this and all other passions of the
mind may be discovered by the pulse. "And if you will know, saith
he, whether the men suspected be such or such, touch their
arteries," &c. And in his fourth book, fourteenth chapter, he speaks
of this particular pulse, "Love makes an unequal pulse," &c., he
gives instance of a gentlewoman, a patient of his, whom by this
means he found to be much enamoured, and with whom: he named
many persons, but at the last when his name came whom he
suspected, "her pulse began to vary and to beat swifter, and so by
often feeling her pulse, he perceived what the matter was."
Apollonius Argonaut. lib. 4. poetically setting down the meeting of
Jason and Medea, makes them both to blush at one another's sight,
and at the first they were not able to speak.

 --"totus Parmeno
Tremo, horreoque postquam aspexi hanc,"

Phaedria trembled at the sight of Thais, others sweat, blow short,
Crura tremunt ac poplites,-- are troubled with palpitation of heart
upon the like occasion, cor proximum ori, saith Aristenaetus, their
heart is at their mouth, leaps, these burn and freeze, (for love is fire,
ice, hot, cold, itch, fever, frenzy, pleurisy, what not) they look pale,
red, and commonly blush at their first congress; and sometimes
through violent agitation of spirits bleed at nose, or when she is
talked of; which very sign Eustathius makes an argument of
Ismene's affection, that when she met her sweetheart by chance, she
changed her countenance to a maiden-blush. 'Tis a common thing
amongst lovers, as Arnulphus, that merry-conceited bishop, hath
well expressed in a facetious epigram of his,

"Alterno facies sibi dat responsa rubore,
Et tener affectum prodit utrique pudor," &c.

"Their faces answer, and by blushing say,
How both affected are, they do betray."

But the best conjectures are taken from such symptoms as appear
when they are both present; all their speeches, amorous glances,
actions, lascivious gestures will betray them; they cannot contain
themselves, but that they will be still kissing. Stratocles, the
physician, upon his wedding-day, when he was at dinner, Nihil
prius sorbillavit, quam tria basia puellae pangeret, could not eat
his meat for kissing the bride, &c. First a word, and then a kiss,
then some other compliment, and then a kiss, then an idle question,
then a kiss, and when he had pumped his wits dry, can say no more,
kissing and colling are never out of season, Hoc non deficit
incipitque semper, 'tis never at an end, another kiss, and then
another, another, and another, &c.-- huc ades O Thelayra -- Come
kiss me Corinna?

 "Centum basia centies,
Centum basia millies,
Mille basia millies,
Et tot millia millies,
Quot guttae Siculo mari,
Quot sunt sidera coelo,
Istis purpureis genis,
Istis turgidulis labris,
Ocelisque loquaculis,
Figam continuo impetu; 
O formosa Neaera. (As Catullus to Lesbia.)
Da mihi basia mille, deindi centum,
Dein mille altera, da secunda centum,
Dein usque altera millia, deinde centum."

 --"first give a hundred,
Then a thousand, then another
Hundred, then unto the other
Add a thousand, and so more," &c.

Till you equal with the store, all the grass, &c. So Venus did by her
Adonis, the moon with Endymion, they are still dallying and
colling, as so many doves, Columbatimque labra conserentes
labiis, and that with alacrity and courage,

 "Affligunt avide corpus, junguntque salivas
Oris, et inspirant prensantes dentibus ora."

 Tam impresso ore ut vix inde labra detrahant, cervice reclinata,
"as Lamprias in Lucian kissed Thais, Philippus her Aristaenetus,"
amore lymphato tam uriose adhaesit, ut vix labra solvere esset,
totumque os mihi contrivit; Aretine's Lucretia, by a suitor of hers
was so saluted, and 'tis their ordinary fashion.

 --"dentes illudunt saepe labellis,
Atque premunt arete adfigentes oscula" --

They cannot, I say, contain themselves, they will be still not only
joining hands, kissing, but embracing, treading on their toes, &c.,
diving into their bosoms, and that libenter, et cum delectatione, as
Philostratus confesseth to his mistress; and Lamprias in Lucian,
Mammillas premens, per sinum clam dextra, &c., feeling their
paps, and that scarce honestly sometimes: as the old man in the
Comedy well observed of his son, Non ego te videbam manum huic
puellae in sinum insere? Did not I see thee put thy hand into her
bosom? go to, with many such love tricks. Juno in Lucian deorum,
tom. 3. dial. 3. complains to Jupiter of Ixion, "he looked so
attentively on her, and sometimes would sigh and weep in her
company, and when I drank by chance, and gave Ganymede the
cup, he would desire to drink still in the very cup that I drank of,
and in the same place where I drank, and would kiss the cup, and
then look steadily on me, and sometimes sigh, and then again
smile." If it be so they cannot come near to dally, have not that
opportunity, familiarity, or acquaintance to confer and talk
together; yet if they be in presence, their eye will betray them: Ubi
amor ibi oculus, as the common saying is, "where I look I like, and
where I like I love;" but they will lose themselves in her looks.

"Alter in alterius jactantes lumina vultus,
Quaerebant taciti noster ubi esset amor."

"They cannot look off whom they love," they will impregnare eam,
ipsis oculis, deflower her with their eyes, be still gazing, staring,
stealing faces, smiling, glancing at her, as Apollo on Leucothoe, the
moon on her Endymion, when she stood still in Caria, and at
Latmos caused her chariot to be stayed. They must all stand and
admire, or if she go by, look after her as long as they can see her,
she is animae auriga, as Anacreon calls her, they cannot go by her
door or window, but, as an adamant, she draws their eyes to it;
though she be not there present, they must needs glance that way,
and look back to it. Aristenaetus of Exithemus, Lucian, in his
Imagim. of himself, and Tatius of Clitophon, say as much, Ille
oculos de Leucippe nunquam dejiciebat, and many lovers confess
when they came in their mistress' presence, they could not hold off
their eyes, but looked wistfully and steadily on her, inconnivo
aspectu, with much eagerness and greediness, as if they would look
through, or should never have enough sight of her. Fixis ardens
obtutibus haeret; so she will do by him, drink to him with her eyes,
nay, drink him up, devour him, swallow him, as Martial's Mamurra
is remembered to have done: Inspexit molles pueros, oculisque
comedit, &c. There is a pleasant story to this purpose in Navigat.
Vertom. lib. 3. cap. 5. The sultan of Sana's wife in Arabia, because
Vertomannus was fair and white, could not look off him, from
sunrising to sunsetting; she could not desist; she made him one day
come into her chamber, et geminae, horae spatio intuebatur, non a
me anquam aciem oculorum avertebat, me observans veluti
Cupidinem quendam, for two hours' space she still gazed on him. A
young man in Lucian fell in love with Venus' picture; he came
every morning to her temple, and there continued all day long from
sunrising to sunset, unwilling to go home at night, sitting over
against the goddess's picture, he did continually look upon her, and
mutter to himself I know not what. If so be they cannot see them
whom they love, they will still be walking and waiting about their
mistress's doors, taking all opportunity to see them, as in Longus
Sophista, Daphnis and Chloe, two lovers, were still hovering at one
another's gates, he sought all occasions to be in her company, to
hunt in summer, and catch birds in the frost about her father's house
in the winter, that she might see him, and he her. "A king's palace
was not so diligently attended," saith Aretine's Lucretia, "as my
house was when I lay in Rome; the porch and street was ever full of
some, walking or riding, on set purpose to see me; their eye was
still upon my window; as they passed by, they could not choose but
look back to my house when they were past, and sometimes hem or
cough, or take some impertinent occasion to speak aloud, that I
might look out and observe them." 'Tis so in other places, 'tis
common to every lover, 'tis all his felicity to be with her, to talk
with her; he is never well but in her company, and will walk "seven
or eight times a day through the street where she dwells, and make
sleeveless errands to see her;" plotting still where, when, and how
to visit her,

 "Levesque sub nocte susurri,
Composita repetuntur hora."

And when he is gone, he thinks every minute an hour, every hour
as long as a day, ten days a whole year, till he see her again.
Tempora si numeres, bene quae numeramus amantes. And if thou
be in love, thou wilt say so too, Et longum formosa, vale, farewell
sweetheart, vale charissima Argenis, &c. Farewell my dear
Argenis, once more farewell, farewell. And though he is to meet
her by compact, and that very shortly, perchance tomorrow, yet
both to depart, he'll take his leave again, and again, and then come
back again, look after, and shake his hand, wave his hat afar off.
Now gone, he thinks it long till he see her again, and she him, the
clocks are surely set back, the hour's past,

 "Hospita Demophoon tua te Rodopheia Phillis,
Ultra promissum tempus abesse queror."

She looks out at window still to see whether he come, and by report
Phillis went nine times to the seaside that day, to see if her
Demophoon were approaching, and Troilus to the city gates, to
look for his Cresseid. She is ill at ease, and sick till she see him
again, peevish in the meantime; discontent, heavy, sad, and why
comes he not? where is he? why breaks he promise? why tarries he
so long? sure he is not well; sure he hath some mischance; sure he
forgets himself and me; with infinite such. And then, confident
again, up she gets, out she looks, listens, and inquires, hearkens,
kens; every man afar off is sure he, every stirring in the street, now
he is there, that's he, male aurorae, malae soli dicit, deiratque, &c.,
the longest day that ever was, so she raves, restless and impatient;
for Amor non patitur moras, love brooks no delays: the time's
quickly gone that's spent in her company, the miles short, the way
pleasant; all weather is good whilst he goes to her house, heat or
cold; though his teeth chatter in his head, he moves not; wet or dry,
'tis all one; wet to the skin, he feels it not, cares not at least for it,
but will easily endure it and much more, because it is done with
alacrity, and for his mistress's sweet sake; let the burden be never
so heavy, love makes it light. Jacob served seven years for Rachel,
and it was quickly gone because he loved her. None so merry; if he
may happily enjoy her company, he is in heaven for a time; and if
he may not, dejected in an instant, solitary, silent, he departs
weeping, lamenting, sighing, complaining.

But the symptoms of the mind in lovers are almost infinite, and so
diverse, that no art can comprehend them; though they be merry
sometimes, and rapt beyond themselves for joy: yet most part, love
is a plague, a torture, a hell, a bitter sweet passion at last; Amor
melle et felle est faecundissimus, gustum dat dulcem et amarum.
'Tis suavis amaricies, dolentia delectabilis, hilare tormentum;

 "Et me melle beant suaviora,
Et me felle necant amariora."

 (Stobaeus e Graeco. "Sweeter than honey it pleases me, more
bitter than gall, it teases me.")

like a summer fly or sphinx's wings, or a rainbow of all colours,

"Quae ad solis radios conversae aureae erant,
Adversus nubes ceruleae, quale jabar iridis,"

fair, foul, and full of variation, though most part irksome and bad.
For in a word, the Spanish Inquisition is not comparable to it; "a
torment" and "execution" as it is, as he calls it in the poet, an
unquenchable fire, and what not? From it, saith Austin, arise
"biting cares, perturbations, passions, sorrows, fears, suspicions,
discontents, contentions, discords, wars, treacheries, enmities,
flattery, cozening, riot, impudence, cruelty, knavery," &c.

 --"dolor, querelae,
Lamentatio, lachrymae perennes,
Languor, anxietas, amaritudo;
Aut si triste magis potest quid esse,
Hos tu das comites Neaera vitae."

These be the companions of lovers, and the ordinary symptoms, as
the poet repeats them.

 "In amore haec insunt vitia,
Suspiciones, inimicitiae, audaciae,
Bellum, pax rursum," &c.

 "Insomnia, aerumna, error, terror, et fuga,
Excogitantia excors immodestia,
Petulantia, cupiditas, et malevolentia;
Inhaeret etiam aviditas, desidia, injuria,
Inopia, contumelia et dispendium," &c.

"In love these vices are; suspicions,.
Peace, war, and impudence, detractions,
Dreams, cares, and errors, terrors and affrights,
Immodest pranks, devices, sleights and flights,
Heart-burnings, wants, neglects, desire of wrong,
Loss continual, expense and hurt among."

Every poet is full of such catalogues of love symptoms; but fear
and sorrow may justly challenge the chief place. Though Hercules
de Saxonia, cap. 3. Tract. de melanch. will exclude fear from love
melancholy, yet I am otherwise persuaded. Res est solliciti plena
timoris amor. 'Tis full of fear, anxiety, doubt, care, peevishness,
suspicion; it turns a man into a woman, which made Hesiod belike
put Fear and Paleness Venus' daughters,

 --"Marti clypeos atque arma secanti Alma
Venus peperit Pallorem, unaque Timorem:"

because fear and love are still linked together. Moreover they are
apt to mistake, amplify, too credulous sometimes, too full of hope
and confidence, and then again very jealous, unapt to believe or
entertain any good news. The comical poet hath prettily painted out
this passage amongst the rest in a dialogue betwixt Mitio and
Aeschines, a gentle father and a lovesick son. "Be of good cheer,
my son, thou shalt have her to wife. Ae. Ah father, do you mock
me now? M. I mock thee, why? Ae. That which I so earnestly
desire, I more suspect and fear. M. Get you home, and send for her
to be your wife. Ae. What now a wife, now father," &c. These
doubts, anxieties, suspicions, are the least part of their torments;
they break many times from passions to actions, speak fair, and
flatter, now most obsequious and willing, by and by they are
averse, wrangle, fight, swear, quarrel, laugh, weep: and he that doth
not so by fits, Lucian holds, is not thoroughly touched with this
loadstone of love. So their actions and passions are intermixed, but
of all other passions, sorrow hath the greatest share; love to many is
bitterness itself; rem amaram Plato calls it, a bitter potion, an
agony, a plague.

"Eripite hanc pestem perniciemque mihi;
Quae mihi subrepens imos ut torpor in artus,
Expulit ex omni pectore laetitias."

"O take away this plague, this mischief from me,
Which, as a numbness over all my body,
Expels my joys, and makes my soul so heavy."

Phaedria had a true touch of this, when he cried out,

 "O Thais, utinam esset mihi
Pars aequa amoris tecum, ac paritor fieret ut
Aut hoc tibi doleret itidem, ut mihi dolet."

"O Thais, would thou hadst of these my pains a part,
Or as it doth me now, so it would make thee smart."

So had that young man, when he roared again for discontent,

 "Jactor, crucior, agitor, stimulor,
Versor in amoris rota miser,
Exanimor, feror, distrahor, deripior,
Ubi sum, ibi non sum; ubi non sum, ibi est animus."

"I am vext and toss'd, and rack'd on love's wheel:
Where not, I am; but where am, do not feel."

The moon in Lucian made her moan to Venus, that she was almost
dead for love, pereo equidem amore, and after a long tale, she
broke off abruptly and wept, "O Venus, thou knowest my poor
heart." Charmides, in Lucian, was so impatient, that he sobbed and
sighed, and tore his hair, and said he would hang himself. "I am
undone, O sister Tryphena, I cannot endure these love pangs; what
shall I do?" Vos O dii Averrunci solvite me his curis, O ye gods,
free me from these cares and miseries, out of the anguish of his
soul, Theocles prays. Shall I say, most part of a lover's life is full of
agony, anxiety, fear, and grief, complaints, sighs, suspicions, and
cares, (heigh-ho, my heart is wo) full of silence and irksome
solitariness?

"Frequenting shady bowers in discontent,
To the air his fruitless clamours he will vent."

except at such times that he hath lucida intervalla, pleasant gales,
or sudden alterations, as if his mistress smile upon him, give him a
good look, a kiss, or that some comfortable message be brought
him, his service is accepted, &c.

He is then too confident and rapt beyond himself, as if he had heard
the nightingale in the spring before the cuckoo, or as Calisto was at
Melebaeas' presence, Quis unquam hac mortali vita, tam gloriosum
corpus vidit? humanitatem transcendere videor., &c. who ever saw
so glorious a sight, what man ever enjoyed such delight? More
content cannot be given of the gods, wished, had or hoped of any
mortal man. There is no happiness in the world comparable to his,
no content, no joy to this, no life to love, he is in paradise.

 "Quis me uno vivit felicior? aut magis hac est
Optandum vita dicere quis poterit?"

"Who lives so happy as myself? what bliss
In this our life may be compar'd to this?"

He will not change fortune in that case with a prince,

 "Donec gratus eram tibi,
Persarum vigui rege beatior."

The Persian kings are not so jovial as he is, O festus dies hominis,
O happy day; so Chaerea exclaims when he came from Pamphila
his sweetheart well pleased,

"Nunc est profecto interfici cum perpeti me possem,
Ne hoc gaudium contaminet vita aliqua aegritudine."

"He could find in his heart to be killed instantly, lest if he live
longer, some sorrow or sickness should contaminate his joys." A
little after, he was so merrily set upon the same occasion, that he
could not contain himself.

 "O populares, ecquis me vivit hodie fortunatior?
Nemo hercule quisquam; nam in me dii plane potestatem
Suam omnem ostendere;"

"Is't possible (O my countrymen) for any living to be so happy as
myself? No sure it cannot be, for the gods have shown all their
power, all their goodness in me." Yet by and by when this young
gallant was crossed in his wench, he laments, and cries, and roars
downright: Occidi -- I am undone,

"Neque virgo est usquam, neque ego, qui e conspectu illam amisi
meo,
Ubi quaeram, ubi investigem, quem percunter, quam insistam
viam?"

"The virgin's gone, and I am gone, she's gone, she's gone, and what
shall I do? where shall I seek her, where shall I find her, whom
shall I ask? what way, what course shall I take? what will become
of me -- " vitales auras invitus agebat, he was weary of his life,
sick, mad, and desperate, utinam mihi esset aliquid hic, quo nunc
me praecipitem darem. 'Tis not Chaereas' case this alone, but his,
and his, and every lover's in the like state. If he hear ill news, have
bad success in his suit, she frown upon him, or that his mistress in
his presence respect another more (as Hedus observes) "prefer
another suitor, speak more familiarly to him, or use more kindly
than himself, if by nod, smile, message, she discloseth herself to
another, he is instantly tormented, none so dejected as he is,"
utterly undone, a castaway, In quem fortuna omnia odiorum
suorum crudelissima tela exonerat, a dead man, the scorn of
fortune, a monster of fortune, worse than nought, the loss of a
kingdom had been less. Aretine's Lucretia made very good proof of
this, as she relates it herself. "For when I made some of my suitors
believe I would betake myself to a nunnery, they took on, as if they
had lost father and mother, because they were for ever after to want
my company." Omnes labores leves fuere, all other labour was
light: but this might not be endured. Tui carendum quod erat -- "for
I cannot be without thy company," mournful Amyntas, painful
Amyntas, careful Amyntas; better a metropolitan city were sacked,
a royal army overcome, an invincible armada sunk, and twenty
thousand kings should perish, than her little finger ache, so zealous
are they, and so tender of her good. They would all turn friars for
my sake, as she follows it, in hope by that means to meet, or see me
again, as my confessors, at stool-ball, or at barley-break: And so
afterwards when an importunate suitor came, "If I had bid my maid
say that I was not at leisure, not within, busy, could not speak with
him, he was instantly astonished, and stood like a pillar of marble;
another went swearing, chafing, cursing, foaming." Illa sibi vox
ipsa Jovis violentior ira, cum tonat, &c. the voice of a mandrake
had been sweeter music: "but he to whom I gave entertainment,
was in the Elysian fields, ravished for joy, quite beyond himself."
'Tis the general humour of all lovers, she is their stern, pole-star,
and guide. Deliciumque animi, deliquiumque sui. As a tulipant to
the sun (which our herbalists calls Narcissus) when it shines, is
Admirandus flos ad radios solis se pandens, a glorious flower
exposing itself; but when the sun sets, or a tempest comes, it hides
itself, pines away, and hath no pleasure left, (which Carolus
Gonzaga, duke of Mantua, in a cause not unlike, sometimes used
for an impress) do all inamorates to their mistress; she is their sun,
their Primum mobile, or anima informans; this one hath elegantly
expressed by a windmill, still moved by the wind, which otherwise
hath no motion of itself. Sic tua ni spiret gratia, truncus ero. "He is
wholly animated from her breath," his soul lives in her body, sola
claves habet interitus et salutis, she keeps the keys of his life: his
fortune ebbs and flows with her favour, a gracious or bad aspect
turns him up or down, Mens mea lucescit Lucia luce tua.
Howsoever his present state be pleasing or displeasing, 'tis
continuate so long as he loves, he can do nothing, think of nothing
but her; desire hath no rest, she is his cynosure, Hesperus and
vesper, his morning and evening star, his goddess, his mistress, his
life, his soul, his everything; dreaming, waking, she is always in his
mouth; his heart, his eyes, ears, and all his thoughts are full of her.
His Laura, his Victorina, his Columbina, Flavia, Flaminia, Coelia,
Delia, or Isabella, (call her how you will) she is the sole object of
his senses, the substance of his soul, nidulus animae suae, he
magnifies her above measure, totus in illa, full of her, can breathe
nothing but her. "I adore Melebaea," saith lovesick Calisto, "I
believe in Melebaea, I honour, admire and love my Melebaea;" His
soul was soused, imparadised, imprisoned in his lady. When Thais
took her leave of Phaedria,-- mi Phaedria, et nunquid aliud vis?
Sweet heart (she said) will you command me any further service?
he readily replied, and gave in this charge,

 --"egone quid velim?
Dies noctesque ames me, me desideres,
Me somnies, me expectes, me cogites,
Me speres, me te oblectes, mecum tota sis,
Meus fac postremo animus, quando ego sum tuus."

"Dost ask (my dear) what service I will have?
To love me day and night is all I crave,
To dream on me, to expect, to think on me,
Depend and hope, still covet me to see,
Delight thyself in me, be wholly mine,
For know, my love, that I am wholly thine."

But all this needed not, you will say; if she affect once, she will be
his, settle her love on him, on him alone,

 --"illum absens absentem
Auditque videtque" --

she can, she must think and dream of nought else but him,
continually of him, as did Orpheus on his Eurydice,

"Te dulcis conjux, te solo in littore mecum,
Te veniente die, te discedente canebam."

"On thee sweet wife was all my song.
Morn, evening, and all along."

And Dido upon her Aeneas;

 --"et quae me insomnia terrent,
Multa viri virtus, et plurima currit imago."

"And ever and anon she thinks upon the man
That was so fine, so fair, so blithe, so debonair."

Clitophon, in the first book of Achilles Tatius, complaineth how
that his mistress Leucippe tormented him much more in the night
than in the day. "For all day long he had some object or other to
distract his senses, but in the night all ran upon her. All night long
he lay awake, and could think of nothing else but her, he could not
get her out of his mind; towards morning, sleep took a little pity on
him, he slumbered awhile, but all his dreams were of her."

 --"te nocte sub atra
Alloquor, amplector, falsaque in imagine somni,
Gaudia solicitam palpant evanida mentem."

"In the dark night I speak, embrace, and find
That fading joys deceive my careful mind."

The same complaint Euryalus makes to his Lucretia, "day and night
I think of thee, I wish for thee, I talk of thee, call on thee, look for
thee, hope for thee, delight myself in thee, day and night I love
thee."

 "Nec mihi vespere Surgente decedunt amores,
Nec rapidum fugiente solem."

Morning, evening, all is alike with me, I have restless thoughts, Te
vigilans oculis, animo te nocte requiro. Still I think on thee. Anima
non est ubi animat, sed ubi amat. I live and breathe in thee, I wish
for thee.

 "O niveam quae te poterit mihi reddere lucem,
O mihi felicem terque quaterque diem."

"O happy day that shall restore thee to my sight." In the meantime
he raves on her; her sweet face, eyes, actions, gestures, hands, feet,
speech, length, breadth, height, depth, and the rest of her
dimensions, are so surveyed, measured, and taken, by that
Astrolabe of phantasy, and that so violently sometimes, with such
earnestness and eagerness, such continuance, so strong an
imagination, that at length he thinks he sees her indeed; he talks
with her, he embraceth her, Ixion-like, pro Junone nubem, a cloud
for Juno, as he said. Nihil praeter Leucippen cerno, Leucippe mihi
perpetuo in oculis, et animo versatur, I see and meditate of nought
but Leucippe. Be she present or absent, all is one;

 "Et quamvis aberat placidae praesentia formae
Quem dederat praesens forma, manebat amor.

 (Ovid. Fast. 2. ver. 775. "Although the presence of her fair form
is wanting, the love which it kindled remains.")

That impression of her beauty is still fixed in his mind,-- haerent
infixi pectora vultus; as he that is bitten with a mad dog thinks all
he sees dogs -- dogs in his meat, dogs in his dish, dogs in his drink:
his mistress is in his eyes, ears, heart, in all his senses. Valleriola
had a merchant, his patient, in the same predicament; and Ulricus
Molitor, out of Austin, hath a story of one, that through vehemency
of his love passion, still thought he saw his mistress present with
him, she talked with him, Et commisceri cum ea vigilans videbatur,
still embracing him.

Now if this passion of love can produce such effects, if it be
pleasantly intended, what bitter torments shall it breed, when it is
with fear and continual sorrow, suspicion, care, agony, as
commonly it is, still accompanied, what an intolerable pain must it
be?

 --"Non tam grandes
Gargara culmos, quot demerso
Pectore curas longa nexas
Usque catena, vel quae penitus
Crudelis amor vulnera miscet."

"Mount Gargarus hath not so many stems
As lover's breast hath grievous wounds,
And linked cares, which love compounds."

When the King of Babylon would have punished a courtier of his,
for loving of a young lady of the royal blood, and far above his
fortunes, Apollonius in presence by all means persuaded to let him
alone; "For to love and not enjoy was a most unspeakable torment,"
no tyrant could invent the like punishment; as a gnat at a candle, in
a short space he would consume himself. For love is a perpetual
flux, angor animi, a warfare, militat omni amans, a grievous wound
is love still, and a lover's heart is Cupid's quiver, a consuming fire,
accede ad hunc ignem, &c. an inextinguishable fire.

 --"alitur et crescit malum,
Et ardet intus, qualis Aetnaeo vapor
Exundat antro" --

As Aetna rageth, so doth love, and more than Aetna or any material
fire.

 --"Nam amor saepe Lypareo
Vulcano ardentiorem flammam incendere solet."

Vulcan's flames are but smoke to this. For fire, saith Xenophon,
burns them alone that stand near it, or touch it; but this fire of love
burneth and scorcheth afar off, and is more hot and vehement than
any material fire: Ignis in igne furit, 'tis a fire in a fire, the
quintessence of fire. For when Nero burnt Rome, as Calisto urgeth,
he fired houses, consumed men's bodies and goods; but this fire
devours the soul itself, "and one soul is worth a hundred thousand
bodies." No water can quench this wild fire.

 --"In pectus coecos absorbuit ignes,
Ignes qui nec aqua perimi potuere, nec imbre
Diminui, neque graminibus, magicisque susurris."

"A fire he took into his breast,
Which water could not quench.
Nor herb, nor art, nor magic spells
Could quell, nor any drench."

Except it be tears and sighs, for so they may chance find a little
ease.

 "Sic candentia colla, sic patens frons,
Sic me blanda tui Neaera ocelli,
Sic pares minio genae perurunt,
Ut ni me lachrymae rigent perennes, 
Totus in tenues eam favillas."

"So thy white neck, Neaera, me poor soul
Doth scorch, thy cheeks, thy wanton eyes that roll:
Were it not for my dropping tears that hinder,
I should be quite burnt up forthwith to cinder."

This fire strikes like lightning, which made those old Grecians
paint Cupid, in many of their temples, with Jupiter's thunderbolts in
his hands; for it wounds, and cannot be perceived how, whence it
came, where it pierced. Urimur, et coecum, pectora vulnus habent,
and can hardly be discerned at first.

 --"Est mollis flamma medullas,
Et tacitum insano vivit sub pectore vulnus."

"A gentle wound, an easy fire it was,
And sly at first, and secretly did pass."

But by-and-by it began to rage and burn amain;

 --"Pectus insanum vapor.
Amorque torret, intus saevus vorat
Penitus medullas, atque per venas meat
Visceribus ignis mersus, et venis latens,
Ut agilis altas flamma percurrit trabes."

"This fiery vapour rageth in the veins,
And scorcheth entrails, as when fire burns
A house, it nimbly runs along the beams,
And at the last the whole it overturns."

Abraham Hoffemannus, lib. 1. amor conjugal, cap. 2. p. 22. relates
out of Plato, how that Empedocles, the philosopher, was present at
the cutting up of one that died for love, "his heart was combust, his
liver smoky, his lungs dried up, insomuch that he verily believed
his soul was either sodden or roasted through the vehemency of
love's fire." Which belike made a modern writer of amorous 
emblems express love's fury by a pot hanging over the fire, and
Cupid blowing the coals. As the heat consumes the water, Sic sua
consumit viscera coecus amor, so doth love dry up his radical
moisture. Another compares love to a melting torch, which stood
too near the fire.

 "Sic quo quis proprior suae puellae est,
Hoc stultus proprior suae runinae est."

"The nearer he unto his mistress is,
The nearer he unto his ruin is."

So that to say truth, as Castilio describes it, "The beginning,
middle, end of love is nought else but sorrow, vexation, agony,
torment, irksomeness, wearisomeness; so that to be squalid, ugly,
miserable, solitary, discontent, dejected, to wish for death, to
complain, rave, and to be peevish, are the certain signs and
ordinary actions of a lovesick person." This continual pain and
torture makes them forget themselves, if they be far gone with it, in
doubt, despair of obtaining, or eagerly bent, to neglect all ordinary
business.

 --"pendent opera interrupta, minaeque
Murorum ingentes, aequataque machina coelo."

 (Virg. Aen. 4. "The works are interrupted, promises of great
walls, and scaffoldings rising towards the skies, are all
suspended.")

Lovesick Dido left her work undone, so did Phaedra,

 --"Palladis telae vacant
Et inter ipsus pensa labuntur manus."

Faustus, in Mantuan, took no pleasure in anything he did,

"Nulla quies mihi dulcis erat, nullus labor aegro
Pectore, sensus iners, et mens torpore sepulta,
Carminis occiderat studium." --

 (Virg. Aen. 4. "The works are interrupted, promises of great
walls, and scaffoldings rising towards the skies, are all
suspended.")

And 'tis the humour of them all, to be careless of their persons and
their estates, as the shepherd in Theocritus, et haec barba inculta
est, squalidique capilli, their beards flag, and they have no more
care of pranking themselves or of any business, they care not, as
they say, which end goes forward.

 "Oblitusque greges, et rura domestica totus
Uritur, et noctes in luctum expendit amaras."

"Forgetting flocks of sheep and country farms,
The silly shepherd always mourns and burns."

Lovesick Chaerea, when he came from Pamphila's house, and had
not so good welcome as he did expect, was all amort, Parmeno
meets him, quid tristis es? Why art thou so sad man? unde es?
whence comest, how doest? but he sadly replies, Ego hercle nescio
neque unde eam, neque quorsum eam, ita prorsus oblitus sum mei,
I have so forgotten myself, I neither know where I am, nor whence
I come, nor whether I will, what I do. P. "How so?" Ch. "I am in
love." Prudens sciens. "-- vivus vidensque pereo, nec quid agam
scio." "He that erst had his thoughts free" (as Philostratus Lemnius,
in an epistle of his, describes this fiery passion) , "and spent his
time like a hard student, in those delightsome philosophical
precepts; he that with the sun and moon wandered all over the
world, with stars themselves ranged about, and left no secret or
small mystery in nature unsearched, since he was enamoured can
do nothing now but think and meditate of love matters, day and
night composeth himself how to please his mistress; all his study,
endeavour, is to approve himself to his mistress, to win his
mistress' favour, to compass his desire, to be counted her servant."
When Peter Abelard, that great scholar of his age, Cui soli patuit
scibile quicquid erat, ("whose faculties were equal to any difficulty
in learning,") was now in love with Heloise, he had no mind to visit
or frequent schools and scholars any more, Taediosum mihi valde
fuit (as he confesseth) ad scholas procedere, vel in iis morari, all
his mind was on his new mistress.

Now to this end and purpose, if there be any hope of obtaining his
suit, to prosecute his cause, he will spend himself, goods, fortunes
for her, and though he lose and alienate all his friends, be
threatened, be cast off, and disinherited; for as the poet saith, Amori
quis legem det? though he be utterly undone by it, disgraced, go a
begging, yet for her sweet sake, to enjoy her, he will willingly beg,
hazard all he hath, goods, lands, shame, scandal, fame, and life
itself.

"Non recedam neque quiescam, noctu et interdiu,
Prius profecto quam aut ipsam, aut mortem investigavero."

"I'll never rest or cease my suit
Till she or death do make me mute."

Parthenis in Aristaenetus was fully resolved to do as much. "I may
have better matches, I confess, but farewell shame, farewell
honour, farewell honesty, farewell friends and fortunes, &c. O,
Harpedona, keep my counsel, I will leave all for his sweet sake, I
will have him, say no more, contra gentes, I am resolved, I will
have him." Gobrias, the captain, when, he had espied Rhodanthe,
the fair captive maid, fell upon his knees before Mystilus, the
general, with tears, vows, and all the rhetoric he could, by the scars
he had formerly received, the good service he had done, or
whatsoever else was dear unto him, besought his governor he might
have the captive virgin to be his wife, virtutis suae spolium, as a
reward of his worth and service; and, moreover, he would forgive
him the money which was owing, and all reckonings besides due
unto him, "I ask no more, no part of booty, no portion, but
Rhodanthe to be my wife." And when as he could not compass her
by fair means, he fell to treachery, force and villainy, and set his
life at stake at last to accomplish his desire. 'Tis a common humour
this, a general passion of all lovers to be so affected, and which
Aemilia told Aratine, a courtier in Castilio's discourse, "surely
Aratine, if thou werst not so indeed, thou didst not love;
ingenuously confess, for if thou hadst been thoroughly enamoured,
thou wouldst have desired nothing more than to please thy mistress.
For that is the law of love, to will and nill the same." Tantum velle
et nolle, velit nolit quod amica?

Undoubtedly this may be pronounced of them all, they are very
slaves, drudges for the time, madmen, fools, dizzards, atrabilarii ,
beside themselves, and as blind as beetles. Their dotage is most
eminent, Amore simul et sapere ipsi Jovi non datur, as Seneca
holds, Jupiter himself cannot love and be wise both together; the
very best of them, if once they be overtaken with this passion, the
most staid, discreet, grave, generous and wise, otherwise able to
govern themselves, in this commit many absurdities, many
indecorums, unbefitting their gravity and persons.

 "Quisquis amat servit, sequitur captivus amantem,
Fert domita cervice jugum" --

 (Mantuan. "Whoever is in love is in slavery, he follows his
sweetheart as a captive his captor, and wears a yoke on his
submissible neck.")

Samson, David, Solomon, Hercules, Socrates, &c. are justly taxed
of indiscretion in this point; the middle sort are between hawk and
buzzard; and although they do perceive and acknowledge their own
dotage, weakness, fury, yet they cannot withstand it; as well may
witness those expostulations and confessions of Dido in Virgil:

 "Incipit effari mediaque in voce resistit."

 (Virg. Aen. 4. "She began to speak but stopped in the middle of
her discourse.")

Phaedra in Seneca:

 "Quod ratio poscit, vincit ac regnat furor,
Potensque tota mente dominatur deus."

 (Seneca, Hippol. "What reason requires, raging love forbids.")

Myrrha in . Ovid:

"Illa quidem sentit, foedoque repugnat amori,
Et secum quo mente feror, quid molior, inquit,
Dii precor, et pietas," &c.

"She sees and knows her fault, and doth resist,
Against her filthy lust she doth contend.
And whither go I, what am I about?
And God forbid, yet doth it in the end."

Again,

 --"Per vigil igne
Carpitur indomito, furiosaque vota retrectat,
Et modo desperat, modo vult tentare, pudetque
Et cupit, et quid agat, non invenit," &c.

"With raging lust she burns, and now recalls
Her vow, and then despairs, and when 'tis past,
Her former thoughts she'll prosecute in haste,
And what to do she knows not at the last."

She will and will not, abhors: and yet as Medea did, doth it,

 --"Trahit invitam nova via, aliudque cupido,
Mens aliud suadet; video meliora, proboque,
Deteriora sequor." --

"Reason pulls one way, burning lust another,
She sees and knows what's good, but she doth neither,"

"O fraus, amorque, et mentis emotae furor, quo me abstulistis?"

 (Buchanan. "Oh fraud, and love, and distraction of mind, whither
have you led me?")

The major part of lovers are carried headlong like so many brute
beasts, reason counsels one way, thy friends, fortunes, shame,
disgrace, danger, and an ocean of cares that will certainly follow;
yet this furious lust precipitates, counterpoiseth, weighs down on
the other; though it be their utter undoing, perpetual infamy, loss,
yet they will do it, and become at last insensati, void of sense;
degenerate into dogs, hogs, asses, brutes; as Jupiter into a bull,
Apuleius an ass, Lycaon a wolf, Tereus a lapwing, Calisto a bear,
Elpenor and Grillus into swine by Circe. For what else may we
think those ingenious poets to have shadowed in their witty fictions
and poems but that a man once given over to his lust (as Fulgentius
interprets that of Apuleius, Alciat of Tereus) "is no better than a
beast."

"Rex fueram, sic crista docet, sed sordida vita
Immundam e tanto culmine fecit avem."

"I was a king, my crown my witness is,
But by my filthiness am come to this."

Their blindness is all out as great, as manifest as their weakness
and dotage, or rather an inseparable companion, an ordinary sign of
it, love is blind, as the saying is, Cupid's blind, and so are all his
followers. Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam. Every
lover admires his mistress, though she be very deformed of herself,
ill-favoured, wrinkled, pimpled, pale, red, yellow, tanned, tallow-
faced, have a swollen juggler's platter face, or a thin, lean, chitty
face, have clouds in her face, be crooked, dry, bald, goggle-eyed,
blear-eyed, or with staring eyes, she looks like a squissed cat, hold
her head still awry, heavy, dull, hollow-eyed, black or yellow about
the eyes, or squint-eyed, sparrow-mouthed, Persian hook-nosed,
have a sharp fox nose, a red nose, China flat, great nose, nare simo
patuloque, a nose like a promontory, gubber-tushed, rotten teeth,
black, uneven, brown teeth, beetle browed, a witch's beard, her
breath stink all over the room, her nose drop winter and summer,
with a Bavarian poke under her chin, a sharp chin, lave eared, with
a long crane's neck, which stands awry too, pendulis mammis, "her
dugs like two double jugs," or else no dugs, in that other extreme,
bloody fallen fingers, she have filthy, long unpared nails, scabbed
hands or wrists, a tanned skin, a rotten carcass, crooked back, she
stoops, is lame, splay-footed, "as slender in the middle as a cow in
the waist," gouty legs, her ankles hang over her shoes, her feet
stink, she breed lice, a mere changeling, a very monster, an oaf
imperfect, her whole complexion savours, a harsh voice, incondite
gesture, vile gait, a vast virago, or an ugly tit, a slug, a fat fustilugs,
a truss, a long lean rawbone, a skeleton, a sneaker (si qua latent
meliora puta) , and to thy judgment looks like a merd in a lantern,
whom thou couldst not fancy for a world, but hatest, loathest, and
wouldst have spit in her face, or blow thy nose in her bosom,
remedium amoris to another man, a dowdy, a slut, a scold, a nasty,
rank, rammy, filthy, beastly quean, dishonest peradventure,
obscene, base, beggarly, rude, foolish, untaught, peevish, Irus'
daughter, Thersites' sister, Grobians' scholar, if he love her once, he
admires her for all this, he takes no notice of any such errors, or
imperfections of body or mind, Ipsa haec -- delectant, veluti
Balbinum Polypus Agnae, (Hor. ser. lib. sat. l. 3. "These very
things please him, as the wen of Agna did Balbinus.") he had rather
have her than any woman in the world. If he were a king, she alone
should be his queen, his empress. O that he had but the wealth and
treasure of both the Indies to endow her with, a carrack of
diamonds, a chain of pearl, a cascanet of jewels, (a pair of calfskin
gloves of four-pence a pair were fitter) , or some such toy, to send
her for a token, she should have it with all his heart; he would
spend myriads of crowns for her sake. Venus herself, Panthea,
Cleopatra, Tarquin's Tanaquil, Herod's Mariamne, or Mary of
Burgundy, if she were alive, would not match her.

 (" Vincit vultus haec Tyndarios,
Qui moverunt horrida bellla."

 ( Seneca in Octavia. "Her beauty excels the Tyndarian Helen's,
which caused such dreadful wars.")

Let Paris himself be judge) renowned Helen comes short, that
Rodopheian Phillis, Larissean Coronis, Babylonian Thisbe,
Polixena, Laura, Lesbia, &c., your counterfeit ladies were never so
fair as she is.

 "Quicquid erit placidi, lepidi, grati, atque faceti,
Vivida cunctorum retines Pandora deorum."

"Whate'er is pretty, pleasant, facete, well,
Whate'er Pandora had, she doth excel."

 Dicebam Trivioe formam nihil esse Dianoe. Diana was not to be
compared to her, nor Juno, nor Minerva, nor any goddess. Thetis'
feet were as bright as silver, the ankles of Hebe clearer than crystal,
the arms of Aurora as ruddy as the rose, Juno's breasts as white as
snow, Minerva wise, Venus fair; but what of this? Dainty come
thou to me. She is all in all,

 --"Coelia ridens Est Venus, incedens Juno,
Minerva loquens."

[or]

 "Fairest of fair, that fairness doth excel."

Ephemerus in Aristaenetus, so far admireth his mistress' good parts,
that he makes proclamation of them, and challengeth all comers in
her behalf. "Whoever saw the beauties of the east, or of the west,
let them come from all quarters, all, and tell truth, if ever they saw
such an excellent feature as this is." A good fellow in Petronius
cries out, no tongue can tell his lady's fine feature, or express it,
quicquid dixeris minus erit, &c.

"No tongue can her perfections tell,
In whose each part, all tongues may dwell."

Most of your lovers are of his humour and opinion. She is nulli
secunda, a rare creature, a phoenix, the sole commandress of his
thoughts, queen of his desires, his only delight: as Triton now
feelingly sings, that lovesick sea-god:

"Candida Leucothoe placet, et placet atra Melaene,
Sed Galatea placet longe magis omnibus una."

"Fair Leucothe, black Melene please me well,
But Galatea doth by odds the rest excel."

All the gracious elogies, metaphors, hyperbolical comparisons of
the best things in the world, the most glorious names; whatsoever, I
say, is pleasant, amiable, sweet, grateful, and delicious, are too
little for her.

"Phoebo pulchrior et sorore Phoebi."

"His Phoebe is so fair, she is so bright,
She dims the sun's lustre, and the moon's light."

Stars, sun, moons, metals, sweet-smelling flowers, odours,
perfumes, colours, gold, silver, ivory, pearls, precious stones, snow,
painted birds, doves, honey, sugar, spice, cannot express her, so
soft, so tender, so radiant, sweet, so fair is she.-- Mollior cuniculi
capillo, &c.

 "Lydia bella, puelia candida,
Quae bene superas lac, et lilium,
Albamque simul rosam et rubicundam,
Et expolitum ebur Indicum."

"Fine Lydia, my mistress, white and fair,
The milk, the lily do not thee come near;
The rose so white, the rose so red to see,
And Indian ivory comes short of thee."

Such a description our English Homer makes of a fair lady

 That Emilia that was fairer to seen,
Then is lily upon the stalk green:
And fresher then May with flowers new,
 For with the rose colour strove her hue,
I no't which was the fairer of the two.

In this very phrase Polyphemus courts Galatea:

"Candidior folio nivei Galatea ligustri,
Floridior prato, longa procerior alno,
Splendidior vitro, tenero lascivior haedo, &c.
Mollior et cygni plumis, et lacte coacto."

"Whiter Galet than the white withie-wind,
Fresher than a field, higher than a tree,
Brighter than glass, more wanton than a kid,
Softer than swan's down, or ought that may be."

So she admires him again, in that conceited dialogue of Lucian,
which John Secundus, an elegant Dutch modern poet, hath
translated into verse. When Doris and those other sea nymphs
upbraided her with her ugly misshapen lover, Polyphemus; she
replies, they speak out of envy and malice,

 "Et plane invidia huc mera vos stimulare videtur.
Quod non vos itidem ut me Polyphemus amet;"

 ("It is envy evidently that prompts you, because Polyphemus
does not love you as he does me.")

Say what they could, he was a proper man. And as Heloise writ to
her sweetheart Peter Abelard, Si me Augustus orbis imperator
uxorem expeteret, mallem tua esse meretrix quam orbis imperatrix;
she had rather be his vassal, his quean, than the world's empress or
queen.-- non si me Jupiter ipse forte velit,-- she would not change
her love for Jupiter himself.

To thy thinking she is a most loathsome creature; and as when a
country fellow discommended once that exquisite picture of Helen,
made by Zeuxis, for he saw no such beauty in it; Nichomachus a
lovesick spectator replied, Sume tibi meos oculos et deam
existimabis, take mine eyes, and thou wilt think she is a goddess,
dote on her forthwith, count all her vices virtues; her imperfections
infirmities, absolute and perfect: if she be flat-nosed, she is lovely;
if hook-nosed, kingly; if dwarfish and little, pretty; if tall, proper
and man-like, our brave British Boadicea; if crooked, wise; if
monstrous, comely; her defects are no defects at all, she hath no
deformities. Immo nec ipsum amicae stercus foetet, though she be
nasty, fulsome, as Sostratus' bitch, or Parmeno's sow; thou hadst as
live have a snake in thy bosom, a toad in thy dish, and callest her
witch, devil, hag, with all the filthy names thou canst invent; he
admires her on the other side, she is his idol, lady, mistress,
venerilla, queen, the quintessence of beauty, an angel, a star, a
goddess.

"Thou art my Vesta, thou my goddess art,
Thy hallowed temple only is my heart."

The fragrancy of a thousand courtesans is in her face: Nec pulchrae
effigies, haec Cypridis aut Stratonices; 'tis not Venus' picture that,
nor the Spanish infanta's, as you suppose (good sir) , no princess, or
king's daughter: no, no, but his divine mistress, forsooth, his dainty
Dulcinia, his dear Antiphila, to whose service he is wholly
consecrate, whom he alone adores.

 "Cui comparatus indecens erit pavo,
Inamabilis sciurus, et frequens Phoenix."

"To whom conferr'd a peacock's indecent,
A squirrel's harsh, a phoenix too frequent."

All the graces, veneries, elegancies, pleasures, attend her. He
prefers her before a myriad of court ladies.

 "He that commends Phillis or Neraea,
Or Amaryllis, or Galatea,
Tityrus or Melibea, by your leave,
Let him be mute, his love the praises have."

Nay, before all the gods and goddesses themselves. So Quintus
Catullus admired his squint-eyed friend Roscius.

"Pace mihi liceat (Coelestes) dicere vestra,
Mortalis visus pulchrior esse Deo."

"By your leave gentle Gods, this I'll say true,
There's none of you that have so fair a hue."

All the bombast epithets, pathetical adjuncts, incomparably fair,
curiously neat, divine, sweet, dainty, delicious, &c., pretty
diminutives, corculum, suaviolum, &c. pleasant names may be
invented, bird, mouse, lamb, puss, pigeon, pigsney, kid, honey,
love, dove, chicken, &c. he puts on her.

 "Meum mel, mea suavitas, meum cor,
Meum suaviolum, mei lepores,"

"my life, my light, my jewel, my glory," Margareta speciosa, cujus
respectu omnia mundi pretiosa sordent, my sweet Margaret, my
sole delight and darling. And as Rhodomant courted Isabella:

"By all kind words and gestures that he might,
He calls her his dear heart, his sole beloved,
His joyful comfort, and his sweet delight,
His mistress, and his goddess, and such names,
As loving knights apply to lovely dames."

Every cloth she wears, every fashion pleaseth him above measure;
her hand, O quales digitos, quos habet illa manus! pretty foot,
pretty coronets, her sweet carriage, sweet voice, tone, O that pretty
tone, her divine and lovely looks, her every thing, lovely, sweet,
amiable, and pretty, pretty, pretty. Her very name (let it be what it
will) is a most pretty, pleasing name; I believe now there is some
secret power and virtue in names, every action, sight, habit,
gesture; he admires, whether she play, sing, or dance, in what tires
soever she goeth, how excellent it was, how well it became her,
never the like seen or heard. Mille habet ornatus, mille decenter
habet. Let her wear what she will, do what she will, say what she
will, Quicquid enim dicit, seu facit, omne decet. He applauds and
admires everything she wears, saith or doth,

 "Illam quicquid agit, quoquo vestigia vertit,
Composuit furtim subsequiturque decor;
Seu solvit crines, fusis decet esse capillis,
Seu compsit, comptis est reverenda comis."

"Whate'er she doth, or whither e'er she go,
A sweet and pleasing grace attends forsooth;
Or loose, or bind her hair, or comb it up,
She's to be honoured in what she doth."

 Vestem induitur, formosa est: exuitur, tota forma est, let her be
dressed or undressed, all is one, she is excellent still, beautiful, fair,
and lovely to behold. Women do as much by men; nay more, far
fonder, weaker, and that by many parasangs. "Come to me my dear
Lycias," (saith Musaeus in Aristaenetus) "come quickly sweetheart,
all other men are satyrs, mere clowns, blockheads to thee, nobody
to thee." Thy looks, words, gestures, actions, &c., "are
incomparably beyond all others." Venus was never so much
besotted on her Adonis, Phaedra so delighted in Hippolitus,
Ariadne in Theseus, Thisbe in her Pyramus, as she is enamoured on
her Mopsus.

"Be thou the marigold, and I will be the sun,
Be thou the friar, and I will be the nun."

I could repeat centuries of such. Now tell me what greater dotage
or blindness can there be than this in both sexes? and yet their
slavery is more eminent, a greater sign of their folly than the rest.

They are commonly slaves, captives, voluntary servants, Amator
amicae mancipium, as Castilio terms him, his mistress' servant, her
drudge, prisoner, bondman, what not? "He composeth himself
wholly to her affections to please her, and, as Aemelia said, makes
himself her lackey. All his cares, actions, all his thoughts, are
subordinate to her will and commandment:" her most devote,
obsequious, affectionate servant and vassal. "For love" (as Cyrus in
Xenophon well observed) "is a mere tyranny, worse than any
disease, and they that are troubled with it desire to be free and
cannot, but are harder bound than if they were in iron chains."
What greater captivity or slavery can there be (as Tully
expostulates) than to be in love? "Is he a free man over whom a
woman domineers, to whom she prescribes laws, commands,
forbids what she will herself; that dares deny nothing she demands;
she asks, he gives; she calls, he comes; she threatens, he fears;
Nequissimum hunc servum puto, I account this man a very drudge."
And as he follows it, "Is this no small servitude for an enamourite
to be every hour combing his head, stiffening his beard, perfuming
his hair, washing his face with sweet water, painting, curling, and
not to come abroad but sprucely crowned, decked, and apparelled?"
Yet these are but toys in respect, to go to the barber, baths, theatres,
&c., he must attend upon her wherever she goes, run along the
streets by her doors and windows to see her, take all opportunities,
sleeveless errands, disguise, counterfeit shapes, and as many forms
as Jupiter himself ever took; and come every day to her house (as
he will surely do if he be truly enamoured) and offer her service,
and follow her up and down from room to room, as Lucretia's
suitors did, he cannot contain himself but he will do it, he must and
will be where she is, sit next her, still talking with her. "If I did but
let my glove fall by chance," (as the said Aretine's Lucretia brags,)
"I had one of my suitors, nay two or three at once ready to stoop
and take it up, and kiss it, and with a low cong deliver it unto me;
if I would walk, another was ready to sustain me by the arm. A
third to provide fruits, pears, plums, cherries, or whatsoever I
would eat or drink." All this and much more he doth in her
presence, and when he comes home, as Troilus to his Cressida, 'tis
all his meditation to recount with himself his actions, words,
gestures, what entertainment he had, how kindly she used him in
such a place, how she smiled, how she graced him, and that
infinitely pleased him; and then he breaks out, O sweet Areusa, O
my dearest Antiphila, O most divine looks, O lovely graces, and
thereupon instantly he makes an epigram, or a sonnet to five or
seven tunes, in her commendation, or else he ruminates how she
rejected his service, denied him a kiss, disgraced him, &c., and that
as effectually torments him. And these are his exercises between
comb and glass, madrigals, elegies, &c., these his cogitations till he
see her again. But all this is easy and gentle, and the least part of
his labour and bondage, no hunter will take such pains for his
game, fowler for his sport, or soldier to sack a city, as he will for
his mistress' favour.

 "Ipsa comes veniam, neque me salebrosa movebunt
Saxa, nec obliquo dente timendus aper."

 ("Nor will the rude rocks affright, me, nor the crooked-tusked
bear, so that I shall not visit my mistress in pleasant mood.")

As Phaedra to Hippolitus. No danger shall affright, for if that be
true the poets feign, Love is the son of Mars and Venus; as he hath
delights, pleasures, elegances from his mother, so hath he hardness,
valour, and boldness from his father. And 'tis true that Bernard
hath; Amore nihil mollius, nihil volentius, nothing so boisterous,
nothing so tender as love. If once, therefore, enamoured, he will go,
run, ride many a mile to meet her, day and night, in a very dark
night, endure scorching heat, cold, wait in frost and snow, rain,
tempest, till his teeth chatter in his head, those northern winds and
showers cannot cool or quench his flame of love. Intempesta nocte
non deterretur, he will, take my word, sustain hunger, thirst,
Penetrabit omnia, perrumpet omnia, "love will find out a way,"
through thick and thin he will to her, Expeditissimi montes videntur
omnes tranabiles, he will swim through an ocean, ride post over the
Alps, Apennines, or Pyrenean hills,

 "Ignem marisque fluctus, atque turbines
Venti paratus est transire," --

though it rain daggers with their points downward, light or dark, all
is one: (Roscida per tenebras Faunus ad antra venit) , for her sweet
sake he will undertake Hercules's twelve labours, endure, hazard,
&c., he feels it not. "What shall I say," saith Haedus, "of their great
dangers they undergo, single combats they undertake, how they
will venture their lives, creep in at windows, gutters, climb over
walls to come to their sweethearts," (anointing the doors and hinges
with oil, because they should not creak, tread soft, swim, wade,
watch, &c.) , "and if they be surprised, leap out at windows, cast
themselves headlong down, bruising or breaking their legs or arms,
and sometimes losing life itself," as Calisto did for his lovely
Melibaea. Hear some of their own confessions, protestations,
complaints, proffers, expostulations, wishes, brutish attempts,
labours in this kind. Hercules served Omphale, put on an apron,
took a distaff and spun; Thraso the soldier was so submissive to
Thais, that he was resolved to do whatever she enjoined. Ego me
Thaidi dedam; et faciam quod jubet, I am at her service.
Philostratus in an epistle to his mistress, "I am ready to die
sweetheart if it be thy will; allay his thirst whom thy star hath
scorched and undone, the fountains and rivers deny no man drink
that comes; the fountain doth not say thou shalt not drink, nor the
apple thou shalt not eat, nor the fair meadow walk not in me, but
thou alone wilt not let me come near thee, or see thee, contemned
and despised I die for grief." Polienus, when his mistress Circe did
but frown upon him in Petronius, drew his sword, and bade her kill,
stab, or whip him to death, he would strip himself naked, and not
resist. Another will take a journey to Japan, Longae navigationis
molestis non curans: a third (if she say it) will not speak a word for
a twelvemonth's space, her command shall be most inviolably kept:
a fourth will take Hercules's club from him, and with that centurion
in the Spanish Coelestina, will kill ten men for his mistress Areusa,
for a word of her mouth he will cut bucklers in two like pippins,
and flap down men like flies, Elige quo mortis genere illum occidi
cupis. Galeatus of Mantua did a little more: for when he was almost
mad for love of a fair maid in the city, she, to try him belike what
he would do for her sake, bade him in jest leap into the river Po if
he loved her; he forthwith did leap headlong off the bridge and was
drowned. Another at Ficinum in like passion, when his mistress by
chance (thinking no harm I dare swear) bade him go hang, the next
night at her doors hanged himself. "Money" (saith Xenophon) "is a
very acceptable and welcome guest, yet I had rather give it my dear
Clinia than take it of others, I had rather serve him than command
others, I had rather be his drudge than take my ease, undergo any
danger for his sake than live in security. For I had rather see Clinia
than all the world besides, and had rather want the sight of all other
things than him alone; I am angry with the night and sleep that I
may not see him, and thank the light and sun because they show me
my Clinia; I will run into the fire for his sake, and if you did but see
him, I know that you likewise would run with me." So Philostratus
to his mistress, "Command me what you will, I will do it; bid me
go to sea, I am gone in an instant, take so many stripes, I am ready,
run through the fire, and lay down my life and soul at thy feet, 'tis
done." So did Aeolus to Juno.

 --"Tuus o regina quod optas
Explorare labor, mihi jussa capescere fas est."

"O queen it is thy pains to enjoin me still,
And I am bound to execute thy will."

And Phaedra to Hippolitus,

"Me vel sororem Hippolite aut famulam voca,
Famulamque potius, omne servitium feram."

"O call me sister, call me servant, choose,
Or rather servant, I am thine to use."

 "Non me per altas ire si jubeas nives,
Pigeat galatis ingredi Pindi jugis,
Non si per ignes ire aut infesta agmina
Cuncter, paratus ensibus pectus dare,
Te tunc jubere, me decet jussa exequi."

"It shall not grieve me to the snowy hills,
Or frozen Pindus' tops forthwith to climb.
Or run through fire, or through an army,
Say but the word, for I am always thine."

Callicratides in Lucian breaks out into this passionate speech, "O
God of Heaven, grant me this life for ever to sit over against my
mistress, and to hear her sweet voice, to go in and out with her, to
have every other business common with her; I would labour when
she labours; sail when she sails; he that hates her should hate me;
and if a tyrant kill her, he should kill me; if she should die, I would
not live, and one grave should hold us both." Finiet illa meos
moriens morientis amores. (Buchanan. "When she dies my love
shall also be at rest in the tomb.") Abrocomus in Aristaenetus
makes the like petition for his Delphia,-- Tecum vivere amem,
tecum obeam lubens. "I desire to live with thee, and I am ready to
die with thee." 'Tis the same strain which Theagines used to his
Chariclea, "so that I may but enjoy thy love, let me die presently:"
Leander to his Hero, when he besought the sea waves to let him go
quietly to his love, and kill him coming back. Parcite dum propero,
mergite dum redeo. "Spare me whilst I go, drown me as I return."
'Tis the common humour of them all, to contemn death, to wish for
death, to confront death in this case, Quippe queis nec fera, nec
ignis, neque praecipitium, nec fretum, nec ensis, neque laqueus
gravia videntur; "'Tis their desire" (saith Tyrius) "to die."

"Haud timet mortem, cupit ire in ipsos
--obvius enses."

"He does not fear death, he desireth such upon the very swords."
Though a thousand dragons or devils keep the gates, Cerberus
himself, Scyron and Procrastes lay in wait, and the way as
dangerous, as inaccessible as hell, through fiery flames and over
burning coulters, he will adventure for all this. And as Peter
Abelard lost his testicles for his Heloise, he will I say not venture
an incision, but life itself. For how many gallants offered to lose
their lives for a night's lodging with Cleopatra in those days! and in
the hour or moment of death, 'tis their sole comfort to remember
their dear mistress, as Zerbino slain in France, and Brandimart in
Barbary; as Arcite did his Emily.

 --when he felt death,
Dusked been his eyes, and faded is his breath
But on his lady yet casteth he his eye,
His last word was, mercy Emely,
His spirit chang'd, and out went there,
Whither I cannot tell, ne where.

 When Captain Gobrius by an unlucky accident had received his
death's wound, heu me miserum exclamat, miserable man that I am,
(instead of other devotions) he cries out, shall I die before I see my
sweetheart Rhodanthe? Sic amor mortem, (saith mine author) aut
quicquid humanitus accidit, aspernatur, so love triumphs,
contemns, insults over death itself. Thirteen proper young men lost
their lives for that fair Hippodamias' sake, the daughter of
Onomaus, king of Elis: when that hard condition was proposed of
death or victory, they made no account of it, but courageously for
love died, till Pelops at last won her by a sleight. As many gallants
desperately adventured their dearest blood for Atalanta, the
daughter of Schenius, in hope of marriage, all vanquished and
overcame, till Hippomenes by a few golden apples happily
obtained his suit. Perseus, of old, fought with a sea monster for
Andromeda's sake; and our St. George freed the king's daughter of
Sabea (the golden legend is mine author) that was exposed to a
dragon, by a terrible combat. Our knights errant, and the Sir
Lancelots of these days, I hope will adventure as much for ladies'
favours, as the Squire of Dames, Knight of the Sun, Sir Bevis of 
Southampton, or that renowned peer,

 "Orlando, who long time had loved dear
Angelica the fair, and for her sake
About the world in nations far and near,
Did high attempts perform and undertake;"

he is a very dastard, a coward, a block and a beast, that will not do
as much, but they will sure, they will; for it is an ordinary thing for
these inamoratos of our time to say and do more, to stab their arms,
carouse in blood, or as that Thessalian Thero, that bit off his own
thumb, provocans rivalem ad hoc aemulandum, to make his co-
rival do as much. 'Tis frequent with them to challenge the field for
their lady and mistress' sake, to run a tilt,

 "That either bears (so furiously they meet)
The other down under the horses' feet,"

and then up and to it again,

"And with their axes both so sorely pour,
That neither plate nor mail sustain'd the stour,
But riveld wreak like rotten wood asunder,
And fire did flash like lightning after thunder;"

and in her quarrel, to fight so long "till their headpiece, bucklers be
all broken, and swords hacked like so many saws," for they must
not see her abused in any sort, 'tis blasphemy to speak against her, a
dishonour without all good respect to name her. 'Tis common with
these creatures, to drink healths upon their bare knees, though it
were a mile to the bottom, no matter of what mixture, off it comes.
If she bid them they will go barefoot to Jerusalem, to the great
Cham's court, to the East Indies, to fetch her a bird to wear in her
hat: and with Drake and Candish sail round about the world for her
sweet sake, adversis ventis, serve twice seven years, as Jacob did
for Rachel; do as much as Gesmunda, the daughter of Tancredus,
prince of Salerna, did for Guisardus, her true love, eat his heart
when he died; or as Artemisia drank her husband's bones beaten to
powder, and so bury him in herself, and endure more torments than
Theseus or Paris. Et his colitur Venus magis quam thure, et
victimis, with such sacrifices as these (as Aristaenetus holds) Venus
is well pleased. Generally they undertake any pain, any labour, any
toil, for their mistress' sake, love and admire a servant, not to her
alone, but to all her friends and followers, they hug and embrace
them for her sake; her dog, picture, and everything she wears, they
adore it as a relic. If any man come from her, they feast him,
reward him, will not be out of his company, do him all offices, still
remembering, still talking of her:

 "Nam si abest quod ames, praesto simulacra tamen sunt
Illius, et nomen dulce observatur ad aures."

 (Lucretius. "For if the object of your love be absent, her image is
present, and her sweet name is still familiar in my ears.")

The very carrier that comes from him to her is a most welcome
guest; and if he bring a letter, she will read it twenty times over,
and as Lucretia did by Euryalus, "kiss the letter a thousand times
together, and then read it:" And Chelidonia by Philonius, after
many sweet kisses, put the letter in her bosom,

"And kiss again, and often look thereon,
And stay the messenger that would be gone:"

And asked many pretty questions, over and over again, as how he
looked, what he did, and what he said? In a word,

 "Vult placere sese amicae, vult mihi, vult pedissequae,
Vult famulis, vult etiam ancillis, et catulo meo."

"He strives to please his mistress, and her maid,
Her servants, and her dog, and's well apaid."

If he get any remnant of hers, a busk-point, a feather of her fan, a
shoe-tie, a lace, a ring, a bracelet of hair,

 "Pignusque direptum lacertis; Aut digito male pertinaci,"

 (Hor. "Some token snatched from her arm or her gently resisting
finger.")

he wears it for a favour on his arm, in his hat, finger, or next his
heart. Her picture he adores twice a day, and for two hours together
will not look off it; as Laodamia did by Protesilaus, when he went
to war, "'sit at home with his picture before her;' a garter or a
bracelet of hers is more precious than any saint's relic," he lays it
up in his casket, (O blessed relic) and every day will kiss it: if in
her presence, his eye is never off her, and drink he will where she
drank, if it be possible, in that very place, &c. If absent, he will
walk in the walk, sit under that tree where she did use to sit, in that
bower, in that very seat,-- et foribus miser oscula figit, ( "And
distracted will imprint kisses on the doors.") many years after
sometimes, though she be far distant and dwell many miles off, he
loves yet to walk that way still, to have his chamber-window look
that way: to walk by that river's side, which (though far away) runs
by the house where she dwells, he loves the wind blows to that
coast.

 "O quoties dixi Zephyris properantibus illuc,
Felices pulchram visuri Amaryllada venti."

"O happy western winds that blow that way,
For you shall see my love's fair face to day."

He will send a message to her by the wind.

 "Vos aurae Alpinae, placidis de montibus aurae,
Haec illi portate," --
 (Fracastorius Naugerio. "Ye alpine winds, ye mountain breezes,
bear these gifts to her.")

 he desires to confer with some of her acquaintance, for his heart is
still with her, to talk of her, admiring and commending her,
lamenting, moaning, wishing himself anything for her sake, to have
opportunity to see her, O that he might but enjoy her presence! So
did Philostratus to his mistress, "O happy ground on which she
treads, and happy were I if she would tread upon me. I think her
countenance would make the rivers stand, and when she comes
abroad, birds will sing and come about her."

"Ridebunt valles, ridebunt obvia Tempe,
In florem viridis protinus ibi humus."

"The fields will laugh, the pleasant valleys burn,
And all the grass will into flowers turn."

Omnis Ambrosiam spirabit aura. "When she is in the meadow, she
is fairer than any flower, for that lasts but for a day, the river is
pleasing, but it vanisheth on a sudden, but thy flower doth not fade,
thy stream is greater than the sea. If I look upon the heaven,
methinks I see the sun fallen down to shine below, and thee to
shine in his place, whom I desire. If I look upon the night, methinks
I see two more glorious stars, Hesperus and thyself." A little after
he thus courts his mistress, "If thou goest forth of the city, the
protecting gods that keep the town will run after to gaze upon thee:
if thou sail upon the seas, as so many small boats, they will follow
thee: what river would not run into the sea?" Another, he sighs and
sobs, swears he hath Cor scissum, a heart bruised to powder,
dissolved and melted within him, or quite gone from him, to his
mistress' bosom belike, he is in an oven, a salamander in the fire, so
scorched with love's heat; he wisheth himself a saddle for her to sit
on, a posy for her to smell to, and it would not grieve him to be
hanged, if he might be strangled in her garters: he would willingly
die tomorrow, so that she might kill him with her own hands. Ovid
would be a flea, a gnat, a ring, Catullus a sparrow,

 "O si tecum ludere sicut ipsa possem,
Et tristes animi levare curas."

 ("Oh, if I might only dally with thee, and alleviate the wasting
sorrows of my mind.")

 Anacreon, a glass, a gown, a chain, anything,

"Sed speculum ego ipse fiam,
Ut me tuum usque cernas,
Et vestis ipse fiam,
Ut me tuum usque gestes.
Mutari et opto in undam,
Lavem tuos ut artus,
Nardus puella fiam,
Ut ego teipsum inungam,
Sim fascia in papillis,
Tuo et monile collo.
Fiamque calceus, me
Saltem ut pede usque calces."

 "But I a looking-glass would be,
Still to be look'd upon by thee,
Or I, my love, would be thy gown,
By thee to be worn up and down;
Or a pure well full to the brims,
That I might wash thy purer limbs:
Or, I'd be precious balm to 'noint,
With choicest care each choicest joint;
Or, if I might, I would be fain
About thy neck thy happy chain,
Or would it were my blessed hap
To be the lawn o'er thy fair pap.
Or would I were thy shoe, to be
Daily trod upon by thee."

O thrice happy man that shall enjoy her: as they that saw Hero in
Museus, and Salmacis to Hermaphroditus,

 --"Felices mater, &c. felix nutrix.--
Sed longe cunctis, longeque beatior ille,
Quem fructu sponsi et socii dignabere lecti."

The same passion made her break out in the comedy, Nae illae
fortunatae, sunt quae cum illo cubant, "happy are his bedfellows;"
and as she said of Cyprus, Beata quae illi uxor futura esset, blessed
is that woman that shall be his wife, nay, thrice happy she that shall
enjoy him but a night. Una nox Jovis sceptro aequiparanda, such a
night's lodging is worth Jupiter's sceptre.

 "Qualis nox erit illa, dii, deaeque,
Quam mollis thorus?"

"O what a blissful night would it be, how soft, how sweet a bed!"
She will adventure all her estate for such a night, for a nectarean, a
balsam kiss alone.

 "Qui te videt beatus est, Beatior qui te audiet,
Qui te potitur est Deus."

 ("He is happy who sees thee, more happy who hears, a god who
enjoys thee.")

The sultan of Sana's wife in Arabia, when she had seen
Vertomannus, that comely traveller, lamented to herself in this
manner, "O God, thou hast made this man whiter than the sun, but
me, mine husband, and all my children black; I would to God he
were my husband, or that I had such a son;" she fell a weeping, and
so impatient for love at last, that (as Potiphar's wife did by Joseph)
she would have had him gone in with her, she sent away Gazella,
Tegeia, Galzerana, her waiting-maids, loaded him with fair
promises and gifts, and wooed him with all the rhetoric she could,--
extremum hoc miserae da munus amanti, "grant this last request to
a wretched lover." But when he gave not consent, she would have
gone with him, and left all, to be his page, his servant, or his
lackey, Certa sequi charum corpus ut umbra solet, so that she
might enjoy him, threatening moreover to kill herself, &c. Men will
do as much and more for women, spend goods, lands, lives,
fortunes; kings will leave their crowns, as King John for Matilda
the nun at Dunmow.

 "But kings in this yet privileg'd may be,
I'll be a monk so I may live with thee."

The very Gods will endure any shame (atque aliquis de diis non
tristibus inquit, &c.) be a spectacle as Mars and Venus were, to all
the rest; so did Lucian's Mercury wish, and peradventure so dost
thou. They will adventure their lives with alacrity -- pro qua non
metuam mori -- nay more, pro qua non metuam bis mori, I will die
twice, nay, twenty times for her. If she die, there's no remedy, they
must die with her, they cannot help it. A lover in Calcagninus,
wrote this on his darling's tomb,

"Quincia obiit, sed non Quincia sola obiit,
Quincia obiit, sed cum Quincia et ipse obii;
Risus obit, obit gratia, lusus obit.
Nec mea nunc anima in pectore, at in tumulo est."

"Quincia my dear is dead, but not alone,
For I am dead, and with her I am gone:
Sweet smiles, mirth, graces, all with her do rest,
And my soul too, for 'tis not in my breast."

How many doting lovers upon the like occasion might say the
same? But these are toys in respect, they will hazard their very
souls for their mistress' sake.

"Atque aliquis interjuvenes miratus est, et verbum dixit,
Non ego in caelo cuperem Deus esse,
Nostram uxorem habens domi Hero."

"One said, to heaven would I not
 desire at all to go,
If that at mine own house I had
 such a fine wife as Hero."

Venus forsook heaven for Adonis' sake,-- caelo praefertur Adonis.
Old Janivere, in Chaucer, thought when he had his fair May he
should never go to heaven, he should live so merrily here on earth;
had I such a mistress, he protests,

 "Caelum diis ego non suum inviderem,
Sed sortem mihi dii meam inviderent."

"I would not envy their prosperity,
The gods should envy my felicity."

Another as earnestly desires to behold his sweetheart he will
adventure and leave all this, and more than this to see her alone.

 "Omnia quae patior mala si pensare velit fors,
Una aliqua nobis prosperitate, dii
Hoc precor, ut faciant, faciant me cernere coram,
Cor mihi captivum quae tenet hocce, deam."

"If all my mischiefs were recompensed
And God would give we what I requested,
I would my mistress' presence only seek,
Which doth mine heart in prison captive keep."

But who can reckon upon the dotage, madness, servitude and
blindness, the foolish phantasms and vanities of lovers, their
torments, wishes, idle attempts?

Yet for all this, amongst so many irksome, absurd, troublesome
symptoms, inconveniences, fantastical fits and passions which are
usually incident to such persons, there be some good and graceful
qualities in lovers, which this affection causeth. "As it makes wise
men fools, so many times it makes fools become wise; it makes
base fellows become generous, cowards courageous," as Cardan
notes out of Plutarch; "covetous, liberal and magnificent; clowns,
civil; cruel, gentle; wicked, profane persons, to become religious;
slovens, neat; churls, merciful; and dumb dogs, eloquent; your lazy
drones, quick and nimble." Feras mentes domat cupido, that fierce,
cruel and rude Cyclops Polyphemus sighed, and shed many a salt
tear for Galatea's sake. No passion causeth greater alterations, or
more vehement of joy or discontent. Plutarch. Sympos. lib. 5.
quaest. 1, saith, "that the soul of a man in love is full of perfumes
and sweet odours, and all manner of pleasing tones and tunes,
insomuch that it is hard to say (as he adds) whether love do mortal
men more harm than good." It adds spirits and makes them,
otherwise soft and silly, generous and courageous, Audacem
faciebat amor. Ariadne's love made Theseus so adventurous, and
Medea's beauty Jason so victorious; expectorat amor timorem.
Plato is of opinion that the love of Venus made Mars so valorous.
"A young man will be much abashed to commit any foul offence
that shall come to the hearing or sight of his mistress." As he that
desired of his enemy now dying, to lay him with his face upward,
ne amasius videret eum a tergo vulneratum, lest his sweetheart
should say he was a coward. "And if it were possible to have an
army consist of lovers, such as love, or are beloved, they would be
extraordinary valiant and wise in their government, modesty would
detain them from doing amiss, emulation incite them to do that
which is good and honest, and a few of them would overcome a
great company of others." There is no man so pusillanimous, so
very a dastard, whom love would not incense, make of a divine
temper, and an heroical spirit. As he said in like case, Tota ruat
caeli moles, non terreor, &c. Nothing can terrify, nothing can
dismay them. But as Sir Blandimor and Paridel, those two brave
fairy knights, fought for the love of fair Florimel in presence --

 "And drawing both their swords with rage anew,
Like two mad mastives each other slew,
And shields did share, and males did rash, and helms did hew;
So furiously each other did assail,
As if their souls at once they would have rent,
Out of their breasts, that streams of blood did trail
Adown as if their springs of life were spent,
That all the ground with purple blood was sprent,
And all their armour stain'd with bloody gore,
Yet scarcely once to breath would they relent.
So mortal was their malice and so sore,
That both resolved (than yield) to die before."

Every base swain in love will dare to do as much for his dear
mistress' sake. He will fight and fetch, Argivum Clypeum, that
famous buckler of Argos, to do her service, adventure at all,
undertake any enterprise. And as Serranus the Spaniard, then
Governor of Sluys, made answer to Marquess Spinola, if the enemy
brought 50,000 devils against him he would keep it. The nine
worthies, Oliver and Rowland, and forty dozen of peers are all in
him, he is all mettle, armour of proof, more than a man, and in this
case improved beyond himself. For as Agatho contends, a true
lover is wise, just, temperate, and valiant. "I doubt not, therefore,
but if a man had such an army of lovers" (as Castilio supposeth)
"he might soon conquer all the world, except by chance he met
with such another army of inamoratos to oppose it." For so perhaps
they might fight as that fatal dog and fatal hare in the heavens,
course one another round, and never make an end. Castilio thinks
Ferdinand King of Spain would never have conquered Granada,
had not Queen Isabel and her ladies been present at the siege: "It
cannot be expressed what courage the Spanish knights took, when
the ladies were present, a few Spaniards overcame a multitude of
Moors." They will undergo any danger whatsoever, as Sir Walter
Manny in Edward the Third's time, stuck full of ladies' favours,
fought like a dragon. For soli amantes, as Plato holds, pro amicis
mori appetunt, only lovers will die for their friends, and in their
mistress' quarrel. And for that cause he would have women follow
the camp, to be spectators and encouragers of noble actions: upon
such an occasion, the Squire of Dames himself, Sir Lancelot or Sir
Tristram, Caesar, or Alexander, shall not be more resolute or go
beyond them.

Not courage only doth love add, but as I said, subtlety, wit, and
many pretty devices, Namque dolos inspirat amor, fraudesque
ministrat, (Hyginus, l. 2. "For love both inspires us with
stratagems, and suggests to us frauds.") Jupiter in love with Leda,
and not knowing how to compass his desire, turned himself into a
swan, and got Venus to pursue him in the likeness of an eagle;
which she doing, for shelter, he fled to Leda's lap, et in ejus gremio
se collocavit, Leda embraced him, and so fell fast asleep, sed
dormientem Jupiter compressit, by which means Jupiter had his
will. Infinite such tricks love can devise, such fine feats in
abundance, with wisdom and wariness, quis fallere possit
amantem. (Virg. "Who can deceive a lover.") All manner of
civility, decency, compliment and good behaviour, plus solis et
leporis, polite graces and merry conceits. Boccaccio hath a pleasant
tale to this purpose, which he borrowed from the Greeks, and
which Beroaldus hath turned into Latin, Bebelius in verse, of
Cymon and Iphigenia. This Cymon was a fool, a proper man of
person, and the governor of Cyprus' son, but a very ass, insomuch
that his father being ashamed of him, sent him to a farmhouse he
had in the country, to be brought up. Where by chance, as his
manner was, walking alone, he espied a gallant young
gentlewoman, named Iphigenia, a burgomaster's daughter of
Cyprus, with her maid, by a brook side in a little thicket, fast asleep
in her smock, where she had newly bathed herself: "When Cymon
saw her, he stood leaning on his staff, gaping on her immovable,
and in amaze;" at last he fell so far in love with the glorious object,
that he began to rouse himself up, to bethink what he was, would
needs follow her to the city, and for her sake began to be civil, to
learn to sing and dance, to play on instruments, and got all those
gentlemanlike qualities and compliments in a short space, which
his friends were most glad of. In brief, he became, from an idiot
and a clown, to be one of the most complete gentlemen in Cyprus,
did many valorous exploits, and all for the love of mistress
Iphigenia. In a word, I may say thus much of them all, let them be
never so clownish, rude and horrid, Grobians and sluts, if once they
be in love they will be most neat and spruce; for, Omnibus rebus, et
nitidis nitoribus antevenit amor, they will follow the fashion, begin
to trick up, and to have a good opinion of themselves, venustatem
enim mater Venus; a ship is not so long a rigging as a young
gentlewoman a trimming up herself against her sweetheart comes.
A painter's shop, a flowery meadow, no so gracious aspect in
nature's storehouse as a young maid, nubilis puella, a Novitsa or
Venetian bride, that looks for a husband, or a young man that is her
suitor; composed looks, composed gait, clothes, gestures, actions,
all composed; all the graces, elegances in the world are in her face.
Their best robes, ribands, chains, jewels, lawns, linens, laces,
spangles, must come on, praeter quam res patitur student
elegantiae, they are beyond all measure coy, nice, and too curious
on a sudden; 'tis all their study, all their business, how to wear their
clothes neat, to be polite and terse, and to set out themselves. No
sooner doth a young man see his sweetheart coming, but he smugs
up himself, pulls up his cloak now fallen about his shoulders, ties
his garters, points, sets his band, cuffs, slicks his hair, twires his
beard, &c. When Mercury was to come before his mistress,

 --"Chlamydemque ut pendeat apte
Collocat, ut limbus totumque appareat aurum."

"He put his cloak in order, that the lace.
 And hem, and gold-work, all might have his grace."

Salmacis would not be seen of Hermaphroditus, till she had
spruced up herself first,

 "Nec tamen ante adiit, etsi properabat adire,
Quam se composuit, quam circumspexit amictus,
Et finxit vultum, et meruit formosa videri."

"Nor did she come, although 'twas her desire,
Till she compos'd herself, and trimm'd her tire,
And set her looks to make him to admire."

Venus had so ordered the matter, that when her son Aeneas was to
appear before Queen Dido, he was

"Os humerosque deo similis (namque ipsa decoram
Caesariem nato genetrix, lumenque juventae
Purpureum et laetos oculis afflarat honores.")

like a god, for she was the tire-woman herself, to set him out with
all natural and artificial impostures. As mother Mammea did her
son Heliogabalus, new chosen emperor, when he was to be seen of
the people first. When the hirsute cyclopical Polyphemus courted
Galatea;

 "Jamque tibi formae, jamque est tibi cura placendi,
Jam rigidos pectis rastris Polypheme capillos,
Jam libet hirsutam tibi falce recidere barbam,
Et spectare feros in aqua et componere vultus."

"And then he did begin to prank himself,
To plait and comb his head, and beard to shave,
And look his face i' th' water as a glass,
And to compose himself for to be brave."

He was upon a sudden now spruce and keen, as a new ground
hatchet. He now began to have a good opinion of his own features
and good parts, now to be a gallant.

"Jam Galatea veni, nec munera despice nostra,
Certe ego me novi, liquidaque in imagine vidi
Nuper aquae, placuitque mihi mea forma videnti."

"Come now, my Galatea, scorn me not,
Nor my poor presents; for but yesterday
I saw myself i' th' water, and methought
Full fair I was, then scorn me not I say."

 "Non sum adeo informis, nuper me in littore vidi,
Cum placidum ventis staret mare" --

 (Virg. E. l. 2. "I am not so deformed, I lately saw myself in the
tranquil glassy sea, as I stood upon the shore.")

'Tis the common humour of all suitors to trick up themselves, to be
prodigal in apparel, pure lotus, neat, combed, and curled, with
powdered hair, comptus et calimistratus, with a long love-lock, a
flower in his ear, perfumed gloves, rings, scarves, feathers, points,
&c. as if he were a prince's Ganymede, with everyday new suits, as
the fashion varies; going as if he trod upon eggs, as Heinsius writ to
Primierus, "if once he be besotten on a wench, he must like awake
at nights, renounce his book, sigh and lament, now and then weep
for his hard hap, and mark above all things what hats, bands,
doublets, breeches, are in fashion, how to cut his beard, and wear
his locks, to turn up his mustachios, and curl his head, prune his
pickedevant, or if he wear it abroad, that the east side be
correspondent to the west;" he may be scoffed at otherwise, as
Julian that apostate emperor was for wearing a long hirsute goatish
beard, fit to make ropes with, as in his Mysopogone, or that
apologetical oration he made at Antioch to excuse himself, he doth
ironically confess, it hindered his kissing, nam non licuit inde pura
puris, eoque suavioribus labra labris adjungere, but he did not
much esteem it, as it seems by the sequel, de accipiendis dandisve
osculis non laboro, yet (to follow mine author) it may much
concern a young lover, he must be more respectful in this behalf,
"he must be in league with an excellent tailor, barber,"

 "Tonsorem pucrum sed arte talem,
Qualis nec Thalamis fuit Neronis;"

"have neat shoe-ties, points, garters, speak in print, walk in print,
eat and drink in print, and that which is all in all, he must be mad in
print."

Amongst other good qualities an amorous fellow is endowed with,
he must learn to sing and dance, play upon some instrument or
other, as without all doubt he will, if he be truly touched with this
loadstone of love. For as Erasmus hath it, Musicam docet amor et
Poesia, love will make them musicians, and to compose ditties,
madrigals, elegies, love sonnets, and sing them to several pretty
tunes, to get all good qualities may be had. Jupiter perceived
Mercury to be in love with Philologia, because he learned
languages, polite speech, (for Suadela herself was Venus' daughter,
as some write) arts and sciences, quo virgini placeret, all to
ingratiate himself, and please his mistress. 'Tis their chiefest study
to sing, dance; and without question, so many gentlemen and
gentlewomen would not be so well qualified in this kind, if love did
not incite them. "Who," saith Castilio, "would learn to play, or give
his mind to music, learn to dance, or make so many rhymes, love-
songs, as most do, but for women's sake, because they hope by that
means to purchase their good wills, and win their favour?" We see
this daily verified in our young women and wives, they that being
maids took so much pains to sing, play, and dance, with such cost
and charge to their parents, to get those graceful qualities, now
being married will scarce touch an instrument, they care not for it.
Constantine agricult. lib. 11. cap. 18, makes Cupid himself to be a
great dancer; by the same token as he was capering amongst the
gods, "he flung down a bowl of nectar, which distilling upon the
white rose, ever since made it red:" and Calistratus, by the help of
Dedalus, about Cupid's statue made a many of young wenches still
a dancing, to signify belike that Cupid was much affected with it,
as without all doubt he was. For at his and Psyche's wedding, the
gods being present to grace the feast, Ganymede filled nectar in
abundance (as Apuleius describes it) , Vulcan was the cook, the
Hours made all fine with roses and flowers, Apollo played on the
harp, the Muses sang to it, sed suavi Musicae super ingressa Venus
saltavit, but his mother Venus danced to his and their sweet
content. Witty Lucian in that pathetical love passage, or pleasant
description of Jupiter's stealing of Europa, and swimming from
Phoenicia to Crete, makes the sea calm, the winds hush, Neptune
and Amphitrite riding in their chariot to break the waves before
them, the tritons dancing round about, with every one a torch, the
sea-nymphs half naked, keeping time on dolphins' backs, and
singing Hymeneus, Cupid nimbly tripping on the top of the waters,
and Venus herself coming after in a shell, strewing roses and
flowers on their heads. Praxiteles, in all his pictures of love, feigns
Cupid ever smiling, and looking upon dancers; and in St. Mark's in
Rome (whose work I know not) , one of the most delicious pieces,
is a many of satyrs dancing about a wench asleep. So that dancing
still is as it were a necessary appendix to love matters. Young
lasses are never better pleased than when as upon a holiday, after
evensong, they may meet their sweethearts, and dance about a
maypole, or in a town-green under a shady elm. Nothing so
familiar in France, as for citizens' wives and maids to dance a
round in the streets, and often too, for want of better instruments, to
make good music of their own voices, and dance after it. Yea many
times this love will make old men and women that have more toes
than teeth, dance,-- "John, come kiss me now," mask and mum; for
Comus and Hymen love masks, and all such merriments above
measure, will allow men to put on women's apparel in some cases,
and promiscuously to dance, young and old, rich and poor,
generous and base, of all sorts. Paulus Jovius taxeth Augustine
Niphus the philosopher, "for that being an old man, and a public
professor, a father of many children, he was so mad for the love of
a young maid (that which many of his friends were ashamed to see)
, an old gouty fellow, yet would dance after fiddlers." Many
laughed him to scorn for it, but this omnipotent love would have it
so.

 "Hyacinthino bacillo
Properans amor, me adegit
Violenter ad sequendum."

"Love hasty with his purple staff did make
Me follow and the dance to undertake."

And 'tis no news this, no indecorum; for why? a good reason may
be given of it. Cupid and death met both in an inn; and being
merrily disposed, they did exchange some arrows from either
quiver; ever since young men die, and oftentimes old men dote --
Sic moritur Juvenis, sic moribundus amat. (Joach. Bellius Epig.
"Thus youth dies, thus in death he loves.") And who can then
withstand it? If once we be in love, young or old, though our teeth
shake in our heads, like virginal jacks, or stand parallel asunder like
the arches of a bridge, there is no remedy, we must dance
trenchmore for a need, over tables, chairs, and stools, &c. And
princum prancum is a fine dance. Plutarch, Sympos. 1. quaest. 5.
doth in some sort excuse it, and telleth us moreover in what sense,
Musicam docet amor, licet prius fuerit rudis, how love makes them
that had no skill before learn to sing and dance; he concludes, 'tis
only that power and prerogative love hath over us. "Love" (as he
holds) "will make a silent man speak, a modest man most officious;
dull, quick; slow, nimble; and that which is most to be admired, a
hard, base, untractable churl, as fire doth iron in a smith's forge,
free, facile, gentle, and easy to be entreated." Nay, 'twill make him
prodigal in the other extreme, and give a hundred sesterces for a
night's lodging, as they did of old to Lais of Corinth, or ducenta
drachmarum millia pro unica nocte, as Mundus to Paulina, spend
all his fortunes (as too many do in like case) to obtain his suit. For
which cause many compare love to wine, which makes men jovial
and merry, frolic and sad, whine, sing, dance, and what not.

But above all the other symptoms of lovers, this is not lightly to be
overpassed, that likely of what condition soever, if once they be in
love, they turn to their ability, rhymers, ballad makers, and poets.
For as Plutarch saith, "They will be witnesses and trumpeters of
their paramours' good parts, bedecking them with verses and
commendatory songs, as we do statues with gold, that they may be
remembered and admired of all." Ancient men will dote in this kind
sometimes as well as the rest; the heat of love will thaw their
frozen affections, dissolve the ice of age, and so far enable them,
though they be sixty years of age above the girdle, to be scarce
thirty beneath. Jovianus Pontanus makes an old fool rhyme, and
turn poetaster to please his mistress.

 "Ne ringas Mariana, meos me dispice canos,
De sene nam juvenem dia referre potes," &c.

"Sweet Marian do not mine age disdain,
For thou canst make an old man young again."

They will be still singing amorous songs and ditties (if young
especially) , and cannot abstain though it be when they go to, or
should be at church. We have a pretty story to this purpose in
Westmonasteriensis, an old writer of ours (if you will believe it)
An. Dom. 1012. at Colewiz in Saxony, on Christmas eve a
company of young men and maids, whilst the priest was at mass in
the church, were singing catches and love songs in the churchyard,
he sent to them to make less noise, but they sung on still: and if you
will, you shall have the very song itself.

"Equitabat homo per sylvam frondosam,
Ducebatque secum Meswinden formosam.
Quid stamus, cur non imus?"

"A fellow rid by the greenwood side,
And fair Meswinde was his bride,
Why stand we so, and do not go?"

This they sung, he chaft, till at length, impatient as he was, he
prayed to St. Magnus, patron of the church, they might all three
sing and dance till that time twelvemonth, and so they did without
meat and drink, wearisomeness or giving over, till at year's end
they ceased singing, and were absolved by Herebertus archbishop
of Cologne. They will in all places be doing thus, young folks
especially, reading love stories, talking of this or that young man,
such a fair maid, singing, telling or hearing lascivious tales,
scurrilous tunes, such objects are their sole delight, their continual
meditation, and as Guastavinius adds, Com. in 4. Sect. 27. Prov.
Arist. ob seminis abundantiam crebrae cogitationes, veneris
frequens recordatio et pruriens voluptas, &c. an earnest longing
comes hence, pruriens corpus, pruriens anima, amorous conceits,
tickling thoughts, sweet and pleasant hopes; hence it is, they can
think, discourse willingly, or speak almost of no other subject. 'Tis
their only desire, if it may be done by art, to see their husband's
picture in a glass, they'll give anything to know when they shall be
married, how many husbands they shall have, by cromnyomantia, a
kind of divination with onions laid on the altar on Christmas eve, or
by fasting on St. Anne's eve or night, to know who shall be their
first husband, or by amphitormantia, by beans in a cake, &c., to
burn the same. This love is the cause of all good conceits, neatness,
exornations, plays, elegancies, delights, pleasant expressions, sweet
motions, and gestures, joys, comforts, exultancies, and all the
sweetness of our life, qualis jam vita foret, aut quid jucundi sine
aurea Venere? Emoriar cum ista non amplius mihi cura fuerit, let
me live no longer than I may love, saith a mad merry fellow in
Mimnermus. This love is that salt that seasoneth our harsh and dull
labours, and gives a pleasant relish to our other unsavoury
proceedings, Absit amor, surgunt tenebrae, torpedo, veternum,
pestis, &c. All our feasts almost, masques, mummings, banquets,
merry meetings, weddings, pleasing songs, fine tunes, poems, love
stories, plays, comedies, Atellans, jigs, Fescennines, elegies, odes,
&c. proceed hence. Danaus, the son of Belus, at his daughter's
wedding at Argos, instituted the first plays (some say) that ever
were heard of symbols, emblems, impresses, devices, if we shall
believe Jovius, Coutiles, Paradine, Camillus de Camillis, may be
ascribed to it. Most of our arts and sciences, painting amongst the
rest, was first invented, saith Patritius ex amoris beneficio, for
love's sake. For when the daughter of Deburiades the Sycionian,
was to take leave of her sweetheart now going to wars, ut desiderio
ejus minus tabesceret, to comfort herself in his absence, she took
his picture with coal upon a wall, as the candle gave the shadow,
which her father admiring, perfected afterwards, and it was the first
picture by report that ever was made. And long after, Sycion for
painting, carving, statuary, music, and philosophy, was preferred
before all the cities in Greece. Apollo was the first inventor of
physic, divination, oracles; Minerva found out weaving, Vulcan
curious ironwork, Mercury letters, but who prompted all this into
their heads? Love, Nunquam talia invenissent, nisi talia
adamassent, they loved such things, or some party, for whose sake
they were undertaken at first. 'Tis true, Vulcan made a most
admirable brooch or necklace, which long after Axion and
Temenus, Phegius' sons, for the singular worth of it, consecrated to
Apollo at Delphos, but Pharyllus the tyrant stole it away, and
presented it to Ariston's wife, on whom he miserably doted
(Parthenius tells the story out of Phylarchus) ; but why did Vulcan
make this excellent Ouch? to give Hermione Cadmus' wife, whom
he dearly loved. All our tilts and tournaments, orders of the garter,
golden fleece, &c.-- Nobilitas sub amore jacet -- owe their
beginnings to love, and many of our histories. By this means, saith
Jovius, they would express their loving minds to their mistress, and
to the beholders. 'Tis the sole subject almost of poetry, all our
invention tends to it, all our songs, whatever those old Anacreons:
(and therefore Hesiod makes the Muses and Graces still follow
Cupid, and as Plutarch holds, Menander and the rest of the poets
were love's priests,) all our Greek and Latin epigrammatists, love
writers. Antony Diogenes the most ancient, whose epitome we find
in Phocius Bibliotheca, Longus Sophista, Eustathius, Achilles,
Tatius, Aristaenetus, Heliodorus, Plato, Plutarch, Lucian,
Parthenius, Theodorus, Prodromus, Ovid, Catullus, Tibullus, &c.
Our new Ariostoes, Boyards, Authors of Arcadia, Urania, Faerie
Queen, &c. Marullus, Leotichius, Angerianus, Stroza, Secundus,
Capellanus, &c. with the rest of those facete modern poets, have
written in this kind, are but as so many symptoms of love. Their
whole books are a synopsis or breviary of love, the portuous of
love, legends of lovers' lives and deaths, and of their memorable
adventures, nay more, quod leguntur, quod laudantur amori
debent, as Nevisanus the lawyer holds, "there never was any
excellent poet that invented good fables, or made laudable verses,
which was not in love himself;" had he not taken a quill from
Cupid's wings, he could never have written so amorously as he did.

 "Cynthia te vatem fecit lascive Properti,
Ingenium Galli pulchra Lycoris habet.
Fama est arguti Nemesis formosa Tibulli,
Lesbia dictavit docte Catulle tibi.
Non me Pelignus, nec spernet Mantua vatem,
Si qua Corinna mihi, si quis Alexis erit."

"Wanton Propertius and witty Gallus,
Subtile Tibullus, and learned Catullus,
It was Cynthia, Lesbia, Lychoris,
That made you poets all; and if Alexis,
Or Corinna chance my paramour to be,
Virgil and Ovid shall not despise me."

 "Non me carminibus vincet nec
Thraceus Orpheus, Nec Linus."

 (Virg. Eclog. 4. "None shall excel me in poetry, neither the
Thracian Orpheus, nor Apollo.")

Petrarch's Laura made him so famous, Astrophel's Stella, and
Jovianus Pontanus' mistress was the cause of his roses, violets,
lilies, nequitiae, blanditiae, joci, decor, nardus, ver, corolla, thus,
Mars, Pallas, Venus, Charis, crocum, Laurus, unguentem, costum,
lachrymae, myrrha, musae, &c. and the rest of his poems; why are
Italians at this day generally so good poets and painters? Because
every man of any fashion amongst them hath his mistress. The very
rustics and hog-rubbers, Menalcas and Corydon, qui faetant de
stercore equino, those fulsome knaves, if once they taste of this
love-liquor, are inspired in an instant. Instead of those accurate
emblems, curious impresses, gaudy masques, tilts, tournaments,
&c., they have their wakes, Whitsun-ales, shepherd's feasts,
meetings on holidays, country dances, roundelays, writing their
names on trees, true lover's knots, pretty gifts.

"With tokens, hearts divided, and half rings,
Shepherds in their loves are as coy as kings."

Choosing lords, ladies, kings, queens, and valentines, &c., they go
by couples,

"Corydon's Phillis, Nysa and Mopsus,
With dainty Dousibel and Sir Tophus."

Instead of odes, epigrams and elegies, &c., they have their ballads,
country tunes, "O the broom, the bonny, bonny broom," ditties and
songs, "Bess a belle, she doth excel," -- they must write likewise
and indite all in rhyme.

 "Thou honeysuckle of the hawthorn hedge,
Vouchsafe in Cupid's cup my heart to pledge;
My heart's dear blood, sweet Cis is thy carouse
Worth all the ale in Gammer Gubbin's house,
I say no more, affairs call me away,
My father's horse for provender doth stay,
Be thou the Lady Cressetlight to me,
Sir Trolly Lolly will I prove to thee,
Written in haste, farewell my cowslip sweet,
Pray let's a Sunday at the alehouse meet."

Your most grim stoics and severe philosophers will melt away with
this passion, and if Atheneus belie them not, Aristippus,
Apollodorus, Antiphanes, &c., have made love-songs and
commentaries of their mistress' praises, orators write epistles,
princes give titles, honours, what not? Xerxes gave to Themistocles
Lampsacus to find him wine, Magnesia for bread, and Myunte for
the rest of his diet. The Persian kings allotted whole cities to like
use, haec civitas mulieri redimiculum praebeat, haec in collum,
haec in crines, one whole city served to dress her hair, another her
neck, a third her hood. Ahasuerus would have given Esther half his
empire, and Herod bid Herodias "ask what she would, she should
have it." Caligula gave 100,000 sesterces to his courtesan at first
word, to buy her pins, and yet when he was solicited by the senate
to bestow something to repair the decayed walls of Rome for the
commonwealth's good, he would give but 6000 sesterces at most.
Dionysius, that Sicilian tyrant, rejected all his privy councillors,
and was so besotted on Mirrha his favourite and mistress, that he
would bestow no office, or in the most weightiest business of the
kingdom do aught without her especial advice, prefer, depose,
send, entertain no man, though worthy and well deserving, but by
her consent; and he again whom she commended, howsoever unfit,
unworthy, was as highly approved. Kings and emperors, instead of
poems, build cities; Adrian built Antinoa in Egypt, besides
constellations, temples, altars, statues, images, &c., in the honour
of his Antinous. Alexander bestowed infinite sums to set out his
Hephestion to all eternity. Socrates professeth himself love's
servant, ignorant in all arts and sciences, a doctor alone in love
matters, et quum alienarum rerum omnium scientiam diffiteretur,
saith Maximus Tyrius, his sectator, hujus negotii professor, &c.,
and this he spake openly, at home and abroad, at public feasts, in
the academy, in Pyraeo, Lycaeo, sub Platano, &c., the very
bloodhound of beauty, as he is styled by others. But I conclude
there is no end of love's symptoms, 'tis a bottomless pit. Love is
subject to no dimensions; not to be surveyed by any art or engine:
and besides, I am of Haedus' mind, "no man can discourse of love
matters, or judge of them aright, that hath not made trial in his own
person," or as Aeneas Sylvius adds, "hath not a little doted, been
mad or lovesick himself." I confess I am but a novice, a
contemplator only, Nescio quid sit amor nec amo ("I am not in
love, nor do I know what love may be.") I have a tincture; for why
should I lie, dissemble or excuse it, yet homo sum, &c., not
altogether inexpert in this subject, non sum praeceptor amandi, and
what I say, is merely reading, ex altorum forsan ineptiis, by mine
own observation, and others' relation.





MEMB. IV. Prognostics of Love-Melancholy.

What fires, torments, cares, jealousies, suspicions, fears, griefs,
anxieties, accompany such as are in love, I have sufficiently said:
the next question is, what will be the event of such miseries, what
they foretell. Some are of opinion that this love cannot be cured,
Nullis amor est medicabilis herbis, it accompanies them to the last,
Idem amor exitio est pecori pecorisque magistro. "The same
passion consume both the sheep and the shepherd," and is so
continuate, that by no persuasion almost it may be relieved. "Bid
me not love," said Euryalus, "bid the mountains come down into
the plains, bid the rivers run back to their fountains; I can as soon
leave to love, as the sun leave his course;"

 "Et prius aequoribus pisces, et montibus umbrae,
Et volucres deerunt sylvis, et murmura ventis,
Quam mihi discedent formosae Amaryllidis ignes."

"First seas shall want their fish, the mountains shade
Woods singing birds, the wind's murmur shall fade,
Than my fair Amaryllis' love allay'd."

Bid me not love, bid a deaf man hear, a blind man see, a dumb
speak, lame run, counsel can do no good, a sick man cannot relish,
no physic can ease me. Non prosunt domino quae prosunt omnibus
artes. As Apollo confessed, and Jupiter himself could not be cured.

 "Omnes humanos curat medicina dolores,
Solus amor morbi non habet artificem."

"Physic can soon cure every disease,
Excepting love that can it not appease."

But whether love may be cured or no, and by what means, shall be
explained in his place; in the meantime, if it take his course, and be
not otherwise eased or amended, it breaks out into outrageous often
and prodigious events. Amor et Liber violenti dii sunt, as Tatius
observes, et eiusque animum incendunt, ut pudoris oblivisci cogant,
love and Bacchus are so violent gods, so furiously rage in our
minds, that they make us forget all honesty, shame, and common
civility. For such men ordinarily, as are thoroughly possessed with
this humour, become insensati et insani, for it is amor insanus, as
the poet calls it, beside themselves, and as I have proved, no better
than beasts, irrational, stupid, headstrong, void of fear of God or
men, they frequently forswear themselves, spend, steal, commit
incests, rapes, adulteries, murders, depopulate towns, cities,
countries, to satisfy their lust.

 "A devil 'tis, and mischief such doth work,
As never yet did Pagan, Jew, or Turk."

The wars of Troy may be a sufficient witness; and as Appian, lib. 5.
hist, saith of Antony and Cleopatra, "Their love brought themselves
and all Egypt into extreme and miserable calamities," "the end of
her is as bitter as wormwood, and as sharp as a two-edged sword,"
Prov. v. 4, 5. "Her feet go down to death, her steps lead on to hell.
She is more bitter than death," (Eccles. vii. 28.) "and the sinner
shall be taken by her." Qui in amore praecipitavit, pejus perit,
quam qui saxo salit. "He that runs headlong from the top of a rock
is not in so bad a case as he that falls into this gulf of love." "For
hence," saith Platina, "comes repentance, dotage, they lose
themselves, their wits, and make shipwreck of their fortunes
altogether:" madness, to make away themselves and others, violent
death. Prognosticatio est talis, saith Gordonius, si non succurratur
iis, aut in maniam cadunt, aut moriuntur; the prognostication is,
they will either run mad, or die. "For if this passion continue," saith
Aelian Montaltus, "it makes the blood hot, thick, and black; and if
the inflammation get into the brain, with continual meditation and
waking, it so dries it up, that madness follows, or else they make
away themselves," O Corydon, Corydon, quae te dementia cepit?
(Virg. Egl. 2. "Oh Corydon, Corydon! what madness possesses
you?") Now, as Arnoldus adds, it will speedily work these effects,
if it be not presently helped; "They will pine away, run mad, and
die upon a sudden;" Facile incidunt in maniam, saith Valescus,
quickly mad, nisi succurratur, if good order be not taken,

 "Ehou triste jugum quisquis amoris habet,
Is prius se norit se periisse perit."

"Oh heavy yoke of love, which whoso bears,
Is quite undone, and that at unawares."

So she confessed of herself in the poet,

 --"insaniam priusquam quis sentiat,
Vix pili intervallo a furore absum."

"I shall be mad before it be perceived,
A hair-breadth off scarce am I, now distracted."

As mad as Orlando for his Angelica, or Hercules for his Hylas,

"At ille ruebat quo pedes ducebant, furibundus,
Nam illi saevus Deus intus jecur laniabat."

"He went he car'd not whither, mad he was,
The cruel God so tortured him, alas!"

At the sight of Hero I cannot tell how many ran mad,

 "Alius vulnus celans insanit pulchritudine puellae."

"And whilst he doth conceal his grief,
Madness comes on him like a thief."

Go to Bedlam for examples. It is so well known in every village,
how many have either died for love, or voluntary made away
themselves, that I need not much labour to prove it: Nec modus aut
requies nisi mors reperitur amoris: death is the common
catastrophe to such persons.

 "Mori mihi contingat, non enim alia
Liberatio ab aeramnis fuerit ullo paeto istis."

"Would I were dead, for nought, God knows,
But death can rid me of these woes."

As soon as Euryalus departed from Senes, Lucretia, his paramour,
"never looked up, no jests could exhilarate her sad mind, no joys
comfort her wounded and distressed soul, but a little after she fell
sick and died." But this is a gentle end, a natural death, such 
persons commonly make away themselves.

 --"proprioque in sanguine laetus,
Indignantem animam vacuas elludit in auras;"

so did Dido; Sed moriamur ait, sic sic juvat ire per umbras; ("But
let me die, she says, thus; thus it is better to descend to the
shades.") Pyramus and Thisbe, Medea, Coresus and Callirhoe,
Theagines the philosopher, and many myriads besides, and so will
ever do,

 --"et mihi fortis
Est manus, est et amor, dabit hic in vulnera vires."

"Whoever heard a story of more woe,
Than that of Juliet and her Romeo?"

Read Parthenium in Eroticis, and Plutarch's amatorias narrationes,
or love stories, all tending almost to this purpose. Valleriola, lib. 2.
observ. 7, hath a lamentable narration of a merchant, his patient,
"that raving through impatience of love, had he not been watched,
would every while have offered violence to himself." Amatus
Lusitanus, cent. 3. car. 56, hath such another story, and Felix
Plater, med. observ. lib. 1. a third of a young gentleman that studied
physic, and for the love of a doctor's daughter, having no hope to
compass his desire, poisoned himself, anno 1615. A barber in
Frankfort, because his wench was betrothed to another, cut his own
throat. At Neoburg, the same year, a young man, because he could
not get her parents' consent, killed his sweetheart, and afterward
himself, desiring this of the magistrate, as he gave up the ghost,
that they might be buried in one grave, Quodque rogis superest una
requiescat in urna, which Gismunda besought of Tancredus, her
father, that she might be in like sort buried with Guiscardus, her
lover, that so their bodies might lie together in the grave, as their
souls wander about Campos lugentes in the Elysian fields,-- quos
durus amor crudeli tabe peredit, ("Whom cruel love with its
wasting power destroyed.") in a myrtle grove

 --"et myrtea circum
Sylva tegit: curae non ipsa in morte relinquunt."

 ("And a myrtle grove overshadow thee; nor do cares relinquish
thee even in death itself.")

You have not yet heard the worst, they do not offer violence to
themselves in this rage of lust, but unto others, their nearest and
dearest friends. Catiline killed his only son, misitque ad orci
pallida, lethi obnubila, obsita tenebris loca, for the love of Aurelia
Oristella, quod ejus nuptias vivo filio recusaret. Laodice, the sister
of Mithridates, poisoned her husband, to give content to a base
fellow whom she loved. Alexander, to please Thais, a concubine of
his, set Persepolis on fire. Nereus' wife, a widow, and lady of
Athens, for the love of a Venetian gentleman, betrayed the city; and
he for her sake murdered his wife, the daughter of a nobleman in
Venice. Constantine Despota made away Catherine, his wife,
turned his son Michael and his other children out of doors, for the
love of a base scrivener's daughter in Thessalonica, with whose
beauty he was enamoured. Leucophria betrayed the city where she
dwelt, for her sweetheart's sake, that was in the enemies' camp.
Pithidice, the governor's daughter of Methinia, for the love of
Achilles, betrayed the whole island to him, her father's enemy.
Diognetus did as much in the city where he dwelt, for the love of
Policrita, Medea for the love of Jason, she taught him how to tame
the fire-breathing brass-feeted bulls, and kill the mighty dragon that
kept the golden fleece, and tore her little brother Absyrtus in
pieces, that her father. Aethes might have something to detain him,
while she ran away with her beloved Jason, &c. Such acts and
scenes hath this tragicomedy of love.





MEMB. V.

SUBSECT. 1.-- Cure of Love-Melancholy, by Labour, Diet, Physic,
Fasting, &c.

Although it be controverted by some, whether love-melancholy
may be cured, because it is so irresistible and violent a passion; for
as you know,

 --"facilis descensus Averni;
Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras;
Hic labor, hoc opus est." --

"It is an easy passage down to hell,
But to come back, once there, you cannot well."

Yet without question, if it be taken in time, it may be helped, and
by many good remedies amended. Avicenna, lib. 3. Fen. cap. 23. et
24. sets down seven compendious ways how this malady may be
eased, altered, and expelled. Savanarola 9. principal observations,
Jason Pratensis prescribes eight rules besides physic, how this
passion may be tamed, Laurentius 2. main precepts, Arnoldus,
Valleriola, Montaltus, Hildesheim, Langius, and others inform us
otherwise, and yet all tending to, the same purpose. The sum of
which I will briefly epitomise, (for I light my candle from their
torches) and enlarge again upon occasion, as shall seem best to me,
and that after mine own method. The first rule to be observed in
this stubborn and unbridled passion, is exercise and diet. It is an old
and well-known, sentence, Sine Cerere et Saccho friget Venus
(love grows cool without bread and wine) . As an idle sedentary
life, liberal feeding, are great causes of it, so the opposite, labour,
slender and sparing diet, with continual business, are the best and
most ordinary means to prevent it.

"Otio si tollas, periere Cupidinis artes,
Contemptaeque jacent, et sine luce faces."

"Take idleness away, and put to flight
Are Cupid's arts, his torches give no light."

Minerva, Diana, Vesta, and the nine Muses were not enamoured at
all, because they never were idle.

 "Frustra blanditae appulistis ad has,
Frustra nequitiae venistis ad has,
Frustra delitiae obsidebitis has,
Frustra has illecebrae, et procacitates,
Et suspiria, et oscula, et susurri,
Et quisquis male sana corda amantum
Blandis ebria fascinat venenis."

"In vain are all your flatteries,
In vain are all your knaveries,
Delights, deceits, procacities,
Sighs, kisses, and conspiracies,
And whate'er is done by art,
To bewitch a lover's heart."

'Tis in vain to set upon those that are busy. 'Tis Savanarola's third
rule, Occupari in multis et magnis negotiis, and Avicenna's precept,
cap. 24. Cedit amor rebus; res, age tutus eris. (Ovid lib. 1. remed.
"Love yields to business; be employed, and you'll be safe.") To be
busy still, and as Guianerius enjoins, about matters of great
moment, if it may be. Magninus adds, "Never to be idle but at the
hours of sleep."

 --"et ni
Poscas ante diem librum cum lumine, si non
Intendas animum studiis, et rebus honestis,
Invidia vel amore miser torquebere." --

"For if thou dost not ply thy book,
By candlelight to study bent,
Employ'd about some honest thing,
Envy or love shall thee torment."

No better physic than to be always occupied, seriously intent.

 "Cur in penates rarius tenues subit,
Haec delicatas eligens pestis domus,
Mediumque sanos vulgus affectuss tenet?" &c.

"Why dost thou ask, poor folks are often free,
And dainty places still molested be?"

Because poor people fare coarsely, work hard, go wolward and
bare. Non habet unde suum paupertas pascat amorem. ("Poverty
has not the means of feeding her passion.") Guianerius therefore
prescribes his patient "to go with hair-cloth next his skin, to go
barefooted, and barelegged in cold weather, to whip himself now
and then, as monks do, but above all to fast." Not with sweet wine,
mutton and pottage, as many of those tender-bellies do, howsoever
they put on Lenten faces, and whatsoever they pretend, but from all
manner of meat. Fasting is an all-sufficient remedy of itself; for, as
Jason Pratensis holds, the bodies of such persons that feed liberally,
and live at ease, "are full of bad spirits and devils, devilish
thoughts; no better physic for such parties, than to fast."
Hildesheim, spicel. 2. to this of hunger, adds, "often baths, much
exercise and sweat," but hunger and fasting he prescribes before the
rest. And 'tis indeed our Saviour's oracle, "This kind of devil is not
cast out but by fasting and prayer," which makes the fathers so
immoderate in commendation of fasting. As "hunger," saith
Ambrose, "is a friend of virginity, so is it an enemy to
lasciviousness, but fullness overthrows chastity, and fostereth all
manner of provocations." If thine horse be too lusty, Hierome
adviseth thee to take away some of his provender; by this means
those Pauls, Hilaries, Anthonies, and famous anchorites, subdued
the lusts of the flesh; by this means Hilarion "made his ass, as he
called his own body, leave kicking," (so Hierome relates of him in
his life) "when the devil tempted him to any such foul offence." By
this means those Indian Brahmins kept themselves continent: they
lay upon the ground covered with skins, as the red-shanks do on
heather, and dieted themselves sparingly on one dish, which
Guianerius would have all young men put in practice, and if that
will not serve, Gordonius "would have them soundly whipped, or,
to cool their courage, kept in prison," and there fed with bread and
water till they acknowledge their error, and become of another
mind. If imprisonment and hunger will not take them down,
according to the directions of that Theban Crates, "time must wear
it out; if time will not, the last refuge is a halter." But this, you will
say, is comically spoken. Howsoever, fasting, by all means, must
be still used; and as they must refrain from such meats formerly
mentioned, which cause venery, or provoke lust, so they must use
an opposite diet. Wine must be altogether avoided of the younger
sort. So Plato prescribes, and would have the magistrates
themselves abstain from it, for example's sake, highly commending
the Carthaginians for their temperance in this kind. And 'twas a
good edict, a commendable thing, so that it were not done for some
sinister respect, as those old Egyptians abstained from wine,
because some fabulous poets had given out, wine sprang first from
the blood of the giants, or out of superstition, as our modern Turks,
but for temperance, it being animae virus et vitiorum fomes, a
plague itself, if immoderately taken. Women of old for that cause,
in hot countries, were forbid the use of it; as severely punished for
drinking of wine as for adultery; and young folks, as Leonicus hath
recorded, Var. hist. l. 3. cap. 87, 88. out of Athenaeus and others,
and is still practised in Italy, and some other countries of Europe
and Asia, as Claudius Minoes hath well illustrated in his Comment
on the 23. Emblem of Alciat. So choice is to be made of other diet.

"Nec minus erucas aptum est vitare salaces,
Et quicquid veneri corpora nostra parat."

"Eringos are not good for to be taken,
And all lascivious meats must be forsaken."

Those opposite meats which ought to be used are cucumbers,
melons, purslane, water-lilies, rue, woodbine, ammi, lettuce, which
Lemnius so much commends, lib. 2, cap. 42. and Mizaldus hort.
med. to this purpose; vitex, or agnus castus before the rest, which,
saith Magninus, hath a wonderful virtue in it. Those Athenian
women, in their solemn feasts called Thesmopheries, were to
abstain nine days from the company of men, during which time,
saith Aelian, they laid a certain herb, named hanea, in their beds,
which assuaged those ardent flames of love, and freed them from
the torments of that violent passion. See more in Porta, Matthiolus,
Crescentius lib. 5. &c., and what every herbalist almost and
physician hath written, cap. de Satyriasi et Priapismo; Rhasis
amongst the rest. In some cases again, if they be much dejected,
and brought low in body, and now ready to despair through
anguish, grief, and too sensible a feeling of their misery, a cup of
wine and full diet is not amiss, and as Valescus adviseth, cum alia
honesta venerem saepe exercendo, which Langius epist. med. lib. 1.
epist. 24. approves out of Rhasis (ad assiduationem coitus invitat]
and Guianerius seconds it, cap. 16. tract. 16. as a very profitable
remedy.

 --"tument tibi quum inguina, cum si
Ancilla, aut verna praesto est, tentigine rumpi
Malis? non ego namque," &c.--

 Jason Pratensis subscribes to this counsel of the poet, Excretio
enim aut tollet prorsus aut lenit aegritudinem. As it did the raging
lust of Ahasuerus, qui ad impatientiam amoris leniendam, per
singulas fere noctes novas puellas devirginavit. And to be drunk
too by fits; but this is mad physic, if it be at all to be permitted. If
not, yet some pleasure is to be allowed, as that which Vives speaks
of, lib. 3. de anima., "A lover that hath as it were lost himself
through impotency, impatience, must be called home as a traveller,
by music, feasting, good wine, if need be to drunkenness itself,
which many so much commend for the easing of the mind, all
kinds of sports and merriments, to see fair pictures, hangings,
buildings, pleasant fields, orchards, gardens, groves, ponds, pools,
rivers, fishing, fowling, hawking, hunting, to hear merry tales, and
pleasant discourse, reading, to use exercise till he sweat, that new
spirits may succeed, or by some vehement affection or contrary
passion to be diverted till he be fully weaned from anger, suspicion,
cares, fears, &c., and habituated into another course." Semper
tecum sit, (as Sempronius adviseth Calisto his lovesick master) qui
sermones joculares moveat, conciones ridiculas, dicteria falsa,
suaves historias, fabulas venustas recenseat, coram ludat, &c., still
have a pleasant companion to sing and tell merry tales, songs and
facete histories, sweet discourse, &c. And as the melody of music,
merriment, singing, dancing, doth augment the passion of some
lovers, as Avicenna notes, so it expelleth it in others, and doth very
much good. These things must be warily applied, as the parties'
symptoms vary, and as they shall stand variously affected.

If there be any need of physic, that the humours be altered, or any
new matter aggregated, they must be cured as melancholy men.
Carolus a Lorme, amongst other questions discussed for his degree
at Montpelier in France, hath this, An amantes et amantes iisdem
remediis curentur? Whether lovers and madmen be cured by the
same remedies? he affirms it; for love extended is mere madness.
Such physic then as is prescribed, is either inward or outward, as
hath been formerly handled in the precedent partition in the cure of
melancholy. Consult with Valleriola observat. lib. 2. observ. 7.
Lod. Mercatus lib. 2. cap. 4. de mulier. affect. Daniel Sennertus lib.
1. part. 2. cap. 10. Jacobus Ferrandus the Frenchman, in his Tract
de amore Erotique, Forestus lib. 10. observ. 29 and 30, Jason
Pratensis and others for peculiar receipts. Amatus Lusitanus cured a
young Jew, that was almost mad for love, with the syrup of
hellebore, and such other evacuations and purges which are usually
prescribed to black choler: Avicenna confirms as much if need
require, and "bloodletting above the rest," which makes amantes ne
sint amentes, lovers to come to themselves, and keep in their right
minds. 'Tis the same which Schola Salernitana, Jason Pratensis,
Hildesheim, &c., prescribe bloodletting to be used as a principal
remedy. Those old Scythians had a trick to cure all appetite of
burning lust, by letting themselves blood under the ears, and to
make both men and women barren, as Sabellicus in his Aeneades
relates of them. Which Salmuth. Tit. 10. de Herol. comment. in
Pancirol. de nov. report. Mercurialis, var. lec. lib. 3. cap. 7. out of
Hippocrates and Benzo say still is in use amongst the Indians, a
reason of which Langius gives lib. 1. epist. 10.

Huc faciunt medicamenta venerem sopientia, ut camphora
pudendis alligata, et in bracha gestata (quidam ait) membrum
flaccidum reddit. Laboravit hoc morbo virgo nobilis, cui inter
caetera praescripsit medicus, ut laminam plumbeam multis
foraminibus pertusam ad dies viginti portaret in dorso; ad
exiccandum vero sperma jussit eam quam parcissime cibari, et
manducare frequentur coriandrum praeparatum, et semen
lactucae, et acetosae, et sic eam a morbo liberavit. Porro impediunt
et remittunt coitum folia salicis trita et epota, et si frequentius
usurpentur ipsa in totum auferunt. Idem praestat Topatius annulo
gestatus, dexterum lupi testiculum attritum, et oleo vel aqua rosata
exhibitum veneris taedium inducere scribit Alexander Benedictus:
lac butyri commestum et semen canabis, et camphora exhibita idem
praestant. Verbena herba gestata libidinem extinguit, pulvisquae
ranae decollatae et exiccatae. Ad extinguendum coitum, ungantur
membra genitalia, et renes et pecten aqua in qua opium Thebaicum
sit dissolutum; libidini maxime contraria camphora est, et
coriandrum siccum frangit coitum, et erectionem virgae impedit;
idem efficit synapium ebibitum. "Da verbenam in potu et non
erigetur virga sex diebus; utere mentha sicca cum aceto, genitalia
illinita succo hyoscyami aid cicutae, coitus appelitum sedant, &c.
[Symbol: Rx]. seminis lactuc. portulac. coriandri an. [Symbol:
Dram]j. menthae siccae [Symbol: Dram]. sacchari albiss.
[Symbol: Ounce]iiij. pulveriscentur omnia subtiliter, et post ea
simul misce aqua nenupharis, f. confec. solida in morsulis. Ex his
sumat mane unum quum surgat". Innumera fere his similia petas ab
Hildishemo loco praedicto, Mizaldo, Porta, caeterisque.





SUBSECT. II.-- Withstand the beginnings, avoid occasions,
change his place: fair and foul means, contrary passions, with witty
inventions: to bring in another, and discommend the former.

Other good rules and precepts are enjoined by our physicians,
which, if not alone, yet certainly conjoined, may do much; the first
of which is obstare principiis, to withstand the beginning, Quisquis
in primo obstitit, Pepulitque amorem tutus ac victor fuit, he that
will but resist at first, may easily be a conqueror at the last.
Balthazar Castilio, l. 4. urgeth this prescript above the rest, "when 
he shall chance" (saith he) "to light upon a woman that hath good
behaviour joined with her excellent person, and shall perceive his
eyes with a kind of greediness to pull unto them this image of
beauty, and carry it to the heart: shall observe himself to be
somewhat incensed with this influence, which moveth within:
when he shall discern those subtle spirits sparkling in her eyes, to
administer more fuel to the fire, he must wisely withstand the
beginnings, rouse up reason, stupefied almost, fortify his heart by
all means, and shut up all those passages, by which it may have
entrance." 'Tis a precept which all concur upon,

 "Opprime dum nova sunt subiti mala semina morbi,
Dum licet, in primo lumine siste pedem."

"Thy quick disease, whilst it is fresh today,
By all means crush, thy feet at first step stay."

Which cannot speedier be done, than if he confess his grief and
passion to some judicious friend (qui tacitus ardet magis uritur, the
more he conceals, the greater is his pain) that by his good advice
may happily ease him on a sudden; and withal to avoid occasions,
or any circumstance that may aggravate his disease, to remove the
object by all means; for who can stand by a fire and not burn?

 "Sussilite obsecro et mittite istanc foras,
Quae misero mihi amanti ebibit sanguinem."

 (Plautus gurcu. "Remove and throw her quite out of doors, she
who has drank my lovesick blood.")

'Tis good therefore to keep quite out of her company, which
Hierom so much labours to Paula, to Nepotian; Chrysost. so much
inculcates in ser. in contubern. Cyprian, and many other fathers of
the church, Siracides in his ninth chapter, Jason Pratensis,
Savanarola, Arnoldus, Valleriola, &c., and every physician that
treats of this subject. Not only to avoid, as Gregory Tholosanus
exhorts, "kissing, dalliance, all speeches, tokens, love-letters, and
the like," or as Castilio, lib. 4. to converse with them, hear them
speak, or sing, (tolerabilius est audire basiliscum sibilantem, thou
hadst better hear, saith Cyprian, a serpent hiss) "those amiable
smiles, admirable graces, and sweet gestures," which their presence
affords.

 "Neu capita liment solitis morsiunculis,
Et his papillarum oppressiunculis
Abstineant:" --

but all talk, name, mention, or cogitation of them, and of any other
women, persons, circumstance, amorous book or tale that may
administer any occasion of remembrance. Prosper adviseth young
men not to read the Canticles, and some parts of Genesis at other
times; but for such as are enamoured they forbid, as before, the
name mentioned, &c., especially all sight, they must not so much
as come near, or look upon them.

 "Et fugitare decet simulacra et pabula amoris,
Abstinere sibi atque alio convertere mentem."

Lucretius. "It is best to shun the semblance and the food of love,
to abstain from it, and totally avert the mind from the object."

"Gaze not on a maid," saith Siracides, "turn away thine eyes from a
beautiful woman," c. 9. v. 5. 7, 8. averte oculos, saith David, or if
thou dost see them, as Ficinus adviseth, let not thine eye be intentus
ad libidinem, do not intend her more than the rest: for as Propertius
holds, Ipse alimenta sibi maxima praebet amor, love as a snow ball
enlargeth itself by sight: but as Hierome to Nepotian, aut aequaliter
ama, aut aequaliter ignora, either see all alike, or let all alone;
make a league with thine eyes, as Job did, and that is the safest
course, let all alone, see none of them. Nothing sooner revives, "or
waxeth sore again," as Petrarch holds, "than love doth by sight."
"As pomp renews ambition; the sight of gold, covetousness; a
beauteous object sets on fire this burning lust." Et multum saliens
incitat unda sitim. The sight of drink makes one dry, and the sight
of meat increaseth appetite. 'Tis dangerous therefore to see. A
young gentleman in merriment would needs put on his mistress's
clothes, and walk abroad alone, which some of her suitors espying,
stole him away for her that he represented. So much can sight
enforce. Especially if he have been formerly enamoured, the sight
of his mistress strikes him into a new fit, and makes him rave many
days after.

 --"Infirmis causa pusilla nocet,
Ut pene extinctum cinerem si sulphure tangas,
Vivet, et ex minimo maximus ignis erit:
Sic nisi vitabis quicquid renovabit amorem,
Flamma recrudescet, quae modo nulla fuit."

"A sickly man a little thing offends,
As brimstone doth a fire decayed renew,
And makes it burn afresh, doth love's dead flames,
If that the former object it review."

Or, as the poet compares it to embers in ashes, which the wind
blows, ut solet a ventis, &c., a scald head (as the saying is) is soon
broken, dry wood quickly kindles, and when they have been
formerly wounded with sight, how can they by seeing but be
inflamed? Ismenias acknowledged as much of himself, when he
had been long absent, and almost forgotten his mistress, "at the first
sight of her, as straw in a fire, I burned afresh, and more than ever I
did before." "Chariclia was as much moved at the sight of her dear
Theagines, after he had been a great stranger." Mertila, in
Aristaenetus, swore she would never love Pamphilus again, and did
moderate her passion, so long as he was absent; but the next time
he came in presence, she could not contain, effuse amplexa
attrectari se sinit, &c., she broke her vow, and did profusely
embrace him. Hermotinus, a young man (in the said author) is all
out as unstaid, he had forgot his mistress quite, and by his friends
was well weaned from her love; but seeing her by chance, agnovit
veteris vestigia flammae, he raved amain, Illa tamen emergens
veluti lucida stella cepit elucere, &c., she did appear as a blazing
star, or an angel to his sight. And it is the common passion of all
lovers to be overcome in this sort. For that cause belike Alexander
discerning this inconvenience and danger that comes by seeing,
"when he heard Darius's wife so much commended for her beauty,
would scarce admit her to come in his sight," foreknowing belike
that of Plutarch, formosam videre periculosissimum, how full of
danger it is to see a proper woman, and though he was intemperate
in other things, yet in this superbe se gessit, he carried himself
bravely. And so when as Araspus, in Xenophon, had so much
magnified that divine face of Panthea to Cyrus, "by how much she
was fairer than ordinary, by so much he was the more unwilling to
see her." Scipio, a young man of twenty-three years of age, and the
most beautiful of the Romans, equal in person to that Grecian
Charinus, or Homer's Nireus, at the siege of a city in Spain, when
as a noble and most fair young gentlewoman was brought unto him,
"and he had heard she was betrothed to a lord, rewarded her, and
sent her back to her sweetheart." St. Austin, as Gregory reports of
him, ne cum sorore quidem sua putavit habitandum, would not live
in the house with his own sister. Xenocrates lay with Lais of
Corinth all night, and would not touch her. Socrates, though all the
city of Athens supposed him to dote upon fair Alcibiades, yet when
he had an opportunity, solus cum solo to lie in the chamber with,
and was wooed by him besides, as the said Alcibiades publicly
confessed, formam sprevit et superbe contempsit, he scornfully
rejected him. Petrarch, that had so magnified his Laura in several
poems, when by the pope's means she was offered unto him, would
not accept of her. "It is a good happiness to be free from this
passion of love, and great discretion it argues in such a man that he
can so contain himself; but when thou art once in love, to moderate
thyself (as he saith) is a singular point of wisdom."

 "Nam vitare plagas in amoris ne jaciamur
Non ita difficile est, quam captum retibus ipsis
Exire, et validos Veneris perrumpere nodos."

"To avoid such nets is no such mastery,
But ta'en escape is all the victory."

But, forasmuch as few men are free, so discreet lovers, or that can
contain themselves, and moderate their passions, to curb their
senses, as not to see them, not to look lasciviously, not to confer
with them, such is the fury of this headstrong passion of raging lust,
and their weakness, ferox ille ardor a natura insitus, as he terms it
"such a furious desire nature hath inscribed, such unspeakable
delight."

"Sic Divae Veneris furor,
Insanis adeo mentibus incubat,"

which neither reason, counsel, poverty, pain, misery, drudgery,
partus dolor, &c., can deter them from; we must use some speedy
means to correct and prevent that, and all other inconveniences,
which come by conference and the like. The best, readiest, surest
way, and which all approve, is Loci mutatio, to send them several
ways, that they may neither hear of, see, nor have an opportunity to
send to one another again, or live together, soli cum sola, as so
many Gilbertines. Elongatio a patria, 'tis Savanarola's fourth rule,
and Gordonius' precept, distrahatur ad longinquas regiones, send
him to travel. 'Tis that which most run upon, as so many hounds,
with full cry, poets, divines, philosophers, physicians, all, mutet
patriam: Valesius: as a sick man he must be cured with change of
air, Tully 4 Tuscul. The best remedy is to get thee gone, Jason
Pratensis: change air and soil, Laurentius.

"Fuge littus amatum.
Utile finitimis abstinuisse locis. "

 (Virg. "Fly the cherished shore. It is advisable to withdraw from
the places near it.")

"I procul, et longas carpere perge vias.
--sed fuge tutus eris."

 (Ovid. Amorum, l. 2. "Depart, and take a long journey -- safety
is in flight only.")

Travelling is an antidote of love,

 "Magnum iter ad doctas proficisci cogor Athenas,
Ut me longa gravi solvat amore via."

For this purpose, saith Propertius, my parents sent me to Athens;
time and patience wear away pain and grief, as fire goes out for
want of fuel. Quantum oculis, animo tam procul ibit amor. But so
as they tarry out long enough: a whole year Xenophon prescribes
Critobulus, vix enim intra hoc tempus ab amore sanari poteris:
some will hardly be weaned under. All this Heinsius merrily
inculcates in an epistle to his friend Primierus; first fast, then tarry,
thirdly, change thy place, fourthly, think of a halter. If change of
place, continuance of time, absence, will not wear it out with those
precedent remedies, it will hardly be removed: but these commonly
are of force. Felix Plater, observ. lib. 1. had a baker to his patient,
almost mad for the love of his maid, and desperate; by removing
her from him, he was in a short space cured. Isaeus, a philosopher
of Assyria, was a most dissolute liver in his youth, palam
lasciviens, in love with all he met; but after he betook himself, by
his friends' advice, to his study, and left women's company, he was
so changed that he cared no more for plays, nor feasts, nor masks,
nor songs, nor verses, fine clothes, nor no such love toys: he
became a new man upon a sudden, tanquam si priores oculos
amisisset, (saith mine author) as if he had lost his former eyes.
Peter Godefridus, in the last chapter of his third book, hath a story
out of St. Ambrose, of a young man that meeting his old love after
long absence, on whom he had extremely doted, would scarce take
notice of her; she wondered at it, that he should so lightly esteem
her, called him again, lenibat dictis animum, and told him who she
was, Ego sum, inquit: At ego non sum ego; but he replied, "he was
not the same man:" proripuit sese tandem, as Aeneas fled from
Dido, not vouchsafing her any farther parley, loathing his folly, and
ashamed of that which formerly he had done. Non sum stultus ut
ante jam Neaera. "O Neaera, put your tricks, and practise hereafter
upon somebody else, you shall befool me no longer." Petrarch hath
such another tale of a young gallant, that loved a wench with one
eye, and for that cause by his parents was sent to travel into far
countries, "after some years he returned, and meeting the maid for
whose sake he was sent abroad, asked her how, and by what chance
she lost her eye? no, said she, I have lost none, but you have found
yours:" signifying thereby, that all lovers were blind, as Fabius
saith, Amantes de forma judicare non possunt, lovers cannot judge
of beauty, nor scarce of anything else, as they will easily confess
after they return unto themselves, by some discontinuance or better
advice, wonder at their own folly, madness, stupidity, blindness, be
much abashed, "and laugh at love, and call it an idle thing,
condemn themselves that ever they should be so besotted or misled:
and be heartily glad they have so happily escaped."

If so be (which is seldom) that change of place will not effect this
alteration, then other remedies are to be annexed, fair and foul
means, as to persuade, promise, threaten, terrify, or to divert by
some contrary passion, rumour, tales, news, or some witty
invention to alter his affection, "by some greater sorrow to drive
out the less," saith Gordonius, as that his house is on fire, his best
friends dead, his money stolen. "That he is made some great
governor, or hath some honour, office, some inheritance is befallen
him." He shall be a knight, a baron; or by some false accusation, as
they do to such as have the hiccup, to make them forget it. St.
Hierome, lib. 2. epist. 16. to Rusticus the monk, hath an instance of
a young man of Greece, that lived in a monastery in Egypt, "that by
no labour, no continence, no persuasion, could be diverted, but at
last by this trick he was delivered. The abbot sets one of his
convent to quarrel with him, and with some scandalous reproach or
other to defame him before company, and then to come and
complain first, the witnesses were likewise suborned for the
plaintiff. The young man wept, and when all were against him, the
abbot cunningly took his part, lest he should be overcome with
immoderate grief: but what need many words? by this invention he 
was cured, and alienated from his pristine love-thoughts" --
Injuries, slanders, contempts, disgraces -- spretaeque injuria
formae, "the insult of her slighted beauty," are very forcible means
to withdraw men's affections, contumelia affecti amatores amare
desinunt, as Lucian saith, lovers reviled or neglected, contemned or
misused, turn love to hate; redeam? Non si me obsecret, "I'll never
love thee more." Egone illam, quae illum, quae me, quae non? So
Zephyrus hated Hyacinthus because he scorned him, and preferred
his co-rival Apollo (Palephaetus fab. Nar.) , he will not come again
though he be invited. Tell him but how he was scoffed at behind his
back, ('tis the counsel of Avicenna) , that his love is false, and
entertains another, rejects him, cares not for him, or that she is a
fool; a nasty quean, a slut, a vixen, a scold, a devil, or, which
Italians commonly do, that he or she hath some loathsome filthy
disease, gout, stone, strangury, falling sickness, and that they are 
hereditary, not to be avoided, he is subject to a consumption, hath
the pox, that he hath three or four incurable tetters, issues; that she
is bald, her breath stinks, she is mad by inheritance, and so are all
the kindred, a hair-brain, with many other secret infirmities, which
I will not so much as name, belonging to women. That he is a
hermaphrodite, an eunuch, imperfect, impotent, a spendthrift, a
gamester, a fool, a gull, a beggar, a whoremaster, far in debt, and
not able to maintain her, a common drunkard, his mother was a
witch, his father hanged, that he hath a wolf in his bosom, a sore
leg, he is a leper, hath some incurable disease, that he will surely
beat her, he cannot hold his water, that he cries out or walks in the
night, will stab his bedfellow, tell all his secrets in his sleep, and
that nobody dare lie with him, his house is haunted with spirits,
with such fearful and tragical things, able to avert and terrify any
man or woman living, Gordonius, cap. 20. part. 2. hunc in modo
consulit; Paretur aliqua vetula turpissima aspectu, cum turpi et vili
habitu: et portet subtus gremium pannum menstrualem, et dicat
quod amica sua sit ebriosa, et quod mingat in lecto, et quod est
epileptica et impudicia; et quod in corpore suo sunt excrescentiae
enormes, cum faetore anhelitus, et aliae enormitates, quibus
vetulae sunt edoctae: si nolit his persuaderi, subito extrahat
pannum menstrualem, coram facie portando, exclamando, talis est
amica tua; et si ex his non demiserit, non est homo, sed diabolus
incarnatus. Idem fere, Avicenna, cap. 24, de cura Elishi, lib. 3,
Fen. 1. Tract. 4. Narrent res immundas vetulae, ex quibus
abominationem incurrat, et res sordidas et, hoc assiduent. Idem
Arculanus cap. 16. in 9. Rhasis, &c.

Withal as they do discommend the old, for the better effecting a
more speedy alteration, they must commend another paramour,
alteram inducere, set him or her to be wooed, or woo some other
that shall be fairer, of better note, better fortune, birth, parentage,
much to be preferred, Invenies alium si te hic fastidit Alexis, (Virg.
Ecl. 3 "You will easily find another if this Alexis disdains you.") by
this means, which Jason Pratensis wisheth, to turn the stream of
affection another way, Successore novo truditur omnis amor; or, as
Valesius adviseth, by subdividing to diminish it, as a great river cut
into many channels runs low at last. Hortor et ut pariter binas
habeatis amicas, &c. If you suspect to be taken, be sure, saith the
poet, to have two mistresses at once, or go from one to another: as
he that goes from a good fire in cold weather is loth to depart from
it, though in the next room there be a better which will refresh him
as much; there's as much difference of haec as hac ignis; or bring
him to some public shows, plays, meetings, where he may see
variety, and he shall likely loathe his first choice: carry him but to
the next town, yea peradventure to the next house, and as Paris lost
Oenone's love by seeing Helen, and Cressida forsook Troilus by
conversing with Diomede, he will dislike his former mistress, and
leave her quite behind him, as Theseus left Ariadne fast asleep in
the island of Dia, to seek her fortune, that was erst his loving
mistress. Nunc primum Dorida vetus amator contempsi, as he said,
Doris is but a dowdy to this. As he that looks himself in a glass
forgets his physiognomy forthwith, this flattering glass of love will
be diminished by remove; after a little absence it will be remitted,
the next fair object will likely alter it. A young man in Lucian was
pitifully in love, he came to the theatre by chance, and by seeing
other fair objects there, mentis sanitatem recepit, was fully
recovered, "and went merrily home, as if he had taken a dram of
oblivion." A mouse (saith an apologer) was brought up in a chest,
there fed with fragments of bread and cheese, though there could be
no better meat, till coming forth at last, and feeding liberally of
other variety of viands, loathed his former life: moralise this fable
by thyself. Plato, in. his seventh book De Legibus, hath a pretty
fiction of a city under ground, to which by little holes some small
store of light came; the inhabitants thought there could not be a
better place, and at their first coming abroad they might not endure
the light, aegerrime solem intueri; but after they were accustomed a
little to it, "they deplored their fellows' misery that lived under
ground." A silly lover is in like state, none so fair as his mistress at
first, he cares for none but her; yet after a while, when he hath
compared her with others, he abhors her name, sight, and memory.
'Tis generally true; for as he observes, Priorem flammam novus
ignis extrudit; et ea multorum natura, ut praesentes maxime ament,
one fire drives out another; and such is women's weakness, that
they love commonly him that is present. And so do many men; as
he confessed, he loved Amye, till he saw Florial, and when he saw
Cynthia, forgat them both: but fair Phillis was incomparably
beyond, them all, Cloris surpassed her, and yet when he espied
Amaryllis, she was his sole mistress; O divine Amaryllis: quam
procera, cupressi ad instar, quam elegans, quam decens, &c. How
lovely, how tall, how comely she was (saith Polemius) till he saw
another, and then she was the sole subject of his thoughts. In
conclusion, her he loves best he saw last. Triton, the sea-god, first
loved Leucotho, till he came in presence of Milaene, she was the
commandress of his heart, till he saw Galatea: but (as she
complains) he loved another eftsoons, another, and another. 'Tis a
thing which, by Hierom's report, hath been usually practised.
"Heathen philosophers drive out one love with another, as they do a
peg, or pin with a pin. Which those seven Persian princes did to
Ahasuerus, that they might requite the desire of Queen Vashti with
the love of others." Pausanias in Eliacis saith, that therefore one
Cupid was painted to contend with another, and to take the garland
from him, because one love drives out another, Alterius vires
subtrahit alter amor; (Ovid. "One love extracts the influence of
another.") and Tully, 3. Nat. Deor. disputing with C. Cotta, makes
mention of three several Cupids, all differing in office. Felix Plater,
in the first book of his observations, boasts how he cured a
widower in Basil, a patient of his, by this stratagem alone, that
doted upon a poor servant his maid, when friends, children, no
persuasion could serve to alienate his mind: they motioned him to
another honest man's daughter in the town, whom he loved, and
lived with long after, abhorring the very name and sight of the first.
After the death of Lucretia, Euryalus would admit of no comfort,
till the Emperor Sigismund married him to a noble lady of his
court, and so in short space he was freed.





SUBSECT. III.-- By counsel and persuasion, foulness of the fact,
men's, women's faults, miseries of marriage, events of lust, &c.

As there be divers causes of this burning lust, or heroical love, so
there be many good remedies to ease and help; amongst which,
good counsel and persuasion, which I should have handled in the
first place, are of great moment, and not to be omitted. Many are of
opinion, that in this blind headstrong passion counsel can do no
good.

 "Quae enim res in se neque consilium neque modum
Habet, ullo eam consilio regere non potes."

"Which thing hath neither judgment, or an end,
How should advice or counsel it amend?"

 Quis enim modus adsit amori? But, without question, good counsel
and advice must needs be of great force, especially if it shall
proceed from a wise, fatherly, reverent, discreet person, a man of
authority, whom the parties do respect, stand in awe of, or from a
judicious friend, of itself alone it is able to divert and suffice.
Gordonius, the physician, attributes so much to it, that he would
have it by all means used in the first place. Amoveatur ab illa,
consilio viri quem timet, ostendendo pericula saeculi, judicium
inferni, gaudia Paradisi. He would have some discreet men to
dissuade them, after the fury of passion is a little spent, or by
absence allayed; for it is as intempestive at first, to give counsel, as
to comfort parents when their children are in that instant departed;
to no purpose to prescribe narcotics, cordials, nectarines, potions,
Homer's nepenthes, or Helen's bowl, &c. Non cessabit pectus
tundere, she will lament and howl for a season: let passion have his
course awhile, and then he may proceed, by foreshowing the
miserable events and dangers which will surely happen, the pains
of hell, joys of Paradise, and the like, which by their preposterous
courses they shall forfeit or incur; and 'tis a fit method, a very good
means; for what Seneca said of vice, I say of love, Sine magistro
discitur, vix sine magistro deseritur, 'tis learned of itself, but hardly
left without a tutor. 'Tis not amiss therefore to have some such
overseer, to expostulate and show them such absurdities,
inconveniences, imperfections, discontents, as usually follow;
which their blindness, fury, madness, cannot apply unto
themselves, or will not apprehend through weakness; and good for
them to disclose themselves, to give ear to friendly admonitions.
"Tell me, sweetheart (saith Tryphena to a lovesick Charmides in
Lucian) , what is it that troubles thee? peradventure I can ease thy
mind, and further thee in thy suit;" and so, without question, she
might, and so mayst thou, if the patient be capable of good counsel,
and will hear at least what may be said.

If he love at all, she is either an honest woman or a whore. If
dishonest, let him read or inculcate to him that 5. of Solomon's
Proverbs, Ecclus. 26. Ambros. lib. 1. cap. 4. in his book of Abel
and Cain, Philo Judeus de mercede mer. Platina's dial. in Amores,
Espencaeus, and those three books of Pet. Haedus de contem.
amoribus, Aeneas Sylvius' tart Epistle, which he wrote to his friend
Nicholas of Warthurge, which he calls medelam illiciti amoris &c.
"For what's a whore," as he saith, "but a poller of youth, a ruin of
men, a destruction, a devourer of patrimonies, a downfall of
honour, fodder for the devil, the gate of death, and supplement of
hell?" Talis amor est laqueus animae, &c., a bitter honey, sweet
poison, delicate destruction, a voluntary mischief, commixtum
coenum, sterquilinium. And as Pet. Aretine's Lucretia, a notable
quean, confesseth: "Gluttony, anger, envy, pride, sacrilege, theft,
slaughter, were all born that day that a whore began her profession;
for," as she follows it, "her pride is greater than a rich churl's, she is
more envious than the pox, as malicious as melancholy, as
covetous as hell. If from the beginning of the world any were mala,
pejor, pessima, bad in the superlative degree, 'tis a whore; how
many have I undone, caused to be wounded, slain! O Antonia, thou
seest what I am without, but within, God knows, a puddle of
iniquity, a sink of sin, a pocky quean." Let him now that so dotes
meditate on this; let him see the event and success of others,
Samson, Hercules, Holofernes, &c. Those infinite mischiefs attend
it: if she be another man's wife he loves, 'tis abominable in the sight
of God and men; adultery is expressly forbidden in God's
commandment, a mortal sin, able to endanger his soul: if he be
such a one that fears God, or have any religion, he will eschew it,
and abhor the loathsomeness of his own fact. If he love an honest
maid, 'tis to abuse or marry her; if to abuse, 'tis fornication, a foul
fact (though some make light of it) , and almost equal to adultery
itself. If to marry, let him seriously consider what he takes in hand,
look before ye leap, as the proverb is, or settle his affections, and
examine first the party, and condition of his estate and hers,
whether it be a fit match, for fortunes, years, parentage, and such
other circumstances, an sit sitae Veneris. Whether it be likely to
proceed: if not, let him wisely stave himself off at the first, curb in
his inordinate passion, and moderate his desire, by thinking of
some other subject, divert his cogitations. Or if it be not for his
good, as Aeneas, forewarned by Mercury in a dream, left Dido's
love, and in all haste got him to sea,

 "Mnestea, Surgestumque vocat fortemque Cloanthem,
Classem aptent taciti jubet" --

 (Virg. "He calls Mnestheus, Surgestus, and the brave Cloanthus,
and orders them silently to prepare the fleet.")

and although she did oppose with vows, tears, prayers, and
imprecation.

 --"nullis ille movetur
Fletibus, aut illas voces tractabilis audit;"

 ("He is moved by no tears, he cannot he induced to hear her
words.")

Let thy Mercury-reason rule thee against all allurements, seeming
delights, pleasing inward or outward provocations. Thou mayst do
this if thou wilt, pater non deperit filiam, nec frater sororem, a
father dotes not on his own daughter, a brother on a sister; and
why? because it is unnatural, unlawful, unfit. If he be sickly, soft,
deformed, let him think of his deformities, vices, infirmities; if in
debt, let him ruminate how to pay his debts: if he be in any danger,
let him seek to avoid it: if he have any lawsuit, or other business, he
may do well to let his love-matters alone and follow it, labour in his
vocation whatever it is. But if he cannot so ease himself, yet let him
wisely premeditate of both their estates; if they be unequal in years,
she young and he old, what an unfit match must it needs be, an
uneven yoke, how absurd and indecent a thing is it! as Lycinus in
Lucian told Timolaus, for an old bald crook-nosed knave to marry a
young wench; how odious a thing it is to see an old lecher! What
should a bald fellow do with a comb, a dumb doter with a pipe, a
blind man with a looking-glass, and thou with such a wife? How
absurd it is for a young man to marry an old wife for a piece of
good. But put case she be equal in years, birth, fortunes, and other
qualities correspondent, he doth desire to be coupled in marriage,
which is an honourable estate, but for what respects? Her beauty
belike, and comeliness of person, that is commonly the main
object, she is a most absolute form, in his eye at least, Cui formam
Paphia, et Charites tribuere decoram; but do other men affirm as
much? or is it an error in his judgment.

 "Fallunt nos oculi vagique sensus,
Oppressa ratione mentiuntur,"

"our eyes and other senses will commonly deceive us;" it may be,
to thee thyself upon a more serious examination, or after a little
absence, she is not so fair as she seems. Quaedam videntur et non
sunt; compare her to another standing by, 'tis a touchstone to try,
confer hand to hand, body to body, face to face, eye to eye, nose to
nose, neck to neck, &c., examine every part by itself, then
altogether, in all postures, several sites, and tell me how thou likest
her. It may be not she, that is so fair, but her coats, or put another in
her clothes, and she will seem all out as fair; as the poet then
prescribes, separate her from her clothes: suppose thou saw her in a
base beggar's weed, or else dressed in some old hirsute attires out
of fashion, foul linen, coarse raiment, besmeared with soot, colly,
perfumed with opoponax, sagapenum, asafoetida, or some such
filthy gums, dirty, about some indecent action or other; or in such a
case as Brassivola, the physician, found Malatasta, his patient, after
a potion of hellebore, which he had prescribed: Manibus in terram
depositis, et ano versus caelum elevato (ac si videretur Socraticus
ille Aristophanes, qui Geometricas figuras in terram scribens,
tubera colligere videbatur) atram bilem in album parietem
injiciebat, adeoque totam cameram, et se deturpabat, ut, &c., all to
bewrayed, or worse; if thou saw'st her (I say) would thou affect her
as thou dost? Suppose thou beheldest her in a frosty morning, in
cold weather, in some passion or perturbation of mind, weeping,
chafing, &c., rivelled and ill-favoured to behold. She many times
that in a composed look seems so amiable and delicious, tam
scitula, forma, if she do but laugh or smile, makes an ugly sparrow-
mouthed face, and shows a pair of uneven, loathsome, rotten, foul
teeth: she hath a black skin, gouty legs, a deformed crooked carcass
under a fine coat. It may be for all her costly tires she is bald, and
though she seem so fair by dark, by candlelight, or afar off at such
a distance, as Callicratides observed in Lucian, "If thou should see
her near, or in a morning, she would appear more ugly than a
beast;" si diligenter consideres, quid per os et nares et caeteros
corporis meatus egreditur, vilius sterquilinium nunquam vidisti.
(Hugo de claustro Animae, lib. 1. c. 1. "If you quietly reflect upon
what passes through her mouth, nostrils, and other conduits of her
body, you never saw viler stuff.") Follow my counsel, see her
undressed, see her, if it be possible, out of her attires, furtivis
nudatam coloribus, it may be she is like Aesop's jay, or Pliny's
cantharides, she will be loathsome, ridiculous, thou wilt not endure
her sight: or suppose thou saw'st her, pale, in a consumption, on her
death-bed, skin and bones, or now dead, Cujus erat gratissimus
amplexus (whose embrace was so agreeable) as Barnard saith, erit
horribilis aspectus; Non redolet, sed olet, quae, redolere solet, "As
a posy she smells sweet, is most fresh and fair one day, but dried
up, withered, and stinks another." Beautiful Nireus, by that Homer
so much admired, once dead, is more deformed than Thersites, and
Solomon deceased as ugly as Marcolphus: thy lovely mistress that
was erst Charis charior ocellis, "dearer to thee than thine eyes,"
once sick or departed, is Vili vilior aestimata coeno, "worse than
any dirt or dunghill." Her embraces were not so acceptable, as now
her looks be terrible: thou hadst better behold a Gorgon's head, than
Helen's carcass.

Some are of opinion, that to see a woman naked is able of itself to
alter his affection; and it is worthy of consideration, saith
Montaigne the Frenchman in his Essays, that the skilfulest masters
of amorous dalliance, appoint for a remedy of venerous passions, a
full survey of the body; which the poet insinuates,

 "Ille quod obscaenas in aperto corpore partes
Viderat, in cursu qui fuit, haesit amor."

"The love stood still, that run in full career,
When once it saw those parts should not appear."

It is reported of Seleucus, king of Syria, that seeing his wife
Stratonice's bald pate, as she was undressing her by chance, he
could never affect her after. Remundus Lullius, the physician,
spying an ulcer or cancer in his mistress' breast, whom he so dearly
loved, from that day following abhorred the looks of her. Philip the
French king, as Neubrigensis, lib. 4. cap. 24. relates it, married the
king of Denmark's daughter, "and after he had used her as a wife
one night, because her breath stunk, they say, or for some other
secret fault, sent her back again to her father." Peter Mattheus, in
the life of Lewis the Eleventh, finds fault with our English
chronicles, for writing how Margaret the king of Scots' daughter,
and wife to Louis the Eleventh, French king, was ob graveolentiam
oris, rejected by her husband. Many such matches are made for by-
respects, or some seemly comeliness, which after honeymoon's
past, turn to bitterness: for burning lust is but a flash, a gunpowder
passion; and hatred oft follows in the highest degree, dislike and
contempt.

 --"Cum se cutis arida laxat,
Fiunt obscuri dentes" --

 (Juvenal. "When the wrinkled skin becomes flabby, and the teeth
black.")

when they wax old, and ill-favoured, they may commonly no
longer abide them,-- Jam gravis es nobis, Be gone, they grow stale,
fulsome, loathsome, odious, thou art a beastly filthy quean,--
faciem Phoebe cacantis habes, thou art Saturni podex, withered
and dry, insipida et vetula, -- Te quia rugae turpant, et capitis
nives, (Tully in Cat. "Because wrinkles and hoary locks disfigure
you.") (I say) be gone, portae patent, proficiscere.

Yea, but you will infer, your mistress is complete, of a most
absolute form in all men's opinions, no exceptions can be taken at
her, nothing may be added to her person, nothing detracted, she is
the mirror of women for her beauty, comeliness and pleasant grace,
inimitable, merae deliciae, meri lepores, she is Myrothetium
Veneris, Gratiarum pixis, a mere magazine of natural perfections,
she hath all the Veneres and Graces,-- mille faces et mille figuras,
in each part absolute and complete, Laeta genas laeta os roseum,
vaga lumina laeta: (Locheus. "Beautiful cheeks, rosy lips, and
languishing eyes.") to be admired for her person, a most
incomparable, unmatchable piece, aurea proles, ad simulachrum
alicujus numinis composita, a Phoenix, vernantis aetatulae
Venerilla, a nymph, a fairy, like Venus herself when she was a
maid, nulli secunda, a mere quintessence, flores spirans et
amaracum, foeminae prodigium: put case she be, how long will she
continue? Florem decoris singuli carpunt dies: "Every day detracts
from her person," and this beauty is bonum fragile, a mere flash, a
Venice glass, quickly broken,

 "Anceps forma bonum mortalibus,
--exigui donum breve temporis,"

 (Seneca Hyp. "Beauty is a gift of dubious worth to mortals, and
of brief duration.")

it will not last. As that fair flower Adonis, which we call an
anemone, flourisheth but one month, this gracious all-commanding
beauty fades in an instant. It is a jewel soon lost, the painter's
goddess, fulsa veritas, a mere picture. "Favour is deceitful, and
beauty is vanity," Prov. xxxi. 30.

 "Vitrea gemmula, fluxaque bullula, candida forma est,
Nix, rosa, fumus, ventus et aura, nihil."

"A brittle gem, bubble, is beauty pale,
A rose, dew, snow, smoke, wind, air, nought at all."

If she be fair, as the saying is, she is commonly a fool: if proud,
scornful, sequiturque superbia formam, or dishonest, rara est
concordia formae, atque pudicitiae, "can she be fair and honest
too?" Aristo, the son of Agasicles, married a Spartan lass, the
fairest lady in all Greece next to Helen, but for her conditions the
most abominable and beastly creature of the world. So that I would
wish thee to respect, with Seneca, not her person but qualities.
"Will you say that's a good blade which hath a gilded scabbard,
embroidered with gold and jewels? No, but that which hath a good
edge and point, well tempered metal, able to resist." This beauty is
of the body alone, and what is that, but as Gregory Nazianzen
telleth us, "a mock of time and sickness?" or as Boethius, "as
mutable as a flower, and 'tis not nature so makes us, but most part
the infirmity of the beholder." For ask another, he sees no such
matter: Dic mihi per gratias qualis tibi videtur, "I pray thee tell me
how thou likest my sweetheart," as she asked her sister in
Aristenaetus, "whom I so much admire, methinks he is the sweetest
gentleman, the properest man that ever I saw: but I am in love, I
confess (nec pudet fateri) and cannot therefore well judge." But be
she fair indeed, golden-haired, as Anacreon his Bathillus, (to 
examine particulars) she have Flammeolos oculos, collaque
lacteola, (Luc. Brugensis. "Bright eyes and snow-white neck.") a
pure sanguine complexion, little mouth, coral lips, white teeth, soft
and plump neck, body, hands, feet, all fair and lovely to behold,
composed of all graces, elegances, an absolute piece,

 "Lumina sint Melitae Junonia, dextra Minervae,
Mamillae Veneris, sura maris dominae," &c.

 (Idem. "Let my Melita's eyes be like Juno's, her hand Minerva's,
her breasts Venus', her leg Amphitiles'.")

Let her head be from Prague, paps out of Austria, belly from
France, back from Brabant, hands out of England, feet from Rhine,
buttocks from Switzerland, let her have the Spanish gait, the
Venetian tire, Italian compliment and endowments:

 "Candida sideriis ardescant lumina flammis,
Sudent colla rosas, et cedat crinibus aurum,
Mellea purpurem depromant ora ruborem;
Fulgeat, ac Venerem coelesti corpore vincat,
Forma dearum omnis," &c.

 (Petron. Cat. "Let her eyes be as bright as the stars, her neck
smell like the rose, her hair shine more than gold, her honied lips
be ruby coloured; let her beauty be resplendent, and superior to
Venus, let her be in all respects a deity," &c.)

Let her be such a one throughout, as Lucian deciphers in his
Imagines, as Euphranor of old painted Venus, Aristaenetus
describes Lais, another Helena, Chariclea, Leucippe, Lucretia,
Pandora; let her have a box of beauty to repair herself still, such a
one as Venus gave Phaon, when he carried her over the ford; let her
use all helps art and nature can yield; be like her, and her, and
whom thou wilt, or all these in one; a little sickness, a fever, small-
pox, wound, scar, loss of an eye, or limb, a violent passion, a
distemperature of heat or cold, mars all in an instant, disfigures all;
child-bearing, old age, that tyrant time will turn Venus to Erinnys;
raging time, care, rivels her upon a sudden; after she hath been
married a small while, and the black ox hath trodden on her toe, she
will be so much altered, and wax out of favour, thou wilt not know
her. One grows too fat, another too lean, &c., modest Matilda,
pretty pleasing Peg, sweet-singing Susan, mincing merry Moll,
dainty dancing Doll, neat Nancy, jolly Joan, nimble Nell, kissing
Kate, bouncing Bess, with black eyes, fair Phyllis, with fine white
hands, fiddling Frank, tall Tib, slender Sib, &c., will quickly lose
their grace, grow fulsome, stale, sad, heavy, dull, sour, and all at
last out of fashion. Ubi jam vultus argutia, suavis suavitatio,
blandus, risus, &c. Those fair sparkling eyes will look dull, her soft
coral lips will be pale, dry, cold, rough, and blue, her skin rugged,
that soft and tender superficies will be hard and harsh, her whole
complexion change in a moment, and as Matilda writ to King John.

"I am not now as when thou saw'st me last,
That favour soon is vanished and past;
That rosy blush lapt in a lily vale,
Now is with morphew overgrown and pale."

'Tis so in the rest, their beauty fades as a tree in winter, which
Dejanira hath elegantly expressed in the poet,

 "Deforme solis aspicis truncis nemus?
Sic nostra longum forma percurrens iter,
Deperdit aliquid semper, et fulget minus,
Malisque minus est quiquid in nobis fuit,
Olim petitum cecidit, et partu labat,
Maturque multum rapuit ex illa mihi,
Aetas citato senior eripuit gradu."

"And as a tree that in the green wood grows,
With fruit and leaves, and in the summer blows,
In winter like a stock deformed shows:
Our beauty takes his race and journey goes,
And doth decrease, and lose, and come to nought,
Admir'd of old, to this by child-birth brought:
And mother hath bereft me of my grace,
And crooked old age coming on apace."

To conclude with Chrysostom, "When thou seest a fair and
beautiful person, a brave Bonaroba, a bella donna, quae salivam
moveat, lepidam puellam et quam tu facile ames, a comely woman,
having bright eyes, a merry countenance, a shining lustre in her
look, a pleasant grace, wringing thy soul, and increasing thy
concupiscence; bethink with thyself that it is but earth thou lovest,
a mere excrement, which so vexeth thee, which thou so admirest,
and thy raging soul will be at rest. Take her skin from her face, and
thou shalt see all loathsomeness under it, that beauty is a superficial
skin and bones, nerves, sinews: suppose her sick, now rivelled,
hoary-headed, hollow-cheeked, old; within she is full of filthy
phlegm, stinking, putrid, excremental stuff: snot and snivel in her
nostrils, spittle in her mouth, water in her eyes, what filth in her
brains," &c. Or take her at best, and look narrowly upon her in the
light, stand near her, nearer yet, thou shalt perceive almost as
much, and love less, as Cardan well writes, minus amant qui acute
vident, though Scaliger deride him for it: if he see her near, or look
exactly at such a posture, whosoever he is, according to the true
rules of symmetry and proportion, those I mean of Albertus Durer,
Lomatius and Tasnier, examine him of her. If he be elegans
formarum spectator he shall find many faults in physiognomy, and
ill colour: if form, one side of the face likely bigger than the other,
or crooked nose, bad eyes, prominent veins, concavities about the
eyes, wrinkles, pimples, red streaks, freckles, hairs, warts, neves,
inequalities, roughness, scabredity, paleness, yellowness, and as
many colours as are in a turkeycock's neck, many indecorums in
their other parts; est quod desideres, est quod amputes, one leers,
another frowns, a third gapes, squints, &c. And 'tis true that he
saith, Diligenter consideranti raro facies absoluta, et quae vitio
caret, seldom shall you find an absolute face without fault, as I
have often observed; not in the face alone is this defect or
disproportion to be found; but in all the other parts, of body and
mind; she is fair, indeed, but foolish; pretty, comely, and decent, of
a majestical presence, but peradventure, imperious, dishonest,
acerba, iniqua, self-willed: she is rich, but deformed; hath a sweet
face, but bad carriage, no bringing up, a rude and wanton flirt; a
neat body she hath, but it is a nasty quean otherwise, a very slut, of
a bad kind. As flowers in a garden have colour some, but no smell,
others have a fragrant smell, but are unseemly to the eye; one is
unsavoury to the taste as rue, as bitter as wormwood, and yet a
most medicinal cordial flower, most acceptable to the stomach; so
are men and women; one is well qualified, but of ill proportion,
poor and base: a good eye she hath, but a bad hand and foot, foeda
pedes et foeda manus, a fine leg, bad teeth, a vast body, &c.
Examine all parts of body and mind, I advise thee to inquire of all.
See her angry, merry, laugh, weep, hot, cold, sick, sullen, dressed,
undressed, in all attires, sites, gestures, passions, eat her meals, &c.,
and in some of these you will surely dislike. Yea, not her only let
him observe, but her parents how they carry themselves: for what
deformities, defects, encumbrances of body or mind be in them at
such an age, they will likely be subject to, be molested in like
manner, they will patrizare or matrizare. And withal let him take
notice of her companions, in convictu (as Quiverra prescribes) , et
quibuscum conversetur, whom she converseth with. Noscitur ex
comite, qui non cognoscitur ex se. ("Show me your company and
I'll tell you who you are.") According to Thucydides, she is
commonly the best, de quo minimus foras habetur sermo, that is
least talked of abroad. For if she be a noted reveller, a gadder, a
singer, a pranker or dancer, than take heed of her. For what saith
Theocritus?

 "At vos festivae ne ne saltate puellae,
En malus hireus adest in vos saltare paratus."

 ("Hark, you merry maids, do not dance so, for see the he-goat is
at hand, ready to pounce upon you.")

Young men will do it when they come to it. Fauns and satyrs will
certainly play wreeks, when they come in such wanton Baccho's or
Elenora's presence. Now when they shall perceive any such
obliquity, indecency, disproportion, deformity, bad conditions, &c.,
let them still ruminate on that, and as Haedus adviseth out of Ovid,
earum mendas notent, note their faults, vices, errors, and think of
their imperfections; 'tis the next way to divert and mitigate love's
furious headstrong passions; as a peacock's feet, and filthy comb,
they say, make him forget his fine feathers, and pride of his tail;
she is lovely, fair, well-favoured, well qualified, courteous and
kind, "but if she be not so to me, what care I how kind she be?" I
say with Philostratus, formosa aliis, mihi superba, she is a tyrant to
me, and so let her go. Besides these outward neves or open faults,
errors, there be many inward infirmities, secret, some private
(which I will omit) , and some more common to the sex, sullen fits,
evil qualities, filthy diseases, in this case fit to be considered;
consideratio foeditatis mulierum, menstruae imprimis, quam
immundae sunt, quam Savanarola proponit regula septima penitus
observandam; et Platina dial. amoris fuse perstringit. Lodovicus
Bonacsialus, mulieb. lib. 2. cap. 2. Pet. Haedus, Albertus, et infiniti
fere medici. A lover, in Calcagninus's Apologies, wished with all
his heart he were his mistress's ring, to hear, embrace, see, and do I
know not what: O thou fool, quoth the ring, if thou wer'st in my
room, thou shouldst hear, observe, and see pudenda et poenitenda,
that which would make thee loathe and hate her, yea, peradventure,
all women for her sake.

I will say nothing of the vices of their minds, their pride, envy,
inconstancy, weakness, malice, selfwill, lightness, insatiable lust,
jealousy, Ecclus. v. 14. "No malice to a woman's, no bitterness like
to hers," Eccles. vii. 21. and as the same author urgeth, Prov. xxxi.
10. "Who shall find a virtuous woman?" He makes a question of it.
Neque jus neque bonum, neque aequum sciunt, melius pejus, prosit,
obsit, nihil vident, nisi quod libido suggerit. "They know neither
good nor bad, be it better or worse" (as the comical poet hath it) ,
"beneficial or hurtful, they will do what they list."

 "Insidiae humani generis, querimonia vitae,
Exuviae noctis, durissima cura diei,
Poena virum, nex et juvenum," &c.--

 (Laedieus. "Snares of the human species, torments of life, spoils
of the night, bitterest cares of day, the torture of husbands, the
ruin of youths.")

And to that purpose were they first made, as Jupiter insinuates in
the poet;

"The fire that bold Prometheus stole from me,
With plagues call'd women shall revenged be,
On whose alluring and enticing face,
Poor mortals doting shall their death embrace."

In fine, as Diogenes concludes in Nevisanus, Nulla est foemina
quae non habeat quid: they have all their faults.

 Every each of them hath some vices,
If one be full of villainy,
Another hath a liquorish eye,
If one be full of wantonness,
Another is a chideress.

When Leander was drowned, the inhabitants of Sestos consecrated
Hero's lantern to Anteros, Anteroti sacrum, and he that had good
success in his love should light the candle: but never any man was
found to light it; which I can refer to nought, but the inconstancy
and lightness of women.

 "For in a thousand, good there is not one;
All be so proud, unthankful, and unkind,
With flinty hearts, careless of other's moan.
In their own lusts carried most headlong blind,
But more herein to speak I am forbidden;
Sometimes for speaking truth one may be chidden."

I am not willing, you see, to prosecute the cause against them, and
therefore take heed you mistake me not, matronam nullam ego
tango, I honour the sex, with all good men, and as I ought to do,
rather than displease them, I will voluntarily take the oath which
Mercurius Britannicus took, Viragin. descript. tib. 2. fol. 95. Me
nihil unquam mali nobilissimo sexui, vel verbo, vel facto
machinaturum, &c., let Simonides, Mantuan, Platina, Pet. Aretine,
and such women-haters bare the blame, if aught be said amiss; I
have not writ a tenth of that which might be urged out of them and
others; non possunt invectivae omnes, et satirae in foeminas
scriptae, uno volumine comprehendi. And that which I have said
(to speak truth) no more concerns them than men, though women
be more frequently named in this tract; (to apologise once for all) I
am neither partial against them, or therefore bitter; what is said of
the one, mutato nomine, may most part be understood of the other.
My words are like Passus' picture in Lucian, of whom, when a
good fellow had bespoke a horse to be painted with his heels
upwards, tumbling on his back, he made him passant: now when
the fellow came for his piece, he was very angry, and said, it was
quite opposite to his mind; but Passus instantly turned the picture
upside down, showed him the horse at that site which he requested,
and so gave him satisfaction. If any man take exception at my
words, let him alter the name, read him for her, and 'tis all one in
effect.

But to my purpose: If women in general be so bad (and men worse
than they) what a hazard is it to marry? where shall a man find a
good wife, or a woman a good husband? A woman a man may
eschew, but not a wife: wedding is undoing (some say) marrying
marring, wooing woeing: "a wife is a fever hectic," as Scaliger calls
her, "and not be cured but by death," as out of Menander,
Athenaeus adds,

"In pelaprus te jacis negotiorum,--
Non Libyum, non Aegeum, ubi ex triginta non pereunt
Tria navigia: duceus uxorem servatur prorsus nemo."

"Thou wadest into a sea itself of woes;
In Libya and Aegean each man knows
Of thirty not three ships are cast away,
But on this rock not one escapes, I say."

The worldly cares, miseries, discontents, that accompany marriage,
I pray you learn of them that have experience, for I have none;
pa?da? e?? ?????? e?e??sa?? [paidas ego logoys egensamen] ,
libri mentis liberi. For my part I'll dissemble with him,

 "Este procul nymphae, fallax genus este puellae,
Vita jugata meo non facit ingenio: me juvat," &c.

 ("Avaunt, ye nymphs, maidens, ye are a deceitful race, no
married life for me," &c.)

many married men exclaim at the miseries of it, and rail at wives
downright; I never tried, but as I hear some of them say, Mare haud
mare, vos mare acerrimum, an Irish Sea is not so turbulent and
raging as a litigious wife.

 "Scylla et Charybdis Sicula contorquens freta,
Minus est timenda, nulla non melior fera est."

"Scylla and Charybdis are less dangerous,
There is no beast that is so noxious."

Which made the devil belike, as most interpreters hold, when he
had taken away Job's goods, corporis et fortunae bona, health,
children, friends, to persecute him the more, leave his wicked wife,
as Pineda proves out of Tertullian, Cyprian, Austin, Chrysostom,
Prosper, Gaudentius, &c. ut novum calamitatis inde genus viro
existeret, to vex and gall him worse quam totus infernus than all the
fiends in hell, as knowing the conditions of a bad woman. Jupiter
non tribuit homini pestilentius malum, saith Simonides: "better
dwell with a dragon or a lion, than keep house with a wicked wife,"
Ecclus. xxv. 18. "better dwell in a wilderness," Prov. xxi. 19. "no
wickedness like to her," Ecclus. xxv. 22. "She makes a sorry heart,
an heavy countenance, a wounded mind, weak hands, and feeble
knees," vers. 25. "A woman and death are two the bitterest things
in the world:" uxor mihi ducenda est hodie, id mihi visus est dicere,
abi domum et suspende te. Ter. And. 1. 5. And yet for all this we
bachelors desire to be married; with that vestal virgin, we long for
it, Felices nuptae! moriar, nisi nubere dulce est. 'Tis the sweetest
thing in the world, I would I had a wife saith he,

"For fain would I leave a single life,
If I could get me a good wife."

Heigh-ho for a husband, cries she, a bad husband, nay, the worst
that ever was is better than none: O blissful marriage, O most
welcome marriage, and happy are they that are so coupled: we do
earnestly seek it, and are never well till we have effected it. But
with what fate? like those birds in the Emblem, that fed about a
cage, so long as they could fly away at their pleasure liked well of
it; but when they were taken and might not get loose, though they
had the same meat, pined away for sullenness, and would not eat.
So we commend marriage,

 --"donec miselli liberi
Aspicimus dominam; sed postquam heu janua clausa est,
Fel intus est quod mel fuit:"

"So long as we are wooers, may kiss and coll at our pleasure,
nothing is so sweet, we are in heaven as we think; but when we are
once tied, and have lost our liberty, marriage is an hell," "give me
my yellow hose again:" a mouse in a trap lives as merrily, we are in
a purgatory some of us, if not hell itself. Dulce bellum inexpertis,
as the proverb is, 'tis fine talking of war, and marriage sweet in
contemplation, till it be tried: and then as wars are most dangerous,
irksome, every minute at death's door, so is, &c. When those wild
Irish peers, saith Stanihurst, were feasted by king Henry the
Second, (at what time he kept his Christmas at Dublin) and had
tasted of his prince-like cheer, generous wines, dainty fare, had
seen his massy plate of silver, gold, enamelled, beset with jewels,
golden candlesticks, goodly rich hangings, brave furniture, heard
his trumpets sound, fifes, drums, and his exquisite music in all
kinds: when they had observed his majestical presence as he sat in
purple robes, crowned, with his sceptre, &c., in his royal seat, the
poor men were so amazed, enamoured, and taken with the object,
that they were pertaesi domestici et pristini tyrotarchi, as weary
and ashamed of their own sordidity and manner of life. They would
all be English forthwith; who but English! but when they had now
submitted themselves, and lost their former liberty, they began to
rebel some of them, others repent of what they had done, when it
was too late. 'Tis so with us bachelors, when we see and behold
those sweet faces, those gaudy shows that women make, observe
their pleasant gestures and graces, give ear to their siren tunes, see
them dance, &c., we think their conditions are as fine as their faces,
we are taken, with dumb signs, in amplexum ruimus, we rave, we
burn, and would fain be married. But when we feel the miseries,
cares, woes, that accompany it, we make our moan many of us, cry
out at length and cannot be released. If this be true now, as some
out of experience will inform us, farewell wiving for my part, and
as the comical poet merrily saith,

 "Perdatur ille pessime qui foeminam
Duxit secundus, nam nihil primo imprecor!
Ignarus ut puto mali primus fuit."

 "Foul fall him that brought the second match to pass,
The first I wish no harm, poor man alas!
He knew not what he did, nor what it was."

What shall I say to him that marries again and again, Stulta maritali
qui porrigit ora capistro, (Juvenal. "Who thrusts his foolish neck a
second time into the halter.") I pity him not, for the first time he
must do as he may, bear it out sometimes by the head and
shoulders, and let his next neighbour ride, or else run away, or as
that Syracusian in a tempest, when all ponderous things were to be
exonerated out of the ship, quia maximum pondus erat, fling his
wife into the sea. But this I confess is comically spoken, and so I
pray you take it. In sober sadness, marriage is a bondage, a
thraldom, a yoke, a hindrance to all good enterprises, ("he hath
married a wife and cannot come") a stop to all preferments, a rock
on which many are saved, many impinge and are cast away: not
that the thing is evil in itself or troublesome, but full of all
contentment and happiness, one of the three things which please
God, "when a man and his wife agree together," an honourable and
happy estate, who knows it not? If they be sober, wise, honest, as
the poet infers,

 "Si commodos nanciscantur amores,
Nullum iis abest voluptatis genus."

"If fitly match'd be man and wife,
No pleasure's wanting to their life."

But to undiscreet sensual persons, that as brutes are wholly led by
sense, it is a feral plague, many times a hell itself, and can give
little or no content, being that they are often so irregular and
prodigious in their lusts, so diverse in their affections. Uxor nomen
dignitatis, non voluptatis, as he said, a wife is a name of honour,
not of pleasure: she is fit to bear the office, govern a family, to
bring up children, sit at a board's end and carve, as some carnal
men think and say; they had rather go to the stews, or have now
and then a snatch as they can come by it, borrow of their
neighbours, than have wives of their own; except they may, as
some princes and great men do, keep as many courtesans as they
will themselves, fly out impune, Permolere uxores alienas, that
polygamy of Turks, Lex Julia, with Caesar once enforced in Rome,
(though Levinus Torrentius and others suspect it) uti uxores quot et
quas vellent liceret, that every great man might marry, and keep as
many wives as he would, or Irish divorcement were in use: but as it
is, 'tis hard and gives not that satisfaction to these carnal men,
beastly men as too many are: What still the same, to be tied to one,
be she never so fair, never so virtuous, is a thing they may not
endure, to love one long. Say thy pleasure, and counterfeit as thou
wilt, as Parmeno told Thais, Neque tu uno eris contenta, "one man
will never please thee;" nor one woman many men. But as Pan
replied to his father Mercury, when he asked whether he was
married, Nequaquam pater, amator enim sum &c. "No, father, no, I
am a lover still, and cannot be contented with one woman."
Pythias, Echo, Menades, and I know not how many besides, were
his mistresses, he might not abide marriage. Varietas delectat, 'tis
loathsome and tedious, what one still? which the satirist said of
Iberina, is verified in most,

 "Unus Iberinae vir sufficit? ocyus illud
Extorquebis ut haec oculo contenta sit uno."

"'Tis not one man will serve her by her will,
As soon she'll have one eye as one man still."

As capable of any impression as materia prima itself, that still
desires new forms, like the sea their affections ebb and flow.
Husband is a cloak for some to hide their villainy; once married she
may fly out at her pleasure, the name of husband is a sanctuary to
make all good. Eo ventum (saith Seneca) ut nulla virum habeat, nisi
ut irritet adulterum. They are right and straight, as true Trojans as
mine host's daughter, that Spanish wench in Ariosto, as good wives
as Messalina. Many men are as constant in their choice, and as
good husbands as Nero himself, they must have their pleasure of all
they see, and are in a word far more fickle than any woman.

For either they be full of jealousy,
Or masterfull, or loven novelty.

Good men have often ill wives, as bad as Xanthippe was to
Socrates, Elevora to St. Lewis, Isabella to our Edward the Second;
and good wives are as often matched to ill husbands, as Mariamne
to Herod, Serena to Diocletian, Theodora to Theophilus, and Thyra
to Gurmunde. But I will say nothing of dissolute and bad husbands,
of bachelors and their vices; their good qualities are a fitter subject
for a just volume, too well known already in every village, town
and city, they need no blazon; and lest I should mar any matches,
or dishearten loving maids, for this present I will let them pass.

Being that men and women are so irreligious, depraved by nature,
so wandering in their affections, so brutish, so subject to
disagreement, so unobservant of marriage rites, what shall I say? If
thou beest such a one, or thou light on such a wife, what concord
can there be, what hope of agreement? 'tis not conjugium but
conjurgium, as the Reed and Fern in the Emblem, averse and
opposite in nature: 'tis twenty to one thou wilt not marry to thy
contentment: but as in a lottery forty blanks were drawn commonly
for one prize, out of a multitude you shall hardly choose a good
one: a small ease hence then, little comfort,

 "Nec integrum unquam transiges laetus diem."

"If he or she be such a one,
Thou hadst much better be alone."

If she be barren, she is not -- &c. If she have children, and thy state
be not good, though thou be wary and circumspect, thy charge will
undo thee,-- foecunda domum tibi prole gravabit, thou wilt not be
able to bring them up, "and what greater misery can there be than
to beget children, to whom thou canst leave no other inheritance
but hunger and thirst?" cum fames dominatur, strident voces
rogantium panem, penetrantes patris cor: what so grievous as to
turn them up to the wide world, to shift for themselves? No plague
like to want: and when thou hast good means, and art very careful
of their education, they will not be ruled. Think but of that old
proverb, ????? te??a p?ata [eroon tekna pemata], heroum filii
noxae, great men's sons seldom do well; O utinam aut coelebs
mansissem, aut prole carerem! "would that I had either remained
single, or not had children," Augustus exclaims in Suetonius. Jacob
had his Reuben, Simeon and Levi; David an Amnon, an Absalom,
Adoniah; wise men's sons are commonly fools, insomuch that
Spartian concludes, Neminem prope magnorum virorum optimum
et utilem reliquisse filium: they had been much better to have been
childless. 'Tis too common in the middle sort; thy son's a drunkard,
a gamester, a spendthrift; thy daughter a fool, a whore; thy servants
lazy drones and thieves; thy neighbours devils, they will make thee
weary of thy life. "If thy wife be froward, when she may not have
her will, thou hadst better be buried alive; she will be so impatient,
raving still, and roaring like Juno in the tragedy, there's nothing but
tempests, all is in an uproar." If she be soft and foolish, thou wert
better have a block, she will shame thee and reveal thy secrets; if
wise and learned, well qualified, there is as much danger on the
other side, mulierem doctam ducere periculosissimum, saith
Nevisanus, she will be too insolent and peevish, Malo Venusinam
quam te Cornelia mater. (Juvenal. "I would rather have a
Venusinian wench than thee, Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi,"
&c.) Take heed; if she be a slut, thou wilt loathe her; if proud, she'll
beggar thee, so "she'll spend thy patrimony in baubles, all Arabia
will not serve to perfume her hair," saith Lucian; if fair and wanton,
she'll make thee a cornuto; if deformed, she will paint. "If her face
be filthy by nature, she will mend it by art," alienis et adscititiis
imposturis, "which who can endure?" If she do not paint, she will
look so filthy, thou canst not love her, and that peradventure will
make thee dishonest. Cromerus lib. 12. hist., relates of Casimirus,
that he was unchaste, because his wife Aleida, the daughter of
Henry, Landgrave of Hesse, was so deformed. If she be poor, she
brings beggary with her (saith Nevisanus) , misery and discontent.
If you marry a maid, it is uncertain how she proves, Haec forsan
veniet non satis apta tibi. ( "Perhaps she will not suit you.") If
young, she is likely wanton and untaught; if lusty, too lascivious;
and if she be not satisfied, you know where and when, nil nisi
jurgia, all is in an uproar, and there is little quietness to be had; If
an old maid, 'tis a hazard she dies in childbed; if a rich widow,
induces te in laqueum, thou dost halter thyself, she will make all
away beforehand, to her other children, &c.-- dominam quis possit
ferre tonantem? ("Who can endure a virago for a wife?") she will
hit thee still in the teeth with her first husband; if a young widow,
she is often insatiable and immodest. If she be rich, well descended,
bring a great dowry, or be nobly allied, thy wife's friends will eat
thee out of house and home, dives ruinam aedibus inducit, she will
be so proud, so high-minded, so imperious. For -- nihil est magis
intolerabile dite, "there's nothing so intolerable," thou shalt be as
the tassel of a goshawk, "she will ride upon thee, domineer as she
list," wear the breeches in her oligarchical government, and beggar
thee besides. Uxores divites servitutem exigunt (as Seneca hits
them, declam. lib. 2. declam. 6.) -- Dotem accepi imperium perdidi.
They will have sovereignty, pro conjuge dominam arcessis, they
will have attendance, they will do what they list. In taking a dowry
thou losest thy liberty, dos intrat, libertas exit, hazardest thine
estate.

"Hae sunt atque aliae multae in magnis dotibus
Incommoditates, sumptusque intolerabiles," &c.

"with many such inconveniences:" say the best, she is a
commanding servant; thou hadst better have taken a good
housewife maid in her smock. Since then there is such hazard, if
thou be wise keep thyself as thou art, 'tis good to match, much
better to be free.

 " -- procreare liberos lepidissimum.
Hercle vero liberum esse, id multo est lepidius."

 (Plautus Mil. Glor. act. 3. sc. 1. "To be a father is very pleasant,
but to be a freeman still more so.")

 Art thou young? then match not yet; if old, match not at all.

"Vis juvenis nubere? nondum venit tempus.
Ingravescente aetate jam tempus praeteriit."

And therefore, with that philosopher, still make answer to thy
friends that importune thee to marry, adhuc intempestivum, 'tis yet
unseasonable, and ever will be.

Consider withal how free, how happy, how secure, how heavenly,
in respect, a single man is, as he said in the comedy, Et isti quod
fortunatum esse autumant, uxorem nunquam habui, and that which
all my neighbours admire and applaud me for, account so great a
happiness, I never had a wife; consider how contentedly, quietly,
neatly, plentifully, sweetly, and how merrily he lives! he hath no
man to care for but himself, none to please, no charge, none to
control him, is tied to no residence, no cure to serve, may go and
come, when, whither, live where he will, his own master, and do
what he list himself. Consider the excellency of virgins, Virgo
coelum meruit, marriage replenisheth the earth, but virginity
Paradise; Elias, Eliseus, John Baptist, were bachelors: virginity is a
precious jewel, a fair garland, a never-fading flower; for why was
Daphne turned to a green bay-tree, but to show that virginity is
immortal?

 "Ut flos in septis secretus nascitur hortis,
Ignotus pecori, nullo contusus aratro,
Quam mulcent aurae, firmat sol, educat imber, &c.
Sic virgo dum intacta manet, dum chara suis, sed
Cum Castum amisit," &c.--

 (Catul. car. nuptiali. "As the flower that grows in the secret
inclosure of the garden, unknown to the flocks, impressed by the
ploughshare, which also the breezes refresh, the heat strengthens,
the rain makes grow: so is a virgin whilst untouched, whilst dear
to her relatives, but when once she forfeits her chastity," &c)

Virginity is a fine picture, as Bonaventure calls it, a blessed thing in
itself, and if you will believe a Papist, meritorious. And although
there be some inconveniences, irksomeness, solitariness, &c.,
incident to such persons, want of those comforts, quae, aegro
assideat et curet aegrotum, fomentum paret, roget medieum, &c.,
embracing, dalliance, kissing, colling, &c., those furious motives
and wanton pleasures a new-married wife most part enjoys; yet
they are but toys in respect, easily to be endured, if conferred to
those frequent encumbrances of marriage. Solitariness may be
otherwise avoided with mirth, music, good company, business,
employment; in a word, Gaudebit minus, et minus dolebit; for their
good nights, he shall have good days. And methinks some time or
other, amongst so many rich bachelors, a benefactor should be
found to build a monastical college for old, decayed, deformed, or
discontented maids to live together in, that have lost their first
loves, or otherwise miscarried, or else are willing howsoever to
lead a single life. The rest I say are toys in respect, and sufficiently
recompensed by those innumerable contents and incomparable
privileges of virginity. Think of these things, confer both lives, and
consider last of all these commodious prerogatives a bachelor hath,
how well he is esteemed, how heartily welcome to all his friends,
quam mentitis obsequiis, as Tertullian observes, with what
counterfeit courtesies they will adore him, follow him, present him
with gifts, humatis donis; "it cannot be believed" (saith Ammianus)
"with what humble service he shall be worshipped," how loved and
respected: "If he want children, (and have means) he shall be often
invited, attended on by princes, and have advocates to plead his
cause for nothing," as Plutarch adds. Wilt thou then be reverenced,
and had in estimation?

 --"dominus tamen et domini rex
Si tu vis fieri, nullus tibi parvulus aula.
Luserit Aeneas, nec filia dulcior illa?
Jucundum et charum sterilis facit uxor amicum."

 (Annal. 11. "If you wish to be master of your house, let no little
ones play in your halls, nor any little daughter yet more dear, a
barren wife makes a pleasant and affectionate companion.")

Live a single man, marry not, and thou shalt soon perceive how
those Haeredipetae (for so they were called of old) will seek after
thee, bribe and flatter thee for thy favour, to be thine heir or
executor: Aruntius and Aterius, those famous parasites in this kind,
as Tacitus and Seneca have recorded, shall not go beyond them.
Periplectomines, that good personate old man, delicium senis, well
understood this in Plautus: for when Pleusides exhorted him to
marry that he might have children of his own, he readily replied in
this sort,

"Quando habeo multos cognatos, quid opus mihi sit liberis?
Nunc bene vivo et fortunate, atque animo ut lubet.
Mea bona mea morte cognatis dicam interpartiant.
Illi apud me edunt, me curant, visunt quid agam, ecquid velim,
Qui mihi mittunt munera, ad prandium, ad coenam vocant."

"Whilst I have kin, what need I brats to have?
Now I live well, and as I will, most brave.
And when I die, my goods I'll give away
To them that do invite me every day.
That visit me, and send me pretty toys,
And strive who shall do me most courtesies."

This respect thou shalt have in like manner, living as he did, a
single man. But if thou marry once, cogitato in omni vita te servum
fore, bethink thyself what a slavery it is, what a heavy burden thou
shalt undertake, how hard a task thou art tied to, (for as Hierome
hath it, qui uxorem habet, debitor est, et uxoris servus alligatus,)
and how continuate, what squalor attends it, what irksomeness,
what charges, for wife and children are a perpetual bill of charges;
besides a myriad of cares, miseries, and troubles; for as that
comical Plautus merrily and truly said, he that wants trouble, must
get to be master of a ship, or marry a wife; and as another seconds
him, wife and children have undone me; so many and such infinite
encumbrances accompany this kind of life. Furthermore, uxor
intumuit, &c., or as he said in the comedy, Duxi uxorem, quam ibi
miseriam vidi, nati filii, alia cura. (Ter. Adelph. "I have married a
wife; what misery it has entailed upon me! sons were born and
other cares followed.") All gifts and invitations cease, no friend
will esteem thee, and thou shalt be compelled to lament thy misery,
and make thy moan with Bartholomeus Scheraeus, that famous
poet laureate, and professor of Hebrew in Wittenberg: I had
finished this work long since, but that inter alia dura et tristia quae
misero mihi pene tergum fregerunt, (I use his own words) amongst
many miseries which almost broke my back, s?????a [syzygia] ob
Xantipismum, a shrew to my wife tormented my mind above
measure, and beyond the rest. So shalt thou be compelled to
complain, and to cry out at last, with Phoroneus the lawyer, "How
happy had I been, if I had wanted a wife!" If this which I have said
will not suffice, see more in Lemnius lib. 4. cap. 13. de occult. nat.
mir. Espensaeus de continentia, lib. 6. cap. 8. Kornman de
virginitate, Platina in Amor. dial. Practica artis amandi, Barbarus
de re uxoria, Arnisaeus in polit. cap. 3. and him that is instar
omnium, Nevisanus the lawyer, Sylva nuptial, almost in every page.





SUBSECT. IV.-- Philters, Magical and Poetical Cures.

Where persuasions and other remedies will not take place, many fly
to unlawful means, philters, amulets, magic spells, ligatures,
characters, charms, which as a wound with the spear of Achilles, if
so made and caused, must so be cured. If forced by spells and
philters, saith Paracelsus, it must be eased by characters, Mag. lib.
2. cap 28. and by incantations. Fernelius Path. lib. 6. cap. 13.
Skenkius lib. 4. observ. med. hath some examples of such as have
been so magically caused, and magically cured, and by witchcraft:
so saith Baptista Codronchus, lib. 3. cap. 9. de mor. ven. Malleus
malef. cap. 6. 'Tis not permitted to be done, I confess; yet often
attempted: see more in Wierus lib. 3. cap. 18. de praestig. de
remediis per philtra. Delrio tom. 2. lib. 2. quaest. 3. sect. 3.
disquisit. magic. Cardan lib. 16. cap. 90. reckons up many
magnetical medicines, as to piss through a ring, &c. Mizaldus cent.
3. 30, Baptista Porta, Jason Pratensis, Lobelius pag. 87, Matthiolus,
&c., prescribe many absurd remedies. Radix mandragora ebibitae,
Annuli ex ungulis Asini, Stercus amatae sub cervical positum, illa
nesciente, &c., quum odorem foeditatis sentit, amor solvitur.
Noctuae ocum abstemios facit comestum, ex consilio Jarthae
Indorum gymnosophistae apud Philostratum lib. 3. Sanguis
amasiae, ebibitus omnem amoris sensum tollit: Faustinam Marci
Aurelii uxorem, gladiatoris amore captam, ita penitus consilio
Chaldaeorum liberatam, refert Julius Capitolinus. Some of our
astrologers will effect as much by characteristical images, ex
sigillis Hermetis, Salomonis, Chaelis, &c. mulieris imago habentis
crines sparsos, &c. Our old poets and fantastical writers have many
fabulous remedies for such as are lovesick, as that of Protesilaus'
tomb in Philostratus, in his dialogue between Phoenix and Vinitor:
Vinitor, upon occasion discoursing of the rare virtues of that shrine,
telleth him that Protesilaus' altar and tomb "cures almost all manner
of diseases, consumptions, dropsies, quartan-agues, sore eyes: and
amongst the rest, such as are lovesick shall there be helped." But
the most famous is Leucata Petra, that renowned rock in Greece, of
which Strabo writes, Geog. lib. 10. not far from St. Maures, saith
Sands, lib. 1. from which rock if any lover flung himself down
headlong, he was instantly cured. Venus after the death of Adonis,
"when she could take no rest for love," Cum vesana suas torreret
flamma medullas, came to the temple of Apollo to know what she
should do to be eased of her pain: Apollo sent her to Leucata Petra,
where she precipitated herself, and was forthwith freed; and when
she would needs know of him a reason of it, he told her again, that
he had often observed Jupiter, when he was enamoured on Juno,
thither go to ease and wash himself, and after him divers others.
Cephalus for the love of Protela, Degonetus' daughter, leaped down
here, that Lesbian Sappho for Phaon, on whom she miserably
doted. Cupidinis oestro percita e summo praeceps ruit, (Menander.
"Stricken by the gad-fly of love, rushed headlong from the
summit.") hoping thus to ease herself, and to be freed of her love
pangs.

 "Hic se Deucalion Pyrrhae suecensus amore
Mersit, et illaeso corpore pressit aquas.
Nec mora, fugit amor," &c.--

"Hither Deucalion came, when Pyrrha's love
Tormented him, and leapt down to the sea,
And had no harm at all, but by and by
His love was gone and chased quite away."

This medicine Jos. Scaliger speaks of, Ausoniarum lectionum lib.
18. Salmutz in Pancirol. de 7. mundi mirac. and other writers.
Pliny reports, that amongst the Cyzeni, there is a well consecrated
to Cupid, of which if any lover taste, his passion is mitigated: and
Anthony Verdurius Imag. deorum de Cupid. saith, that amongst the
ancients there was Amor Lethes, "he took burning torches, and
extinguished them in the river; his statute was to be seen in the
temple of Venus Eleusina," of which Ovid makes mention, and
saith "that all lovers of old went thither on pilgrimage, that would
be rid of their love-pangs." Pausanias, in Phocicis, writes of a
temple dedicated Veneri in spelunca, to Venus in the vault, at
Naupactus in Achaia (now Lepanto) in which your widows that
would have second husbands, made their supplications to the
goddess; all manner of suits concerning lovers were commenced,
and their grievances helped. The same author, in Achaicis, tells as
much of the river Senelus in Greece; if any lover washed himself in
it, by a secret virtue of that water, (by reason of the extreme
coldness belike) he was healed, of love's torments, Amoris vulnus
idem qui sanat facit; (Seneca. "The rise and remedy of love the
same.") which if it be so, that water, as he holds, is omni auro
pretiosior, better than any gold. Where none of all these remedies
will take place, I know no other but that all lovers must make a
head and rebel, as they did in Ausonius, and crucify Cupid till he
grant their request, or satisfy their desires.





SUBSECT. V.-- The last and best Cure of Love-Melancholy, is to
let them have their Desire.

The last refuge and surest remedy, to be put in practice in the
utmost place, when no other means will take effect, is to let them
go together, and enjoy one another: potissima cura est ut heros
amasia sua potiatur, saith Guianerius, cap. 15. tract. 15.
Aesculapius himself, to this malady, cannot invent a better remedy,
quam ut amanti cedat amatum, (Jason Pratensis) than that a lover
have his desire.

"Et pariter torulo bini jungantur in uno,
Et pulchro detur Aeneae Lavinia conjux."

"And let them both be joined in a bed,
And let Aeneas fair Lavinia wed;"

'Tis the special cure, to let them bleed in vena Hymenaea, for love
is a pleurisy, and if it be possible, so let it be,-- optataque gaudia
carpant. Arculanus holds it the speediest and the best cure, 'tis
Savanarola's last precept, a principal infallible remedy, the last,
sole, and safest refuge.

 "Julia sola poles nostras extinguere flammas,
Non nive, nun glacie, sed potes igne pari."

"Julia alone can quench my desire,
With neither ice nor snow, but with like fire."

When you have all done, saith Avicenna, "there is no speedier or
safer course, than to join the parties together according to their
desires and wishes, the custom and form of law; and so we have
seen him quickly restored to his former health, that was languished
away to skin and bones; after his desire was satisfied, his discontent
ceased, and we thought it strange; our opinion is therefore that in
such cases nature is to be obeyed." Areteus, an old author, lib. 3.
cap. 3. hath an instance of a young man, when no other means
could prevail, was so speedily relieved. What remains then but to
join them in marriage?

 "Tunc et basia morsiunculasque
Surreptim dare, mutuos fovere
Amplexus licet, et licet jocari;"

"they may then kiss and coll, lie and look babies in one another's
eyes," as their sires before them did, they may then satiate
themselves with love's pleasures, which they have so long wished
and expected;

"Atque uno simul in toro quiescant,
Conjuncto simul ore suavientur,
Et somnos agitent quiete in una."

Yea, but hic labor, hoc opus, this cannot conveniently be done, by
reason of many and several impediments. Sometimes both parties
themselves are not agreed: parents, tutors, masters, guardians, will
not give consent; laws, customs, statutes hinder: poverty,
superstition, fear and suspicion: many men dote on one woman,
semel et simul: she dotes as much on him, or them, and in modesty
must not, cannot woo, as unwilling to confess as willing to love:
she dare not make it known, show her affection, or speak her mind.
"And hard is the choice" (as it is in Euphues) "when one is
compelled either by silence to die with grief, or by speaking to live
with shame." In this case almost was the fair lady Elizabeth,
Edward the Fourth his daughter, when she was enamoured on
Henry the Seventh, that noble young prince, and new saluted king,
when she broke forth into that passionate speech, "O that I were
worthy of that comely prince! but my father being dead, I want
friends to motion such a matter! What shall I say? I am all alone,
and dare not open my mind to any. What if I acquaint my mother
with it? bashfulness forbids. What if some of the lords? audacity
wants. O that I might but confer with him, perhaps in discourse I
might let slip such a word that might discover mine intention!"
How many modest maids may this concern, I am a poor servant,
what shall I do? I am a fatherless child, and want means, I am
blithe and buxom, young and lusty, but I have never a suitor,
Expectant stolidi ut ego illos rogatum veniam, as she said, A
company of silly fellows look belike that I should woo them and
speak first: fain they would and cannot woo,-- quae primum
exordia sumam? being merely passive they may not make suit, with
many such lets and inconveniences, which I know not; what shall
we do in such a case? sing "Fortune my foe?" --

Some are so curious in this behalf, as those old Romans, our
modern Venetians, Dutch and French, that if two parties clearly
love, the one noble, the other ignoble, they may not by their laws
match, though equal otherwise in years, fortunes, education, and all
good affection. In Germany, except they can prove their gentility
by three descents, they scorn to match with them. A nobleman must
marry a noblewoman: a baron, a baron's daughter; a knight, a
knight's; a gentleman, a gentleman's: as slaters sort their slates, do
they degrees and families. If she be never so rich, fair, well
qualified otherwise, they will make him forsake her. The Spaniards
abhor all widows; the Turks repute them old women, if past five-
and-twenty. But these are too severe laws, and strict customs,
dandum aliquid amori, we are all the sons of Adam, 'tis opposite to
nature, it ought not to be so. Again: he loves her most impotently,
she loves not him, and so e contra. Pan loved Echo, Echo Satyrus,
Satyrus Lyda.

"Quantum ipsorum aliquis amantem oderat,
Tantum ipsius amans odiosus erat."

"They love and loathe of all sorts, he loves her, she hates him; and
is loathed of him, on whom she dotes." Cupid hath two darts, one
to force love, all of gold, and that sharp,-- Quod facit auratum est;
(Ovid. Met. 1. "The efficacious one is golden.") another blunt, of
lead, and that to hinder;-- fugat hoc, facit illud amorem, "this
dispels, that creates love." This we see too often verified in our
common experience. Choresus dearly loved that virgin Callyrrhoe;
but the more he loved her, the more she hated him. Oenone loved
Paris, but he rejected her: they are stiff of all sides, as if beauty
were therefore created to undo, or be undone. I give her all
attendance, all observance, I pray and intreat, Alma precor miserere
mei, fair mistress pity me, I spend myself, my time, friends and
fortunes, to win her favour, (as he complains in the Eclogue,) I
lament, sigh, weep, and make my moan to her, "but she is hard as
flint," -- cautibus Ismariis immotior -- as fair and hard as a
diamond, she will not respect, Despectus tibi sum, or hear me,

 --"fugit illa vocantem
Nil lachrymas miserata meas, nil flexa querelis."

 ("Having no compassion for my tears, she avoids my prayers,
and is inflexible to my plaints.")

What shall I do?

"I wooed her as a young man should do,
But sir, she said, I love not you."

 "Durior at scopulis mea
Coelia, marmore, ferro,
Robore, rupe, antro, cornu, adamante, gelu."

"Rock, marble, heart of oak with iron barr'd,
Frost, flint or adamants, are not so hard."

I give, I bribe, I send presents, but they are refused. Rusticus est
Coridon, nec munera curat Alexis. I protest, I swear, I weep,

 --"odioque rependit amores,
Irrisu lachrymas" --

"She neglects me for all this, she derides me," contemns me, she
hates me, "Phillida flouts me:" Caute, feris, quercu durior
Eurydice, stiff, churlish, rocky still.

And 'tis most true, many gentlewomen are so nice, they scorn all
suitors, crucify their poor paramours, and think nobody good
enough for them, as dainty to please as Daphne herself.

 "Multi illum petiere, illa aspernate petentes,
Nec quid Hymen, quid amor, quid sint connubia curat."

"Many did woo her, but she scorn'd them still,
And said she would not marry by her will."

One while they will not marry, as they say at least, (when as they
intend nothing less) another while not yet, when 'tis their only
desire, they rave upon it. She will marry at last, but not him: he is a
proper man indeed, and well qualified, but he wants means: another
of her suitors hath good means, but he wants wit; one is too old,
another too young, too deformed, she likes not his carriage: a third
too loosely given, he is rich, but base born: she will be a
gentlewoman, a lady, as her sister is, as her mother is: she is all out
as fair, as well brought up, hath as good a portion, and she looks for
as good a match, as Matilda or Dorinda: if not, she is resolved as
yet to tarry, so apt are young maids to boggle at every object, so
soon won or lost with every toy, so quickly diverted, so hard to be
pleased. In the meantime, quot torsit amantes? one suitor pines
away, languisheth in love, mori quot denique cogit! another sighs
and grieves, she cares not: and which Siroza objected to Ariadne,

"Nec magis Euryali gemitu, lacrymisque moveris,
Quam prece turbati flectitur ora sati.
Tu juvenem, quo non formosior alter in urbe,
Spernis, et insano cogis amore mori."

"Is no more mov'd with those sad sighs and tears,
Of her sweetheart, than raging sea with prayers:
Thou scorn'st the fairest youth in all our city,
And mak'st him almost mad for love to die:"

They take a pride to prank up themselves, to make young men.
enamoured,-- captare viros et spernere capias, (T. H. "To captivate
the men, but despise them when captive.") to dote on them, and to
run mad for their sakes,

 --"sed nullis illa movetur
Fletibus, aut voces ullas tractabilis audit."

"Whilst niggardly their favours they discover,
They love to be belov'd, yet scorn the lover."

All suit and service is too little for them, presents too base:
Tormentis gaudet amantis -- et spoliis. As Atalanta they must be
overrun, or not won. Many young men are as obstinate, and as
curious in their choice, as tyrannically proud, insulting, deceitful,
false-hearted, as irrefragable and peevish on the other side;
Narcissus-like,

 "Multi illum juvenes, multae petiere puellae,
Sed fuit in tenera tam dira superbia forma,
Nulli illum juvenes, nullas petiere puellae."

"Young men and maids did to him sue,
But in his youth, so proud, so coy was he,
Young men and maids bade him adieu."

Echo wept and wooed him by all means above the rest, Love me
for pity, or pity me for love, but he was obstinate, Ante ait emoriar
quam sit tibi copia nostri, "he would rather die than give consent."
Psyche ran whining after Cupid,

 "Formosum tua te Psyche formosa requirit,
Et poscit te dia deum, puerumque puella;"

"Fair Cupid, thy fair Psyche to thee sues,
A lovely lass a fine young gallant woos;"

but he rejected her nevertheless. Thus many lovers do hold out so
long, doting on themselves, stand in their own light, till in the end
they come to be scorned and rejected, as Stroza's Gargiliana was,

"Te juvenes, te odere senes, desertaque langues,
Quae fueras procerum publica cura prius."

"Both young and old do hate thee scorned now,
That once was all their joy and comfort too."

As Narcissus was himself,

 --"Who despising many.
Died ere he could enjoy the love of any."

They begin to be contemned themselves of others, as he was of his
shadow, and take up with a poor curate, or an old serving-man at
last, that might have had their choice of right good matches in their
youth; like that generous mare, in Plutarch, which would admit of
none but great horses, but when her tail was cut off and mane shorn
close, and she now saw herself so deformed in the water, when she
came to drink, ab asino conscendi se passa, she was contented at
last to be covered by an ass. Yet this is a common humour, will not
be left, and cannot be helped.

 "Hanc volo quae non vult, illam quae vult ego nolo:
Vincere vult animos, non satiare Venus."

"I love a maid, she loves me not: full fain
She would have me, but I not her again;
So love to crucify men's souls is bent:
But seldom doth it please or give consent."

"Their love danceth in a ring, and Cupid hunts them round about;
he dotes, is doted on again." Dumque petit petitur, pariterque
accedit et ardet, their affection cannot be reconciled. Oftentimes
they may and will not, 'tis their own foolish proceedings that mars
all, they are too distrustful of themselves, too soon dejected: say
she be rich, thou poor: she young, thou old; she lovely and fair,
thou most ill-favoured and deformed; she noble, thou base: she
spruce and fine, but thou an ugly clown: nil desperandum, there's
hope enough yet: Mopso Nisa datur, quid non speremus amantes?
Put thyself forward once more, as unlikely matches have been and
are daily made, see what will be the event. Many leave roses and
gather thistles, loathe honey and love verjuice: our likings are as
various as our palates. But commonly they omit opportunities,
oscula qui sumpsit, &c., they neglect the usual means and times.

"He that will not when he may,
When he will he shall have nay."

They look to be wooed, sought after, and sued to. Most part they
will and cannot, either for the above-named reasons, or for that
there is a multitude of suitors equally enamoured, doting all alike;
and where one alone must speed, what shall become of the rest?
Hero was beloved of many, but one did enjoy her; Penelope had a
company of suitors, yet all missed of their aim. In such cases he or
they must wisely and warily unwind themselves, unsettle his
affections by those rules above prescribed,-- quin stultos excutit
ignes, divert his cogitations, or else bravely bear it out, as Turnus
did, Tua sit Lavinia conjux, when he could not get her, with a kind
of heroical scorn he bid Aeneas take her, or with a milder farewell,
let her go. Et Phillida solus habeto, "Take her to you, God give you
joy, sir." The fox in the emblem would eat no grapes, but why?
because he could not get them; care not then for that which may not
be had.

Many such inconveniences, lets, and hindrances there are, which
cross their projects and crucify poor lovers, which sometimes may,
sometimes again cannot be so easily removed. But put case they be
reconciled all, agreed hitherto, suppose this love or good liking be
between two alone, both parties well pleased, there is mutuus amor,
mutual love and great affection; yet their parents, guardians, tutors,
cannot agree, thence all is dashed, the match is unequal: one rich,
another poor: durus pater, a hard-hearted, unnatural, a covetous
father will not marry his son, except he have so much money, ita in
aurum omnes insaniunt, as Chrysostom notes, nor join his daughter 
in marriage, to save her dowry, or for that he cannot spare her for
the service she doth him, and is resolved to part with nothing whilst
he lives, not a penny, though he may peradventure well give it, he
will not till he dies, and then as a pot of money broke, it is divided
amongst them that gaped after it so earnestly. Or else he wants
means to set her out, he hath no money, and though it be to the
manifest prejudice of her body and soul's health, he cares not, he
will take no notice of it, she must and shall tarry. Many slack and
careless parents, iniqui patres, measure their children's affections
by their own, they are now cold and decrepit themselves, past all
such youthful conceits, and they will therefore starve their
children's genus, have them a pueris illico nasci senes, they must
not marry, nec earum affines esse rerum quas secum fert
adolescentia: ex sua libidine moderatur quae est nunc, non quae
olim fuit: as he said in the comedy: they will stifle nature, their
young bloods must not participate of youthful pleasures, but be as
they are themselves old on a sudden. And 'tis a general fault
amongst most parents in bestowing of their children, the father
wholly respects wealth, when through his folly, riot, indiscretion,
he hath embezzled his estate, to recover himself, he confines and
prostitutes his eldest son's love and affection to some fool, or
ancient, or deformed piece for money.

 "Phanaretae ducet filiam, rufam, illam virginem,
Caesiam, sparso ore, adunco naso" --

 (Ter. Heaut. Scen. ult. "He will marry the daughter of rich
parents, a red-haired, blear-eyed, big-mouthed, crooked-nosed
wench.")

and though his son utterly dislike, with Clitipho in the comedy,
Non possum pater: If she be rich, Eia (he replies) ut elegans est,
credas animum ibi esse? he must and shall have her, she is fair
enough, young enough, if he look or hope to inherit his lands, he
shall marry, not when or whom he loves, Arconidis hujus filiam,
but whom his father commands, when and where he likes, his
affection must dance attendance upon him. His daughter is in the
same predicament forsooth, as an empty boat, she must carry what,
where, when, and whom her father will. So that in these businesses
the father is still for the best advantage; now the mother respects
good kindred, must part the son a proper woman. All which Livy
exemplifies, dec. 1. lib. 4. a gentleman and a yeoman wooed a
wench in Rome (contrary to that statute that the gentry and
commonalty must not match together) ; the matter was
controverted: the gentleman was preferred by the mother's voice,
quae quam splendissimis nuptiis jungi puellam volebat: the
overseers stood for him that was most worth, &c. But parents ought
not to be so strict in this behalf, beauty is a dowry of itself all
sufficient, Virgo formosa, etsi oppido pauper, abunde dotata est,
Rachel was so married to Jacob, and Bonaventure, in 4. sent,
"denies that he so much as venially sins, that marries a maid for
comeliness of person." The Jews, Deut. xxi. 11, if they saw
amongst the captives a beautiful woman, some small circumstances
observed, might take her to wife. They should not be too severe in
that kind, especially if there be no such urgent occasion, or
grievous impediment. 'Tis good for a commonwealth. Plato holds,
that in their contracts "young men should never avoid the affinity
of poor folks, or seek after rich." Poverty and base parentage may
be sufficiently recompensed by many other good qualities,
modesty, virtue, religion, and choice bringing up, "I am poor, I
confess, but am I therefore contemptible, and an abject? Love itself
is naked, the graces; the stars, and Hercules clad in a lion's skin."
Give something to virtue, love, wisdom, favour, beauty, person; be
not all for money. Besides, you must consider that Amor cogi non
potest, love cannot be compelled, they must affect as they may:
Fatum est in partibus illis quas sinus abscondit, as the saying is,
marriage and hanging goes by destiny, matches are made in
heaven.

"It lies not in our power to love or hate,
For will in us is overrul'd by fate."

A servant maid in Aristaenetus loved her mistress's minion, which
when her dame perceived, furiosa aemulatione in a jealous humour
she dragged her about the house by the hair of the head, and vexed
her sore. The wench cried out, "O mistress, fortune hath made my
body your servant, but not my soul!" Affections are free, not to be
commanded. Moreover it may be to restrain their ambition, pride,
and covetousness, to correct those hereditary diseases of a family,
God in his just judgment assigns and permits such matches to be
made. For I am of Plato and Bodine's mind, that families have their
bounds and periods as well as kingdoms, beyond which for extent
or continuance they shall not exceed, six or seven hundred years, as
they there illustrate by a multitude of examples, and which Peucer
and Melancthon approve, but in a perpetual tenor (as we see by
many pedigrees of knights, gentlemen, yeomen) continue as they
began, for many descents with little alteration. Howsoever let them,
I say, give something to youth, to love; they must not think they
can fancy whom they appoint; Amor enim non imperatur, affectus
liber si quis alius et vices exigens, this is a free passion, as Pliny
said in a panegyric of his, and may not be forced: Love craves
liking, as the saying is, it requires mutual affections, a
correspondency: invito non datur nec aufertur, it may not be
learned, Ovid himself cannot teach us how to love, Solomon
describe, Apelles paint, or Helen express it. They must not
therefore compel or intrude; quis enim (as Fabius urgeth) amare
alieno animo potest? but consider withal the miseries of enforced
marriages; take pity upon youth: and such above the rest as have
daughters to bestow, should be very careful and provident to marry
them in due time. Siracides cap. 7. vers. 25. calls it "a weighty
matter to perform, so to marry a daughter to a man of
understanding in due time:" Virgines enim tempestive locandae, as
Lemnius admonisheth, lib. 1. cap. 6. Virgins must be provided for
in season, to prevent many diseases, of which Rodericus a Castro
de morbis mulierum, lib. 2. cap. 3. and Lod. Mercatus lib. 2. de
mulier. affect, cap. 4, de melanch. virginum et viduarum, have both
largely discoursed. And therefore as well to avoid these feral
maladies, 'tis good to get them husbands betimes, as to prevent
some other gross inconveniences, and for a thing that I know
besides; ubi nuptiarum tempus et aetas advenerit, as Chrysostom
adviseth, let them not defer it; they perchance will marry
themselves else, or do worse. If Nevisanus the lawyer do not
impose, they may do it by right: for as he proves out of Curtius, and
some other civilians, Sylvae, nup. lib. 2. numer. 30. "A maid past
twenty-five years of age, against her parents' consent may marry
such a one as is unworthy of, and inferior to her, and her father by
law must be compelled to give her a competent dowry." Mistake
me not in the mean time, or think that I do apologise here for any
headstrong, unruly, wanton flirts. I do approve that of St. Ambrose
(Comment. in Genesis xxiv. 51) , which he hath written touching
Rebecca's spousals, "A woman should give unto her parents the
choice of her husband, lest she be reputed to be malapert and
wanton, if she take upon her to make her own choice; for she
should rather seem to be desired by a man, than to desire a man
herself." To those hard parents alone I retort that of Curtius, (in the
behalf of modester maids) , that are too remiss and careless of their
due time and riper years. For if they tarry longer, to say truth, they
are past date, and nobody will respect them. A woman with us in
Italy (saith Aretine's Lucretia) twenty-four years of age, "is old
already, past the best, of no account." An old fellow, as Lycistrata
confesseth in Aristophanes, etsi sit canus, cito puellam virginem
ducat uxorem, and 'tis no news for an old fellow to marry a young
wench: but as he follows it, mulieris brevis occasio est, etsi hoc
non apprehenderit, nemo vult ducere uxorem, expectans vero sedet;
who cares for an old maid? she may set, &c. A virgin, as the poet
holds, lasciva et petulans puella virgo, is like a flower, a rose
withered on a sudden.

 "Quam modo nascentem rutilus conspexit Eous,
 Hanc rediens sero vespere vidit anum."

"She that was erst a maid as fresh as May,
Is now an old crone, time so steals away."

Let them take time then while they may, make advantage of youth,
and as he prescribes,

 "Collige virgo rosas dum flos novus et nova pubes,
Et memor esto aevum sic properare tuum."

"Fair maids, go gather roses in the prime,
And think that as a flower so goes on time."

Let's all love, dum vires annique sinunt, while we are in the flower
of years, fit for love matters, and while time serves: for

 "Soles occidere et redire possunt,
Nobis cum semel occidit brevis lux,
Nox est perpetuo una dormienda."

 "Suns that set may rise again,
But if once we lose this light,
'Tis with us perpetual night."

Volat irrevocabile tempus, time past cannot be recalled. But we
need no such exhortation, we are all commonly too forward: yet if
there be any escape, and all be not as it should, as Diogenes struck
the father when the son swore, because he taught him no better, if a
maid or young man miscarry, I think their parents oftentimes,
guardians, overseers, governors, neque vos (saith Chrysostom) a
supplicio immunes evadetis, si non statim ad nuptias, &c. are in as
much fault, and as severely to be punished as their children, in
providing for them no sooner.

Now for such as have free liberty to bestow themselves, I could
wish that good counsel of the comical old man were put in practice,

 "Opulentiores pauperiorum ut filias
Indotas dicant uxores domum:
Et multo fiet civitas concordior,
Et invidia nos minore utemur, quam utimur."

"That rich men would marry poor maidens some,
And that without dowry, and so bring them home,
So would much concord be in our city,
Less envy should we have, much more pity."

If they would care less for wealth, we should have much more
content and quietness in a commonwealth. Beauty, good bringing
up, methinks, is a sufficient portion of itself, Dos est sua forma
puellis, "her beauty is a maiden's dower," and he doth well that will
accept of such a wife. Eubulides, in Aristaenetus, married a poor
man's child, facie non illaetabili, of a merry countenance, and
heavenly visage, in pity of her estate, and that quickly. Acontius
coming to Delos, to sacrifice to Diana, fell in love with Cydippe, a
noble lass, and wanting means to get her love, flung a golden apple
into her lap, with this inscription upon it,

"Juro tibi sane per mystica sacra Dianae,
Me tibi venturum comitem, sponsumque futurum."

"I swear by all the rites of Diana,
I'll come and be thy husband if I may."

She considered of it, and upon some small inquiry of his person
and estate, was married unto him.

"Blessed is the wooing,
That is not long a doing."

As the saying is; when the parties are sufficiently known to each
other, what needs such scrupulosity, so many circumstances? dost
thou know her conditions, her bringing-up, like her person? let her
means be what they will, take her without any more ado. Dido and
Aeneas were accidentally driven by a storm both into one cave,
they made a match upon it; Massinissa was married to that fair
captive Sophonisba, King Syphax' wife, the same day that he saw
her first, to prevent Scipio Laelius, lest they should determine
otherwise of her. If thou lovest the party, do as much: good
education and beauty is a competent dowry, stand not upon money.
Erant olim aurei homines (saith Theocritus) et adamantes
redamabant, in the golden world men did so, (in the reign of
Ogyges belike, before staggering Ninus began to domineer) if all
be true that is reported: and some few nowadays will do as much,
here and there one; 'tis well done methinks, and all happiness befall
them for so doing. Leontius, a philosopher of Athens, had a fair
daughter called Athenais, multo corporis lepore ac Venere, (saith
mine author) of a comely carriage, he gave her no portion but her
bringing up, occulto formae, praesagio, out of some secret
foreknowledge of her fortune, bestowing that little which he had
amongst his other children. But she, thus qualified, was preferred
by some friends to Constantinople, to serve Pulcheria, the
emperor's sister, of whom she was baptised and called Eudocia.
Theodosius, the emperor, in short space took notice of her excellent
beauty and good parts, and a little after, upon his sister's sole
commendation, made her his wife: 'twas nobly done of Theodosius.
Rudophe was the fairest lady in her days in all Egypt; she went to
wash her, and by chance, (her maids meanwhile looking but
carelessly to her clothes) an eagle stole away one of her shoes, and
laid it in Psammeticus the King of Egypt's lap at Memphis: he
wondered at the excellency of the shoe and pretty foot, but more
Aquilae factum, at the manner of the bringing of it: and caused
forthwith proclamation to be made, that she that owned that shoe
should come presently to his court; the virgin came, and was
forthwith married to the king. I say this was heroically done, and
like a prince: I commend him for it, and all such as have means,
that will either do (as he did) themselves, or so for love, &c., marry
their children. If he be rich, let him take such a one as wants, if she
be virtuously given; for as Siracides, cap. 7. ver. 19. adviseth,
"Forego not a wife and good woman; for her grace is above gold."
If she have fortunes of her own, let her make a man. Danaus of
Lacedaemon had a many daughters to bestow, and means enough
for them all, he never stood inquiring after great matches, as others
used to do, but sent for a company of brave young gallants to his
house, and bid his daughters choose every one one, whom she liked
best, and take him for her husband, without any more ado. This act
of his was much approved in those times. But in this iron age of
ours, we respect riches alone, (for a maid must buy her husband
now with a great dowry, if she will have him) covetousness and
filthy lucre mars all good matches, or some such by-respects.
Crales, a Servian prince (as Nicephorus Gregoras Rom. hist. lib. 6.
relates it,) was an earnest suitor to Eudocia, the emperor's sister;
though her brother much desired it, yet she could not abide him, for
he had three former wives, all basely abused; but the emperor still,
Cralis amicitiam magni faciens, because he was a great prince, and
a troublesome neighbour, much desired his affinity, and to that end
betrothed his own daughter Simonida to him, a little girl five years
of age (he being forty-five,) and five years older than the emperor
himself: such disproportionable and unlikely matches can wealth
and a fair fortune make. And yet not that alone, it is not only
money, but sometimes vainglory, pride, ambition, do as much harm
as wretched covetousness itself in another extreme. If a yeoman
have one sole daughter, he must overmatch her, above her birth and
calling, to a gentleman forsooth, because of her great portion, too
good for one of her own rank, as he supposeth: a gentleman's
daughter and heir must be married to a knight baronet's eldest son
at least; and a knight's only daughter to a baron himself, or an earl,
and so upwards, her great dower deserves it. And thus striving for
more honour to their wealth, they undo their children, many
discontents follow, and oftentimes they ruinate their families.
Paulus Jovius gives instance in Galeatius the Second, that heroical
Duke of Milan, externas affinitates, decoras quidem regio fastu,
sed sibi et posteris damnosas et fere exitiales quaesivit; he married
his eldest son John Galeatius to Isabella the King of France his
sister, but she was socero tam gravis, ut ducentis millibus
aureorum constiterit, her entertainment at Milan was so costly that
it almost undid him. His daughter Violanta was married to Lionel
Duke of Clarence, the youngest son to Edward the Third, King of
England, but, ad ejus adventum tantae opes tam admirabili
liberalitate profusae sunt, ut opulentissimorum regum splendorem
superasse videretur, he was welcomed with such incredible
magnificence, that a king's purse was scarce able to bear it; for
besides many rich presents of horses, arms, plate, money, jewels,
&c., he made one dinner for him and his company, in which were
thirty-two messes and as much provision left, ut relatae a mensa
dapes decem millibus hominum sufficerent, as would serve ten
thousand men: but a little after Lionel died, novae nuptae et
intempestivis conviviis operam dans, &c., and to the duke's great
loss, the solemnity was ended. So can titles, honours, ambition,
make many brave, but unfortunate matches of all sides for by-
respects, (though both crazed in body and mind, most unwilling,
averse, and often unfit,) so love is banished, and we feel the smart
of it in the end. But I am too lavish peradventure in this subject.

Another let or hindrance is strict and severe discipline, laws and
rigorous customs, that forbid men to marry at set times, and in
some places; as apprentices, servants, collegiates, states of lives in
copyholds, or in some base inferior offices, Velle licet in such
cases, potiri non licet, as he said. They see but as prisoners through
a grate, they covet and catch, but Tantalus a labris, &c. Their love
is lost, and vain it is in such an estate to attempt. Gravissimum est
adamare nec potiri, 'tis a grievous thing to love and not enjoy.
They may, indeed, I deny not, marry if they will, and have free
choice, some of them; but in the meantime their case is desperate,
Lupum auribus tenent, they hold a wolf by the ears, they must
either burn or starve. 'Tis cornutum sophisma, hard to resolve, if
they marry they forfeit their estates, they are undone, and starve
themselves through beggary and want: if they do not marry, in this
heroical passion they furiously rage, are tormented, and torn in
pieces by their predominate affections. Every man hath not the gift
of continence, let him pray for it then, as Beza adviseth in his Tract
de Divortiis, because God hath so called him to a single life, in
taking away the means of marriage. Paul would have gone from
Mysia to Bithynia, but the spirit suffered him not, and thou wouldst
peradventure be a married man with all thy will, but that protecting
angel holds it not fit. The devil too sometimes may divert by his ill
suggestions, and mar many good matches, as the same Paul was
willing to see the Romans, but hindered of Satan he could not.
There be those that think they are necessitated by fate, their stars
have so decreed, and therefore they grumble at their hard fortune,
they are well inclined to marry, but one rub or other is ever in the
way; I know what astrologers say in this behalf, what Ptolemy
quadripartit. Tract. 4. cap. 4. Skoner lib. 1. cap. 12. what Leovitius
genitur. exempl. 1. which Sextus ab Heminga takes to be the
horoscope of Hieronymus Wolfius, what Pezelius, Origanaus and
Leovitius his illustrator Garceus, cap. 12. what Junctine, Protanus,
Campanella, what the rest, (to omit those Arabian conjectures a
parte conjugii, a parte lasciviae, triplicitates veneris, &c., and
those resolutions upon a question, an amica potiatur, &c.)
determine in this behalf, viz. an sit natus conjugem habiturus,
facile an difficulter sit sponsam impetraturus, quot conjuges, quo
tempore, quales decernantur nato uxores, de mutuo amore
conjugem, both in men's and women's genitures, by the
examination of the seventh house the almutens, lords and planets
there, a [Symbol: Moon-3/4] et [Symbol: Sun] &c., by particular
aphorisms, Si dominus 7mae in 7ma vel secunda nobilem decernit
uxorem, servam aut ignobilem si duodecima. Si Venus in 12ma,
&c., with many such, too tedious to relate. Yet let no man be
troubled, or find himself grieved with such predictions, as Hier.
Wolfius well saith in his astrological dialogue, non sunt
praetoriana decreta, they be but conjectures, the stars incline, but
not enforce,

 "Sidera corporibus praesunt caelestia nostris,
Sunt ea de vili condita namque luto:
Cogere sed nequeunt animum ratione fruentem,
Quippe sub imperio solius ipse dei est."

 ("The stars in the skies preside over our persons, for they are
made of humble matter. They cannot bind a rational mind, for
that is under the control of God only.")

wisdom, diligence, discretion, may mitigate if not quite alter such
decrees, Fortuna sua a cujusque fingitur moribus, Qui cauti,
prudentes, voti compotes, &c., let no man then be terrified or
molested with such astrological aphorisms, or be much moved,
either to vain hope or fear, from such predictions, but let every man
follow his own free will in this case, and do as he sees cause. Better
it is indeed to marry than burn, for their soul's health, but for their
present fortunes, by some other means to pacify themselves, and
divert the stream of this fiery torrent, to continue as they are, rest
satisfied, lugentes virginitatis florem sic aruisse, deploring their
misery with that eunuch in Libanius, since there is no help or
remedy, and with Jephtha's daughter to bewail their virginities.

Of like nature is superstition, those rash vows of monks and friars,
and such as live in religious orders, but far more tyrannical and
much worse. Nature, youth, and his furious passion forcibly
inclines, and rageth on the one side; but their order and vow checks
them on the other. Votoque suo sua forma repugnat. (Ovid. 1. Met
"Their beauty is inconsistent with their vows.") What merits and
indulgences they heap unto themselves by it, what commodities, I
know not; but I am sure, from such rash vows, and inhuman
manner of life, proceed many inconveniences, many diseases,
many vices, mastupration, satyriasis, priapismus, melancholy,
madness, fornication, adultery, buggery, sodomy, theft, murder,
and all manner of mischiefs: read but Bale's Catalogue of
Sodomites, at the visitation of abbeys here in England, Henry
Stephan. his Apol. for Herodotus, that which Ulricus writes in one
of his epistles, "that Pope Gregory when he saw 600 skulls and
bones of infants taken out of a fishpond near a nunnery, thereupon
retracted that decree of priests' marriages, which was the cause of
such a slaughter, was much grieved at it, and purged himself by
repentance." Read many such, and then ask what is to be done, is
this vow to be broke or not? No, saith Bellarmine, cap. 38. lib. de
Monach. melius est scortari et uri quam de voto coelibatus ad
nuptias transire, better burn or fly out, than to break thy vow. And
Coster in his Enchirid. de coelibat. sacerdotum, saith it is
absolutely gravius peccatum, "a greater sin for a priest to marry,
than to keep a concubine at home." Gregory de Valence, cap. 6. de
coelibat. maintains the same, as those of Essei and Montanists of
old. Insomuch that many votaries, out of a false persuasion of merit
and holiness in this kind, will sooner die than marry, though it be to
the saving of their lives. Anno 1419. Pius 2, Pope, James Rossa,
nephew to the King of Portugal, and then elect Archbishop of
Lisbon, being very sick at Florence, "when his physicians told him,
that his disease was such, he must either lie with a wench, marry, or
die, cheerfully chose to die." Now they commended him for it; but
St. Paul teacheth otherwise, "Better marry than burn," and as St.
Hierome gravely delivers it, Aliae, sunt leges Caesarum, aliae
Christi, aliud Papinianus, aliud Paulus noster praecipit, there's a
difference betwixt God's ordinances and men's laws: and therefore
Cyprian Epist. 8. boldly denounceth, impium est, adulterum est,
sacrilegum est, quodcunque humano furore statuitur, ut dispositio
divina violetur, it is abominable, impious, adulterous, and
sacrilegious, what men make and ordain after their own furies to
cross God's laws. Georgius Wicelius, one of their own arch divines
(Inspect. eccles. pag. 18) exclaims against it, and all such rash
monastical vows, and would have such persons seriously to
consider what they do, whom they admit, ne in posterum querantur
de inanibus stupris, lest they repent it at last. For either, as he 
follows it, you must allow them concubines, or suffer them to
marry, for scarce shall you find three priests of three thousand, qui
per aetatem non ament, that are not troubled with burning lust.
Wherefore I conclude it is an unnatural and impious thing to bar
men of this Christian liberty, too severe and inhuman an edict.

 The silly wren, the titmouse also,
The little redbreast have their election,
They fly I saw and together gone,
Whereas hem list, about environ
As they of kinde have inclination,
And as nature impress and guide,
Of everything list to provide.

But man alone, alas the hard stond,
Full cruelly by kinds ordinance
Constrained is, and by statutes bound,
And debarred from all such pleasance:
What meaneth this, what is this pretence
Of laws, I wis, against all right of kinde
Without a cause, so narrow men to binde?

Many laymen repine still at priests' marriages above the rest, and
not at clergymen only, but of all the meaner sort and condition,
they would have none marry but such as are rich and able to
maintain wives, because their parish belike shall be pestered with
orphans, and the world full of beggars: but these are hard-hearted,
unnatural, monsters of men, shallow politicians, they do not
consider that a great part of the world is not yet inhabited as it
ought, how many colonies into America, Terra Australis incognita,
Africa, may be sent? Let them consult with Sir William
Alexander's Book of Colonies, Orpheus Junior's Golden Fleece,
Captain Whitburne, Mr. Hagthorpe, &c. and they shall surely be
otherwise informed. Those politic Romans were of another mind,
they thought their city and country could never be too populous.
Adrian the emperor said he had rather have men than money, malle
se hominum adjectione ampliare imperium, quam pecunia.
Augustus Caesar made an oration in Rome ad coelibes, to persuade
them to marry; some countries compelled them to marry of old, as
Jews, Turks, Indians, Chinese, amongst the rest in these days, who
much wonder at our discipline to suffer so many idle persons to
live in monasteries, and often marvel how they can live honest. In
the isle of Maragnan, the governor and petty king there did wonder
at the Frenchmen, and admire how so many friars, and the rest of
their company could live without wives, they thought it a thing
impossible, and would not believe it. If these men should but
survey our multitudes of religious houses, observe our numbers of
monasteries all over Europe, 18 nunneries in Padua, in Venice 34
cloisters of monks, 28 of nuns, &c. ex ungue leonem, 'tis to this
proportion, in all other provinces and cities, what would they think,
do they live honest? Let them dissemble as they will, I am of
Tertullian's mind, that few can continue but by compulsion. "O
chastity" (saith he) "thou art a rare goddess in the world, not so
easily got, seldom continuate: thou mayst now and then be
compelled, either for defect of nature, or if discipline persuade,
decrees enforce:" or for some such by-respects, sullenness,
discontent, they have lost their first loves, may not have whom they
will themselves, want of means, rash vows, &c. But can he
willingly contain? I think not. Therefore, either out of
commiseration of human imbecility, in policy, or to prevent a far
worse inconvenience, for they hold some of them as necessary as
meat and drink, and because vigour of youth, the state and temper
of most men's bodies do so furiously desire it, they have heretofore
in some nations liberally admitted polygamy and stews, a hundred
thousand courtesans in Grand Cairo in Egypt, as Radzivilus
observes, are tolerated, besides boys: how many at Fez, Rome,
Naples, Florence, Venice, &c., and still in many other provinces
and cities of Europe they do as much, because they think young
men, churchmen, and servants amongst the rest, can hardly live
honest. The consideration of this belike made Vibius, the Spaniard,
when his friend Crassus, that rich Roman gallant, lay hid in the
cave, ut voluptatis quam aetas illa desiderat copiam faceret, to
gratify him the more, send two lusty lasses to accompany him all
that while he was there imprisoned, And Surenus, the Parthian
general, when he warred against the Romans, to carry about with
him 200 concubines, as the Swiss soldiers do now commonly their
wives. But, because this course is not generally approved, but
rather contradicted as unlawful and abhorred, in most countries
they do much encourage them to marriage, give great rewards to
such as have many children, and mulct those that will not marry,
Jus trium liberorum, and in Agellius, lib. 2. cap. 15. Elian. lib. 6.
cap. 5. Valerius, lib. 1. cap. 9. We read that three children freed the
father from painful offices, and five from all contribution. "A
woman shall be saved by bearing children." Epictetus would have
all marry, and as Plato will, 6 de legibus, he that marrieth not
before 35 years of his age, must be compelled and punished, and
the money consecrated to Juno's temple, or applied to public uses.
They account him, in some countries, unfortunate that dies without
a wife, a most unhappy man, as Boethius infers, and if at all happy,
yet infortunio felix, unhappy in his supposed happiness. They
commonly deplore his estate, and much lament him for it: O, my
sweet son, &c. See Lucian, de Luctu, Sands fol. 83, &c.

Yet, notwithstanding, many with us are of the opposite part, they
are married themselves, and for others, let them burn, fire and
flame, they care not, so they be not troubled with them. Some are
too curious, and some too covetous, they may marry when they will
both for ability and means, but so nice, that except as Theophilus
the emperor was presented, by his mother Euprosune, with all the
rarest beauties of the empire in the great chamber of his palace at
once, and bid to give a golden apple to her he liked best. If they
might so take and choose whom they list out of all the fair maids
their nation affords, they could happily condescend to marry:
otherwise, &c., why should a man marry, saith another epicurean
rout, what's matrimony but a matter of money? why should free
nature be entrenched on, confined or obliged, to this or that man or
woman, with these manacles of body and goods? &c. There are
those too that dearly love, admire and follow women all their lives
long, sponsi Penelopes, never well but in their company, wistly
gazing on their beauties, observing close, hanging after them,
dallying still with them, and yet dare not, will not marry. Many
poor people, and of the meaner sort, are too distrustful of God's
providence, "they will not, dare not for such worldly respects," fear
of want, woes, miseries, or that they shall light, as "Lemnius saith,
on a scold, a slut, or a bad wife." And therefore, Tristem Juventam
venere deserta colunt, they are resolved to live single, as
Epaminondas did, Nil ait esse prius, melius nil coelibe vita, (Senec.
Hip. "There is nothing better, nothing preferable to a single life.")
and ready with Hippolitus to abjure all women, Detestor omnes,
horreo, fugio, execror, &c. But,

"Hippolite nescis quod fugis vitae bonum,
Hippolite nescis"--

"alas, poor Hippolitus, thou knowest not what thou sayest, 'tis
otherwise, Hippolitus." Some make a doubt, an uxor literato sit
ducenda, whether a scholar should marry, if she be fair she will
bring him back from his grammar to his horn book, or else with
kissing and dalliance she will hinder his study; if foul with
scolding, he cannot well intend to do both, as Philippus Beroaldus,
that great Bononian doctor, once writ, impediri enim studia
literarum, &c., but he recanted at last, and in a solemn sort with
true conceived words he did ask the world and all women
forgiveness. But you shall have the story as he relates himself, in
his Commentaries on the sixth of Apuleius. For a long time I lived
a single life, et ab uxore ducenda semper abhorrui, nec quicquam
libero lecto censui jucundius. I could not abide marriage, but as a
rambler, erraticus ac volaticus amator (to use his own words) per
multiplices amores discurrebam, I took a snatch where I could get
it; nay more, I railed at marriage downright, and in a public
auditory, when I did interpret that sixth Satire of Juvenal, out of
Plutarch and Seneca, I did heap up all the dicteries I could against
women; but now recant with Stesichorus, palinodiam cano, nec
poenitet censeri in ordine maritorum, I approve of marriage, I am
glad I am a married man, I am heartily glad I have a wife, so sweet
a wife, so noble a wife, so young, so chaste a wife, so loving a
wife, and I do wish and desire all other men to marry; and
especially scholars, that as of old Martia did by Hortensius,
Terentia by Tullius, Calphurnia to Plinius, Pudentilla to Apuleius,
hold the candle whilst their husbands did meditate and write, so
theirs may do them, and as my dear Camilla doth to me. Let other
men be averse, rail then and scoff at women, and say what they can
to the contrary, vir sine uxore malorum expers est, &c., a single
man is a happy man, &c., but this is a toy. Nec dulces amores
sperne puer, neque tu choreas; (Hor. "Neither despise agreeable
love, nor mirthful pleasure.") these men are too distrustful and
much to blame, to use such speeches, Parcite paucorum diffundere,
crimen in omnes. "They must not condemn all for some." As there
be many bad, there be some good wives; as some be vicious, some
be virtuous. Read what Solomon hath said in their praises, Prov.
xiii. and Siracides, cap. 26 et 30, "Blessed is the man that hath a
virtuous wife, for the number of his days shall be double. A
virtuous woman rejoiceth her husband, and she shall fulfil the years
of his life in peace. A good wife is a good portion" (and xxxvi. 24)
, "an help, a pillar of rest," columina quietis, Qui capit uxorem,
fratrem capit atque sororem. (Aphranius. "He who chooses a wife,
takes a brother and a sister.") And 30, "He that hath no wife
wandereth to and fro mourning." Minuuntur atrae conjuge curae,
women are the sole, only joy, and comfort of a man's life, born ad
usum et lusum hominum, firmamenta familiae,

 "Delitiae humani generis, solatia vitae.
Blanditiae noctis, placidissima cura diei,
Vota virum, juvenum spes," &c.

 (Locheus. "The delight of mankind, the solace of life, the
blandishments of night, delicious cares of day, the wishes of
older men, the hopes of young.")

 "A wife is a young man's mistress, a middle age's companion, an
old man's nurse:" Particeps laetorum et tristium, a prop, a help, &c.

 "Optima viri possessio est uxor benevola,
Mitigans iram et avertens animam ejus a tristitia."

"Man's best possession is a loving wife,
She tempers anger and diverts all strife."

There is no joy, no comfort, no sweetness, no pleasure in the world
like to that of a good wife,

 "Quam cum chara domi conjux, fidusque maritus
Unanimes degunt"--

 ("How harmoniously do a loving wife and constant husband lead
their lives.")

saith our Latin Homer, she is still the same in sickness and in
health, his eye, his hand, his bosom friend, his partner at all times,
his other self, not to be separated by any calamity, but ready to
share all sorrow, discontent, and as the Indian women do, live and
die with him, nay more, to die presently for him. Admetus, king of
Thessaly, when he lay upon his death-bed, was told by Apollo's
Oracle, that if he could get anybody to die for him, he should live
longer yet, but when all refused, his parents, etsi decrepiti, friends
and followers forsook him, Alcestus, his wife, though young, most
willingly undertook it; what more can be desired or expected? And
although on the other side there be an infinite number of bad
husbands (I should rail downright against some of them) , able to
discourage any women; yet there be some good ones again, and
those most observant of marriage rites. An honest country fellow
(as Fulgosus relates it) in the kingdom of Naples, at plough by the
seaside, saw his wife carried away by Mauritanian pirates, he ran
after in all haste, up to the chin first, and when he could wade no
longer, swam, calling to the governor of the ship to deliver his
wife, or if he must not have her restored, to let him follow as a
prisoner, for he was resolved to be a galley-slave, his drudge,
willing to endure any misery, so that he might but enjoy his dear
wife. The Moors seeing the man's constancy, and relating the
whole matter to their governors at Tunis, set them both free, and
gave them an honest pension to maintain themselves during their
lives. I could tell many stories to this effect; but put case it often
prove otherwise, because marriage is troublesome, wholly therefore
to avoid it, is no argument; "He that will avoid trouble must avoid
the world." (Eusebius praepar. Evangel. 5. cap. 50.) Some trouble
there is in marriage I deny not, Etsi grave sit matrimonium, saith
Erasmus, edulcatur tamen multis, &c., yet there be many things to
sweeten it, a pleasant wife, placens uxor, pretty children, dulces
nati, deliciae filiorum hominum, the chief delight of the sons of
men; Eccles. ii. 8. &c. And howsoever though it were all troubles,
utilitatis publicae causa devorandum, grave quid libenter
subeundum, it must willingly be undergone for public good's sake,

 "Audite (populus) haec, inquit Susarion,
Malae sunt mulieres, veruntamen O populares,
Hoc sine malo domum inhabitare non licet."

"Hear me, O my countrymen, saith Susarion,
Women are naught, yet no life without one."

 Malum est mulier, sed necessarium malum. They are necessary
evils, and for our own ends we must make use of them to have
issue, Supplet Venus ac restituit humanum genus, and to propagate
the church. For to what end is a man born? why lives he, but to
increase the world? and how shall he do that well, if he do not
marry? Matrimonium humano generi immortalitatem tribuit, saith
Nevisanus, matrimony makes us immortal, and according to
Tacitus, 'tis firmissimum imperii munimentum, the sole and chief
prop of an empire. Indigne vivit per quem non vivit et alter,
(Palingenius. "He lives contemptibly by whom no other lives.")
which Pelopidas objected to Epaminondas, he was an unworthy
member of a commonwealth, that left not a child after him to
defend it, and as Trismegistus to his son Tatius, "have no
commerce with a single man:" Holding belike that a bachelor could
not live honestly as he should, and with Georgius Wicelius, a great
divine and holy man, who of late by twenty-six arguments
commends marriage as a thing most necessary for all kinds of
persons, most laudable and fit to be embraced: and is persuaded
withal, that no man can live and die religiously, and as he ought,
without a wife, persuasus neminem posse neque pie vivere, neque
bene mori citra uxorem, he is false, an enemy to the
commonwealth, injurious to himself, destructive to the world, an
apostate to nature, a rebel against heaven and earth. Let our wilful,
obstinate, and stale bachelors ruminate of this, "If we could live
without wives," as Marcellus Numidicus said in Agellius, "we
would all want them; but because we cannot, let all marry, and
consult rather to the public good, than their own private pleasure or
estate." It were an happy thing, as wise Euripides hath it, if we
could buy children with gold and silver, and be so provided, sine
mulierum congressu, without women's company; but that may not
be:

 "Orbis jacebit squallido turpis situ,
Vanum sine ullis classibus stabit mare,
Alesque coelo deerit et sylvis fera."

"Earth, air, sea, land eftsoon would come to nought,
The world itself should be to ruin brought."

Necessity therefore compels us to marry.

But what do I trouble myself, to find arguments to persuade to, or
commend marriage? behold a brief abstract of all that which I have
said, and much more, succinctly, pithily, pathetically,
perspicuously, and elegantly delivered in twelve motions to 
mitigate the miseries of marriage, by Jacobus de Voragine,

1. Res est? habes quae tucatur et augeat.-- 2. Non est? habes quae
quaerat.-- 3. Secundae res sunt? felicitas duplicatur.-- 4. Adversae
sunt? Consolatur, adsidet, onus participat ut tolerabile fiat.-- 5.
Domi es? solitudinis taedium pellit.-- 6. Foras? Discendentem visu
prosequitur, absentem desiderat, redeuntem laeta excipit.-- 7. Nihil
jucundum absque societate? Nulla societas matrimonio suavior.--
8. Vinculum conjugalis charitatis adamentinum.-- 9. Accrescit
dulcis affinium turba, duplicatur numerus parentum, fratrum,
sororum, nepotum.-- 10. Pulchra sis prole parens.-- 11. Lex Mosis
sterilitatem matrimonii execratur, quanto amplius coelibatum?--
12. Si natura poenam non effugit, ne voluntas quidem effugiet.

1. Hast thou means? thou hast none to keep and increase it.-- 2.
Hast none? thou hast one to help to get it.-- 3. Art in prosperity?
thine happiness is doubled.-- 4. Art in adversity? she'll comfort,
assist, bear a part of thy burden to make it more tolerable.-- 5. Art
at home? she'll drive away melancholy.-- 6. Art abroad? she looks
after thee going from home, wishes for thee in thine absence, and
joyfully welcomes thy return.-- 7. There's nothing delightsome
without society, no society so sweet as matrimony.-- 8. The band of
conjugal love is adamantine.-- 9. The sweet company of kinsmen
increaseth, the number of parents is doubled, of brothers, sisters,
nephews.-- 10. Thou art made a father by a fair and happy issue.--
11. Moses curseth the barrenness of matrimony, how much more a
single life?-- 12. If nature escape not punishment, surely thy will
shall not avoid it.

All this is true, say you, and who knows it not? but how easy a
matter is it to answer these motives, and to make an Antiparodia
quite opposite unto it? To exercise myself I will essay:

1. Hast thou means? thou hast one to spend it.-- 2. Hast none? thy
beggary is increased.-- 3. Art in prosperity? thy happiness is
ended.-- 4. Art in adversity? like Job's wife she'll aggravate thy
misery, vex thy soul, make thy burden intolerable.-- 5. Art at
home? she'll scold thee out of doors.-- 6. Art abroad? If thou be
wise keep thee so, she'll perhaps graft horns in thine absence, scowl
on thee coming home.-- 7. Nothing gives more content than
solitariness, no solitariness like this of a single life,-- 8. The band
of marriage is adamantine, no hope of losing it, thou art undone.--
9. Thy number increaseth, thou shalt be devoured by thy wife's
friends.-- 10. Thou art made a cornuto by an unchaste wife, and
shalt bring up other folks' children instead of thine own.-- 11. Paul
commends marriage, yet he prefers a single life.-- 12. Is marriage
honourable? What an immortal crown belongs to virginity?

So Siracides himself speaks as much as may be for and against
women, so doth almost every philosopher plead pro and con, every
poet thus argues the case (though what cares vulgus nominum what
they say?) : so can I conceive peradventure, and so canst thou:
when all is said, yet since some be good, some bad, let's put it to
the venture. I conclude therefore with Seneca,

--"cur Toro viduo jaces?
Tristem juventam solve: mine luxus rape,
Effunde habenas, optimos vitae dies
Effluere prohibe."

"Why dost thou lie alone, let thy youth and best days to pass
away?" Marry whilst thou mayst, donec viventi canities abest
morosa, whilst thou art yet able, yet lusty, Elige cui dicas, tu mihi
sola places, (Ovid. "Find her to whom you may say, 'thou art my
only pleasure.'") make thy choice, and that freely forthwith, make
no delay, but take thy fortune as it falls. 'Tis true,

 "--calamitosus est qui inciderit
In malam uxorem, felix qui in bonam,"

 (Euripides. "Unhappy the man who has met a bad wife, happy
who found a good one.")

'Tis a hazard both ways I confess, to live single or to marry, Nam et
uxorem ducere, et non ducere malum est, ( E Graeco Valerius, lib.
7. cap. 7. "To marry, and not to marry, are equally base.") it may be
bad, it may be good, as it is a cross and calamity on the one side, so
'tis a sweet delight, an incomparable happiness, a blessed estate, a
most unspeakable benefit, a sole content, on the other; 'tis all in the 
proof. Be not then so wayward, so covetous, so distrustful, so
curious and nice, but let's all marry, mutuos foventes amplexus;
"Take me to thee, and thee to me," tomorrow is St. Valentine's day,
let's keep it holiday for Cupid's sake, for that great god Love's sake,
for Hymen's sake, and celebrate Venus' vigil with our ancestors for
company together, singing as they did,

"Cras a et qui nunquam amavit, quique amavit, cras amet,
Ver novum, ver jam canorum, ver natus orbis est,
Vere concordant amores, vere nubunt alites,
Et nemus coma resolvit, &c.--
Cras amet," &c.--

"Let those love now who never loved before,
And those who always loved now love the more;
Sweet loves are born with every opening spring;
Birds from the tender boughs their pledges sing," &c.

Let him that is averse from marriage read more in Barbarus de re
uxor. lib. 1. cap. 1. Lemnius de institut. cap. 4. P. Godefridus de
Amor. lib. 3. cap. 1. Nevisanus, lib. 3. Alex. ab Alexandro, lib. 4.
cap. 8. Tunstall, Erasmus' tracts in laudem matrimonii &c., and I
doubt not but in the end he will rest satisfied, recant with
Beroaldus, do penance for his former folly, singing some
penitential ditties, desire to be reconciled to the deity of this great
god Love, go a pilgrimage to his shrine, offer to his image,
sacrifice upon his altar, and be as willing at last to embrace
marriage as the rest: There will not be found, I hope, "No, not in
that severe family of Stoics, who shall refuse to submit his grave
beard, and supercilious looks to the clipping of a wife," or disagree
from his fellows in this point. "For what more willingly" (as Varro
holds) "can a proper man see than a fair wife, a sweet wife, a
loving wife?" can the world afford a better sight, sweeter content, a
fairer object, a more gracious aspect?

Since then this of marriage is the last and best refuge, and cure of
heroical love, all doubts are cleared, and impediments removed; I
say again, what remains, but that according to both their desires,
they be happily joined, since it cannot otherwise be helped? God
send us all good wives, every man his wish in this kind, and me
mine!

 And God that all this world hath ywrought
Send him his Love that hath it so deere bought.

If all parties be pleased, ask their banns, 'tis a match. Fruitur
Rhodanthe sponsa, sponso Dosicle, Rhodanthe and Dosicles shall
go together, Clitiphon and Leucippe, Theagines and Chariclea,
Poliarchus hath his Argenis', Lysander Calista, to make up the
mask) Polilurque sua puer Iphis Ianthi.

And Troilus in lust and in quiet
Is with Creseid, his own heart sweet.

And although they have hardly passed the pikes, through many
difficulties and delays brought the match about, yet let them take
this of Aristaenetus (that so marry) for their comfort: "after many
troubles and cares, the marriages of lovers are more sweet and
pleasant." As we commonly conclude a comedy with a wedding,
and shaking of hands, let's shut up our discourse, and end all with
an Epithalamium.

Feliciter nuptis, God give them joy together. Hymen O Hymenae,
Hymen ades O Hymenaee! Bonum factum, 'tis well done, Haud
equidem sine mente reor, sine numine Divum, 'tis a happy
conjunction, a fortunate match, an even couple,

"Ambo animis, ambo praestantes viribus, ambo
Florentes annis,"--

"they both excel in gifts of body and mind, are both equal in years,"
youth, vigour, alacrity, she is fair and lovely as Lais or Helen, he as
another Charinus or Alcibiades,

 --"ludite ut lubet et brevi
Liberos date."--

"Then modestly go sport and toy,
And let's have every year a boy."

 "Go give a sweet smell as incense, and bring forth flowers as the
lily:" that we may say hereafter, Scitus Mecastor natus est
Pamphilo puer. In the meantime I say,

 "Ite, agite, O juvenes, non murmura vestra columbae,
Brachia, non hederae, neque vincant oscula conchae."

"Gentle youths, go sport yourselves betimes,
Let not the doves outpass your murmurings,
Or ivy-clasping arms, or oyster-kissings."

And in the morn betime, as those Lacedaemonian lasses saluted
Helena and Menelaus, singing at their windows, and wishing good
success, do we at yours:

"Salve O sponsa, salve felix, det vobis Latona
Felicem sobolem, Venus dea det aequalem amorem
Inter vos mutuo; Saturnus durabiles divitias,
Dormite in pectora mutuo amorem inspirantes,
Et desiderium!"--

"Good morrow, master bridegroom, and mistress bride,
Many fair lovely bairns to you betide!
Let Venus to you mutual love procure,
Let Saturn give you riches to endure.
Long may you sleep in one another's arms,
Inspiring sweet desire, and free from harms."

Even all your lives long,

 "Contingat vobis turturum concordia,
Corniculae vivacitas"--

"The love of turtles hap to you,
And ravens' years still to renew."

Let the Muses sing, (as he said;) the Graces dance, not at their
weddings only but all their days long; "so couple their hearts, that
no irksomeness or anger ever befall them: let him never call her
other name than my joy, my light, or she call him otherwise than
sweetheart. To this happiness of theirs, let not old age any whit
detract, but as their years, so let their mutual love and comfort
increase." And when they depart this life,

--"concordes quoniam vixere tot annos,
Auferat hora duos eadem, nec conjugis usquam
Busta suae videat, nec sit tumulandus ab illa."

"Because they have so sweetly liv'd together,
Let not one die a day before the other,
He bury her, she him, with even fate,
One hour their souls let jointly separate."

 "Fortunati ambo si quid mea carmina possunt,
Nulla dies unquam memori vos eximet aevo."

"Happy both, if my verses have any charms, nor shall time ever
detract from the memorable example of your lives."

Atque haec de amore dixisse sufficiat, sub correctione, quod ait
ille, cujusque melius sentientis. Plura qui volet de remediis amoris,
legat Jasonem Pratensem, Arnoldum, Montaltum, Savanarolum,
Langium, Valescum, Crimisonum, Alexandrum Benedictum,
Laurentium, Valleriolam, e Poetis Nasonem, e nostratibus
Chaucerum, &c., with whom I conclude,

 For my words here and every part,
I speak hem all under correction,
Of you that feeling have in love's art,
And put it all in your discretion,
To intreat or make diminution,
Of my language, that I you beseech:
But now to purpose of my rather speech.





SECT. III. MEMB. I.

SUBSECT. I.--Jealousy, its Equivocations, Name, Definition,
Extent, several kinds; of Princes, Parents, Friends. In Beasts, Men:
before marriage, as Co-rivals; or after, as in this place.

Valescus de Taranta cap. de Melanchol. Aelian Montaltus, Felix
Platerus, Guianerius, put jealousy for a cause of melancholy, others
for a symptom; because melancholy persons amongst these
passions and perturbations of the mind, are most obnoxious to it.
But methinks for the latitude it hath, and that prerogative above
other ordinary symptoms, it ought to be treated of as a species
apart, being of so great and eminent note, so furious a passion, and
almost of as great extent as love itself, as Benedetto Varchi holds,
"no love without a mixture of jealousy," qui non zelat, non amat.
For these causes I will dilate, and treat of it by itself, as a bastard-
branch or kind of love-melancholy, which, as heroical love goeth
commonly before marriage, doth usually follow, torture, and
crucify in like sort, deserves therefore to be rectified alike, requires
as much care and industry, in setting out the several causes of it,
prognostics and cures. Which I have more willingly done, that he
that is or hath been jealous, may see his error as in a glass; he that
is not, may learn to detest, avoid it himself, and dispossess others
that are anywise affected with it.

Jealousy is described and defined to be "a certain suspicion which
the lover hath of the party he chiefly loveth, lest he or she should
be enamoured of another:" or any eager desire to enjoy some
beauty alone, to have it proper to himself only: a fear or doubt, lest
any foreigner should participate or share with him in his love. Or
(as Scaliger adds) "a fear of losing her favour whom he so earnestly
affects." Cardan calls it "a zeal for love, and a kind of envy lest any
man should beguile us." Ludovicus Vives defines it in the very
same words, or little differing in sense.

There be many other jealousies, but improperly so called all; as that
of parents, tutors, guardians over their children, friends whom they
love, or such as are left to their wardship or protection.

 "Storax non rediit hac nocte a coena Aeschinus,
Neque servulorum quispiam qui adversum ierant?"

"Has not every one of the slaves that went to meet him returned
this night from the supper?"

As the old man in the comedy cried out in a passion, and from a
solicitous fear and care he had of his adopted son; "not of beauty,
but lest they should miscarry, do amiss, or any way discredit,
disgrace" (as Vives notes) "or endanger themselves and us."
Aegeus was so solicitous for his son Theseus, (when he went to
fight with the Minotaur) of his success, lest he should be foiled,
Prona est timori semper in pejus fides. We are still apt to suspect
the worst in such doubtful cases, as many wives in their husband's
absence, fond mothers in their children's, lest if absent they should
be misled or sick, and are continually expecting news from them,
how they do fare, and what is become of them, they cannot endure
to have them long out of their sight: oh my sweet son, O my dear
child, &c. Paul was jealous over the Church of Corinth, as he
confesseth, 2 Cor. xi. 12. "With a godly jealousy, to present them a
pure virgin to Christ;" and he was afraid still, lest as the serpent
beguiled Eve, through his subtlety, so their minds should be corrupt
from the simplicity that is in Christ. God himself, in some sense, is
said to be jealous, "I am a jealous God, and will visit:" so Psalm
lxxix. 5. "Shall thy jealousy burn like fire for ever?" But these are
improperly called jealousies, and by a metaphor, to show the care
and solicitude they have of them. Although some jealousies express
all the symptoms of this which we treat of, fear, sorrow, anguish,
anxiety, suspicion, hatred, &c., the object only varied. That of some
fathers is very eminent, to their sons and heirs; for though they love
them dearly being children, yet now coming towards man's estate
they may not well abide them, the son and heir is commonly sick of
the father, and the father again may not well brook his eldest son,
inde simultates, plerumque contentiones et inimicitiae; but that of
princes is most notorious, as when they fear co-rivals (if I may so
call them) successors, emulators, subjects, or such as they have
offended. Omnisque potestas impatiens consortis erit: "they are
still suspicious, lest their authority should be diminished," as one
observes; and as Comineus hath it, "it cannot be expressed what
slender causes they have of their grief and suspicion, a secret
disease, that commonly lurks and breeds in princes' families."
Sometimes it is for their honour only, as that of Adrian the
emperor, "that killed all his emulators." Saul envied David;
Domitian Agricola, because he did excel him, obscure his honour,
as he thought, eclipse his fame. Juno turned Praetus' daughters into
kine, for that they contended with her for beauty; Cyparissae, king
Eteocles' children, were envied of the goddesses for their excellent
good parts, and dancing amongst the rest, saith Constantine, "and
for that cause flung headlong from heaven, and buried in a pit, but
the earth took pity of them, and brought out cypress trees to
preserve their memories." Niobe, Arachne, and Marsyas, can testify
as much. But it is most grievous when it is for a kingdom itself, or
matters of commodity, it produceth lamentable effects, especially
amongst tyrants, in despotico Imperio, and such as are more feared
than beloved of their subjects, that get and keep their sovereignty
by force and fear. Quod civibus tenere te invitis scias, &c., as
Phalaris, Dionysius, Periander held theirs. For though fear,
cowardice, and jealousy, in Plutarch's opinion, be the common
causes of tyranny, as in Nero, Caligula, Tiberius, yet most take
them to be symptoms. For "what slave, what hangman" (as Bodine
well expresseth this passion, l. 2. c. 5. de rep.) "can so cruelly
torture a condemned person, as this fear and suspicion? Fear of
death, infamy, torments, are those furies and vultures that vex and
disquiet tyrants, and torture them day and night, with perpetual
terrors and affrights, envy, suspicion, fear, desire of revenge, and a
thousand such disagreeing perturbations, turn and affright the soul
out of the hinges of health, and more grievously wound and pierce,
than those cruel masters can exasperate and vex their apprentices or
servants, with clubs, whips, chains, and tortures." Many terrible
examples we have in this kind, amongst the Turks especially, many
jealous outrages; Selimus killed Kornutus his youngest brother,
five of his nephews, Mustapha Bassa, and divers others. Bajazet the
second Turk, jealous of the valour and greatness of Achmet Bassa,
caused him to be slain. Suleiman the Magnificent murdered his
own son Mustapha; and 'tis an ordinary thing amongst them, to
make away their brothers, or any competitors, at the first coming to
the crown: 'tis all the solemnity they use at their fathers' funerals.
What mad pranks in his jealous fury did Herod of old commit in
Jewry, when he massacred all the children of a year old? Valens the
emperor in Constantinople, when as he left no man alive of quality
in his kingdom that had his name begun with Theo; Theodoti,
Theognosti, Theodosii, Theoduli, &c. They went all to their long
home, because a wizard told him that name should succeed in his
empire. And what furious designs hath Jo. Basilius, that Muscovian
tyrant, practised of late? It is a wonder to read that strange
suspicion, which Suetonius reports of Claudius Caesar, and of
Domitian, they were afraid of every man they saw: and which
Herodian of Antoninus and Geta, those two jealous brothers, the
one could not endure so much as the other's servants, but made
away him, his chiefest followers, and all that belonged to him, or
were his well-wishers. Maximinus "perceiving himself to be odious
to most men, because he was come to that height of honour out of
base beginnings, and suspecting his mean parentage would be
objected to him, caused all the senators that were nobly descended,
to be slain in a jealous humour, turned all the servants of Alexander
his predecessor out of doors, and slew many of them, because they
lamented their master's death, suspecting them to be traitors, for the
love they bare to him." When Alexander in his fury had made
Clitus his dear friend to be put to death, and saw now (saith
Curtius) an alienation in his subjects' hearts, none durst talk with
him, he began to be jealous of himself, lest they should attempt as
much on him, "and said they lived like so many wild beasts in a
wilderness, one afraid of another." Our modern stories afford us
many notable examples. Henry the Third of France, jealous of
Henry of Lorraine, Duke of Guise, anno 1588, caused him to be
murdered in his own chamber. Louis the Eleventh was so
suspicious, he durst not trust his children, every man about him he
suspected for a traitor; many strange tricks Comineus telleth of
him. How jealous was our Henry the Fourth of King Richard the
Second, so long as he lived, after he was deposed? and of his own
son Henry in his latter days? which the prince well perceiving,
came to visit his father in his sickness, in a watchet velvet gown,
full of eyelet holes, and with needles sticking in them (as an
emblem of jealousy) , and so pacified his suspicious father, after
some speeches and protestations, which he had used to that
purpose. Perpetual imprisonment, as that of Robert Duke of
Normandy, in the days of Henry the First, forbidding of marriage to
some persons, with such like edicts and prohibitions, are ordinary
in all states. In a word ( as he said) three things cause jealousy, a
mighty state, a rich treasure, a fair wife; or where there is a cracked
title, much tyranny, and exactions. In our state, as being freed from
all these fears and miseries, we may be most secure and happy
under the reign of our fortunate prince:

 "His fortune hath indebted him to none
But to all his people universally;
And not to them but for their love alone,

Which they account as placed worthily.
He is so set, he hath no cause to be
Jealous, or dreadful of disloyalty;
The pedestal whereon his greatness stands.
Is held of all our hearts, and all our hands."

But I rove, I confess. These equivocations, jealousies, and many
such, which crucify the souls of men, are not here properly meant,
or in this distinction of ours included, but that alone which is for
beauty, tending to love, and wherein they can brook no co-rival, or
endure any participation: and this jealousy belongs as well to brute
beasts, as men. Some creatures, saith Vives, swans, doves, cocks,
bulls, &c., are jealous as well as men, and as much moved, for fear
of communion.

 "Grege pro toto bella juvenci,
Si con jugio timuere suo,
Poscunt timidi praelia cervi,
Et mugitus dant concepti signa furoris."

"In Venus' cause what mighty battles make
Your raving bulls, and stirs for their herd's sake:
And harts and bucks that are so timorous,
Will fight and roar, if once they be but jealous."

In bulls, horses, goats, this is most apparently discerned. Bulls
especially, alium in pascuis non admittit, he will not admit another
bull to feed in the same pasture, saith Oppin: which Stephanus
Bathorius, late king of Poland, used as an impress, with that motto,
Regnum non capit duos. R. T. in his Blazon of Jealousy, telleth a
story of a swan about Windsor, that finding a strange cock with his
mate, did swim I know not how many miles after to kill him, and
when he had so done, came back and killed his hen; a certain truth,
he saith, done upon Thames, as many watermen, and neighbour
gentlemen, can tell. Fidem suam liberet; for my part, I do believe it
may be true; for swans have ever been branded with that epithet of
jealousy.

 The jealous swanne against his death that singeth,
And eke the owle that of death bode bringeth.

 Some say as much of elephants, that they are more jealous than
any other creatures whatsoever; and those old Egyptians, as Pierius
informeth us, express in their hieroglyphics, the passion of jealousy
by a camel; because that fearing the worst still about matters of
venery, he loves solitudes, that he may enjoy his pleasure alone, et
in quoscunque obvios insurgit, Zelolypiae stimulis agitatus, he will
quarrel and fight with whatsoever comes next, man or beast, in his
jealous fits. I have read as much of crocodiles; and if Peter Martyr's
authority be authentic, legat. Babylonicae lib. 3. you shall have a
strange tale to that purpose confidently related. Another story of the
jealousy of dogs, see in Hieron. Fabricius, Tract. 3. cap. 5. de
loquela animalium.

But this furious passion is most eminent in men, and is as well
amongst bachelors as married men. If it appear amongst bachelors,
we commonly call them rivals or co-rivals, a metaphor derived
from a river, rivales, a rivo; for as a river, saith Acron in Hor. Art.
Poet. and Donat in Ter. Eunuch. divides a common ground
between two men, and both participate of it, so is a woman
indifferent between two suitors, both likely to enjoy her; and thence
comes this emulation, which breaks out many times into
tempestuous storms, and produceth lamentable effects, murder
itself, with much cruelty, many single combats. They cannot endure
the least injury done unto them before their mistress, and in her
defence will bite off one another's noses; they are most impatient of
any flout, disgrace, lest emulation or participation in that kind.
Lacerat lacerium Largi mordax Memnius. Memnius the Roman (as
Tully tells the story, de oratore, lib. 2.) , being co-rival with Largus
Terracina, bit him by the arm, which fact of his was so famous, that
it afterwards grew to a proverb in those parts. Phaedria could not
abide his co-rival Thraso; for when Parmeno demanded, numquid
aliud imperas? whether he would command him any more service:
"No more" (saith he) "but to speak in his behalf, and to drive away
his co-rival if he could." Constantine, in the eleventh book of his
husbandry, cap. 11, hath a pleasant tale of the pine-tree; she was
once a fair maid, whom Pineus and Boreas, two co-rivals, dearly
sought; but jealous Boreas broke her neck, &c. And in his
eighteenth chapter he telleth another tale of Mars, that in his
jealousy slew Adonis. Petronius calleth this passion amantium
furiosum aemulationem, a furious emulation; and their symptoms
are well expressed by Sir Geoffrey Chaucer in his first Canterbury
Tale. It will make the nearest and dearest friends fall out; they will
endure all other things to be common, goods, lands, moneys,
participate of each pleasure, and take in good part any disgraces,
injuries in another kind; but as Propertius well describes it in an
elegy of his, in this they will suffer nothing, have no co-rivals.

 "Tu mihi vel ferro pectus, vel perde veneno,
A domina tantum te modo tolle mea:
Te socium vitae te corporis esse licebit,
Te dominum admitto rebus amice meis.
Lecto te solum, lecto te deprecor uno,
Rivalem possum non ego ferre Jovem."

"Stab me with sword, or poison strong
Give me to work my bane:
So thou court not my lass, so thou
From mistress mine refrain.
Command myself, my body, purse,
As thine own goods take all,
And as my ever dearest friend,
I ever use thee shall.
O spare my love, to have alone
Her to myself I crave,
Nay, Jove himself I'll not endure
My rival for to have."

This jealousy, which I am to treat of, is that which belongs to
married men, in respect of their own wives; to whose estate, as no
sweetness, pleasure, happiness can be compared in the world, if
they live quietly and lovingly together; so if they disagree or be
jealous, those bitter pills of sorrow and grief, disastrous mischiefs,
mischances, tortures, gripings, discontents, are not to be separated
from them. A most violent passion it is where it taketh place, an
unspeakable torment, a hellish torture, an infernal plague, as
Ariosto calls it, "a fury, a continual fever, full of suspicion, fear,
and sorrow, a martyrdom, a mirth-marring monster. The sorrow
and grief of heart of one woman jealous of another, is heavier than
death," Ecclus. xxviii. 6. as Peninnah did Hannah, "vex her and
upbraid her sore." 'Tis a main vexation, a most intolerable burden, a
corrosive to all content, a frenzy, a madness itself; as Beneditto
Varchi proves out of that select sonnet of Giovanni de la Casa, that
reverend lord, as he styles him.





SUBSECT. II.--Causes of Jealousy. Who are most apt. Idleness,
melancholy, impotency, long absence, beauty, wantonness, naught
themselves. Allurements, from time, place, persons, bad usage,
causes.

Astrologers make the stars a cause or sign of this bitter passion, and
out of every man's horoscope will give a probable conjecture
whether he will be jealous or no, and at what time, by direction of
the significators to their several promissors: their aphorisms are to
be read in Albubater, Pontanus, Schoner, Junctine, &c. Bodine,
cap. 5. meth. hist. ascribes a great cause to the country or clime,
and discourseth largely there of this subject, saying, that southern
men are more hot, lascivious, and jealous, than such as live in the
north; they can hardly contain themselves in those hotter climes,
but are most subject to prodigious lust. Leo Afer telleth incredible
things almost, of the lust and jealousy of his countrymen of Africa,
and especially such as live about Carthage, and so doth every
geographer of them in Asia, Turkey, Spaniards, Italians. Germany
hath not so many drunkards, England tobacconists, France dancers,
Holland mariners, as Italy alone hath jealous husbands. And in Italy
some account them of Piacenza more jealous than the rest. In
Germany, France, Britain, Scandia, Poland, Muscovy, they are not
so troubled with this feral malady, although Damianus a Goes,
which I do much wonder at, in his topography of Lapland, and
Herbastein of Russia, against the stream of all other geographers,
would fasten it upon those northern inhabitants. Altomarius
Poggius, and Munster in his description of Baden, reports that men
and women of all sorts go commonly into the baths together,
without all suspicion, "the name of jealousy" (saith Munster) "is
not so much as once heard of among them." In Friesland the
women kiss him they drink to, and are kissed again of those they
pledge. The virgins in Holland go hand in hand with young men
from home, glide on the ice, such is their harmless liberty, and
lodge together abroad without suspicion, which rash Sansovinus an
Italian makes a great sign of unchastity. In France, upon small
acquaintance, it is usual to court other men's wives, to come to their
houses, and accompany them arm in arm in the streets, without
imputation. In the most northern countries young men and maids
familiarly dance together, men and their wives, which, Siena only
excepted, Italians may not abide. The Greeks, on the other side,
have their private baths for men and women, where they must not
come near, nor so much as see one another: and as Bodine observes
lib. 5. de repub. "the Italians could never endure this," or a
Spaniard, the very conceit of it would make him mad: and for that
cause they lock up their women, and will not suffer them to be near
men, so much as in the church, but with a partition between. He
telleth, moreover, how that "when he was ambassador in England,
he heard Mendoza the Spanish legate finding fault with it, as a
filthy custom for men and women to sit promiscuously in churches
together; but Dr. Dale the master of the requests told him again,
that it was indeed a filthy custom in Spain, where they could not
contain themselves from lascivious thoughts in their holy places,
but not with us." Baronius in his Annals, out of Eusebius, taxeth
Licinius the emperor for a decree of his made to this effect, Jubens
ne viri simul cum mulieribus in ecclesia interessent: for being
prodigiously naught himself, aliorum naturam ex sua vitiosa mente
spectavit, he so esteemed others. But we are far from any such
strange conceits, and will permit our wives and daughters to go to
the tavern with a friend, as Aubanus saith, modo absit lascivia, and 
suspect nothing, to kiss coming and going, which, as Erasmus
writes in one of his epistles, they cannot endure. England is a
paradise for women, and hell for horses: Italy a paradise for horses,
hell for women, as the diverb goes. Some make a question whether
this headstrong passion rage more in women than men, as
Montaigne l. 3. But sure it is more outrageous in women, as all
other melancholy is, by reason of the weakness of their sex.
Scaliger Poet. lib. cap. 13. concludes against women: "Besides
their inconstancy, treachery, suspicion, dissimulation, superstition,
pride," (for all women are by nature proud) "desire of sovereignty,
if they be great women," (he gives instance in Juno) "bitterness and
jealousy are the most remarkable affections."

"Sed neque fulvus aper media tam fulvus in ira est,
Fulmineo rapidos dum rotat ore canes.
Nec leo," &c.--

"Tiger, boar, bear, viper, lioness,
A woman's fury cannot express."

 Some say redheaded women, pale-coloured, black-eyed, and of a
shrill voice, are most subject to jealousy.

 "High colour in a woman choler shows,
Naught are they, peevish, proud, malicious;
But worst of all, red, shrill, and jealous."

Comparisons are odious, I neither parallel them with others, nor
debase them any more: men and women are both bad, and too
subject to this pernicious infirmity. It is most part a symptom and
cause of melancholy, as Plater and Valescus teach us: melancholy
men are apt to be jealous, and jealous apt to be melancholy.

"Pale jealousy, child of insatiate love,
Of heart-sick thoughts which melancholy bred,
A hell-tormenting fear, no faith can move,
By discontent with deadly poison fed;
With heedless youth and error vainly led.
A mortal plague, a virtue-drowning flood,
A hellish fire not quenched but with blood."

If idleness concur with melancholy, such persons are most apt to be
jealous; 'tis Nevisanus' note, "an idle woman is presumed to be
lascivious, and often jealous." Mulier cum sola cogitat, male
cogitat: and 'tis not unlikely, for they have no other business to
trouble their heads with.

More particular causes be these which follow. Impotency first,
when a man is not able of himself to perform those dues which he
ought unto his wife: for though he be an honest liver, hurt no man,
yet Trebius the lawyer may make a question, an suum cuique
tribuat, whether he give every one their own; and therefore when
he takes notice of his wants, and perceives her to be more craving,
clamorous, insatiable and prone to lust than is fit, he begins
presently to suspect, that wherein he is defective, she will satisfy
herself, she will be pleased by some other means. Cornelius Gallus
hath elegantly expressed this humour in an epigram to his Lychoris.

 "Jamque alios juvenes aliosque requirit amores,
Me vocat imbellem decrepitumque senem," &c.

 ("And now she requires other youths and other loves, calls me
the imbecile and decrepit old man.")

For this cause is most evident in old men, that are cold and dry by
nature, and married, succi plenis, to young wanton wives; with old
doting Janivere in Chaucer, they begin to mistrust all is not well,

-- She was young and he was old,
And therefore he feared to be a cuckold.

And how should it otherwise be? old age is a disease of itself,
loathsome, full of suspicion and fear; when it is at best, unable,
unfit for such matters. Tam apta nuptiis quam bruma messibus, as
welcome to a young woman as snow in harvest, saith Nevisanus: Et
si capis juvenculam, faciet tibi cornua: marry a lusty maid and she
will surely graft horns on thy head. "All women are slippery, often
unfaithful to their husbands" (as Aeneas Sylvius epist. 38. seconds
him) , "but to old men most treacherous:" they had rather mortem
amplexarier, lie with a corse than such a one: Oderunt illum pueri,
contemnunt mulieres. On the other side many men, saith
Hieronymus, are suspicious of their wives, if they be lightly given,
but old folks above the rest. Insomuch that she did not complain
without a cause in Apuleius, of an old bald bedridden knave she
had to her good man: "Poor woman as I am, what shall I do? I have
an old grim sire to my husband, as bald as a coot, as little and as
unable as a child," a bedful of bones, "he keeps all the doors barred
and locked upon me, woe is me, what shall I do?" He was jealous,
and she made him a cuckold for keeping her up: suspicion without
a cause, hard usage is able of itself to make a woman fly out, that
was otherwise honest,

 --"plerasque bonas tractatio pravas
Esse facit,"--

"bad usage aggravates the matter." Nam quando mulieres
cognoscunt maritum hoc advertere, licentius peccant, as Nevisanus
holds, when a woman thinks her husband watcheth her, she will
sooner offend; Liberius peccant, et pudor omnis abest, rough
handling makes them worse: as the goodwife of Bath in Chaucer
brags,

In his own grease I made him frie
For anger and for every jealousie.

Of two extremes, this of hard usage is the worst. 'Tis a great fault
(for some men are uxorii) to be too fond of their wives, to dote on
them as Senior Deliro on his Fallace, to be too effeminate, or as
some do, to be sick for their wives, breed children for them, and
like the Tiberini lie in for them, as some birds hatch eggs by turns,
they do all women's offices: Coelius Rhodiginus ant. lect. Lib. 6.
cap. 24. makes mention of a fellow out of Seneca, that was so
besotted on his wife, he could not endure a moment out of her
company, he wore her scarf when he went abroad next his heart,
and would never drink but in that cup she began first. We have
many such fondlings that are their wives' packhorses and slaves,
(nam grave malum uxor superans virum suum, as the comical poet 
hath it, there's no greater misery to a man than to let his wife
domineer) to carry her muff, dog, and fan, let her wear the
breeches, lay out, spend, and do what she will, go and come
whither, when she will, they give consent.

"Here, take my muff, and, do you hear, good man;
Now give me pearl, and carry you my fan," &c.

 --"poscit pallam, redimicula, inaures;
Curre, quid hic cessas? vulgo vult illa videri,
Tu pete lecticas"--

many brave and worthy men have trespassed in this kind, multos
foras claros domestica haec destruxit infamia, and many noble
senators and soldiers (as Pliny notes) have lost their honour, in
being uxorii, so sottishly overruled by their wives; and therefore
Cato in Plutarch made a bitter jest on his fellow-citizens, the
Romans, "we govern all the world abroad, and our wives at home
rule us." These offend in one extreme; but too hard and too severe,
are far more offensive on the other. As just a cause may be long
absence of either party, when they must of necessity be much from
home, as lawyers, physicians, mariners, by their professions; or
otherwise make frivolous, impertinent journeys, tarry long abroad
to no purpose, lie out, and are gadding still, upon small occasions,
it must needs yield matter of suspicion, when they use their wives
unkindly in the meantime, and never tarry at home, it cannot use
but engender some such conceit.

 "Uxor si cessas amare te cogitat
Aut tote amari, aut potare, aut animo obsequi,
Ex tibi bene esse soli, quum sibi sit male."

"If thou be absent long, thy wife then thinks,
Th' art drunk, at ease, or with some pretty minx,
'Tis well with thee, or else beloved of some,
Whilst she poor soul doth fare full ill at home."

Hippocrates, the physician, had a smack of this disease; for when
he was to go home as far as Abdera, and some other remote cities
of Greece, he writ to his friend Dionysius (if at least those Epistles
be his) "to oversee his wife in his absence, (as Apollo set a raven to
watch his Coronis) although she lived in his house with her father
and mother, who be knew would have a care of her; yet that would
not satisfy his jealousy, he would have his special friend Dionysius
to dwell in his house with her all the time of his peregrination, and
to observe her behaviour, how she carried herself in her husband's
absence, and that she did not lust after other men. For a woman had
need to have an overseer to keep her honest; they are bad by nature,
and lightly given all, and if they be not curbed in time, as an
unpruned tree, they will be full of wild branches, and degenerate of
a sudden." Especially in their husband's absence: though one
Lucretia were trusty, and one Penelope, yet Clytemnestra made
Agamemnon cuckold; and no question there be too many of her
conditions. If their husbands tarry too long abroad upon
unnecessary business, well they may suspect: or if they run one
way, their wives at home will fly out another, quid pro quo. Or if
present, and give them not that content which they ought, Primum
ingratae, mox invisae noctes quae per somnum transiguntur, they
cannot endure to lie alone, or to fast long. Peter Godefridus, in his
second book of Love, and sixth chapter, hath a story out of St.
Anthony's life, of a gentleman, who, by that good man's advice,
would not meddle with his wife in the passion week, but for his
pains she set a pair of horns on his head. Such another he hath out
of Abstemius, one persuaded a new married man, "to forbear the
three first nights, and he should all his lifetime after be fortunate in
cattle," but his impatient wife would not tarry so long: well he
might speed in cattle, but not in children. Such a tale hath Heinsius
of an impotent and slack scholar, a mere student, and a friend of
his, that seeing by chance a fine damsel sing and dance, would
needs marry her, the match was soon made, for he was young and
rich, genis gratus, corpore glabellus, arte multiscius, et fortuna
opulentus, like that Apollo in Apuleius. The first night, having
liberally taken his liquor (as in that country they do) my fine
scholar was so fuzzled, that he no sooner was laid in bed, but he
fell fast asleep, never waked till morning, and then much abashed,
purpureis formosa rosis cum Aurora ruberet; when the fair morn
with purple hue 'gan shine, he made an excuse, I know not what,
out of Hippocrates Cous, &c., and for that time it went current: but
when as afterward he did not play the man as he should do, she fell
in league with a good fellow, and whilst he sat up late at his study
about those criticisms, mending some hard places in Festus or
Pollux, came cold to bed, and would tell her still what he had done,
she did not much regard what he said, &c. "She would have
another matter mended much rather, which he did not conceive was
corrupt:" thus he continued at his study late, she at her sport, alibi
enim festivas noctes agitabat, hating all scholars for his sake, till at
length he began to suspect, and turned a little yellow, as well he
might; for it was his own fault; and if men be jealous in such cases
( as oft it falls out) the mends is in their own hands, they must
thank themselves. Who will pity them, saith Neander, or be much
offended with such wives, si deceptae prius viros decipiant, et
cornutos reddant, if they deceive those that cozened them first. A
lawyer's wife in Aristaenetus, because her husband was negligent
in his business, quando lecto danda opera, threatened to cornute
him: and did not stick to tell Philinna, one of her gossips, as much,
and that aloud for him to hear: "If he follow other men's matters
and leave his own, I'll have an orator shall plead my cause, I care
not if he know it."

A fourth eminent cause of jealousy may be this, when he that is
deformed, and as Pindarus of Vulcan, sine gratiis natus, hirsute,
ragged, yet virtuously given, will marry some fair nice piece, or
light housewife, begins to misdoubt (as well he may) she doth not
affect him. Lis est cum forma magna pudicitiae, beauty and honesty
have ever been at odds. Abraham was jealous of his wife because
she was fair: so was Vulcan of his Venus, when he made her
creaking shoes, saith Philostratus, ne maecharetur, sandalio scilicet
deferente, that he might hear by them when she stirred, which Mars
indigne ferre, was not well pleased with. Good cause had Vulcan to
do as he did, for she was no honester than she should be. Your fine
faces have commonly this fault; and it is hard to find, saith Francis
Philelphus in an epistle to Saxola his friend, a rich man honest, a
proper woman not proud or unchaste. "Can she be fair and honest
too?"

 "Saepe etenim oculuit picta sese hydra sub herba,
Sub specie formae, incauto se saepe marito
Nequam animus vendit,"--

 (Hor. epist. 15. "Often has the serpent lain hid beneath the
coloured grass, under a beauliful aspect, and often has the evil
inclination affected a sale without the husband's privity.")

He that marries a wife that is snowy fair alone, let him look, saith
Barbarus, for no better success than Vulcan had with Venus, or
Claudius with Messalina. And 'tis impossible almost in such cases
the wife should contain, or the good man not be jealous: for when
he is so defective, weak, ill-proportioned, unpleasing in those parts
which women most affect, and she most absolutely fair and able on
the other side, if she be not very virtuously given, how can she love
him? and although she be not fair, yet if he admire her and think
her so, in his conceit she is absolute, he holds it impossible for any
man living not to dote as he doth, to look on her and not lust, not to
covet, and if he be in company with her, not to lay siege to her
honesty: or else out of a deep apprehension of his infirmities,
deformities, and other men's good parts, out of his own little worth
and desert, he distrusts himself, (for what is jealousy but distrust?)
he suspects she cannot affect him, or be not so kind and loving as
she should, she certainly loves some other man better than himself.

 Nevisanus, lib. 4. num. 72, will have barrenness to be a main cause
of jealousy. If her husband cannot play the man, some other shall,
they will leave no remedies unessayed, and thereupon the good
man grows jealous; I could give an instance, but be it as it is.

I find this reason given by some men, because they have been
formerly naught themselves, they think they may be so served by
others, they turned up trump before the cards were shuffled; they
shall have therefore legem talionis, like for like.

 "Ipse miser docui, quo posset ludere pacto
Custodes, eheu nunc premor arte mea."

"Wretch as I was, I taught her bad to be,
And now mine own sly tricks are put upon me."

Mala mens, malus animus, as the saying is, ill dispositions cause ill
suspicions.

 "There is none jealous, I durst pawn my life,
But he that hath defiled another's wife,
And for that he himself hath gone astray,
He straightway thinks his wife will tread that way."

To these two above-named causes, or incendiaries of this rage, I
may very well annex those circumstances of time, place, persons,
by which it ebbs and flows, the fuel of this fury, as Vives truly
observes; and such like accidents or occasions, proceeding from the
parties themselves, or others, which much aggravate and intend this
suspicious humour. For many men are so lasciviously given, either
out of a depraved nature, or too much liberty, which they do
assume unto themselves, by reason of their greatness, in that they
are noble men, (for licentiae peccandi, et multitudo peccantium are
great motives) though their own wives be never so fair, noble,
virtuous, honest, wise, able, and well given, they must have change.

 "Qui cum legitimi junguntur foedere lecti,
Virtute egregiis, facieque domoque puellis,
Scorta tamen, foedasque lupas in fornice quaerunt,
Et per adulterium nova carpere gaudia tentant."

"Who being match'd to wives most virtuous,
Noble, and fair, fly out lascivious."

Quod licet ingratum est, that which is ordinary, is unpleasant. Nero
(saith Tacitus) abhorred Octavia his own wife, a noble virtuous
lady, and loved Acte, a base quean in respect. Cerinthus rejected
Sulpitia, a nobleman's daughter, and courted a poor servant maid.--
tanta est aliena in messe voluptas, for that "stolen waters be more
pleasant:" or as Vitellius the emperor was wont to say, Jucundiores
amores, qui cum periculo habentur, like stolen venison, still the
sweetest is that love which is most difficultly attained: they like
better to hunt by stealth in another man's walk, than to have the
fairest course that may be at game of their own.

 "Aspice ut in coelo modo sol, modo luna ministret,
Sic etiam nobis una pella parum est."

"As sun and moon in heaven change their course,
So they change loves, though often to the worse."

Or that some fair object so forcibly moves them, they cannot
contain themselves, be it heard or seen they will be at it. Nessus,
the centaur, was by agreement to carry Hercules and his wife over
the river Evenus; no sooner had he set Dejanira on the other side,
but he would have offered violence unto her, leaving Hercules to
swim over as he could: and though her husband was a spectator, yet
would he not desist till Hercules, with a poisoned arrow, shot him
to death. Neptune saw by chance that Thessalian Tyro, Eunippius'
wife, he forthwith, in the fury of his lust, counterfeited her
husband's habit, and made him cuckold. Tarquin heard Collatine
commend his wife, and was so far enraged, that in the midst of the
night to her he went. Theseus stole Ariadne, vi rapuit that
Trazenian Anaxa, Antiope, and now being old, Helen, a girl not yet
ready for a husband. Great men are most part thus affected all, "as a
horse they neigh," saith Jeremiah, after their neighbours' wives,--ut
visa pullus adhinnit equa: and if they be in company with other
women, though in their own wives' presence, they must be courting
and dallying with them. Juno in Lucian complains of Jupiter that he
was still kissing Ganymede before her face, which did not a little
offend her: and besides he was a counterfeit Amphitryo, a bull, a
swan, a golden shower, and played many such bad pranks, too
long, too shameful to relate.

Or that they care little for their own ladies, and fear no laws, they
dare freely keep whores at their wives' noses. 'Tis too frequent with
noblemen to be dishonest; Pielas, probitas, fides, privata bona
sunt, as he said long since, piety, chastity, and such like virtues are
for private men: not to be much looked after in great courts: and
which Suetonius of the good princes of his time, they might be all
engraven in one ring, we may truly hold of chaste potentates of our
age. For great personages will familiarly run out in this kind, and
yield occasion of offence. Montaigne, in his Essays, gives instance
in Caesar, Mahomet the Turk, that sacked Constantinople, and
Ladislaus, king of Naples, that besieged Florence: great men, and
great soldiers, are commonly great, &c., probatum est, they are
good doers. Mars and Venus are equally balanced in their actions,

 "Militis in galea nidum fecere columbae,
Apparet Marti quam sit amica Venus."

"A dove within a headpiece made her nest,
'Twixt Mars and Venus see an interest."

Especially if they be bald, for bald men have ever been suspicious
(read more in Aristotle, Sect. 4. prob. 19.) as Galba, Otho,
Domitian, and remarkable Caesar amongst the rest. Urbani servate
uxores, maechum calvum adducimus; besides, this bald Caesar,
saith Curio in Sueton, was omnium mulierum vir; he made love to
Eunoe, queen of Mauritania; to Cleopatra; to Posthumia, wife to
Sergius Sulpitius; to Lollia, wife to Gabinius; to Tertulla, of
Crassus; to Mutia, Pompey's wife, and I know not how many
besides: and well he might, for, if all be true that I have read, he
had a license to lie with whom he list. Inter alios honores Caesari
decretos (as Sueton, cap. 52. de Julio, and Dion, lib. 44. relate) jus
illi datum, cum quibuscunque foeminis se jungendi. Every private
history will yield such variety of instances: otherwise good, wise,
discreet men, virtuous and valiant, but too faulty in this. Priamus
had fifty sons, but seventeen alone lawfully begotten. Philippus
Bonus left fourteen bastards. Lorenzo de Medici, a good prince and
a wise, but, saith Machiavel, prodigiously lascivious. None so
valiant as Castruccius Castrucanus, but, as the said author hath it,
none so incontinent as he was. And 'tis not only predominant in
grandees this fault: but if you will take a great man's testimony, 'tis
familiar with every base soldier in France, (and elsewhere, I think) .
"This vice" ( saith mine author) "is so common with us in France,
that he is of no account, a mere coward, not worthy the name of a
soldier, that is not a notorious whoremaster." In Italy he is not a
gentleman, that besides his wife hath not a courtesan and a
mistress. 'Tis no marvel, then, if poor women in such cases be
jealous, when they shall see themselves manifestly neglected,
contemned, loathed, unkindly used: their disloyal husbands to
entertain others in their rooms, and many times to court ladies to
their faces: other men's wives to wear their jewels: how shall a poor
woman in such a case moderate her passion? Quis tibi nunc Dido
cernenti talia sensus? (Virg. Aen. 4. "What now must have been
Dido's sensations when she witnessed these doings?")

How, on the other side, shall a poor man contain himself from this
feral malady, when he shall see so manifest signs of his wife's
inconstancy? when, as Milo's wife, she dotes upon every young
man she sees, or, as Martial's Sota,--deserto sequitur Clitum
marito, "deserts her husband and follows Clitus." Though her
husband be proper and tall, fair and lovely to behold, able to give
contentment to any one woman, yet she will taste of the forbidden
fruit: Juvenal's Iberina to a hair, she is as well pleased with one eye
as one man. If a young gallant come by chance into her presence, a
fastidious brisk, that can wear his clothes well in fashion, with a
lock, jingling spur, a feather, that can cringe, and withal
compliment, court a gentlewoman, she raves upon him, "O what a
lovely proper man he was," another Hector, an Alexander, a goodly
man, a demigod, how sweetly he carried himself, with how comely
a grace, sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat, how neatly he
did wear his clothes! Quam sese ore ferens, quam forti pectore et
armis, how bravely did he discourse, ride, sing, and dance, &c., and
then she begins to loathe her husband, repugnans osculatur, to hate
him and his filthy beard, his goatish complexion, as Doris said of
Polyphemus, totus qui saniem, totus ut hircus olet, he is a rammy
fulsome fellow, a goblin-faced fellow, he smells, he stinks, Et
caepas simul alliumque ructat ("And belches out the smell of
onions and garlic.") --si quando ad thalamum, &c., how like a
dizzard, a fool, an ass, he looks, how like a clown he behaves
himself! she will not come near him by her own good will, but
wholly rejects him, as Venus did her fuliginous Vulcan, at last, Nec
Deus hunc mensa, Dea nec dignata cubili est. ("Neither a god
honoured him with his table, nor a goddess with her bed.") So did
Lucretia, a lady of Senae, after she had but seen Euryalus, in
Eurialum tota ferebatur, domum reversa, &c., she would not hold
her eyes off him in his presence,-- tantum egregio decus enitet ore
(Virg. 4. Aen. "Such beauty shines in his graceful features.") , and
in his absence could think of none but him, odit virum, she loathed
her husband forthwith, might not abide him:

 "Et conjugalis negligens tori, viro
Praesente, acerbo nauseat fastidio;"

"All against the laws of matrimony,
She did abhor her husband's phis'nomy;"

and sought all opportunity to see her sweetheart again. Now when
the good man shall observe his wife so lightly given, "to be so free
and familiar with every gallant, her immodesty and wantonness,"
(as Camerarius notes) it must needs yield matter of suspicion to
him, when she still pranks up herself beyond her means and
fortunes, makes impertinent journeys, unnecessary visitations, stays
out so long, with such and such companions, so frequently goes to
plays, masks, feasts, and all public meetings, shall use such
immodest gestures, free speeches, and withal show some distaste of
her own husband; how can he choose, "though he were another
Socrates, but be suspicious, and instantly jealous?" Socraticas
tandem faciet transcendere metas; more especially when he shall
take notice of their more secret and sly tricks, which to cornute
their husbands they commonly use (dum ludis, ludos haec te facit)
they pretend love, honour, chastity, and seem to respect them
before all men living, saints in show, so cunningly can they
dissemble, they will not so much as look upon another man in his
presence, so chaste, so religious, and so devout, they cannot endure
the name or sight of a quean, a harlot, out upon her! and in their
outward carriage are most loving and officious, will kiss their
husband, and hang about his neck (dear husband, sweet husband) ,
and with a composed countenance salute him, especially when he
comes home; or if he go from home, weep, sigh, lament, and take
upon them to be sick and swoon (like Jocundo's wife in Ariosto,
when her husband was to depart) , and yet arrant, &c. they care not
for him,

"Aye me, the thought (quoth she) makes me so 'fraid,
That scarce the breath abideth in my breast;
Peace, my sweet love and wife, Jocundo said,
And weeps as fast, and comforts her his best, &c.
All this might not assuage the woman's pain,
Needs must I die before you come again,
Nor how to keep my life I can devise,
The doleful days and nights I shall sustain,
From meat my mouth, from sleep will keep mine eyes, &c.
That very night that went before the morrow,
That he had pointed surely to depart,
Jocundo's wife was sick, and swoon'd for sorrow
Amid his arms, so heavy was her heart."

And yet for all these counterfeit tears and protestations, Jocundo
coming back in all haste for a jewel he had forgot,

"His chaste and yoke-fellow he found
Yok'd with a knave, all honesty neglected,
The adulterer sleeping very sound,
Yet by his face was easily detected:
A beggar's brat bred by him from his cradle.,
And now was riding on his master's saddle."

Thus can they cunningly counterfeit, as Platina describes their
customs, "kiss their husbands, whom they had rather see hanging
on a gallows, and swear they love him dearer than their own lives,
whose soul they would not ransom for their little dog's,"

--"similis si permutatio detur,
Morte viri cupiunt aniniani servare catellae."

Many of them seem to be precise and holy forsooth, and will go to
such a church, to hear such a good man by all means, an excellent
man, when 'tis for no other intent (as he follows it) than "to see and
to be seen, to observe what fashions are in use, to meet some
pander, bawd, monk, friar, or to entice some good fellow." For they
persuade themselves, as Nevisanus shows, "That it is neither sin
nor shame to lie with a lord or parish priest, if he be a proper man;"
"and though she kneel often, and pray devoutly, 'tis" (saith Platina)
"not for her husband's welfare, or children's good, or any friend, but
for her sweetheart's return, her pander's health." If her husband
would have her go, she feigns herself sick, Et simulat subito
condoluisse caput: her head aches, and she cannot stir: but if her
paramour ask as much, she is for him in all seasons, at all hours of
the night. In the kingdom of Malabar, and about Goa in the East
Indies, the women are so subtile that, with a certain drink they give
them to drive away cares as they say, "they will make them sleep
for twenty-four hours, or so intoxicate them that they can
remember nought of that they saw done, or heard, and, by washing
of their feet, restore them again, and so make their husbands
cuckolds to their faces." Some are ill-disposed at all times, to all
persons they like, others more wary to some few, at such and such
seasons, as Augusta, Livia, non nisi plena navi vectorem tollebat.
But as he said,

 "No pen could write, no tongue attain to tell,
By force of eloquence, or help of art,
Of women's treacheries the hundredth part."

Both, to say truth, are often faulty; men and women give just
occasions in this humour of discontent, aggravate and yield matter
of suspicion: but most part of the chief causes proceed from other
adventitious accidents and circumstances, though the parties be
free, and both well given themselves. The indiscreet carriage of
some lascivious gallant (et e contra of some light woman) by his
often frequenting of a house, bold unseemly gestures, may make a
breach, and by his over-familiarity, if he be inclined to yellowness,
colour him quite out. If he be poor, basely born, saith Beneditto
Varchi, and otherwise unhandsome, he suspects him the less; but if
a proper man, such as was Alcibiades in Greece, and Castruccius
Castrucanus in Italy, well descended, commendable for his good
parts, he taketh on the more, and watcheth his doings. Theodosius
the emperor gave his wife Eudoxia a golden apple when he was a
suitor to her, which she long after bestowed upon a young gallant
in the court, of her especial acquaintance. The emperor, espying
this apple in his hand, suspected forthwith, more than was, his
wife's dishonesty, banished him the court, and from that day
following forbare to accompany her any more. A rich merchant had
a fair wife; according to his custom he went to travel; in his
absence a good fellow tempted his wife; she denied him; yet he,
dying a little after, gave her a legacy for the love he bore her. At his
return, her jealous husband, because she had got more by land than
he had done at sea, turned her away upon suspicion.

Now when those other circumstances of time and place,
opportunity and importunity shall concur, what will they not effect?

"Fair opportunity can win the coyest she that is,
So wisely he takes time, as he'll be sure he will not miss:
Then lie that loves her gamesome vein, and tempers toys with art,
Brings love that swimmeth in her eyes to dive into her heart."

As at plays, masks, great feasts and banquets, one singles out his
wife to dance, another courts her in his presence, a third tempts her,
a fourth insinuates with a pleasing compliment, a sweet smile,
ingratiates himself with an amphibological speech, as that merry
companion in the Satirist did to his Glycerium, adsidens et
interiorem palmam amabiliter concutiens, ("Sitting close to her,
and shaking her hand lovingly.")

"Quod meus hortus habet sumat impune licebit,
Si dederis nobis quod tuus hortus habet;"

with many such, &c., and then as he saith,

 She may no while in chastity abide.
That is assail'd on every side.

For after a great feast, Vino saepe suum nescit amica virum. ("After
wine the mistress is often unable to distinguish her own lover.")
Noah (saith Hierome) "showed his nakedness in his drunkenness,
which for six hundred years he had covered in soberness." Lot lay 
with his daughters in his drink, as Cyneras with Myrrha,-- quid
enim Venus ebria curat? The most continent may be overcome, or
if otherwise they keep bad company, they that are modest of
themselves, and dare not offend, "confirmed by others, grow
impudent, and confident, and get an ill habit."

 "Alia quaestus gratia matrimonium corrumpit,
Alia peccans multas vult morbi habere socias."

 (Euripides, l. 63. "Love of gain induces one to break her
marriage vow, a wish to have associates to keep her in
countenance actuates others.")

Or if they dwell in suspected places, as in an infamous inn, near
some stews, near monks, friars, Nevisanus adds, where be many
tempters and solicitors, idle persons that frequent their companies,
it may give just cause of suspicion. Martial of old inveighed against
them that counterfeited a disease to go to the bath; for so, many
times,

--"relicto
Conjuge Penelope venit, abit Helene."

Aeneas Sylvius puts in a caveat against princes' courts, because
there be tot formosi juvenes qui promittunt, so many brave suitors
to tempt, &c. "If you leave her in such a place, you shall likely find
her in company you like not, either they come to her, or she is gone
to them." Kornmannus makes a doubting jest in his lascivious
country, Virginis illibata censeatur ne castitas ad quam frequentur
accedant scholares? And Baldus the lawyer scoffs on, quum
scholaris, inquit, loquitur cum puella, non praesumitur ei dicere,
Pater noster, when a scholar talks with a maid, or another man's
wife in private, it is presumed he saith not a pater noster. Or if I
shall see a monk or a friar climb up a ladder at midnight into a
virgin's or widow's chamber window, I shall hardly think he then
goes to administer the sacraments, or to take her confession. These
are the ordinary causes of jealousy, which are intended or remitted
as the circumstances vary.





MEMB. II. Symptoms of Jealousy, Fear, Sorrow, Suspicion,
strange Actions, Gestures, Outrages, Locking up, Oaths, Trials,
Laws, &c.

Of all passions, as I have already proved, love is most violent, and
of those bitter potions which this love-melancholy affords, this
bastard jealousy is the greatest, as appears by those prodigious
symptoms which it hath, and that it produceth. For besides fear and
sorrow, which is common to all melancholy, anxiety of mind,
suspicion, aggravation, restless thoughts, paleness, meagreness,
neglect of business, and the like, these men are farther yet
misaffected, and in a higher strain. 'Tis a more vehement passion, a
more furious perturbation, a bitter pain, a fire, a pernicious
curiosity, a gall corrupting the honey of our life, madness, vertigo,
plague, hell, they are more than ordinarily disquieted, they lose
bonum pacis, as Chrysostom observes; and though they be rich,
keep sumptuous tables, be nobly allied, yet miserrimi omnium sunt,
they are most miserable, they are more than ordinarily discontent,
more sad, nihil tristius, more than ordinarily suspicious. Jealousy,
saith Vives, "begets unquietness in the mind, night and day: he
hunts after every word he hears, every whisper, and amplifies it to
himself" (as all melancholy men do in other matters) "with a most
unjust calumny of others, he misinterprets everything is said or
done, most apt to mistake or misconstrue," he pries into every
corner, follows close, observes to a hair. 'Tis proper to jealousy so
to do,

"Pale hag, infernal fury, pleasure's smart,
Envy's observer, prying in every part."

Besides those strange gestures of staring, frowning, grinning,
rolling of eyes, menacing, ghastly looks, broken pace, interrupt,
precipitate, half-turns. He will sometimes sigh, weep, sob for anger.
Nempe suos imbres etiam ista tonitrua fundunt, ( "These thunders
pour down their peculiar showers.") --swear and belie, slander any
man, curse, threaten, brawl, scold, fight; and sometimes again
flatter and speak fair, ask forgiveness, kiss and coll, condemn his
rashness and folly, vow, protest, and swear he will never do so
again; and then eftsoons, impatient as he is, rave, roar, and lay
about him like a madman, thump her sides, drag her about
perchance, drive her out of doors, send her home, he will be
divorced forthwith, she is a whore, &c., and by-and-by with all
submission compliment, entreat her fair, and bring her in again, he
loves her dearly, she is his sweet, most kind and loving wife, he
will not change, nor leave her for a kingdom; so he continues off
and on, as the toy takes him, the object moves him, but most part
brawling, fretting, unquiet he is, accusing and suspecting not
strangers only, but brothers and sisters, father and mother, nearest
and dearest friends. He thinks with those Italians,

"Chi non tocca parentado,
Tocca mai e rado."

And through fear conceives unto himself things almost incredible
and impossible to be effected. As a heron when she fishes, still
prying on all sides; or as a cat doth a mouse, his eye is never off
hers; he gloats on him, on her, accurately observing on whom she
looks, who looks at her, what she saith, doth, at dinner, at supper,
sitting, walking, at home, abroad, he is the same, still inquiring,
maundering, gazing, listening, affrighted with every small object;
why did she smile, why did she pity him, commend him? why did
she drink twice to such a man? why did she offer to kiss, to dance?
&c., a whore, a whore, an arrant whore. All this he confesseth in
the poet,

 "Omnia me terrent, timidus sum, ignosce timori.
Et miser in tunica suspicor esse virum.
Me laedit si multa tibi dabit oscula mater,
Me soror, et cum qua dormit amica simul."

"Each thing affrights me, I do fear,
Ah pardon me my fear,
I doubt a man is hid within
The clothes that thou dost wear."

Is it not a man in woman's apparel? is not somebody in that great
chest, or behind the door, or hangings, or in some of those barrels?
may not a man steal in at the window with a ladder of ropes, or
come down the chimney, have a false key, or get in when he is
asleep? If a mouse do but stir, or the wind blow, a casement clatter,
that's the villain, there he is: by his goodwill no man shall see her,
salute her, speak with her, she shall not go forth of his sight, so
much as to do her needs. Non ita bovem argus, &c. Argus did not
so keep his cow, that watchful dragon the golden fleece, or
Cerberus the coming in of hell, as he keeps his wife. If a dear friend
or near kinsman come as guest to his house, to visit him, he will
never let him be out of his own sight and company, lest,
peradventure, &c. If the necessity of his business be such that he
must go from home, he doth either lock her up, or commit her with
a deal of injunctions and protestations to some trusty friends, him
and her he sets and bribes to oversee: one servant is set in his
absence to watch another, and all to observe his wife, and yet all
this will not serve, though his business be very urgent, he will when
he is halfway come back in all post haste, rise from supper, or at
midnight, and be gone, and sometimes leave his business undone,
and as a stranger court his own wife in some disguised habit.
Though there be no danger at all, no cause of suspicion, she live in
such a place, where Messalina herself could not be dishonest if she
would, yet he suspects her as much as if she were in a bawdy-
house, some prince's court, or in a common inn, where all comers
might have free access. He calls her on a sudden all to nought, she
is a strumpet, a light housewife, a bitch, an arrant whore. No
persuasion, no protestation can divert this passion, nothing can ease
him, secure or give him satisfaction. It is most strange to report
what outrageous acts by men and women have been committed in
this kind, by women especially, that will run after their husbands
into all places and companies, as Jovianus Pontanus's wife did by
him, follow him whithersoever he went, it matters not, or upon
what business, raving like Juno in the tragedy, miscalling, cursing,
swearing, and mistrusting every one she sees. Gomesius in his third
book of the Life and Deeds of Francis Ximenius, sometime
archbishop of Toledo, hath a strange story of that incredible
jealousy of Joan queen of Spain, wife to King Philip, mother of
Ferdinand and Charles the Fifth, emperors; when her husband
Philip, either for that he was tired with his wife's jealousy, or had
some great business, went into the Low Countries: she was so
impatient and melancholy upon his departure, that she would scarce
eat her meat, or converse with any man; and though she were with
child, the season of the year very bad, the wind against her, in all
haste she would to sea after him. Neither Isabella her queen
mother, the archbishop, or any other friend could persuade her to
the contrary, but she would after him. When she was now come
into the Low Countries, and kindly entertained by her husband, she
could not contain herself, "but in a rage ran upon a yellow-haired
wench," with whom she suspected her husband to be naught, "cut
off her hair, did beat her black and blue, and so dragged her about."
It is an ordinary thing for women in such cases to scratch the faces,
slit the noses of such as they suspect; as Henry the Second's
importune Juno did by Rosamond at Woodstock; for she complains
in a modern poet, she scarce spake,

"But flies with eager fury to my face,
Offering me most unwomanly disgrace.
Look how a tigress, &c.
So fell she on me in outrageous wise,
As could disdain and jealousy devise."

Or if it be so they dare not or cannot execute any such tyrannical
injustice, they will miscall, rail and revile, bear them deadly hate
and malice, as Tacitus observes, "The hatred of a jealous woman is
inseparable against such as she suspects."

 "Nulla vis flammae tumidique venti
Tanta, nec teli metuanda torti.
Quanta cum conjux viduata taedis
Ardet et odit."

"Winds, weapons, flames make not such hurly burly,
As raving women turn all topsy-turvy."

So did Agrippina by Lollia, and Calphurnia in the days of Claudius.
But women are sufficiently curbed in such cases, the rage of men is
more eminent, and frequently put in practice. See but with what
rigour those jealous husbands tyrannise over their poor wives. In
Greece, Spain, Italy, Turkey, Africa, Asia, and generally over all
those hot countries, Mulieres vestrae terra vestra, arate sicut vultis.
Mahomet in his Alcoran gives this power to men, your wives are as 
your land, till them, use them, entreat them fair or foul, as you will
yourselves. Mecastor lege dura vivunt mulieres, they lock them
still in their houses, which are so many prisons to them. will suffer
nobody to come at them, or their wives to be seen abroad,--nec
campos liceat lustrare patentes. They must not so much as look
out. And if they be great persons, they have eunuchs to keep them,
as the Grand Signior among the Turks, the Sophies of Persia, those
Tartarian Mogors, and Kings of China. Infantes masculos castrant
innumeros ut regi serviant, saith Riccius, "they geld innumerable
infants" to this purpose; the King of China "maintains 10,000
eunuchs in his family to keep his wives." The Xeriffes of Barbary
keep their courtesans in such a strict manner, that if any man come
but in sight of them he dies for it; and if they chance to see a man,
and do not instantly cry out, though from their windows, they must
be put to death. The Turks have I know not how many black,
deformed eunuchs (for the white serve for other ministeries) to this
purpose sent commonly from Egypt, deprived in their childhood of
all their privities, and brought up in the seraglio at Constantinople
to keep their wives; which are so penned up they may not confer
with any living man, or converse with younger women, have a
cucumber or carrot sent into them for their diet, but sliced, for fear,
&c. and so live and are left alone to their unchaste thoughts all the
days of their lives. The vulgar sort of women, if at any time they
come abroad, which is very seldom, to visit one another, or to go to
their baths, are so covered, that no man can see them, as the
matrons were in old Rome, lectica aut sella tecta, vectae, so Dion
and Seneca record, Velatae totae incedunt, which Alexander ab
Alexandro relates of the Parthians, lib. 5. cap. 24. which, with
Andreas Tiraquellus his commentator, I rather think should be
understood of Persians. I have not yet said all, they do not only
lock them up, sed et pudendis seras adhibent: hear what Bembus
relates lib. 6. of his Venetian history, of those inhabitants that dwell
about Quilon in Africa. Lusitani, inquit, quorundum civitates
adierunt: qui natis statim foeminis naturam consuunt, quoad urinae
exitus ne impediatur, easque quum adoleverint sic consutas in
matrimonium collocant, ut sponsi prima cura sit conglutinatas
puellae oras ferro interscindere. In some parts of Greece at this
day, like those old Jews, they will not believe their wives are
honest, nisi pannum menstruatum prima nocte videant: our
countryman Sands, in his peregrination, saith it is severely
observed in Zanzynthus, or Zante; and Leo Afer in his time at Fez,
in Africa, non credunt virginem esse nisi videant sanguineam
mappam; si non, ad parentes pudore rejicitur. Those sheets are
publicly shown by their parents, and kept as a sign of incorrupt
virginity. The Jews of old examined their maids ex tenui
membrana, called Hymen, which Laurentius in his anatomy,
Columbus lib. 12. cap. 10. Capivaccius lib. 4. cap. 11. de uteri
affectibus, Vincent, Alsarus Genuensis quaesit. med. cent. 4.
Hieronymus Mercurialis consult. Ambros. Pareus, Julius Caesar
Claudinus Respons. 4. as that also de ruptura venarum ut sauguis
fluat, copiously confute; 'tis no sufficient trial they contend. And
yet others again defend it, Gaspar Bartholinus Institut. Anat. lib. 1.
cap. 31. Pinaeus of Paris, Albertus Magnus de secret. mulier. cap.
9 & 10. &c. and think they speak too much in favour of women.
Ludovicus Boncialus lib. 4. cap. 2. muliebr. naturalem illam uteri
labiorum constrictionem, in qua virginitatem consistere volunt,
astringentibus medicinis fieri posse vendicat, et si defloratae sint,
astutae mulieres (inquit) nos fallunt in his. Idem Alsarius Crucius
Genuensis iisdem fere verbis. Idem Avicenna lib. 3. Fen. 20. Tract.
1, cap. 47. Rhasis Continent. lib. 24. Rodericus a Castro de nat.
mul. lib. 1. cap. 3. An old bawdy nurse in Aristaenetus, (like that
Spanish Coelestina, quae, quinque mille virgines fecit mulieres,
totidemque mulieres arte sua virgines) when a fair maid of her
acquaintance wept and made her moan to her, how she had been
deflowered, and now ready to be married, was afraid it would be
perceived, comfortably replied, Noli vereri filia, &c. "Fear not,
daughter, I'll teach thee a trick to help it." Sed haec extra callem.
To what end are all those astrological questions, an sit virgo, an sit
casta, an sit mulier? and such strange absurd trials in Albertus
Magnus, Bap. Porta, Mag. lib. 2. cap. 21. in Wecker. lib. 5. de
secret, by stones, perfumes, to make them piss, and confess I know
not what in their sleep; some jealous brain was the first founder of
them. And to what passion may we ascribe those severe laws
against jealousy, Num. v. 14, Adulterers Deut. cap. 22. v. xxii. as
amongst the Hebrews, amongst the Egyptians (read Bohemus l. 1.
c. 5. de mor. gen. of the Carthaginians, cap. 6. of Turks, lib. 2. cap.
11.) amongst the Athenians of old, Italians at this day, wherein they
are to be severely punished, cut in pieces, burned, vivi-comburio,
buried alive, with several expurgations, &c. are they not as so many
symptoms of incredible jealousy? we may say the same of those
vestal virgins that fetched water in a sieve, as Tatia did in Rome,
anno ab. urb. condita 800. before the senators; and Aemilia, virgo
innocens, that ran over hot irons, as Emma, Edward the Confessor's
mother did, the king himself being a spectator, with the like. We
read in Nicephorus, that Chunegunda the wife of Henricus Bavarus
emperor, suspected of adultery, insimulata adulterii per ignitos
vomeres illaesa transiit, trod upon red hot coulters, and had no
harm: such another story we find in Regino lib. 2. In Aventinus and
Sigonius of Charles the Third and his wife Richarda, an. 887, that
was so purged with hot irons. Pausanias saith, that he was once an
eyewitness of such a miracle at Diana's temple, a maid without any
harm at all walked upon burning coals. Pius Secund. in his
description of Europe, c. 46. relates as much, that it was commonly
practised at Diana's temple, for women to go barefoot over hot
coals, to try their honesties: Plinius, Solinus, and many writers,
make mention of Geronia's temple, and Dionysius Halicarnassus,
lib. 3. of Memnon's statue, which were used to this purpose. Tatius
lib. 6. of Pan his cave, (much like old St. Wilfrid's needle in
Yorkshire) wherein they did use to try, maids, whether they were
honest; when Leucippe went in, suavissimus exaudiri sonus caepit
Austin de civ. Dei lib. 10. c. 16. relates many such examples, all
which Lavater de spectr. part. 1. cap. 19 contends to be done by
the illusion of devils; though Thomas quaest. 6. de polentia, &c.
ascribes it to good angels. Some, saith Austin, compel their wives
to swear they be honest, as if perjury were a lesser sin than
adultery; some consult oracles, as Phaerus that blind king of Egypt.
Others reward, as those old Romans used to do; if a woman were
contented with one man, Corona pudicitiae donabatur, she had a
crown of chastity bestowed on her. When all this will not serve,
saith Alexander Gaguinus, cap. 5. descript. Muscoviae, the
Muscovites, if they suspect their wives, will beat them till they
confess, and if that will not avail, like those wild Irish, be divorced
at their pleasures, or else knock them on the heads, as the old Gauls
have done in former ages. Of this tyranny of jealousy read more in
Parthenius Erot. cap. 10. Camerarius cap. 53. hor. subcis. et cent.
2. cap. 34. Coelia's epistles, Tho. Chaloner de repub. Aug. lib. 9.
Ariosto lib. 31. stasse 1. Felix Platerus observat. lib. 1. &c.





MEMB. III. Prognostics of Jealousy. Despair, Madness, to make
away themselves and others.

Those which are jealous, most part, if they be not otherwise
relieved, "proceed from suspicion to hatred, from hatred to frenzy,
madness, injury, murder and despair."

 "A plague by whose most damnable effect.
Divers in deep despair to die have sought,
By which a man to madness near is brought,
As well with causeless as with just suspect."

In their madness many times, saith Vives, they make away
themselves and others. Which induceth Cyprian to call it,
Foecundam et multiplicem perniciem, fontem cladium et
seminarium delictorum, a fruitful mischief, the seminary of
offences, and fountain of murders. Tragical examples are too
common in this kind, both new and old, in all ages, as of Cephalus
and Procris, Phaereus of Egypt, Tereus, Atreus, and Thyestes.
Alexander Phaereus was murdered of his wife, ob pellicatus
suspitionem, Tully saith. Antoninus Verus was so made away by
Lucilla; Demetrius the son of Antigonus, and Nicanor, by their
wives. Hercules poisoned by Dejanira, Caecinna murdered by
Vespasian, Justina, a Roman lady, by her husband. Amestris,
Xerxes' wife, because she found her husband's cloak in Masista's
house, cut off Masista, his wife's paps, and gave them to the dogs,
flayed her besides, and cut off her ears, lips, tongue, and slit the
nose of Artaynta her daughter. Our late writers are full of such
outrages.

 Paulus Aemilius, in his history of France, hath a tragical story of
Chilpericus the First his death, made away by Ferdegunde his
queen. In a jealous humour he came from hunting, and stole behind
his wife, as she was dressing and combing her head in the sun, gave
her a familiar touch with his wand, which she mistaking for her
lover, said, "Ah Landre, a good knight should strike before, and not
behind:" but when she saw herself betrayed by his presence, she
instantly took order to make him away. Hierome Osorius, in his
eleventh book of the deeds of Emanuel King of Portugal, to this
effect hath a tragical narration of one Ferdinandus Chalderia, that
wounded Gotherinus, a noble countryman of his, at Goa in the East
Indies, "and cut off one of his legs, for that he looked as he thought
too familiarly upon his wife, which was afterwards a cause of many
quarrels, and much bloodshed." Guianerius cap. 36. de aegritud.
matr. speaks of a silly jealous fellow, that seeing his child new-
born included in a caul, thought sure a Franciscan that used to
come to his house, was the father of it, it was so like the friar's
cowl, and thereupon threatened the friar to kill him: Fulgosus of a
woman in Narbonne, that cut off her husband's privities in the
night, because she thought he played false with her. The story of
Jonuses Bassa, and fair Manto his wife, is well known to such as
have read the Turkish history; and that of Joan of Spain, of which I
treated in my former section. Her jealousy, saith Gomesius, was the
cause of both their deaths: King Philip died for grief a little after, as
Martian his physician gave it out, "and she for her part after a
melancholy discontented life, misspent in lurking-holes and
corners, made an end of her miseries." Felix Plater, in the first book
of his observations, hath many such instances, of a physician of his
acquaintance, "that was first mad through jealousy, and afterwards
desperate:" of a merchant "that killed his wife in the same humour,
and after precipitated himself:" of a doctor of law that cut off his 
man's nose: of a painter's wife in Basil, anno 1600, that was mother
of nine children and had been twenty-seven years married, yet
afterwards jealous, and so impatient that she became desperate, and
would neither eat nor drink in her own house, for fear her husband
should poison her. 'Tis a common sign this; for when once the
humours are stirred, and the imagination misaffected, it will vary
itself in divers forms; and many such absurd symptoms will
accompany, even madness itself. Skenkius observat. lib. 4. cap. de
Uter. hath an example of a jealous woman that by this means had
many fits of the mother: and in his first book of some that through
jealousy ran mad: of a baker that gelded himself to try his wife's
honesty, &c. Such examples are too common.





MEMB. IV.

SUBSECT I.--Cure of Jealousy; by avoiding occasions, not to be
idle: of good counsel; to contemn it, not to watch or lock them up:
to dissemble it, &c.

As of all other melancholy, some doubt whether this malady may
be cured or no, they think 'tis like the gout, or Switzers, whom we
commonly call Walloons, those hired soldiers, if once they take
possession of a castle, they can never be got out.

"Qui timet ut sua sit, ne quis sibi subtrahat illam,
Ille Machaonia vix ope salvus est."

 "This is the cruel wound against whose smart,
No liquor's force prevails, or any plaister,
No skill of stars, no depth of magic art,
Devised by that great clerk Zoroaster,
A wound that so infects the soul and heart,
As all our sense and reason it doth master;
A wound whose pang and torment is so durable,
As it may rightly called be incurable."

Yet what I have formerly said of other melancholy, I will say again,
it may be cured or mitigated at least by some contrary passion,
good counsel and persuasion, if it be withstood in the beginning,
maturely resisted, and as those ancients hold, "the nails of it be
pared before they grow too long." No better means to resist or repel
it than by avoiding idleness, to be still seriously busied about some
matters of importance, to drive out those vain fears, foolish
fantasies and irksome suspicions out of his head, and then to be
persuaded by his judicious friends, to give ear to their good counsel
and advice, and wisely to consider, how much he discredits
himself, his friends, dishonours his children, disgraceth his family,
publisheth his shame, and as a trumpeter of his own misery,
divulgeth, macerates, grieves himself and others; what an argument
of weakness it is, how absurd a thing in its own nature, how
ridiculous, how brutish a passion, how sottish, how odious; for as
Hierome well hath it, Odium sui facit, et ipse novissime sibi odio
est, others hate him, and at last he hates himself for it; how
harebrain a disease, mad and furious. If he will but hear them
speak, no doubt he may be cured. Joan, queen of Spain, of whom I
have formerly spoken, under pretence of changing air was sent to
Complutum, or Alcada de las Heneras, where Ximenius the
archbishop of Toledo then lived, that by his good counsel (as for
the present she was) she might be eased. "For a disease of the soul,
if concealed, tortures and overturns it, and by no physic can sooner
be removed than by a discreet man's comfortable speeches." I will
not here insert any consolatory sentences to this purpose, or
forestall any man's invention, but leave it every one to dilate and
amplify as he shall think fit in his own judgment: let him advise
with Siracides cap. 9. 1. "Be not jealous over the wife of thy
bosom;" read that comfortable and pithy speech to this purpose of
Ximenius, in the author himself, as it is recorded by Gomesius;
consult with Chaloner lib. 9. de repub. Anglor. or Coelia in her
epistles, &c. Only this I will add, that if it be considered aright,
which causeth this jealous passion, be it just or unjust, whether
with or without cause, true or false, it ought not so heinously to be
taken; 'tis no such real or capital matter, that it should make so deep
a wound. 'Tis a blow that hurts not, an insensible smart, grounded
many times upon false suspicion alone, and so fostered by a sinister
conceit. If she be not dishonest, he troubles and macerates himself
without a cause; or put case which is the worst, he be a cuckold, it
cannot be helped, the more he stirs in it, the more he aggravates his
own misery. How much better were it in such a case to dissemble
or contemn it? why should that be feared which cannot be
redressed? multae tandem deposuerunt (saith Vives) quum flecti
maritos non posse vident, many women, when they see there is no
remedy, have been pacified; and shall men be more jealous than
women? 'Tis some comfort in such a case to have companions,
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris; Who can say he is free?
Who can assure himself he is not one de praeterito, or secure
himself de futuro? If it were his case alone, it were hard; but being
as it is almost a common calamity, 'tis not so grievously to be
taken. If a man have a lock, which every man's key will open, as
well as his own, why should he think to keep it private to himself?
In some countries they make nothing of it, ne nobiles quidem, saith
Leo Afer, in many parts of Africa (if she be past fourteen) there's
not a nobleman that marries a maid, or that hath a chaste wife; 'tis
so common; as the moon gives horns once a month to the world, do
they to their husbands at least. And 'tis most part true which that
Caledonian lady, Argetocovus, a British prince's wife, told Julia
Augusta, when she took her up for dishonesty, "We Britons are
naught at least with some few choice men of the better sort, but you
Romans lie with every base knave, you are a company of common
whores." Severus the emperor in his time made laws for the
restraint of this vice; and as Dion Nicaeus relates in his life, tria
millia maechorum, three thousand cuckold-makers, or naturae
monetam adulterantes, as Philo calls them, false coiners, and
clippers of nature's money, were summoned into the court at once.
And yet, Non omnem molitor quae fluit undam videt, "the miller
sees not all the water that goes by his mill:" no doubt, but, as in our
days, these were of the commonalty, all the great ones were not so
much as called in question for it. Martial's Epigram I suppose
might have been generally applied in those licentious times, Omnia
solus habes, &c., thy goods, lands, money, wits are thine own,
Uxorem sed habes Candide cum populo; but neighbour Candidus
your wife is common: husband and cuckold in that age it seems
were reciprocal terms; the emperors themselves did wear Actaeon's
badge; how many Caesars might I reckon up together, and what a
catalogue of cornuted kings and princes in every story?
Agamemnon, Menelaus, Philippus of Greece, Ptolomeus of Egypt,
Lucullus, Caesar, Pompeius, Cato, Augustus, Antonius, Antoninus,
&c., that wore fair plumes of bull's feathers in their crests. The
bravest soldiers and most heroical spirits could not avoid it. They
have been active and passive in this business, they have either
given or taken horns. King Arthur, whom we call one of the nine
worthies, for all his great valour, was unworthily served by
Mordred, one of his round table knights: and Guithera, or Helena
Alba, his fair wife, as Leland interprets it, was an arrant honest
woman. Parcerem libenter (saith mine author) Heroinarum laesae
majestati, si non historiae veritas aurem vellicaret, I could
willingly wink at a fair lady's faults, but that I am bound by the
laws of history to tell the truth: against his will, God knows, did he
write it, and so do I repeat it. I speak not of our times all this while,
we have good, honest, virtuous men and women, whom fame, zeal,
fear of God, religion and superstition contains: and yet for all that,
we have many knights of this order, so dubbed by their wives,
many good women abused by dissolute husbands. In some places,
and such persons you may as soon enjoin them to carry water in a
sieve, as to keep themselves honest. What shall a man do now in
such a case? What remedy is to be had? how shall he be eased? By
suing a divorce? this is hard to be effected: si non caste, tamen
caute they carry the matter so cunningly, that though it be as
common as simony, as clear and as manifest as the nose in a man's
face, yet it cannot be evidently proved, or they likely taken in the
fact: they will have a knave Gallus to watch, or with that Roman
Sulpitia, all made fast and sure,

"Ne se Cadurcis destitutam fasciis,
Nudam Caleno concumbentem videat."

"she will hardly be surprised by her husband, be he never so wary."
Much better then to put it up: the more he strives in it, the more he
shall divulge his own shame: make a virtue of necessity, and
conceal it. Yea, but the world takes notice of it, 'tis in every man's
mouth: let them talk their pleasure, of whom speak they not in this
sense? From the highest to the lowest they are thus censured all:
there is no remedy then but patience. It may be 'tis his own fault,
and he hath no reason to complain, 'tis quid pro quo, she is bad, he
is worse: "Bethink thyself, hast thou not done as much for some of
thy neighbours? why dost thou require that of thy wife, which thou
wilt not perform thyself?" Thou rangest like a town bull, "why art
thou so incensed if she tread awry?"

 "Be it that some woman break chaste wedlock's laws,
And leaves her husband and becomes unchaste:
Yet commonly it is not without cause,
She sees her man in sin her goods to waste,
She feels that he his love from her withdraws,
And hath on some perhaps less worthy placed.
Who strike with sword, the scabbard them may strike,
And sure love craveth love, like asketh like."

Ea semper studebit, saith Nevisanus, pares reddere vices, she will
quit it if she can. And therefore, as well adviseth Siracides, cap. ix.
1. "teach her not an evil lesson against thyself," which as Jansenius,
Lyranus, on his text, and Carthusianus interpret, is no otherwise to
be understood than that she do thee not a mischief. I do not excuse
her in accusing thee; but if both be naught, mend thyself first; for as
the old saying is, a good husband makes a good wife.

Yea but thou repliest, 'tis not the like reason betwixt man and
woman, through her fault my children are bastards, I may not
endure it; Sit amarulenta, sit imperiosa prodiga, &c. Let her scold,
brawl, and spend, I care not, modo sit casta, so she be honest, I
could easily bear it; but this I cannot, I may not, I will not; "my
faith, my fame, mine eye must not be touched," as the diverb is,
Non patitur tactum fama, fides, oculus. I say the same of my wife,
touch all, use all, take all but this. I acknowledge that of Seneca to
be true, Nullius boni jucunda possessio sine socio, there is no sweet
content in the possession of any good thing without a companion,
this only excepted, I say, "This." And why this? Even this which
thou so much abhorrest, it may be for thy progeny's good, better be
any man's son than thine, to be begot of base Irus, poor Seius, or
mean Mevius, the town swineherd's, a shepherd's son: and well is
he, that like Hercules he hath any two fathers; for thou thyself hast
peradventure more diseases than a horse, more infirmities of body
and mind, a cankered soul, crabbed conditions, make the worst of
it, as it is vulnus insanabile, sic vulnus insensibile, as it is incurable,
so it is insensible. But art thou sure it is so? res agit ille tuas? "doth
he so indeed?" It may be thou art over-suspicious, and without a
cause as some are: if it be octimestris partus, born at eight months,
or like him, and him, they fondly suspect he got it; if she speak or
laugh familiarly with such or such men, then presently she is
naught with them; such is thy weakness; whereas charity, or a well-
disposed mind, would interpret all unto the best. St. Francis, by
chance seeing a friar familiarly kissing another man's wife, was so
far from misconceiving it, that he presently kneeled down and
thanked God there was so much charity left: but they on the other
side will ascribe nothing to natural causes, indulge nothing to
familiarity, mutual society, friendship: but out of a sinister
suspicion, presently lock them close, watch them, thinking by those
means to prevent all such inconveniences, that's the way to help it;
whereas by such tricks they do aggravate the mischief. 'Tis but in
vain to watch that which will away.

 "Nec custodiri si velit ulla potest;
Nec mentem servare potes, licet omnia serves;
Omnibus exclusis, intus adulter erit."

"None can be kept resisting for her part;
Though body be kept close, within her heart
Advoutry lurks, t'exclude it there's no art."

Argus with a hundred eyes cannot keep her, et hunc unus saepe
fefellit amor, as in Ariosto,

"If all our hearts were eyes, yet sure they said
We husbands of our wives should be betrayed."

Hierome holds, Uxor impudica servari non potest, pudica non
debet, infida custos castitatis est necessitas, to what end is all your
custody? A dishonest woman cannot be kept, an honest woman
ought not to be kept, necessity is a keeper not to be trusted.
Difficile custoditur, quod plures amant; that which many covet, can
hardly be preserved, as Salisburiensis thinks. I am of Aeneas
Sylvius' mind, "Those jealous Italians do very ill to lock up their
wives; for women are of such a disposition, they will most covet
that which is denied most, and offend least when they have free
liberty to trespass." It is in vain to lock her up if she be dishonest;
et tyrranicum imperium, as our great Mr. Aristotle calls it, too
tyrannical a task, most unfit: for when she perceives her husband
observes her and suspects, liberius peccat, saith Nevisanus. Toxica
Zelotypo dedit uxor moecha marito, she is exasperated, seeks by all
means to vindicate herself, and will therefore offend, because she is
unjustly suspected. The best course then is to let them have their
own wills, give them free liberty, without any keeping.

"In vain our friends from this do us dehort,
For beauty will be where is most resort."

If she be honest as Lucretia to Collatinus, Laodamia to Protesilaus,
Penelope to her Ulysses, she will so continue her honour, good
name, credit, Penelope conjux semper Ulyssis ero; "I shall always
be Penelope the wife of Ulysses." And as Phocias' wife in Plutarch,
called her husband "her wealth, treasure, world, joy, delight, orb
and sphere," she will hers. The vow she made unto her good man;
love, virtue, religion, zeal, are better keepers than all those locks,
eunuchs, prisons; she will not be moved:

 "At mihi vel tellus optem prius ima dehiscat,
Aut pater omnipotens adigat me fulmine ad umbras,
Pallentes umbras Erebi, noctemque profundam,
Ante pudor quam te violem, aut tua jura resolvam."

"First I desire the earth to swallow me.
Before I violate mine honesty,
Or thunder from above drive me to hell,
With those pale ghosts, and ugly nights to dwell."

She is resolved with Dido to be chaste; though her husband be
false, she will be true: and as Octavia writ to her Antony,

 "These walls that here do keep me out of sight,
Shall keep me all unspotted unto thee,
And testify that I will do thee right,
I'll never stain thine house, though thou shame me."

Turn her loose to all those Tarquins and Satyrs, she will not be
tempted. In the time of Valence the Emperor, saith St. Austin, one
Archidamus, a Consul of Antioch, offered a hundred pounds of
gold to a fair young wife, and besides to set her husband free, who
was then sub gravissima custodia, a dark prisoner, pro unius noctis
concubitu: but the chaste matron would not accept of it. When Ode
commended Theana's fine arm to his fellows, she took him up
short, "Sir, 'tis not common:" she is wholly reserved to her
husband. Bilia had an old man to her spouse, and his breath stunk,
so that nobody could abide it abroad; "coming home one day he
reprehended his wife, because she did not tell him of it: she vowed
unto him, she had told him, but she thought every man's breath had
been as strong as his." Tigranes and Armena his lady were invited
to supper by King Cyrus: when they came home, Tigranes asked
his wife, how she liked Cyrus, and what she did especially
commend in him? "she swore she did not observe him; when he
replied again, what then she did observe, whom she looked on? She
made answer, her husband, that said he would die for her sake."
Such are the properties and conditions of good women: and if she
be well given, she will so carry herself; if otherwise she be naught,
use all the means thou canst, she will be naught, Non deest animus
sed corruptor, she hath so many lies, excuses, as a hare hath muses,
tricks, panders, bawds, shifts, to deceive, 'tis to no purpose to keep
her up, or to reclaim her by hard usage. "Fair means peradventure
may do somewhat." Obsequio vinces aptius ipse tuo. Men and
women are both in a predicament in this behalf, no sooner won, and
better pacified. Duci volunt, non cogi: though she be as arrant a
scold as Xanthippe, as cruel as Medea, as clamorous as Hecuba, as
lustful as Messalina, by such means (if at all) she may be reformed.
Many patient Grizels, by their obsequiousness in this kind, have
reclaimed their husbands from their wandering lusts. In Nova
Francia and Turkey (as Leah, Rachel, and Sarah did to Abraham
and Jacob) they bring their fairest damsels to their husbands' beds;
Livia seconded the lustful appetites of Augustus: Stratonice, wife to
King Diotarus, did not only bring Electra, a fair maid, to her good
man's bed, but brought up the children begot on her, as carefully as
if they had been her own. Tertius Emilius' wife, Cornelia's mother,
perceiving her husband's intemperance, rem dissimulavit, made
much of the maid, and would take no notice of it. A new-married
man, when a pickthank friend of his, to curry favour, had showed
him his wife familiar in private with a young gallant, courting and
dallying, &c. Tush, said he, let him do his worst, I dare trust my
wife, though I dare not trust him. The best remedy then is by fair
means; if that will not take place, to dissemble it as I say, or turn it
off with a jest: hear Guexerra's advice in this case, vel joco
excipies, vel silentio eludes; for if you take exceptions at everything
your wife doth, Solomon's wisdom, Hercules' valour, Homer's
learning, Socrates' patience, Argus' vigilance, will not serve turn.
Therefore Minus malum, a less mischief, Nevisanus holds,
dissimulare, to be Cunarum emptor, a buyer of cradles, as the
proverb is, than to be too solicitous. "A good fellow, when his wife
was brought to bed before her time, bought half a dozen of cradles
beforehand for so many children, as if his wife should continue to
bear children every two months." Pertinax the Emperor, when one
told him a fiddler was too familiar with his empress, made no
reckoning of it. And when that Macedonian Philip was upbraided
with his wife's dishonesty, cum tot victor regnorum ac populorum
esset, &c., a conqueror of kingdoms could not tame his wife (for
she thrust him out of doors) , he made a jest of it. Sapientes portant
cornua in pectore, stulti in fronte, saith Nevisanus, wise men bear
their horns in their hearts, fools on their foreheads. Eumenes, king
of Pergamus, was at deadly feud with Perseus of Macedonia,
insomuch that Perseus hearing of a journey he was to take to
Delphos, set a company of soldiers to intercept him in his passage;
they did it accordingly, and as they supposed left him stoned to
death. The news of this fact was brought instantly to Pergamus;
Attalus, Eumenes' brother, proclaimed himself king forthwith, took
possession of the crown, and married Stratonice the queen. But by-
and-by, when contrary news was brought, that King Eumenes was
alive, and now coming to the city, he laid by his crown, left his
wife, as a private man went to meet him, and congratulate his
return. Eumenes, though he knew all particulars passed, yet
dissembling the matter, kindly embraced his brother, and took his
wife into his favour again, as if on such matter had been heard of or
done. Jocundo, in Ariosto, found his wife in bed with a knave, both
asleep, went his ways, and would not so much as wake them, much
less reprove them for it. An honest fellow finding in like sort his
wife had played false at tables, and borne a man too many, drew his
dagger, and swore if he had not been his very friend, he would have
killed him. Another hearing one had done that for him, which no
man desires to be done by a deputy, followed in a rage with his
sword drawn, and having overtaken him, laid adultery to his
charge; the offender hotly pursued, confessed it was true; with
which confession he was satisfied, and so left him, swearing that if
he had denied it, he would not have put it up. How much better is it
to do thus, than to macerate himself, impatiently to rave and rage,
to enter an action (as Arnoldus Tilius did in the court of Toulouse,
against Martin Guerre his fellow-soldier, for that he counterfeited
his habit, and was too familiar with his wife) , so to divulge his
own shame, and to remain for ever a cuckold on record? how much
better be Cornelius Tacitus than Publius Cornutus, to condemn in
such cases, or take no notice of it? Melius sic errare, quam
Zelotypiae curis, saith Erasmus, se conficere, better be a wittol and
put it up, than to trouble himself to no purpose. And though he will
not omnibus dormire, be an ass, as he is an ox, yet to wink at it as
many do is not amiss at some times, in some cases, to some parties,
if it be for his commodity, or some great man's sake, his landlord,
patron, benefactor, (as Calbas the Roman saith Plutarch did by
Maecenas, and Phayllus of Argos did by King Philip, when he
promised him an office on that condition he might lie with his wife)
and so let it pass:

 "pol me haud poenitet,
Scilicet boni dimidium dividere cum Jove,"

"it never troubles me" (saith Amphitrio) "to be cornuted by
Jupiter," let it not molest thee then; be friends with her;

 "Tu cum Alcmena uxore antiquam in gratiam
Redi"--

"Receive Alcmena to your grace again;" let it, I say, make no
breach of love between you. Howsoever the best way is to contemn
it, which Henry II. king of France advised a courtier of his, jealous
of his wife, and complaining of her unchasteness, to reject it, and
comfort himself; for he that suspects his wife's incontinency, and
fears the Pope's curse, shall never live a merry hour, or sleep a
quiet night: no remedy but patience. When all is done according to
that counsel of Nevisanus, si vitium uxoris corrigi non potest,
ferendum est: if it may not be helped, it must be endured. Date
veniam et sustinete taciti, 'tis Sophocles' advice, keep it to thyself,
and which Chrysostom calls palaestram philosophiae, et
domesticum gymnasium a school of philosophy, put it up. There is
no other cure but time to wear it out, Injuriarum remedium est
oblivio, as if they had drunk a draught of Lethe in Trophonius' den:
to conclude, age will bereave her of it, dies dolorem minuit, time
and patience must end it.

 "The mind's affections patience will appease,
It passions kills, and healeth each disease."





SUBSECT. II.--By prevention before, or after Marriage, Plato's
Community, marry a Courtesan, Philters, Stews, to marry one
equal in years, fortunes, of a good family, education, good place, to
use them well, &c.

Of such medicines as conduce to the cure of this malady, I have
sufficiently treated; there be some good remedies remaining, by
way of prevention, precautions, or admonitions, which if rightly
practised, may do much good. Plato, in his Commonwealth, to
prevent this mischief belike, would have all things, wives and
children, all as one: and which Caesar in his Commentaries
observed of those old Britons, that first inhabited this land, they
had ten or twelve wives allotted to such a family, or promiscuously
to be used by so many men; not one to one, as with us, or four, five,
or six to one, as in Turkey. The Nicholaites, a set that sprang, saith
Austin, from Nicholas the deacon, would have women indifferent;
and the cause of this filthy sect, was Nicholas the deacon's
jealousy, for which when he was condemned to purge himself of
his offence, he broached his heresy, that it was lawful to lie with
one another's wives, and for any man to lie with his: like to those 
Anabaptists in Munster, that would consort with other men's wives
as the spirit moved them: or as Mahomet, the seducing prophet,
would needs use women as he list himself, to beget prophets; two
hundred and five, their Alcoran saith, were in love with him, and he
as able as forty men. Amongst the old Carthaginians, as Bohemus
relates out of Sabellicus, the king of the country lay with the bride
the first night, and once in a year they went promiscuously all
together. Munster Cosmog. lib. 3. cap. 497. ascribes the beginning
of this brutish custom (unjustly) to one Picardus, a Frenchman, that
invented a new sect of Adamites, to go naked as Adam did, and to
use promiscuous venery at set times. When the priest repeated that
of Genesis, "Increase and multiply," out went the candles in the
place where they met, "and without all respect of age, persons,
conditions, catch that catch may, every man took her that came
next," &c.; some fasten this on those ancient Bohemians and
Russians: others on the inhabitants of Mambrium, in the Lucerne
valley in Piedmont; and, as I read, it was practised in Scotland
amongst Christians themselves, until King Malcolm's time, the
king or the lord of the town had their maidenheads. In some parts
of India in our age, and those islanders, as amongst the
Babylonians of old, they will prostitute their wives and daughters
(which Chalcocondila, a Greek modern writer, for want of better
intelligence, puts upon us Britons) to such travellers or seafaring
men as come amongst them by chance, to show how far they were
from this feral vice of jealousy, and how little they esteemed it. The
kings of Calecut, as Lod. Vertomannus relates, will not touch their
wives, till one of their Biarmi or high priests have lain first with
them, to sanctify their wombs. But those Esai and Montanists, two
strange sects of old, were in another extreme, they would not marry
at all, or have any society with women, "because of their
intemperance they held them all to be naught." Nevisanus the
lawyer, lib. 4. num. 33. sylv. nupt. would have him that is inclined
to this malady, to prevent the worst, marry a quean, Capiens
meretricem, hoc habet saltem boni quod non decipitur, quia scit
eam sic esse, quod non contingit aliis. A fornicator in Seneca
constuprated two wenches in a night; for satisfaction, the one
desired to hang him, the other to marry him. Hierome, king of
Syracuse in Sicily, espoused himself to Pitho, keeper of the stews;
and Ptolemy took Thais a common whore to be his wife, had two
sons, Leontiscus and Lagus by her, and one daughter Irene: 'tis
therefore no such unlikely thing. A citizen of Engubine gelded
himself to try his wife's honesty, and to be freed from jealousy; so
did a baker in Basil, to the same intent. But of all other precedents
in this kind, that of Combalus is most memorable; who to prevent
his master's suspicion, for he was a beautiful young man, and sent
by Seleucus his lord and king, with Stratonice the queen to conduct
her into Syria, fearing the worst, gelded himself before he went,
and left his genitals behind him in a box sealed up. His mistress by
the way fell in love with him, but he not yielding to her, was
accused to Seleucus of incontinency, (as that Bellerophon was in
like case, falsely traduced by Sthenobia, to King Praetus her
husband, cum non posset ad coitum inducere) and that by her, and
was therefore at his corning home cast into prison: the day of
hearing appointed, he was sufficiently cleared and acquitted, by
showing his privities, which to the admiration of the beholders he
had formerly cut off. The Lydians used to geld women whom they
suspected, saith Leonicus var. hist. Tib. 3. cap. 49. as well as men.
To this purpose Saint Francis, because he used to confess women in
private, to prevent suspicion, and prove himself a maid, stripped
himself before the Bishop of Assise and others: and Friar Leonard
for the same cause went through Viterbium in Italy, without any
garments.

Our pseudo-Catholics, to help these inconveniences which proceed
from jealousy, to keep themselves and their wives honest, make
severe laws; against adultery present death; and withal fornication,
a venial sin, as a sink to convey that furious and swift stream of
concupiscence, they appoint and permit stews, those punks and
pleasant sinners, the more to secure their wives in all populous
cities, for they hold them as necessary as churches; and howsoever
unlawful, yet to avoid a greater mischief, to be tolerated in policy,
as usury, for the hardness of men's hearts; and for this end they
have whole colleges of courtesans in their towns and cities. Of
Cato's mind belike, that would have his servants (cum ancillis
congredi coitus causa, definito aere, ut graviora facinora evitarent,
caeteris interim interdicens) familiar with some such feminine
creatures, to avoid worse mischiefs in his house, and made
allowance for it. They hold it impossible for idle persons, young,
rich, and lusty, so many servants, monks, friars, to live honest, too
tyrannical a burden to compel them to be chaste, and most unfit to
suffer poor men, younger brothers and soldiers at all to marry, as
those diseased persons, votaries, priests, servants. Therefore, as
well to keep and ease the one as the other, they tolerate and wink at
these kind of brothel-houses and stews. Many probable arguments
they have to prove the lawfulness, the necessity, and a toleration of
them, as of usury; and without question in policy they are not to be
contradicted: but altogether in religion. Others prescribe filters,
spells, charms to keep men and women honest. Mulier ut alienum
virum non admittat praeter suum: Accipe fel hirci, et adipem, et
exsicca, calescat in oleo, &c., et non alium praeter et amabit. In
Alexi. Porta, &c., plura invenies, et multo his absurdiora, uti et in
Rhasi, ne mulier virum admittat, et maritum solum diligat, &c. But
these are most part Pagan, impious, irreligious, absurd, and
ridiculous devices.

The best means to avoid these and like inconveniences are, to take
away the causes and occasions. To this purpose Varro writ Satyram
Menippeam, but it is lost. Patritius prescribes four rules to be
observed in choosing of a wife (which who so will may read) ;
Fonseca, the Spaniard, in his 45. c. Amphitheat. Amoris, sets down
six special cautions for men, four for women; Sam. Neander out of
Shonbernerus, five for men, five for women; Anthony Guivarra
many good lessons; Cleobulus two alone, others otherwise; as first
to make a good choice in marriage, to invite Christ to their
wedding, and which St. Ambrose adviseth, Deum conjugii
praesidem habere, and to pray to him for her, A Domino enim datur
uxor prudens, Prov. xix. ) not to be too rash and precipitate in his
election, to run upon the first he meets, or dote on every stout fair
piece he sees, but to choose her as much by his ears as eyes, to be
well advised whom he takes, of what age, &c., and cautelous in his
proceedings. An old man should not marry a young woman, nor a
young woman an old man, Quam male inaequales veniunt ad arata
juvenci! such matches must needs minister a perpetual cause of
suspicion, and be distasteful to each other.

 "Noctua ut in tumulis, super atque cadavera bubo,
Talis apud Sophoclem nostra puella sedet."

"Night-crows on tombs, owl sits on carcass dead,
So lies a wench with Sophocles in bed."

For Sophocles, as Atheneus describes him, was a very old man, as
cold as January, a bedfellow of bones, and doted yet upon
Archippe, a young courtesan, than which nothing can be more
odious. Senex maritus uxori juveni ingratus est, an old man is a
most unwelcome guest to a young wench, unable, unfit:

 "Amplexus suos fugiunt puellae,
Omnis horret amor Venusque Hymenque."

 (Pontanus hiarum lib. 1. "Maidens shun their embraces; Love,
Venus, Hymen, all abhor them.")

And as in like case a good fellow that had but a peck of corn
weekly to grind, yet would needs build a new mill for it, found his
error eftsoons, for either he must let his mill lie waste, pull it quite
down, or let others grind at it. So these men, &c.

Seneca therefore disallows all such unseasonable matches, habent
enim maledicti locum crebrae nuptiae. And as Tully farther
inveighs, "'tis unfit for any, but ugly and filthy in old age." Turpe
senilis amor, one of the three things God hateth. Plutarch, in his
book contra Coleten, rails downright at such kind of marriages, 
which are attempted by old men, qui jam corpore impotenti, et a
voluptatibus deserti, peccant animo, and makes a question whether
in some cases it be tolerable at least for such a man to marry,--qui
Venerem affectat sine viribus, "that is now past those venerous
exercises," "as a gelded man lies with a virgin and sighs," Ecclus.
xxx. 20, and now complains with him in Petronius, funerata est
haec pars jam, quad fuit olim Achillea, he is quite done,

 "Vixit puellae nuper idoneus,
Et militavit non sine gloria."

 (Hor. lib. 3. ode 26. "He was lately a match for a maid, and
contended not ingloriously.")

But the question is whether he may delight himself as those
Priapeian popes, which, in their decrepit age, lay commonly
between two wenches every night, contactu formosarum, et
contrectatione, num adhuc gaudeat; and as many doting sires do to
their own shame, their children's undoing, and their families'
confusion: he abhors it, tanquam ab agresti et furioso domino
fugiendum, it must be avoided as a bedlam master, and not obeyed.

 "Alecto--
Ipsa faces praefert nubentibus, et malus Hymen
Triste ululat,"--

 ("Alecto herself holds the torch at such nuptials, and malicious
Hymen sadly howls.")

the devil himself makes such matches. Levinus Lemnius reckons
up three things which generally disturb the peace of marriage: the
first is when they marry intempestive or unseasonably, "as many
mortal men marry precipitately and inconsiderately, when they are
effete and old: the second when they marry unequally for fortunes
and birth: the third, when a sick impotent person weds one that is
sound, novae nuptae spes frustratur: many dislikes instantly
follow." Many doting dizzards, it may not be denied, as Plutarch
confesseth, "recreate themselves with such obsolete, unseasonable
and filthy remedies" (so he calls them) , "with a remembrance of
their former pleasures, against nature they stir up their dead flesh:"
but an old lecher is abominable; mulier tertio nubens, Nevisanus
holds, praesumitur lubrica, et inconstans, a woman that marries a
third time may be presumed to be no honester than she should. Of
them both, thus Ambrose concludes in his comment upon Luke,
"they that are coupled together, not to get children, but to satisfy
their lust, are not husbands, but fornicators," with whom St. Austin
consents: matrimony without hope of children, non matrimonium,
sed concubium dici debet, is not a wedding but a jumbling or
coupling together. In a word (except they wed for mutual society,
help and comfort one of another, in which respects, though Tiberius
deny it, without question old folks may well marry) for sometimes
a man hath most need of a wife, according to Puccius, when he
hath no need of a wife; otherwise it is most odious, when an old
Acherontic dizzard, that hath one foot in his grave, a silicernium,
shall flicker after a young wench that is blithe and bonny,

 --"salaciorque
Verno passere, et albulis columbis."

 (Pontanus biarum lib. 1. "More salacious than the sparrow in
spring, or the snow-white ring-doves.")

What can be more detestable?

 "Tu cano capite amas senex nequissime
Jam plenus aetatis, animaque foetida,
Senex hircosus tu osculare mulierem?
Utine adiens vomitum potius excuties."

"Thou old goat, hoary lecher, naughty man,
With stinking breath, art thou in love?
Must thou be slavering? she spews to see
Thy filthy face, it doth so move."

Yet, as some will, it is much more tolerable for an old man to
marry a young woman (our ladies' match they call it) for cras erit
mulier, as he said in Tully. Cato the Roman, Critobulus in
Xenophon, Tiraquellus of late, Julius Scaliger, &c., and many
famous precedents we have in that kind; but not e contra: 'tis not
held fit for an ancient woman to match with a young man. For as
Varro will, Anus dum ludit morti delitias facit, 'tis Charon's match
between Cascus and Casca, and the devil himself is surely well
pleased with it. And, therefore, as the poet inveighs, thou old
Vetustina bedridden quean, that art now skin and bones,

"Cui tres capilli, quatuorque sunt dentes,
Pectus cicadae, crusculumque formicae,
Rugosiorem quae geris stola frontem,
Et arenaram cassibus pares mammas."

"That hast three hairs, four teeth, a breast
Like grasshopper, an emmet's crest,
A skin more rugged than thy coat,
And drugs like spider's web to boot."

Must thou marry a youth again? And yet ducentas ire nuptum post
mortes amant: howsoever it is, as Apuleius gives out of his Meroe,
congressus annosus, pestilens, abhorrendus, a pestilent match,
abominable, and not to be endured. In such case how can they
otherwise choose but be jealous, how should they agree one with
another? This inequality is not in years only, but in birth, fortunes,
conditions, and all good qualities, si qua voles apte nubere, nube
pari, (Ovid. "If you would marry suitably, marry your equal in
every respect.") 'tis my counsel, saith Anthony Guiverra, to choose
such a one. Civis Civem ducat, Nobilis Nobilem, let a citizen match
with a citizen, a gentleman with a gentlewoman; he that observes
not this precept (saith he) non generum sed malum Genium, non
nurum sed Furiam, non vitae Comitem, sed litis fomitem domi
habebit, instead of a fair wife shall have a fury, for a fit son-in-law
a mere fiend, &c. examples are too frequent.

Another main caution fit to be observed is this, that though they be
equal in years, birth, fortunes, and other conditions, yet they do not
omit virtue and good education, which Musonius and Antipater so
much inculcate in Stobeus:

 "Dos est magna parentum
Virtus, et metuens alterius viri
Certo foedere castitas."

 ("Parental virtue is a rich inheritance, as well as that chastity
which habitually avoids a second husband.")

If, as Plutarch adviseth, one must eat modium salis, a bushel of salt
with him, before he choose his friend, what care should be had in
choosing a wife, his second self, how solicitous should he be to
know her qualities and behaviour; and when he is assured of them,
not to prefer birth, fortune, beauty, before bringing up, and good
conditions. Coquage god of cuckolds, as one merrily said,
accompanies the goddess Jealousy, both follow the fairest, by 
Jupiter's appointment, and they sacrifice to them together: beauty
and honesty seldom agree; straight personages have often crooked
manners; fair faces, foul vices; good complexions, ill conditions.
Suspicionis plena res est, et insidiarum, beauty (saith Chrysostom)
is full of treachery and suspicion: he that hath a fair wife, cannot
have a worse mischief, and yet most covet it, as if nothing else in
marriage but that and wealth were to be respected. Francis Sforza,
Duke of Milan, was so curious in this behalf, that he would not
marry the Duke of Mantua's daughter, except he might see her
naked first: which Lycurgus appointed in his laws, and Morus in
his Utopian Commonwealth approves. In Italy, as a traveller
observes, if a man have three or four daughters, or more, and they
prove fair, they are married eftsoons: if deformed, they change their
lovely names of Lucia, Cynthia, Camaena, call them Dorothy,
Ursula, Bridget, and so put them into monasteries, as if none were
fit for marriage, but such as are eminently fair: but these are
erroneous tenets: a modest virgin well conditioned, to such a fair
snout-piece, is much to be preferred. If thou wilt avoid them, take
away all causes of suspicion and jealousy, marry a coarse piece,
fetch her from Cassandra's temple, which was wont in Italy to be a
sanctuary of all deformed maids, and so shalt thou be sure that no
man will make thee cuckold, but for spite. A citizen of Bizance in
France had a filthy, dowdy, deformed slut to his wife, and finding
her in bed with another man, cried out as one amazed; O miser!
quae te necessitas huc adegit? O thou wretch, what necessity
brought thee hither? as well he might; for who can affect such a
one? But this is warily to be understood, most offend in another
extreme, they prefer wealth before beauty, and so she be rich, they
care not how she look; but these are all out as faulty as the rest.
Attendenda uxoris forma, as Salisburiensis adviseth, ne si alteram
aspexeris, mox eam sordere putes, as the Knight in Chaucer, that
was married to an old woman,

And all day after hid him as an owl,
So woe was his wife looked so foul.

Have a care of thy wife's complexion, lest whilst thou seest
another, thou loathest her, she prove jealous, thou naught,

 "Si tibi deformis conjux, si serva venusta,
Ne utaris serva,"--

 ("If your wife seem deformed, your maid beautiful, still abstain
from the latter.")

I can perhaps give instance. Molestum est possidere, quod nemo 
habere dignetur, a misery to possess that which no man likes: on
the other side, Difficile custoditur quod plures amant. And as the
bragging soldier vaunted in the comedy, nimia est miseria
pulchrum esse hominem nimis. Scipio did never so hardly besiege
Carthage, as these young gallants will beset thine house, one with
wit or person, another with wealth, &c. If she he fair, saith Guazzo,
she will be suspected howsoever. Both extremes are naught,
Pulchra cito adamatur, foeda facile concupiscit, the one is soon
beloved, the other loves: one is hardly kept, because proud and
arrogant, the other not worth keeping; what is to be done in this
case? Ennius in Menelippe adviseth thee as a friend to take statam
formam, si vis habere incolumem pudicitiam, one of a middle size,
neither too fair nor too foul, Nec formosa magis quam mihi casta
placet, (Marullus. "Not the most fair but the most virtuous pleases
me.") with old Cato, though fit let her beauty be, neque lectissima,
neque illiberalis, between both. This I approve; but of the other two
I resolve with Salisburiensis, caeteris paribus, both rich alike,
endowed alike, majori miseria deformis habetur quam formosa
servatur, I had rather marry a fair one, and put it to the hazard, than
be troubled with a blowze; but do as thou wilt, I speak only of
myself.

Howsoever, quod iterum maneo, I would advise thee thus much, be
she fair or foul, to choose a wife out of a good kindred, parentage,
well brought up, in an honest place.

 "Primum animo tibi proponas quo sanguine creta.
Qua forma, qua aetate, quibusque ante omnia virgo
Moribus, in junctos veniat nova nupta penates."

He that marries a wife out of a suspected inn or alehouse, buys a
horse in Smithfield, and hires a servant in Paul's, as the diverb is,
shall likely have a jade to his horse, a knave for his man, an arrant
honest woman to his wife. Filia praesumitur, esse matri similis,
saith Nevisanus? "Such a mother, such a daughter;" mali corvi
malum ovum., cat to her kind.

 "Scilicet expectas ut tradat mater honestos
Atque alios mores quam quos habet?"

"If the mother be dishonest, in all likelihood the daughter will
matrizare, take after her in all good qualities,"

"Creden' Pasiphae non tauripotente futuram
Tauripetam?"--

"If the dam trot, the foal will not amble." My last caution is, that a
woman do not bestow herself upon a fool, or an apparent
melancholy person; jealousy is a symptom of that disease, and
fools have no moderation. Justina, a Roman lady, was much
persecuted, and after made away by her jealous husband, she
caused and enjoined this epitaph, as a caveat to others, to be
engraven on her tomb:

 "Discite ab exemplo Justinae, discite patres,
Ne nubat fatuo filia vestra viro," &c.

"Learn parents all, and by Justina's case,
Your children to no dizzards for to place."

After marriage, I can give no better admonitions than to use their
wives well, and which a friend of mine told me that was a married
man, I will tell you as good cheap, saith Nicostratus in Stobeus, to
avoid future strife, and for quietness' sake, "when you are in bed,
take heed of your wife's flattering speeches over night, and curtain,
sermons in the morning." Let them do their endeavour likewise to
maintain them to their means, which Patricius ingeminates, and let
them have liberty with discretion, as time and place requires: many
women turn queans by compulsion, as Nevisanus observes, because
their husbands are so hard, and keep them so short in diet and
apparel, paupertas cogit eas meretricari, poverty and hunger, want
of means, makes them dishonest, or bad usage; their churlish
behaviour forceth them to fly out, or bad examples, they do it to cry
quittance. In the other extreme some are too liberal, as the proverb
is, Turdus malum sibi cacat, they make a rod for their own tails, as
Candaules did to Gyges in Herodotus, commend his wife's beauty
himself, and besides would needs have him see her naked. Whilst
they give their wives too much liberty to gad abroad, and bountiful
allowance, they are accessory to their own miseries; animae
uxorum pessime olent, as Plautus jibes, they have deformed souls,
and by their painting and colours procure odium mariti, their
husband's hate, especially,-- cum misere viscantur labra mariti.
(Juven. Sat. 6. "He cannot kiss his wife for paint.") Besides, their
wives (as Basil notes) Impudenter se exponunt masculorum
aspectibus, jactantes tunicas, et coram tripudiantes, impudently
thrust themselves into other men's companies, and by their indecent
wanton carriage provoke and tempt the spectators. Virtuous women
should keep house; and 'twas well performed and ordered by the
Greeks,

 --"mulier ne qua in publicum
Spectandam se sine arbitro praebeat viro:"

 ("That a matron should not be seen in public without her
husband as her spokesman.")

which made Phidias belike at Elis paint Venus treading on a
tortoise, a symbol of women's silence and housekeeping. For a
woman abroad and alone, is like a deer broke out of a park, quam
mille venatores insequuntur, whom every hunter follows; and
besides in such places she cannot so well vindicate herself, but as
that virgin Dinah (Gen. xxxiv., 2,) "going for to see the daughters
of the land," lost her virginity, she may be defiled and overtaken of
a sudden: Imbelles damae quid nisi praeda sumus? ("Helpless deer,
what are we but a prey?")

And therefore I know not what philosopher he was, that would
have women come but thrice abroad all their time, "to be baptised,
married, and buried;" but he was too strait-laced. Let them have
their liberty in good sort, and go in good sort, modo non annos
viginti aetatis suae domi relinquant, as a good fellow said, so that
they look not twenty years younger abroad than they do at home,
they be not spruce, neat, angels abroad, beasts, dowdies, sluts at
home; but seek by all means to please and give content to their
husbands: to be quiet above all things, obedient, silent and patient;
if they be incensed, angry, chid a little, their wives must not cample
again, but take it in good part. An honest woman, I cannot now tell
where she dwelt, but by report an honest woman she was, hearing
one of her gossips by chance complain of her husband's impatience,
told her an excellent remedy for it, and gave her withal a glass of
water, which when he brawled she should hold still in her mouth,
and that toties quoties, as often as he chid; she did so two or three
times with good success, and at length seeing her neighbour, gave
her great thanks for it, and would needs know the ingredients, she
told her in brief what it was, "fair water," and no more: for it was
not the water, but her silence which performed the cure. Let every
froward woman imitate this example, and be quiet within doors,
and (as M. Aurelius prescribes) a necessary caution it is to be
observed of all good matrons that love their credits, to come little
abroad, but follow their work at home, look to their household
affairs and private business, oeconomiae incumbentes, be sober,
thrifty, wary, circumspect, modest, and compose themselves to live
to their husbands' means, as a good housewife should do,

 "Quae studiis gavisa coli, partita labores
Fallet opus cantu, formae assimulata coronae
Cura puellaris, circum fusosque rotasque
Cum volvet," &c.

 (Chaloner. "One who delights in the labour of the distaff, and
beguiles the hours of labour with a song: her duties assume an air
of virtuous beauty when she is busied at the wheel and the
spindle with her maids.")

Howsoever 'tis good to keep them private, not in prison;

 "Quisquis custodit uxorem vectibus et seris,
Etsi sibi sapiens, stultus est, et nihil sapit."

 (Menander. "Whoever guards his wife with bolts and bars will
repent his narrow policy.")

Read more of this subject, Horol. princ. lib. 2. per totum.
Arnisaeus, polit. Cyprian, Tertullian, Bossus de mulier. apparat.
Godefridus de Amor. lib. 2. cap. 4. Levinus Lemnius cap. 54. de
institut. Christ. Barbaras de re uxor. lib. 2. cap. 2. Franciscus
Patritius de institut. Reipub. lib. 4. Tit. 4. et 6. de officio mariti et
uxoris, Christ. Fonseca Amphitheat. Amor. cap. 45. Sam. Neander,
&c.

These cautions concern him; and if by those or his own discretion
otherwise he cannot moderate himself, his friends must not be
wanting by their wisdom, if it be possible, to give the party grieved
satisfaction, to prevent and remove the occasions, objects, if it may
be to secure him. If it be one alone, or many, to consider whom he
suspects or at what times, in what places he is most incensed, in
what companies. Nevisanus makes a question whether a young
physician ought to be admitted in cases of sickness, into a new-
married man's house, to administer a julep, a syrup, or some such
physic. The Persians of old would not suffer a young physician to
come amongst women. Apollonides Cous made Artaxerxes
cuckold, and was after buried alive for it. A goaler in Aristaenetus
had a fine young gentleman to his prisoner; in commiseration of his
youth and person he let him loose, to enjoy the liberty of the prison,
but he unkindly made him a cornuto. Menelaus gave good welcome
to Paris a stranger, his whole house and family were at his
command, but he ungently stole away his best beloved wife. The
like measure was offered to Agis king of Lacedaemon, by
Alcibiades an exile, for his good entertainment, he was too familiar
with Timea his wife, begetting a child of her, called Leotichides:
and bragging moreover when he came home to Athens, that he had
a son should be king of the Lacedaemonians. If such objects were
removed, no doubt but the parties might easily be satisfied, or that
they could use them gently and entreat them well, not to revile
them, scoff at, hate them, as in such cases commonly they do, 'tis a
human infirmity, a miserable vexation, and they should not add
grief to grief, nor aggravate their misery, but seek to please, and by
all means give them content, by good counsel, removing such
offensive objects, or by mediation of some discreet friends. In old
Rome there was a temple erected by the matrons to that Viriplaca
Dea, another to Venus verticorda, quae maritos uxoribus reddebat
benevolos, whither (if any difference happened between man and
wife) they did instantly resort: there they did offer sacrifice, a white
hart, Plutarch records, sine felle, without the gall, (some say the
like of Juno's temple) and make their prayers for conjugal peace;
before some indifferent arbitrators and friends, the matter was
heard between man and wife, and commonly composed. In our
times we want no sacred churches, or good men to end such
controversies, if use were made, of them. Some say that precious
stone called beryllus, others a diamond, hath excellent virtue,
contra hostium injurias, et conjugatos invicem conciliare, to
reconcile men and wives, to maintain unity and love; you may try
this when you will, and as you see cause. If none of all these means
and cautions will take place, I know not what remedy to prescribe,
or whither such persons may go for ease, except they can get into
the same Turkey paradise, "Where they shall have as many fair
wives as they will themselves, with clear eyes, and such as look on
none but their own husbands," no fear, no danger of being
cuckolds; or else I would have them observe that strict rule of
Alphonsus, to marry a deaf and dumb man to a blind woman. If this
will not help, let them, to prevent the worst, consult with an
astrologer, and see whether the significators in her horoscope agree
with his, that they be not in signis et partibus odiose intuentibus aut
imperantibus, sed mutuo et amice antisciis et obedientibus,
otherwise (as they hold) there will be intolerable enmities between
them: or else get them sigillum veneris, a characteristical seal
stamped in the day and hour of Venus, when she is fortunate, with
such and such set words and charms, which Villanovanus and Leo
Suavius prescribe, ex sigillis magicis Salomonis, Hermetis,
Raguelis, &c., with many such, which Alexis, Albertus, and some
of our natural magicians put upon us: ut mulier cum aliquo
adulterare non possit, incide de capillis ejus, &c., and he shall
surely be gracious in all women's eyes, and never suspect or
disagree with his own wife so long as he wears it. If this course be
not approved, and other remedies may not be had, they must in the
last place sue for a divorce; but that is somewhat difficult to effect,
and not all out so fit. For as Felisacus in his tract de justa uxore
urgeth, if that law of Constantine the Great, or that of Theodosius
and Valentinian, concerning divorce, were in use in our times,
innumeras propemodum viduas haberemus, et coelibes viros, we
should have almost no married couples left. Try therefore those
former remedies; or as Tertullian reports of Democritus, that put
out his eyes, because he could not look upon a woman without lust,
and was much troubled to see that which he might not enjoy; let
him make himself blind, and so he shall avoid that care and
molestation of watching his wife. One other sovereign remedy I
could repeat, an especial antidote against jealousy, an excellent
cure, but I am not now disposed to tell it, not that like a covetous
empiric I conceal it for any gain, but some other reasons, I am not
willing to publish it: if you be very desirous to know it, when I
meet you next I will peradventure tell you what it is in your ear.
This is the best counsel I can give; which he that hath need of, as
occasion serves, may apply unto himself. In the mean time,--dii
talem terris avertite pestem, ("Ye gods avert such a pestilence from
the world.") as the proverb is, from heresy, jealousy and frenzy,
good Lord deliver us.





SECT. IV. MEMB. I.

SUBSECT. I.--Religious Melancholy. Its object God; what his
beauty is; How it allures. The parts and parties affected.

That there is such a distinct species of love melancholy, no man
hath ever yet doubted: but whether this subdivision of Religious
Melancholy be warrantable, it may be controverted.

 "Pergite Pieridies, medio nec calle vagantem
Linquite me, qua nulla pedum vestigia ducunt,
Nulla rotae currus testantur signa priores."

 (Grotius. "Proceed, ye muses, nor desert me in the middle of my
journey, where no footsteps lead me, no wheeltracks indicate the
transit of former chariots.")

I have no pattern to follow as in some of the rest, no man to imitate.
No physician hath as yet distinctly written of it as of the other; all
acknowledge it a most notable symptom, some a cause, but few a
species or kind. Areteus, Alexander, Rhasis, Avicenna, and most of
our late writers, as Gordonius, Fuchsius, Plater, Bruel, Montaltus,
&c. repeat it as a symptom. Some seem to be inspired of the Holy
Ghost, some take upon them to be prophets, some are addicted to
new opinions, some foretell strange things, de statu mundi et
Antichristi, saith Gordonius. Some will prophesy of the end of the
world to a day almost, and the fall of the Antichrist, as they have
been addicted or brought up; for so melancholy works with them,
as Laurentius holds. If they have been precisely given, all their
meditations tend that way, and in conclusion produce strange
effects, the humour imprints symptoms according to their several
inclinations and conditions, which makes Guianerius and Felix
Plater put too much devotion, blind zeal, fear of eternal
punishment, and that last judgment for a cause of those
enthusiastics and desperate persons: but some do not obscurely
make a distinct species of it, dividing love melancholy into that
whose object is women; and into the other whose object is God.
Plato, in Convivio, makes mention of two distinct furies; and
amongst our neoterics, Hercules de Saxonia lib. 1. pract. med. cap.
16. cap. de Melanch. doth expressly treat of it in a distinct species.
"Love melancholy" (saith he) "is twofold; the first is that (to which
peradventure some will not vouchsafe this name or species of
melancholy) affection of those which put God for their object, and
are altogether about prayer, fasting, &c., the other about women."
Peter Forestus in his observations delivereth as much in the same
words: and Felix Platerus de mentis alienat. cap. 3. frequentissima
est ejus species, in qua curanda saepissime multum fui impeditus;
'tis a frequent disease; and they have a ground of what they say,
forth of Areteus and Plato. Areteus, an old author, in his third book
cap. 6. doth so divide love melancholy, and derives this second
from the first, which comes by inspiration or otherwise. Plato in his
Phaedrus hath these words, "Apollo's priests in Delphos, and at
Dodona, in their fury do many pretty feats, and benefit the Greeks,
but never in their right wits." He makes them all mad, as well he
might; and he that shall but consider that superstition of old, those
prodigious effects of it (as in its place I will shew the several furies
of our fatidici dii, pythonissas, sibyls, enthusiasts, pseudoprophets,
heretics, and schismatics in these our latter ages) shall instantly
confess, that all the world again cannot afford so much matter of
madness, so many stupendous symptoms, as superstition, heresy,
schism have brought out: that this species alone may be paralleled
to all the former, has a greater latitude, and more miraculous
effects; that it more besots and infatuates men, than any other
above named whatsoever, does more harm, works more
disquietness to mankind, and has more crucified the souls of mortal
men (such hath been the devil's craft) than wars, plagues,
sicknesses, dearth, famine, and all the rest.

Give me but a little leave, and I will set before your eyes in brief a
stupendous, vast, infinite ocean of incredible madness and folly: a
sea full of shelves and rocks, sands, gulfs, euripes and contrary
tides, full of fearful monsters, uncouth shapes, roaring waves,
tempests, and siren calms, halcyonian seas, unspeakable misery,
such comedies and tragedies, such absurd and ridiculous, feral and
lamentable fits, that I know not whether they are more to be pitied
or derided, or may be believed, but that we daily see the same still
practised in our days, fresh examples, nova novitia, fresh objects of
misery and madness, in this kind that are still represented unto us,
abroad, at home, in the midst of us, in our bosoms.

But before I can come to treat of these several errors and
obliquities, their causes, symptoms, affections, &c., I must say
something necessarily of the object of this love, God himself, what
this love is, how it allureth, whence it proceeds, and (which is the 
cause of all our miseries) how we mistake, wander and swerve
from it.

Amongst all those divine attributes that God doth vindicate to
himself, eternity, omnipotency, immutability, wisdom, majesty,
justice, mercy, &c., his beauty is not the least, one thing, saith
David, have I desired of the Lord, and that I will still desire, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, Psal. xxvii. 4. And out of Sion,
which is the perfection of beauty, hath God shined, Psal. 1. 2. All
other creatures are fair, I confess, and many other objects do much
enamour us, a fair house, a fair horse, a comely person. "I am
amazed," saith Austin, "when I look up to heaven and behold the
beauty of the stars, the beauty of angels, principalities, powers, who
can express it? who can sufficiently commend, or set out this
beauty which appears in us? so fair a body, so fair a face, eyes,
nose, cheeks, chin, brows, all fair and lovely to behold; besides the
beauty of the soul which cannot be discerned. If we so labour and
be so much affected with the comeliness of creatures, how should
we be ravished with that admirable lustre of God himself?" If
ordinary beauty have such a prerogative and power, and what is
amiable and fair, to draw the eyes and ears, hearts and affections of
all spectators unto it, to move, win, entice, allure: how shall this
divine form ravish our souls, which is the fountain and
quintessence of all beauty? Coelum pulchrum, sed pulchrior coeli
fabricator; if heaven be so fair, the sun so fair, how much fairer
shall he be, that made them fair? "For by the greatness and beauty
of the creatures, proportionally, the maker of them is seen," Wisd.
xiii. 5. If there be such pleasure in beholding a beautiful person
alone, and as a plausible sermon, he so much affect us, what shall
this beauty of God himself, that is infinitely fairer than all
creatures, men, angels, &c. Omnis pulchritudo florem, hominum,
angelorum, et rerum omnium pulcherrimarum ad Dei
pulchritudinem collata, nox est et tenebrae, all other beauties are
night itself, mere darkness to this our inexplicable,
incomprehensible, unspeakable, eternal, infinite, admirable and
divine beauty. This lustre, pulchritudo omnium pulcherrima. This
beauty and "splendour of the divine Majesty," is it that draws all
creatures to it, to seek it, love, admire, and adore it; and those
heathens, pagans, philosophers, out of those relics they have yet
left of God's image, are so far forth incensed, as not only to
acknowledge a God; but, though after their own inventions, to
stand in admiration of his bounty, goodness, to adore and seek him;
the magnificence and structure of the world itself, and beauty of all
his creatures, his goodness, providence, protection, enforceth them
to love him, seek him, fear him, though a wrong way to adore him:
but for us that are Christians, regenerate, that are his adopted sons,
illuminated by his word, having the eyes of our hearts and
understandings opened; how fairly doth he offer and expose
himself? Ambit nos Deus (Austin saith) donis et forma sua, he
woos us by his beauty, gifts, promises, to come unto him; "the
whole Scripture is a message, an exhortation, a love letter to this
purpose;" to incite us, and invite us, God's epistle, as Gregory calls
it, to his creatures. He sets out his son and his church in that
epithalamium or mystical song of Solomon, to enamour us the
more, comparing his head "to fine gold, his locks curled and black
as a raven," Cant. iv. 5. "his eyes like doves on rivers of waters,
washed with milk, his lips as lilies, dropping down pure juice, his
hands as rings of gold set with chrysolite: and his church to a
vineyard, a garden enclosed, a fountain of living waters, an orchard
of pomegranates, with sweet scents of saffron, spike, calamus and
cinnamon, and all the trees of incense, as the chief spices, the
fairest amongst women, no spot in her, his sister, his spouse,
undefiled, the only daughter of her mother, dear unto her, fair as
the moon, pure as the sun, looking out as the morning;" that by
these figures, that glass, these spiritual eyes of contemplation, we
might perceive some resemblance of his beauty, the love between
his church and him. And so in the xlv. Psalm this beauty of his
church is compared to a "queen in a vesture of gold of Ophir,
embroidered raiment of needlework, that the king might take
pleasure in her beauty." To incense us further yet, John, in his
apocalypse, makes a description of that heavenly Jerusalem, the
beauty, of it, and in it the maker of it; "Likening it to a city of pure
gold, like unto clear glass, shining and garnished with all manner of
precious stones, having no need of sun or moon: for the lamb is the
light of it, the glory of God doth illuminate it: to give us to
understand the infinite glory, beauty and happiness of it." Not that
it is no fairer than these creatures to which it is compared, but that
this vision of his, this lustre of his divine majesty, cannot otherwise
be expressed to our apprehensions, "no tongue can tell, no heart can
conceive it," as Paul saith. Moses himself, Exod. xxxiii. 18. when
he desired to see God in his glory, was answered that he might not
endure it, no man could see his face and live. Sensibile forte
destruit sensum, a strong object overcometh the sight, according to
that axiom in philosophy: fulgorem solis ferre non potes, multo
magis creatoris; if thou canst not endure the sunbeams, how canst
thou endure that fulgor and brightness of him that made the sun?
The sun itself and all that we can imagine, are but shadows of it, 'tis
visio praecellens, as Austin calls it, the quintessence of beauty this,
"which far exceeds the beauty of heavens, sun and moon, stars,
angels, gold and silver, woods, fair fields, and whatsoever is
pleasant to behold." All those other beauties fail, vary, are subject
to corruption, to loathing; "But this is an immortal vision, a divine
beauty, an immortal love, an indefatigable love and beauty, with
sight of which we shall never be tired nor wearied, but still the
more we see the more we shall covet him." "For as one saith, where
this vision is, there is absolute beauty; and where is that beauty,
from the same fountain comes all pleasure and happiness; neither
can beauty, pleasure, happiness, be separated from his vision or
sight, or his vision, from beauty, pleasure, happiness." In this life
we have but a glimpse of this beauty and happiness: we shall
hereafter, as John saith, see him as he is: thine eyes, as Isaiah
promiseth, xxxiii. 17. "shall behold the king in his glory," then
shall we be perfectly enamoured, have a full fruition of it, desire,
behold and love him alone as the most amiable and fairest object,
or summum bonum, or chiefest good.

This likewise should we now have done, had not our will been
corrupted; and as we are enjoined to love God with all our heart,
and all our soul: for to that end were we born, to love this object, as
Melancthon discourseth, and to enjoy it. "And him our will would
have loved and sought alone as our summum bonum, or principal
good, and all other good things for God's sake: and nature, as she
proceeded from it, would have sought this fountain; but in this
infirmity of human nature this order is disturbed, our love is
corrupt:" and a man is like that monster in Plato, composed of a
Scylla, a lion and a man; we are carried away headlong with the
torrent of our affections: the world, and that infinite variety of
pleasing objects in it, do so allure and enamour us, that we cannot
so much as look towards God, seek him, or think on him as we
should: we cannot, saith Austin, Rempub. coelestem cogitare, we
cannot contain ourselves from them, their sweetness is so pleasing
to us. Marriage, saith Gualter, detains many; "a thing in itself
laudable, good and necessary, but many, deceived and carried away
with the blind love of it, have quite laid aside the love of God, and
desire of his glory. Meat and drink hath overcome as many, whilst
they rather strive to please, satisfy their guts and belly, than to
serve God and nature." Some are so busied about merchandise to
get money, they lose their own souls, whilst covetously carried, and
with an insatiable desire of gain, they forget God; as much we may
say of honour, leagues, friendships, health, wealth, and all other
profits or pleasures in this life whatsoever. "In this world there be
so many beautiful objects, splendours and brightness of gold,
majesty of glory, assistance of friends, fair promises, smooth
words, victories, triumphs, and such an infinite company of
pleasing beauties to allure us, and draw us from God, that we
cannot look after him." And this is it which Christ himself, those
prophets and apostles so much thundered against, 1 John, xvii. 15,
dehort us from; "love not the world, nor the things that are in the
world: if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him," 16. "For all that is in the world, as lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eyes, and pride of life, is not of the Father, but of the world: and
the world passeth away and the lust thereof; but he that fulfilleth
the will of God abideth for ever. No man, saith our Saviour, can 
serve two masters, but he must love the one and hate the other,"
&c., bonos vel malos mores, boni vel mali faciunt amores, Austin
well infers: and this is that which all the fathers inculcate. He
cannot ( Austin admonisheth) be God's friend, that is delighted with
the pleasures of the world: "make clean thine heart, purify thine
heart; if thou wilt see this beauty, prepare thyself for it. It is the eye
of contemplation by which we must behold it, the wing of
meditation which lifts us up and rears our souls with the motion of
our hearts, and sweetness of contemplation:" so saith Gregory cited
by Bonaventure. And as Philo Judeus seconds him, "he that loves
God, will soar aloft and take him wings; and leaving the earth fly
up to heaven, wander with sun and moon, stars, and that heavenly
troop, God himself being his guide." If we desire to see him, we
must lay aside all vain objects, which detain us and dazzle our eyes,
and as Ficinus adviseth us, "get us solar eyes, spectacles as they
that look on the sun: to see this divine beauty, lay aside all material
objects, all sense, and then thou shalt see him as he is." Thou
covetous wretch, as Austin expostulates, "why dost thou stand
gaping on this dross, muck-hills, filthy excrements? behold a far
fairer object, God himself woos thee; behold him, enjoy him, he is
sick for love." Cant. v. he invites thee to his sight, to come into his
fair garden, to eat and drink with him, to be merry with him, to
enjoy his presence for ever. Wisdom cries out in the streets besides
the gates, in the top of high places, before the city, at the entry of
the door, and bids them give ear to her instruction, which is better
than gold or precious stones; no pleasures can be compared to it: 
leave all then and follow her, vos exhortor o amici et obsecro. In.
Ficinus's words, "I exhort and beseech you, that you would
embrace and follow this divine love with all your hearts and
abilities, by all offices and endeavours make this so loving God
propitious unto you." For whom alone, saith Plotinus, "we must
forsake the kingdoms and empires of the whole earth, sea, land, and
air, if we desire to be engrafted into him, leave all and follow him."

Now, forasmuch as this love of God is a habit infused of God, as
Thomas holds, l. 2. quaest. 23. "by which a man is inclined to love
God above all, and his neighbour as himself," we must pray to God
that he will open our eyes, make clear our hearts, that we may be
capable of his glorious rays, and perform those duties that he
requires of us, Deut. vi. and Josh. xxiii. "to love God above all, and
our neighbour as ourself, to keep his commandments." "In this we
know," saith John, c. v. 2, "we love the children of God, when we
love God and keep his commandments." "This is the love of God,
that we keep his commandments; he that loveth not, knoweth not
God, for God is love," cap. iv. 8, "and he that dwelleth in love,
dwelleth in God, and God in him;" for love pre-supposeth
knowledge, faith, hope, and unites us to God himself, as Leon
Hebreus delivereth unto us, and is accompanied with the fear of
God, humility, meekness, patience, all those virtues, and charity
itself. For if we love God, we shall love our neighbour, and
perform the duties which are required at our hands, to which we are
exhorted, 1 Cor. xv. 4, 5; Ephes. iv.; Colos. iii.; Rom. xii. We shall
not be envious or puffed up, or boast, disdain, think evil, or be
provoked to anger, "but suffer all things; endeavour to keep the
unity of the spirit in the bond of peace." Forbear one another,
forgive one another, clothe the naked, visit the sick, and perform all
those works of mercy, which Clemens Alexandrinus calls amoris et
amicitiae, impletionem et extentionem, the extent and complement
of love; and that not for fear or worldly respects, but ordine ad
Deum, for the love of God himself. This we shall do if we be truly
enamoured; but we come short in both, we neither love God nor
our neighbour as we should. Our love in spiritual things is too
defective, in worldly things too excessive, there is a jar in both. We
love the world too much; God too little; our neighbour not at all, or
for our own ends. Vulgus amicitias utilitate probat. "The chief
thing we respect is our commodity;" and what we do is for fear of
worldly punishment, for vainglory, praise of men, fashion, and
such by respects, not for God's sake. We neither know God aright,
nor seek, love or worship him as we should. And for these defects,
we involve ourselves into a multitude of errors, we swerve from
this true love and worship of God: which is a cause unto us of
unspeakable miseries; running into both extremes, we become
fools, madmen, without sense, as now in the next place 1 will show
you.

The parties affected are innumerable almost, and scattered over the
face of the earth, far and near, and so have been in all precedent
ages, from the beginning of the world to these times, of all sorts
and conditions. For method's sake I will reduce them to a twofold
division, according to those two extremes of excess and defect,
impiety and superstition, idolatry and atheism. Not that there is any
excess of divine worship or love of God; that cannot be, we cannot
love God too much, or do our duty as we ought, as Papists hold, or
have any perfection in this life, much less supererogate: when we
have all done, we are unprofitable servants. But because we do
aliud agere, zealous without knowledge, and too solicitous about
that which is not necessary, busying ourselves about impertinent,
needless, idle, and vain ceremonies, populo ut placerent, as the
Jews did about sacrifices, oblations, offerings, incense, new moons,
feasts, &c., but Isaiah taxeth them, i. 12, "who required this at your
hands?" We have too great opinion of our own worth, that we can
satisfy the law: and do more than is required at our hands, by
performing those evangelical counsels, and such works of
supererogation, merit for others, which Bellarmine, Gregory de
Valentia, all their Jesuits and champions defend, that if God should
deal in rigour with them, some of their Franciscans and
Dominicans are so pure, that nothing could be objected to them.
Some of us again are too dear, as we think, more divine and
sanctified than others, of a better mettle, greater gifts, and with that
proud Pharisee, contemn others in respect of ourselves, we are
better Christians, better learned, choice spirits, inspired, know
more, have special revelation, perceive God's secrets, and
thereupon presume, say and do that many times which is not
befitting to be said or done. Of this number are all superstitious
idolaters, ethnics, Mahometans, Jews, heretics, enthusiasts,
divinators, prophets, sectaries, and schismatics. Zanchius reduceth
such infidels to four chief sects; but I will insist and follow mine
own intended method: all which with many other curious persons,
monks, hermits, &c., may be ranged in this extreme, and fight
under this superstitious banner, with those rude idiots, and infinite
swarms of people that are seduced by them. In the other extreme or
in defect, march those impious epicures, libertines, atheists,
hypocrites, infidels, worldly, secure, impenitent, unthankful, and
carnal-minded men, that attribute all to natural causes, that will
acknowledge no supreme power; that have cauterised consciences,
or live in a reprobate sense; or such desperate persons as are too
distrustful of his mercies. Of these there be many subdivisions,
diverse degrees of madness and folly, some more than other, as
shall be shown in the symptoms: and yet all miserably out,
perplexed, doting, and beside themselves for religion's sake. For as
Zanchy well distinguished, and all the world knows religion is
twofold, true or false; false is that vain superstition of idolaters,
such as were of old, Greeks, Romans, present Mahometans, &c.
Timorem deorum inanem, Tully could term it; or as Zanchy defines
it, Ubi falsi dii, aut falso cullu colitur Deus, when false gods, or
that God is falsely worshipped. And 'tis a miserable plague, a
torture of the soul, a mere madness, Religiosa insania, Meteran
calls it, or insanus error, as Seneca, a frantic error; or as Austin,
Insanus animi morbus, a furious disease of the soul; insania
omnium insanissima, a quintessence of madness; for he that is
superstitious can never be quiet. 'Tis proper to man alone, uni
superbia, avaritia, superstitio, saith Plin. lib. 7. cap. 1. atque etiam
post saevit de futuro, which wrings his soul for the present, and to
come: the greatest misery belongs to mankind, a perpetual
servitude, a slavery, Ex timore timor, a heavy yoke, the seal of
damnation, an intolerable burden. They that are superstitious are
still fearing, suspecting, vexing themselves with auguries,
prodigies, false tales, dreams, idle, vain works, unprofitable
labours, as Boterus observes, cura mentis ancipite versantur:
enemies to God and to themselves. In a word, as Seneca concludes,
Religio Deum colit, superstitio destruit, superstition destroys, but
true religion honours God. True religion, ubi verus Deus vere
colitur, where the true God is truly worshipped, is the way to
heaven, the mother of virtues, love, fear, devotion, obedience,
knowledge, &c. It rears the dejected soul of man, and amidst so
many cares, miseries, persecutions, which this world affords, it is a
sole ease, an unspeakable comfort, a sweet reposal, Jugum suave, et
leve, a light yoke, an anchor, and a haven. It adds courage,
boldness, and begets generous spirits: although tyrants rage,
persecute, and that bloody Lictor or sergeant be ready to martyr
them, aut lita, aut morere, (as in those persecutions of the primitive
Church, it was put in practice, as you may read in Eusebius and
others) though enemies be now ready to invade, and all in an
uproar, Si fractus illabatur orbis, impavidos ferient ruinae, though
heaven should fall on his head, he would not be dismayed. But as a
good Christian prince once made answer to a menacing Turk, facile
scelerata hominum arma contemnit, qui del praesidio tutus est: or
as Phalaris writ to Alexander in a wrong cause, he nor any other
enemy could terrify him, for that he trusted in God. Si Deus
nobiscum, quis contra nos? In all calamities, persecutions
whatsoever, as David did, 2 Sam. ii. 22, he will sing with him, "the
Lord is my rock, my fortress, my strength, my refuge, the tower
and horn of my salvation," &c. In all troubles and adversities, Psal.
xlvi. 1. "God is my hope and help, still ready to be found, I will not
therefore fear," &c., 'tis a fear expelling fear; he hath peace of
conscience, and is full of hope, which is (saith Austin) vita vitae
mortalis, the life of this our mortal life, hope of immortality, the
sole comfort of our misery: otherwise, as Paul saith, we of all
others were most wretched, but this makes us happy,
counterpoising our hearts in all miseries; superstition torments, and
is from the devil, the author of lies; but this is from God himself, as
Lucian, that Antiochian priest, made his divine confession in
Eusebius, Auctor nobis de Deo Deus est, God is the author of our
religion himself, his word is our rule, a lantern to us, dictated by the
Holy Ghost, he plays upon our hearts as many harpstrings, and we
are his temples, he dwelleth in us, and we in him.

The part affected of superstition, is the brain, heart, will,
understanding, soul itself, and all the faculties of it, totum
compositum, all is mad and dotes: now for the extent, as I say, the
world itself is the subject of it, (to omit that grand sin of atheism,)
all times have been misaffected, past, present, "there is not one that
doth good, no not one, from the prophet to the priest," &c. A
lamentable thing it is to consider, how many myriads of men this
idolatry and superstition (for that comprehends all) hath infatuated
in all ages, besotted by this blind zeal, which is religion's ape,
religion's bastard, religion's shadow, false glass. For where God
hath a temple, the devil will have a chapel: where God hath
sacrifices, the devil will have his oblations: where God hath
ceremonies, the devil will have his traditions: where there is any
religion, the devil will plant superstition; and 'tis a pitiful sight to
behold and read, what tortures, miseries, it hath procured, what
slaughter of souls it hath made, how it rageth amongst those old
Persians, Syrians, Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Tuscans, Gauls,
Germans, Britons, &c. Britannia jam hodie celebrat tam attonite,
saith Pliny, tantis ceremoniis (speaking of superstition) ut dedisse
Persis videri possit. The Britons are so stupendly superstitious in
their ceremonies, that they go beyond those Persians. He that shall
but read in Pausanias alone, those gods, temples, altars, idols,
statues, so curiously made with such infinite cost and charge,
amongst those old Greeks, such multitudes of them and frequent
varieties, as Gerbelius truly observes, may stand amazed, and never
enough wonder at it; and thank God withal, that by the light of the
Gospel, we are so happily freed from that slavish idolatry in these
our days. But heretofore, almost in all countries, in all places,
superstition hath blinded the hearts of men; in all ages what a small
portion hath the true church ever been! Divisum imperium cum
Jove Daemon habet. ("The devil divides the empire with Jupiter.")
The patriarchs and their families, the Israelites a handful in respect,
Christ and his apostles, and not all of them, neither. Into what
straits hath it been compinged, a little flock! how hath superstition
on the other side dilated herself, error, ignorance, barbarism, folly,
madness, deceived, triumphed, and insulted over the most wise
discreet, and understanding man, philosophers, dynasts, monarchs,
all were involved and overshadowed in this mist, in more than
Cimmerian darkness. Adeo ignara superstitio mentes hominum
depravat, et nonnunquam sapientum animos transversos agit. At
this present, quota pars! How small a part is truly religious! How
little in respect! Divide the world into six parts, and one, or not so
much, as Christians; idolaters and Mahometans possess almost
Asia, Africa, America, Magellanica. The kings of China, great
Cham, Siam, and Borneo, Pegu, Deccan, Narsinga, Japan, &c., are
gentiles, idolaters, and many other petty princes in Asia,
Monomotopa, Congo, and I know not how many Negro princes in
Africa, all Terra Australis Incognita, most of America pagans,
differing all in their several superstitions; and yet all idolaters. The
Mahometans extend themselves over the great Turk's dominions in
Europe, Africa, Asia, to the Xeriffes in Barbary, and its territories
in Fez, Sus, Morocco, &c. The Tartar, the great Mogor, the Sophy
of Persia, with most of their dominions and subjects, are at this day
Mahometans. See how the devil rageth: those at odds, or differing
among themselves, some for Ali, some Enbocar, for Acmor, and
Ozimen, those four doctors, Mahomet's successors, and are
subdivided into seventy-two inferior sects, as Leo Afer reports. The
Jews, as a company of vagabonds, are scattered over all parts;
whose story, present estate, progress from time to time, is fully set
down by Mr. Thomas Jackson, Doctor of Divinity, in his comment
on the creed. A fifth part of the world, and hardly that, now
professeth CHRIST, but so inlarded and interlaced with several
superstitions, that there is scarce a sound part to be found, or any
agreement amongst them. Presbyter John, in Africa, lord of those
Abyssinians, or Ethiopians, is by his profession a Christian, but so
different from us, with such new absurdities and ceremonies, such
liberty, such a mixture of idolatry and paganism, that they keep
little more than a bare title of Christianity. They suffer polygamy,
circumcision, stupend fastings, divorce as they will themselves,
&c., and as the papists call on the Virgin Mary, so do they on
Thomas Didymus before Christ. The Greek or Eastern Church is
rent from this of the West, and as they have four chief patriarchs,
so have they four subdivisions, besides those Nestorians, Jacobins,
Syrians, Armenians, Georgians, &c., scattered over Asia Minor,
Syria, Egypt, &c., Greece, Walachia, Circassia, Bulgaria, Bosnia,
Albania, Illyricum, Sclavonia, Croatia, Thrace, Servia, Rascia, and
a sprinkling amongst the Tartars, the Russians, Muscovites, and
most of that great duke's (czar's) subjects, are part of the Greek
Church, and still Christians: but as one saith, temporis successu
multas illi addiderunt superstitiones. In process of time they have
added so many superstitions, they be rather semi-Christians than
otherwise. That which remains is the Western Church with us in
Europe, but so eclipsed with several schisms, heresies and
superstitions, that one knows not where to find it. The papists have
Italy, Spain, Savoy, part of Germany, France, Poland, and a
sprinkling in the rest of Europe. In America, they hold all that
which Spaniards inhabit, Hispania Nova, Castella Aurea, Peru, &c.
In the East Indies, the Philippines, some small holds about Goa,
Malacca, Zelan, Ormus, &c., which the Portuguese got not long
since, and those land-leaping Jesuits have essayed in China, Japan,
as appears by their yearly letters; in Africa they have Melinda,
Quiloa, Mombaze, &c., and some few towns, they drive out one
superstition with another. Poland is a receptacle of all religions,
where Samosetans, Socinians, Photinians (now protected in
Transylvania and Poland) , Arians, Anabaptists are to be found, as
well as in some German cities. Scandia is Christian, but Damianus
A-Goes, the Portugal knight, complains, so mixed with magic,
pagan rites and ceremonies, they may be as well counted idolaters:
what Tacitus formerly said of a like nation, is verified in them, "A
people subject to superstition, contrary to religion." And some of
them as about Lapland and the Pilapians, the devil's possession to
this day, Misera haec gens (saith mine author) Satanae hactenus
possessio,--et quod maxime mirandum et dolendum, and which is to
be admired and pitied; if any of them be baptised, which the kings
of Sweden much labour, they die within seven or nine days after,
and for that cause they will hardly be brought to Christianity, but
worship still the devil, who daily appears to them. In their
idolatrous courses, Gandentibus diis patriis, quos religiose colunt,
&c. Yet are they very superstitious, like our wild Irish: though they
of the better note, the kings of Denmark and Sweden themselves,
that govern them, be Lutherans; the remnant are Calvinists,
Lutherans, in Germany equally mixed. And yet the emperor
himself, dukes of Lorraine, Bavaria, and the princes, electors, are
most part professed papists. And though some part of France and
Ireland, Great Britain, half the cantons in Switzerland, and the Low
Countries, be Calvinists, more defecate than the rest, yet at odds
amongst themselves, not free from superstition. And which
Brochard, the monk, in his description of the Holy Land, after he
had censured the Greek church, and showed their errors, concluded
at last, Faxit Deus ne Latinis multa irrepserint stultifies, I say God
grant there be no fopperies in our church. As a dam of water
stopped in one place breaks out into another, so doth superstition. I
say nothing of Anabaptists, Socinians, Brownists, Familists, &c.
There is superstition in our prayers, often in our hearing of
sermons, bitter contentions, invectives, persecutions, strange
conceits, besides diversity of opinions, schisms, factions, &c. But
as the Lord (Job xlii. cap. 7. v.) said to Eliphaz, the Temanite, and
his two friends, "his wrath was kindled against them, for they had
not spoken of him things that were right:" we may justly of these
schismatics and heretics, how wise soever in their own conceits,
non recte loquuntur de Deo, they speak not, they think not, they
write not well of God, and as they ought. And therefore, Quid
quaeso mi Dorpi, as Erasmus concludes to Dorpius, hisce
Theologis faciamus, aut quid preceris, nisi forte fidelem medicum,
qui cerebro medeatur? What shall we wish them, but sanam
mentem, and a good physician? But more of their differences,
paradoxes, opinions, mad pranks, in the symptoms: I now hasten to
the causes.





SUBSECT. II.--Causes of Religious melancholy. From the Devil by
miracles, apparitions, oracles. His instruments or factors,
politicians, Priests, Impostors, Heretics, blind guides. In them
simplicity, fear, blind zeal, ignorance, solitariness, curiosity, pride,
vainglory, presumption, &c. his engines, fasting, solitariness, hope,
fear, &c.

We are taught in Holy Scripture, that the "Devil rangeth abroad like
a roaring lion, still seeking whom he may devour:" and as in
several shapes, so by several engines and devices he goeth about to
seduce us; sometimes he transforms himself into an angel of light;
and is so cunning that he is able, if it were possible, to deceive the
very elect. He will be worshipped as God himself, and is so adored
by the heathen, and esteemed. And in imitation of that divine
power, as Eusebius observes, to abuse or emulate God's glory, as
Dandinus adds, he will have all homage, sacrifices, oblations, and
whatsoever else belongs to the worship of God, to be done likewise
unto him, similis erit altissimo, and by this means infatuates the
world, deludes, entraps, and destroys many a thousand souls.
Sometimes by dreams, visions (as God to Moses by familiar
conference) , the devil in several shapes talks with them: in the
Indies it is common, and in China nothing so familiar as
apparitions, inspirations, oracles, by terrifying them with false
prodigies, counterfeit miracles, sending storms, tempests, diseases,
plagues (as of old in Athens there was Apollo, Alexicacus, Apollo
?????? [loimios], pestifer et malorum depulsor) , raising wars,
seditions by spectrums, troubling their consciences, driving them to
despair, terrors of mind, intolerable pains; by promises, rewards,
benefits, and fair means, he raiseth such an opinion of his deity and
greatness, that they dare not do otherwise than adore him, do as he
will have them, they dare not offend him. And to compel them
more to stand in awe of him, "he sends and cures diseases,
disquiets their spirits" (as Cyprian saith) , "torments and terrifies
their souls, to make them adore him: and all his study, all his
endeavour is to divert them from true religion to superstition: and
because he is damned himself, and in an error, he would have all
the world participate of his errors, and be damned with him." The
primum mobile, therefore, and first mover of all superstition, is the
devil, that great enemy of mankind, the principal agent, who in a
thousand several shapes, after diverse fashions, with several
engines, illusions, and by several names hath deceived the
inhabitants of the earth, in several places and countries, still
rejoicing at their falls. "All the world over before Christ's time, he
freely domineered, and held the souls of men in most slavish
subjection" (saith Eusebius) "in diverse forms, ceremonies, and
sacrifices, till Christ's coming," as if those devils of the air had
shared the earth amongst them, which the Platonists held for gods (
Ludus deorum sumus) , and were our governors and keepers. In
several places, they had several rites, orders, names, of which read
Wierus de praestigiis daemonum, lib. 1. cap. 5. Strozzius Cicogna,
and others; Adonided amongst the Syrians; Adramalech amongst
the Capernaites, Asiniae amongst the Emathites; Astartes with the
Sidonians; Astaroth with the Palestines; Dagon with the Philistines;
Tartary with the Hanaei; Melchonis amongst the Ammonites: Beli
the Babylonians; Beelzebub and Baal with the Samaritans and
Moabites; Apis, Isis, and Osiris amongst the Egyptians; Apollo
Pythius at Delphos, Colophon, Ancyra, Cuma, Erythra; Jupiter in
Crete, Venus at Cyprus, Juno at Carthage, Aesculapius at
Epidaurus, Diana at Ephesus, Pallas at Athens, &c. And even in
these our days, both in the East and West Indies, in Tartary, China,
Japan, &c., what strange idols, in what prodigious forms, with what
absurd ceremonies are they adored? What strange sacraments, like
ours of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, what goodly temples,
priests, sacrifices they had in America, when the Spaniards first
landed there, let Acosta the Jesuit relate, lib. 5. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4, &c.,
and how the devil imitated the Ark and the children of Israel's
coming out of Egypt; with many such. For as Lipsius well
discourseth out of the doctrine of the Stoics, maxime cupiunt
adorationem hominum, now and of old, they still and most
especially desire to be adored by men. See but what Vertomannus,
l. 5. c. 2. Marcus Polus, Lerius, Benzo, P. Martyr in his Ocean
Decades, Acosta, and Mat. Riccius expedit. Christ. in Sinus, lib. 1.
relate. Eusebius wonders how that wise city of Athens, and
flourishing kingdoms of Greece, should be so besotted; and we in
our times, how. those witty Chinese, so perspicacious in all other
things should be so gulled, so tortured with superstition, so blind as
to worship stocks and stones. But it is no marvel, when we see all
out as great effects amongst Christians themselves; how are those
Anabaptists, Arians, and Papists above the rest, miserably
infatuated! Mars, Jupiter, Apollo, and Aesculapius, have resigned
their interest, names, and offices to Saint George.

" ( (Maxime bellorum rector, quem nostra juventus
Pro Mavorte colit.) "--

 (Bapt. Mant. 4. Fast, de Sancto Georgio. "O great master of war,
whom our youths worship as if he were Mars self.")

St. Christopher, and a company of fictitious saints, Venus to the
Lady of Loretto. And as those old Romans had several distinct
gods, for divers offices, persons, places, so have they saints, as
Lavater well observes out of Lactantius, mutato nomine tantum, 'tis
the same spirit or devil that deludes them still. The manner how, as
I say, is by rewards, promises, terrors, affrights, punishments. In a
word, fair and foul means, hope and fear. How often hath Jupiter,
Apollo, Bacchus, and the rest, sent plagues in Greece and Italy,
because their sacrifices were neglected?

 "Dii multa neglecti dederunt
Hesperiae mala luctuosae,"

to terrify them, to arouse them up, and the like: see but Livy,
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Thucydides, Pausanius, Philostratus,
Polybius, before the battle of Cannae, prodigiis signis, ostentis,
templa cuncta, privates etiam aedes scatebant. Oeneus reigned in
Aetolia, and because he did not sacrifice to Diana with his other
gods (see more in Labanius his Diana) , she sent a wild boar,
insolitae magnitudinis, qui terras et homines misere depascebatur,
to spoil both men and country, which was afterwards killed by
Meleager. So Plutarch in the Life of Lucullus relates, how
Mithridates, king of Pontus, at the siege of Cizicum, with all his
navy, was overthrown by Proserpina, for neglecting of her holy
day. She appeared in a vision to Aristagoras in the night, Cras
inquit tybicinem Lybicum cum tybicine pontico committam
("tomorrow I will cause a contest between a Libyan and a Pontic
minstrel") , and the day following this enigma was understood; for
with a great south wind which came from Libya, she quite
overwhelmed Mithridates' army. What prodigies and miracles,
dreams, visions, predictions, apparitions, oracles, have been of old
at Delphos, Dodona, Trophonius' den, at Thebes, and Lebaudia, of
Jupiter Ammon in Egypt, Amphiaraus in Attica, &c.; what strange
cures performed by Apollo and Aesculapius? Juno's image and that
of Fortune spake, Castor and Pollux fought in person for the
Romans against Hannibal's army, as Pallas, Mars, Juno, Venus, for
Greeks and Trojans, &c. Amongst our pseudo-Catholics nothing so
familiar as such miracles; how many cures done by our lady of
Loretto, at Sichem! of old at our St. Thomas's shrine, &c. St.
Sabine was seen to fight for Arnulphus, duke of Spoleto. St.
George fought in person for John the Bastard of Portugal, against
the Castilians; St. James for the Spaniards in America. In the battle
of Bannockburn, where Edward the Second, our English king, was
foiled by the Scots, St. Philanus' arm was seen to fight (if Hector
Boethius doth not impose) , that was before shut up in a silver cap-
case; another time, in the same author, St. Magnus fought for them.
Now for visions, revelations, miracles, not only out of the legend,
out of purgatory, but everyday comes news from the Indies, and at
home read the Jesuits' Letters, Ribadineira, Thurselinus, Acosta,
Lippomanus, Xaverius, Ignatius' Lives, &c., and tell me what
difference?

His ordinary instruments or factors which he useth, as God himself
did, good kings, lawful magistrates, patriarchs, prophets, to the
establishing of his church, are politicians, statesmen, priests,
heretics, blind guides, impostors, pseudoprophets, to propagate his
superstition. And first to begin of politicians, it hath ever been a
principal axiom with them to maintain religion or superstition,
which they determine of, alter and vary upon all occasions, as to
them seems best, they make religion mere policy, a cloak, a human
invention, nihil aeque valet ad regendos vulgi animos ac
superstitio, as Tacitus and Tully hold. Austin, l. 4. de civitat. Dei. c.
9. censures Scaevola saying and acknowledging expedire civitates
religione falli, that it was a fit thing cities should be deceived by
religion, according to the diverb, Si mundus vult decipi, decipiatur,
if the world will be gulled, let it be gulled, 'tis good howsoever to
keep it in subjection. 'Tis that Aristotle and Plato inculcate in their
politics, "Religion neglected, brings plague to the city, opens a gap
to all naughtiness." 'Tis that which all our late politicians
ingeminate. Cromerus, l. 2. pol. hist. Boterus, l. 3. de incrementis
urbium. Clapmarius, l. 2. c. 9. de Arcanis rerump. cap. 4. lib. 2.
polit. Captain Machiavel will have a prince by all means to
counterfeit religion, to be superstitious in show at least, to seem to
be devout, frequent holy exercises, honour divines, love the church,
affect priests, as Numa, Lycurgus, and such lawmakers were and
did, non ut his fidem habeant, sed ut subditos religionis metu
facilius in officio contineant, to keep people in obedience. Nam
naturaliter (as Cardan writes) lex Christiana lex est pietatis,
justitiae, fidei, simplicitatis, &c. But this error of his, Innocentius
Jentilettus, a French lawyer, theorem. 9. comment. 1. de Relig, and
Thomas Bozius in his book de ruinis gentium et Regnorum have
copiously confuted. Many politicians, I dare not deny, maintain
religion as a true means, and sincerely speak of it without
hypocrisy, are truly zealous and religious themselves. Justice and
religion are the two chief props and supporters of a well-governed
commonwealth: but most of them are but Machiavellians,
counterfeits only for political ends; for solus rex (which
Campanella, cap. 18. atheismi triumphali observes) , as amongst
our modern Turks, reipub. Finis, as knowing magnus ejus in
animos imperium; and that, as Sabellicus delivers, "A man without
religion, is like a horse without a bridle." No way better to curb
than superstition, to terrify men's consciences, and to keep them in
awe: they make new laws, statutes, invent new religions,
ceremonies, as so many stalking horses, to their ends. Haec enim
(religio) si falsa sit, dummodo vera credatur, animorum ferociam
domat, libidines coercet, subditos principi obsequentes efficit. (If a
religion be false, only let it be supposed to be true, and it will tame
mental ferocity, restrain lusts, and make loyal subjects.") Therefore
(saith Polybius of Lycurgus) , "did he maintain ceremonies, not that
he was superstitious himself, but that he had perceived mortal men
more apt to embrace paradoxes than aught else, and durst attempt
no evil things for fear of the gods." This was Zamolcus's stratagem
amongst the Thracians, Numa's plot, when he said he had
conference with the nymph Aegeria, and that of Sertorius with a
hart; to get more credit to their decrees, by deriving them from the
gods; or else they did all by divine instinct, which Nicholas
Damascen well observes of Lycurgus, Solon, and Minos, they had
their laws dictated, monte sacro, by Jupiter himself. So Mahomet
referred his new laws to the angel Gabriel, by whose direction he
gave out they were made. Caligula in Dion feigned himself to be
familiar with Castor and Pollux, and many such, which kept those
Romans under (who, as Machiavel proves, lib. 1. disput. cap. 11. et
12. were Religione maxime moti, most superstitious) : and did curb
the people more by this means, than by force of arms, or severity of
human laws. Sola plebecula eam agnoscebat (saith Vaninus, dial.
1. lib. 4. de admirandis naturae arcanis) speaking of religion, que
facile decipitur, magnates vero et philosophi nequaquam, your
grandees and philosophers had no such conceit, sed ad imperii
conformationem et amplificationem quam sine praetextu religionis
tueri non poterant; and many thousands in all ages have ever held
as much, Philosophers especially, animadvertebant hi semper haec
esse fabellas, attamen ob metum publicae potestatis silere
cogebantur they were still silent for fear of laws, &c. To this end
that Syrian Phyresides, Pythagoras his master, broached in the East
amongst the heathens, first the immortality of the soul, as
Trismegistus did in Egypt, with a many of feigned gods. Those
French and Briton Druids in the West first taught, saith Caesar, non
interire animas (that souls did not die) , "but after death to go from
one to another, that so they might encourage them to virtue." 'Twas
for a politic end, and to this purpose the old poets feigned those
elysian fields, their Aeacus, Minos, and Rhadamanthus, their
infernal judges, and those Stygian lakes, fiery Phlegethons, Pluto's
kingdom, and variety of torments after death. Those that had done
well, went to the Elysian fields, but evil doers to Cocytus, and to
that burning lake of hell with fire, and brimstone for ever to be
tormented. 'Tis this which Plato labours for in his Phaedon, et 9. de
rep. The Turks in their Alcoran, when they set down rewards, and
several punishments for every particular virtue and vice, when they
persuade men, that they that die in battle shall go directly to
heaven, but wicked livers to eternal torment, and all of all sorts
(much like our papistical purgatory) , for a set time shall be
tortured in their graves, as appears by that tract which John Baptista
Alfaqui, that Mauritanian priest, now turned Christian, hath written
in his confutation of the Alcoran. After a man's death two black
angels, Nunquir and Nequir (so they call them) come to him to his
grave and punish him for his precedent sins; if he lived well, they
torture him the less; if ill, per indesinentes cruciatus ad diem
fudicii, they incessantly punish him to the day of judgment, Nemo
viventium qui ad horum mentionem non totus horret et
contremiscit, the thought of this crucifies them all their lives long,
and makes them spend their days in fasting and prayer, ne mala
haec contingant, &c. A Tartar prince, saith Marcus Polus, lib. 1.
cap. 23. called Senex de Montibus, the better to establish his
government amongst his subjects, and to keep them in awe, found a
convenient place in a pleasant valley, environed with hills, in
"which he made a delicious park full of odoriferous flowers and
fruits, and a palace of all worldly contents," that could possibly be
devised, music, pictures, variety of meats, &c., and chose out a
certain young man, whom with a soporiferous potion he so
benumbed, that he perceived nothing: "and so fast asleep as he was,
caused him to be conveyed into this fair garden:" where after he
had lived awhile in all such pleasures a sensual man could desire,
"He cast him into a sleep again, and brought him forth, that when
he awaked he might tell others he had been in Paradise." The like
he did for hell, and by this means brought his people to subjection.
Because heaven and hell are mentioned in the scriptures, and to be
believed necessary by Christians: so cunningly can the devil and
his ministers, in imitation of true religion, counterfeit and forge the
like, to circumvent and delude his superstitious followers. Many
such tricks and impostures are acted by politicians, in China
especially, but with what effect I will discourse in the symptoms.

Next to politicians, if I may distinguish them, are some of our
priests (who make religion policy) , if not far beyond them, for they
domineer over princes and statesmen themselves. Carnificinam
exercent, one saith they tyrannise over men's consciences more
than any other tormentors whatsoever, partly for their commodity
and gain; Religionem enim omnium abusus (as Postellus holds) ,
quaestus scilicet sacrificum in causa est: for sovereignty, credit, to
maintain their state and reputation, out of ambition and avarice,
which are their chief supporters: what have they not made the
common people believe? Impossibilities in nature, incredible
things; what devices, traditions, ceremonies, have they not invented
in all ages to keep men in obedience, to enrich themselves? Quibus
quaestui sunt capti superstitione animi, as Livy saith. Those
Egyptian priests of old got all the sovereignty into their hands, and
knowing, as Curtius insinuates, nulla res efficacius multitudinem
regit quam superstitio; melius vatibus quam ducibus parent, vana
religione capti, etiam impotentes foeminae; the common people
will sooner obey priests than captains, and nothing so forcible as
superstition, or better than blind zeal to rule a multitude; have so
terrified and gulled them, that it is incredible to relate. All nations
almost have been besotted in this kind; amongst our Britons and
old Gauls the Druids; magi in Persia; philosophers in Greece;
Chaldeans amongst the Oriental; Brachmanni in India;
Gymnosophists in Ethiopia; the Turditanes in Spain; Augurs in
Rome, have insulted; Apollo's priests in Greece, Phaebades and
Pythonissae, by their oracles and phantasms; Amphiaraus and his
companions; now Mahometan and pagan priests, what can they not
effect? How do they not infatuate the world? Adeo ubique (as
Scaliger writes of the Mahometan priests) , tum gentium tum
locorum, gens ista sacrorum ministra, vulgi secat spes, ad ea quae
ipsi fingunt somnia, "so cunningly can they gull the commons in all
places and countries." But above all others, that high priest of
Rome, the dam of that monstrous and superstitious brood, the bull-
bellowing pope, which now rageth in the West, that three-headed
Cerberus hath played his part. "Whose religion at this day is mere
policy, a state wholly composed of superstition and wit, and needs
nothing but wit and superstition to maintain it, that useth colleges
and religious houses to as good purpose as forts and castles, and
doth more at this day" by a company of scribbling parasites, fiery-
spirited friars, zealous anchorites, hypocritical confessors, and
those praetorian soldiers, his Janissary Jesuits, and that dissociable
society, as Languis terms it, postremus diaboli conatus et saeculi
excrementum, that now stand in the fore front of the battle, will
have a monopoly of, and engross all other learning, but domineer in
divinity, Excipiunt soli totius vulnera belli, and fight alone almost
(for the rest are but his dromedaries and asses) , than ever he could
have done by garrisons and armies. What power of prince, or penal
law, be it never so strict, could enforce men to do that which for
conscience' sake they will voluntarily undergo? And as to fast from
all flesh, abstain from marriage, rise to their prayers at midnight,
whip themselves, with stupendous fasting and penance, abandon
the world, wilful poverty, perform canonical and blind obedience,
to prostrate their goods, fortunes, bodies, lives, and offer up
themselves at their superior's feet, at his command? What so
powerful an engine as superstition? which they right well
perceiving, are of no religion at all themselves: Primum enim (as
Calvin rightly suspects, the tenor and practice of their life proves) ,
arcanae illius theologiae, quod apud eos regnat, caput est, nullum
esse deum, they hold there is no God, as Leo X. did, Hildebrand the
magician, Alexander VI., Julius II., mere atheists, and which the
common proverb amongst them approves, "The worst Christians of
Italy are the Romans, of the Romans the priests are wildest, the
lewdest priests are preferred to be cardinals, and the baddest men
amongst the cardinals is chosen to be pope," that is an epicure, as
most part the popes are, infidels and Lucianists, for so they think
and believe; and what is said of Christ to be fables and impostures,
of heaven and hell, day of judgment, paradise, immortality of the
soul, are all,

 "Rumores vacui, verbaque inania,
Et par sollicito fabula somnio."

"Dreams, toys, and old wives' tales." Yet as so many whetstones to
make other tools cut, but cut not themselves, though they be of no
religion at all, they will make others most devout and superstitious,
by promises and threats, compel, enforce from, and lead them by
the nose like so many bears in a line; when as their end is not to
propagate the church, advance God's kingdom, seek His glory or
common good, but to enrich themselves, to enlarge their territories,
to domineer and compel them to stand in awe, to live in subjection
to the See of Rome. For what otherwise care they? Si mundus vult
decipi, decipiatur, "since the world wishes to be gulled, let it be
gulled," 'tis fit it should be so. And for which Austin cites Varro to
maintain his Roman religion, we may better apply to them: multa
vera, quae vulgus scire non est utile; pleraque falsa, quae tamen
uliter existimare populum expedit; some things are true, some false,
which for their own ends they will not have the gullish commonalty
take notice of. As well may witness their intolerable covetousness,
strange forgeries, fopperies, fooleries, unrighteous subtleties,
impostures, illusions, new doctrines, paradoxes, traditions, false
miracles, which they have still forged, to enthral, circumvent and
subjugate them, to maintain their own estates. One while by bulls,
pardons, indulgencies, and their doctrines of good works, that they
be meritorious, hope of heaven, by that means they have so fleeced
the commonalty, and spurred on this free superstitious horse, that
he runs himself blind, and is an ass to carry burdens. They have so
amplified Peter's patrimony, that from a poor bishop, he is become
Rex Regum, Dominus dominantium, a demigod, as his canonists
make him (Felinus and the rest) , above God himself. And for his
wealth and temporalities, is not inferior to many kings: his
cardinals, princes' companions; and in every kingdom almost,
abbots, priors, monks, friars, &c., and his clergy, have engrossed a
third part, half, in some places all, into their hands. Three princes,
electors in Germany, bishops; besides Magdeburg, Spire, Saltsburg,
Breme, Bamberg, &c. In France, as Bodine lib. de repub. gives us
to understand, their revenues are 12,300,000 livres; and of twelve
parts of the revenues in France, the church possesseth seven. The
Jesuits, a new sect, begun in this age, have, as Middendorpius and
Pelargus reckon up, three or four hundred colleges in Europe, and
more revenues than many princes. In France, as Arnoldus proves,
in thirty years they have got bis centum librarum millia annua,
200,000L.. I say nothing of the rest of their orders. We have had in
England, as Armachanus demonstrates, above 30,000 friars at once,
and as Speed collects out of Leland and others, almost 600
religious houses, and near 200,000L. in revenues of the old rent
belonging to them, besides images of gold, silver, plate, furniture,
goods and ornaments, as Weever calculates, and esteems them at
the dissolution of abbeys, worth a million of gold. How many
towns in every kingdom hath superstition enriched? What a deal of
money by musty relics, images, idolatry, have their mass-priests
engrossed, and what sums have they scraped by their other tricks!
Loretto in Italy, Walsingham in England, in those days. Ubi omnia
auro nitent, "where everything shines with gold," saith Erasmus,
St. Thomas's shrine, &c., may witness. Delphos so renowned of old
in Greece for Apollo's oracle, Delos commune conciliabulum et
emporium sola religions manitum; Dodona, whose fame and wealth
were sustained by religion, were not so rich, so famous. If they can
get but a relic of some saint, the Virgin Mary's picture, idols or the
like, that city is for ever made, it needs no other maintenance. Now
if any of these their impostures or juggling tricks be controverted,
or called in question: if a magnanimous or zealous Luther, an
heroical Luther, as Dithmarus Calls him, dare touch the monks'
bellies, all is in a combustion, all is in an uproar: Demetrius and his
associates are ready to pull him in pieces, to keep up their trades,
"Great is Diana of the Ephesians:" with a mighty shout of two
hours long they will roar and not be pacified.

Now for their authority, what by auricular confession, satisfaction,
penance, Peter's keys, thunderings, excommunications, &c., roaring
bulls, this high priest of Rome, shaking his Gorgon's head, hath so
terrified the soul of many a silly man, insulted over majesty itself,
and swaggered generally over all Europe for many ages, and still
doth to some, holding them as yet in slavish subjection, as never
tyrannising Spaniards did by their poor Negroes, or Turks by their
galley-slaves. "The bishop of Rome" (saith Stapleton, a parasite of
his, de mag. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 1.) "hath done that without arms,
which those Roman emperors could never achieve with forty
legions of soldiers," deposed kings, and crowned them again with
his foot, made friends, and corrected at his pleasure, &c. "'Tis a
wonder," saith Machiavel, Florentinae, his. lib. 1. "what slavery
King Henry II. endured for the death of Thomas a Beckett, what
things he was enjoined by the Pope, and how he submitted himself
to do that which in our times a private man would not endure," and
all through superstition. Henry IV. disposed of his empire, stood
barefooted with his wife at the gates of Canossus. Frederic the
Emperor was trodden on by Alexander III., another held Adrian's
stirrup, King John kissed the knees of Pandulphos the Pope's
legate, &c. What made so many thousand Christians travel from
France, Britain, &c., into the Holy Land, spend such huge sums of
money, go a pilgrimage so familiarly to Jerusalem, to creep and
crouch, but slavish superstition? What makes them so freely
venture their lives, to leave their native countries, to go seek
martyrdom in the Indies, but superstition? to be assassins, to meet
death, murder kings, but a false persuasion of merit, of canonical or
blind obedience which they instil into them, and animate them by
strange illusions, hope of being martyrs and saints: such pretty feats
can the devil work by priests, and so well for their own advantage
can they play their parts. And if it were not yet enough, by priests
and politicians to delude mankind, and crucify the souls of men, he
hath more actors in his tragedy, more irons in the fire, another
scene of heretics, factious, ambitious wits, insolent spirits,
schismatics, impostors, false prophets, blind guides, that out of
pride, singularity, vainglory, blind zeal, cause much more madness
yet, set all in an uproar by their new doctrines, paradoxes, figments,
crotchets, make new divisions, subdivisions, new sects, oppose one
superstition to another, one kingdom to another, commit prince and
subjects, brother against brother, father against son, to the ruin and
destruction of a commonwealth, to the disturbance of peace, and to
make a general confusion of all estates. How did those Arians rage
of old? how many did they circumvent? Those Pelagians,
Manichees, &c., their names alone would make a just volume. How
many silly souls have impostors still deluded, drawn away, and
quite alienated from Christ! Lucian's Alexander Simon Magus,
whose statue was to be seen and adored in Rome, saith Justin
Martyr, Simoni deo sancto, &c., after his decease. Apollonius
Tianeus, Cynops, Eumo, who by counterfeiting some new
ceremonies and juggling tricks of that Dea Syria, by spitting fire,
and the like, got an army together of 40,000 men, and did much
harm: with Eudo de stellis, of whom Nubrigensis speaks, lib. 1.
cap. 19. that in King Stephen's days imitated most of Christ's
miracles, fed I know not how many people in the wilderness, and 
built castles in the air, &c., to the seducing of multitudes of poor
souls. In Franconia, 1476, a base illiterate fellow took upon him to
be a prophet, and preach, John Beheim by name, a neatherd at
Nicholhausen, he seduced 30,000 persons, and was taken by the
commonalty to be a most holy man, come from heaven.
"Tradesmen left their shops, women their distaffs, servants ran
from their masters, children from their parents, scholars left their
tutors, all to hear him, some for novelty, some for zeal. He was
burnt at last by the Bishop of Wartzburg, and so he and his heresy
vanished together." How many such impostors, false prophets, have
lived in every king's reign? what chronicles will not afford such
examples? that as so many ignes fatui, have led men out of the
way, terrified some, deluded others, that are apt to be carried about
by the blast of every wind, a rude inconstant multitude, a silly
company of poor souls, that follow all, and are cluttered together
like so many pebbles in a tide. What prodigious follies, madness,
vexations, persecutions, absurdities, impossibilities, these
impostors, heretics, &c., have thrust upon the world, what strange
effects shall be shown in the symptoms.

Now the means by which, or advantages the devil and his infernal
ministers take, so to delude and disquiet the world with such idle
ceremonies, false doctrines, superstitious fopperies, are from
themselves, innate fear, ignorance, simplicity, hope and fear, those
two battering cannons and principal engines, with their objects,
reward and punishment, purgatory, Limbus Patrum, &c. which now
more than ever tyrannise; "for what province is free from atheism,
superstition, idolatry, schism, heresy, impiety, their factors and
followers?" thence they proceed, and from that same decayed
image of God, which is yet remaining in us.

 "Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Jussit."--

 (Lib. 1. de nat. Deorum. "He gave to man an upward gaze,
commanding him to fix his eyes on heaven.")

Our own conscience doth dictate so much unto us, we know there
is a God and nature doth inform us; Nulla gens tam barbara (saith
Tully) cui non insideat haec persuasio Deum esse; sed nec Scytha,
nec Groecus, nec Persa, nec Hyperboreus dissentiet (as Maximus
Tyrius the Platonist ser. 1. farther adds) nec continentis nec
insularum habitator, let him dwell where he will, in what coast
soever, there is no nation so barbarous that is not persuaded there is
a God. It is a wonder to read of that infinite superstition amongst
the Indians in this kind, of their tenets in America, pro suo quisque
libitu varias res venerabantur superstitiose, plantas, animalia,
montes, &c. omne quod amabant aut horrebant (some few places
excepted as he grants, that had no God at all) . So "the heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament declares his handy
work," Psalm xix. "Every creature will evince it;" Praesentemque
refert quaelibet herba deum. Nolentes sciunt, fatentur inviti, as the
said Tyrius proceeds, will or nill, they must acknowledge it. The
philosophers, Socrates, Plato, Plotinus, Pythagoras, Trismegistus,
Seneca, Epictetus, those Magi, Druids, &c. went as far as they
could by the light of nature; multa praeclara, de natura Dei seripta
reliquerunt, "writ many things well of the nature of God, but they
had but a confused light, a glimpse,"

 "Quale per incertam lunam sub luce maligna
Est iter in sylvis,"--

"as he that walks by moonshine in a wood," they groped in the
dark; they had a gross knowledge, as he in Euripides, O Deus
quicquid es, sive coelum, sive terra, sive aliud quid, and that of
Aristotle, Ens entium miserere mei. And so of the immortality of
the soul, and future happiness. Immortalitatem animae (saith
Hierom) Pythagoras somniavit, Democritus non credidit in
consoltlionem damnationis suae Socrates in carcere disputavit;
Indus, Persa, Cothus, &c. Philosophantur. So some said this, some
that, as they conceived themselves, which the devil perceiving, led
them farther out (as Lemnius observes) and made them worship
him as their God with stocks and stones, and torture themselves to
their own destruction, as he thought fit himself, inspired his priests
and ministers with lies and fictions to prosecute the same, which
they for their own ends were as willing to undergo, taking
advantage of their simplicity, fear and ignorance. For the common
people are as a flock of sheep, a rude, illiterate rout, void many
times of common sense, a mere beast, bellua multorum capitum,
will go whithersoever they are led: as you lead a ram over a gap by
the horns, all the rest will follow, Non qua eundum, sed qua itur,
they will do as they see others do, and as their prince will have
them, let him be of what religion he will, they are for him. Now for
those idolaters, Maxentius and Licinius, then for Constantine a
Christian. Qui Christum negant male pereant, acclamatum est
Decies, for two hours' space; qui Christum non colunt, Augusti
inimici sunt, acclamatum est ter decies; and by and by idolaters
again under that Apostate Julianus; all Arians under Constantius,
good Catholics again under Jovinianus, "And little difference there
is between the discretion of men and children in this case,
especially of old folks and women," as Cardan discourseth, "when,
as they are tossed with fear and superstition, and with other men's
folly and dishonesty." So that I may say their ignorance is a cause
of their superstition, a symptom, and madness itself: Supplicii
causa est, suppliciumque sui. Their own fear, folly, stupidity, to be
deplored lethargy, is that which gives occasion to the other, and
pulls these miseries on their own heads. For in all these religions
and superstitions, amongst our idolaters, you shall find that the
parties first affected, are silly, rude, ignorant people, old folks, that
are naturally prone to superstition, weak women, or some poor,
rude, illiterate persons, that are apt to be wrought upon, and gulled
in this kind, prone without either examination or due consideration
(for they take up religion a trust, as at mercers' they do their wares)
to believe anything. And the best means they have to broach first,
or to maintain it when they have done, is to keep them still in
ignorance: for "ignorance is the mother of devotion," as all the
world knows, and these times can amply witness. This hath been
the devil's practice, and his infernal ministers in all ages; not as our
Saviour by a few silly fishermen, to confound the wisdom of the
world, to save publicans and sinners, but to make advantage of
their ignorance, to convert them and their associates; and that they
may better effect what they intend, they begin, as I say, with poor,
stupid, illiterate persons. So Mahomet did when he published his
Alcoran, which is a piece of work (saith Bredenbachius) "full of
nonsense, barbarism, confusion, without rhyme, reason, or any
good composition, first published to a company of rude rustics,
hog-rubbers, that had no discretion, judgment, art, or
understanding, and is so still maintained." For it is a part of their
policy to let no man comment, dare to dispute or call in question to
this day any part of it, be it never so absurd, incredible, ridiculous,
fabulous as it is, must be believed implicite, upon pain of death no
man must dare to contradict it, "God and the emperor," &c. What
else do our papists, but by keeping the people in ignorance vent and
broach all their new ceremonies and traditions, when they conceal
the scripture, read it in Latin, and to some few alone, feeding the
slavish people in the meantime with tales out of legends, and such
like fabulous narrations? Whom do they begin with but collapsed 
ladies, some few tradesmen, superstitious old folks, illiterate
persons, weak women, discontent, rude, silly companions, or
sooner circumvent? So do all our schismatics and heretics. Marcus
and Valentinian heretics, in Irenaeus, seduced first I know not how
many women, and made them believe they were prophets. Friar
Cornelius of Dort seduced a company of silly women. What are all
our Anabaptists, Brownists, Barrowists, familists, but a company of
rude, illiterate, capricious, base fellows? What are most of our
papists, but stupid, ignorant and blind bayards? how should they
otherwise be, when as they are brought up and kept still in
darkness? "If their pastors" (saith Lavater) "have done their duties,
and instructed their flocks as they ought, in the principles of
Christian religion, or had not forbidden them the reading of
scriptures, they had not been as they are." But being so misled all
their lives in superstition, and carried hoodwinked like hawks, how
can they prove otherwise than blind idiots, and superstitious asses?
what else shall we expect at their hands? Neither is it sufficient to
keep them blind, and in Cimmerian darkness, but withal, as a
schoolmaster doth by his boys, to make them follow their books,
sometimes by good hope, promises and encouragements, but most
of all by fear, strict discipline, severity, threats and punishment, do
they collogue and soothe up their silly auditors, and so bring them
into a fools' paradise. Rex eris aiunt, si recte facies, do well, thou
shalt be crowned; but for the most part by threats, terrors, and
affrights, they tyrannise and terrify their distressed souls: knowing
that fear alone is the sole and only means to keep men in
obedience, according to that hemistichium of Petronius, primus in
orbe deos fecit timor, the fear of some divine and supreme powers,
keeps men in obedience, makes the people do their duties: they
play upon their consciences; which was practised of old in Egypt
by their priests; when there was an eclipse, they made the people
believe God was angry, great miseries were to come; they take all
opportunities of natural causes, to delude the people's senses, and
with fearful tales out of purgatory, feigned apparitions, earthquakes
in Japonia or China, tragical examples of devils, possessions,
obsessions, false miracles, counterfeit visions, &c. They do so
insult over and restrain them, never hoby so dared a larke, that they
will not offend the least tradition, tread, or scarce look awry: Deus
bone ( Lavater exclaims) quot hoc commentum de purgatorio
misere afflixit! good God, how many men have been miserably
afflicted by this fiction of purgatory!

To these advantages of hope and fear, ignorance and simplicity, he
hath several engines, traps, devices, to batter and enthral, omitting
no opportunities, according to men's several inclinations, abilities,
to circumvent and humour them, to maintain his superstitions,
sometimes to stupefy, besot them: sometimes again by oppositions,
factions, to set all at odds and in an uproar; sometimes he infects
one man, and makes him a principal agent; sometimes whole cities,
countries. If of meaner sort, by stupidity, canonical obedience,
blind zeal, &c. If of better note, by pride, ambition, popularity,
vainglory. If of the clergy and more eminent, of better parts than
the rest, more learned, eloquent, he puffs them up with a vain
conceit of their own worth, scientia inflati, they begin to swell, and
scorn all the world in respect of themselves, and thereupon turn
heretics, schismatics, broach new doctrines, frame new crotchets
and the like; or else out of too much learning become mad, or out
of curiosity they will search into God's secrets, and eat of the
forbidden fruit; or out of presumption of their holiness and good
gifts, inspirations, become prophets, enthusiasts, and what not? Or
else if they be displeased, discontent, and have not (as they
suppose) preferment to their worth, have some disgrace, repulse,
neglected, or not esteemed as they fondly value themselves, or out
of emulation, they begin presently to rage and rave, coelum terrae,
miscent, they become so impatient in an instant, that a whole
kingdom cannot contain them, they will set all in a combustion, all
at variance, to be revenged of their adversaries. Donatus, when he
saw Cecilianus preferred before him in the bishopric of Carthage,
turned heretic, and so did Arian, because Alexander was advanced:
we have examples at home, and too many experiments of such
persons. If they be laymen of better note, the same engines of pride,
ambition, emulation and jealousy, take place, they will be gods
themselves: Alexander in India, after his victories, became so
insolent, he would be adored for a god: and those Roman emperors
came to that height of madness, they must have temples built to
them, sacrifices to their deities, Divus Augustus, D. Claudius, D.
Adrianus: Heliogabalus, "put out that vestal fire at Rome, expelled
the virgins, and banished all other religions all over the world, and
would be the sole God himself." Our Turks, China kings, great
Chams, and Mogors do little less, assuming divine and bombast
titles to themselves; the meaner sort are too credulous, and led with
blind zeal, blind obedience, to prosecute and maintain whatsoever
their sottish leaders shall propose, what they in pride and
singularity, revenge, vainglory, ambition, spleen, for gain, shall
rashly maintain and broach, their disciples make a matter of
conscience, of hell and damnation, if they do it not, and will rather
forsake wives, children, house and home, lands, goods, fortunes,
life itself, than omit or abjure the least tittle of it, and to advance
the common cause, undergo any miseries, turn traitors, assassins,
pseudomartyrs, with full assurance and hope of reward in that other
world, that they shall certainly merit by it, win heaven, be
canonised for saints.

Now when they are truly possessed with blind zeal, and misled
with superstition, he hath many other baits to inveigle and infatuate
them farther yet, to make them quite mortified and mad, and that
under colour of perfection, to merit by penance, going woolward,
whipping, alms, fastings, &c. An. 1320. there was a sect of
whippers in Germany, that, to the astonishment of the beholders,
lashed, and cruelly tortured themselves. I could give many other
instances of each particular. But these works so done are
meritorious, ex opere operato, ex condigno, for themselves and
others, to make them macerate and consume their bodies, specie
virtutis et umbra, those evangelical counsels are propounded, as
our pseudo-Catholics call them, canonical obedience, wilful
poverty, vows of chastity, monkery, and a solitary life, which
extend almost to all religions and superstitions, to Turks, Chinese,
Gentiles, Abyssinians, Greeks, Latins, and all countries. Amongst
the rest, fasting, contemplation, solitariness, are as it were certain
rams by which the devil doth batter and work upon the strongest
constitutions. Nonnulli (saith Peter Forestus) ob longas inedias,
studia et meditationes coelestes, de rebus sacris et religione semper
agitant, by fasting overmuch, and divine meditations, are
overcome. Not that fasting is a thing of itself to be discommended,
for it is an excellent means to keep the body in subjection, a
preparative to devotion, the physic of the soul, by which chaste
thoughts are engendered, true zeal, a divine spirit, whence
wholesome counsels do proceed, concupiscence is restrained,
vicious and predominant lusts and humours are expelled. The
fathers are very much in commendation of it, and, as Calvin notes,
"sometimes immoderate. The mother of health, key of heaven, a
spiritual wing to arear us, the chariot of the Holy Ghost, banner of
faith," &c. And 'tis true they say of it, if it be moderately and
seasonably used, by such parties as Moses, Elias, Daniel, Christ,
and his apostles made use of it; but when by this means they will
supererogate, and as Erasmus well taxeth, Coelum non sufficere
putant suis meritis. Heaven is too small a reward for it; they make
choice of times and meats, buy and sell their merits, attribute more
to them than to the ten Commandments, and count it a greater sin to
eat meat in Lent, than to kill a man, and as one sayeth, Plus
respiciunt assum piscem, quam Christum crucifixum, plus
salmonem quam Solomonem, quibus in ore Christus, Epicurus in
corde, "pay more respect to a broiled fish than to Christ crucified,
more regard to salmon than to Solomon, have Christ on their lips,
but Epicurus in their hearts," when some counterfeit, and some
attribute more to such works of theirs than to Christ's death and
passion; the devil sets in a foot, strangely deludes them, and by that
means makes them to overthrow the temperature of their bodies,
and hazard their souls. Never any strange illusions of devils
amongst hermits, anchorites, never any visions, phantasms,
apparitions, enthusiasms, prophets, any revelations, but immoderate
fasting, bad diet, sickness, melancholy, solitariness, or some such
things, were the precedent causes, the forerunners or concomitants
of them. The best opportunity and sole occasion the devil takes to
delude them. Marcilius Cognatus, lib. 1. cont. cap. 7. hath many
stories to this purpose, of such as after long fasting have been
seduced by devils; and "'tis a miraculous thing to relate" (as Cardan
writes) "what strange accidents proceed from fasting; dreams,
superstition, contempt of torments, desire of death, prophecies,
paradoxes, madness; fasting naturally prepares men to these
things." Monks, anchorites, and the like, after much emptiness,
become melancholy, vertiginous, they think they hear strange
noises, confer with hobgoblins, devils, rivel up their bodies, et dum
hostem insequimur, saith Gregory, civem quem diligimus,
trucidamus, they become bare skeletons, skin and bones; Carnibus
abstinentes proprias carnes devorant, ut nil praeter cutem et ossa
sit reliquum. Hilarion, as Hierome reports in his life, and
Athanasius of Antonius, was so bare with fasting, "that the skin did
scarce stick to the bones; for want of vapours he could not sleep,
and for want of sleep became idleheaded, heard every night infants
cry, oxen low, wolves howl, lions roar" (as he thought) , "clattering
of chains, strange voices, and the like illusions of devils." Such
symptoms are common to those that fast long, are solitary, given to
contemplation, overmuch solitariness and meditation. Not that
these things (as I said of fasting) are to be discommended of
themselves, but very behoveful in some cases and good: sobriety
and contemplation join our souls to God, as that heathen Porphyry
can tell us. "Ecstasy is a taste of future happiness, by which we are
united unto God, a divine melancholy, a spiritual wing,"
Bonaventure terms it, to lift us up to heaven; but as it is abused, a
mere dotage, madness, a cause and symptom of religious
melancholy. "If you shall at any time see" (saith Guianerius) "a
religious person over-superstitious, too solitary, or much given to
fasting, that man will certainly be melancholy, thou mayst boldly
say it, he will be so." P. Forestus hath almost the same words, and
Cardan subtil, lib. 18. et cap. 40. lib. 8. de rerum varietate,
"solitariness, fasting, and that melancholy humour, are the causes
of all hermits' illusions." Lavater, de spect. cap. 19. part. 1. and
part. 1. cap. 10. puts solitariness a main cause of such spectrums
and apparitions; none, saith he, so melancholy as monks and
hermits, the devil's hath melancholy; "none so subject to visions
and dotage in this kind, as such as live solitary lives, they hear and
act strange things in their dotage." Polydore Virgil, lib. 2. prodigiis,
"holds that those prophecies and monks' revelations? nuns, dreams,
which they suppose come from God, to proceed wholly ab instinctu
daemonum, by the devil's means;" and so those enthusiasts,
Anabaptists, pseudoprophets from the same cause. Fracastorius, lib.
2. de intellect, will have all your pythonesses, sibyls, and
pseudoprophets to be mere melancholy, so doth Wierus prove, lib.
1. cap. 8. et l. 3. cap. 7. and Arculanus in 9 Rhasis, that melancholy
is a sole cause, and the devil together, with fasting and solitariness,
of such sibylline prophecies, if there were ever such, which with
Casaubon and others I justly except at; for it is not likely that the 
Spirit of God should ever reveal such manifest revelations and
predictions of Christ, to those Pythonissae witches, Apollo's priests,
the devil's ministers, (they were no better) and conceal them from
his own prophets; for these sibyls set down all particular
circumstances of Christ's coming, and many other future accidents
far more perspicuous and plain than ever any prophet did. But,
howsoever, there be no Phaebades or sibyls, I am assured there be
other enthusiasts, prophets, dii Fatidici, Magi, (of which read Jo.
Boissardus, who hath laboriously collected them into a great
volume of late, with elegant pictures, and epitomised their lives)
&c., ever have been in all ages, and still proceeding from those
causes, qui visiones suas enarrant, somniant futura, prophetisant,
et ejusmodi deliriis agitati, Spiritum Sanctum sibi communicari
putant. That which is written of Saint Francis' five wounds, and
other such monastical effects, of him and others, may justly be
referred to this our melancholy; and that which Matthew Paris
relates of the monk of Evesham, who saw heaven and hell in a
vision; of Sir Owen, that went down into Saint Patrick's purgatory
in King Stephen's days, and saw as much; Walsingham of him that
showed as much by Saint Julian. Beda, lib. 5. cap. 13. 14. 15. et 20.
reports of King Sebba, lib. 4. cap. 11. eccles. hist. that saw strange
visions; and Stumphius Helvet Cornic, a cobbler of Basle, that
beheld rare apparitions at Augsburg, in Germany. Alexander ab
Alexandro, gen. dier. lib. 6. cap. 21. of an enthusiastical prisoner,
(all out as probable as that of Eris Armenius, in Plato's tenth
dialogue de Repub. that revived again ten days after he was killed
in a battle, and told strange wonders, like those tales Ulysses
related to Alcinous in Homer, or Lucian's vera historia itself) was
still after much solitariness, fasting, or long sickness, when their
brains were addled, and their bellies as empty of meat as their
heads of wit. Florilegus hath many such examples, fol. 191. one of
Saint Gultlake of Crowald that fought with devils, but still after
long fasting, overmuch solitariness, the devil persuaded him
therefore to fast, as Moses and Elias did, the better to delude him.
In the same author is recorded Carolus Magnus vision an. 185. or
ecstasies, wherein he saw heaven and hell after much fasting and
meditation. So did the devil of old with Apollo's priests.
Amphiaraus and his fellows, those Egyptians, still enjoin long
fasting before he would give any oracles, triduum a cibo et vino
abstinerent, before they gave any answers, as Volateran lib. 13.
cap. 4. records, and Strabo Geog. lib. 14. describes Charon's den, in
the way between Tralles and Nissum, whither the priests led sick
and fanatic men: but nothing performed without long fasting, no
good to be done. That scoffing Lucian conducts his Menippus to
hell by the directions of that Chaldean Mithrobarzanes, but after
long fasting, and such like idle preparation. Which the Jesuits right
well perceiving of what force this fasting and solitary meditation is,
to alter men's minds, when they would make a man mad, ravish
him, improve him beyond himself, to undertake some great
business of moment, to kill a king, or the like, they bring him into a
melancholy dark chamber, where he shall see no light for many
days together, no company, little meat, ghastly pictures of devils all
about him, and leave him to lie as he will himself, on the bare floor
in this chamber of meditation, as they call it, on his back, side,
belly, till by this strange usage they make him quite mad and beside
himself. And then after some ten days, as they find him animated
and resolved, they make use of him. The devil hath many such
factors, many such engines, which what effect they produce, you
shall hear in the following symptoms.





SUBSECT. III.--Symptoms general, love to their own sect, hate of
all other religions, obstinacy, peevishness, ready to undergo any
danger or cross for it; Martyrs, blind zeal, blind obedience,
fastings, vows, belief of incredibilities, impossibilities: Particular
of Gentiles, Mahometans, Jews, Christians; and in them, heretics
old, and new, schismatics, schoolmen, prophets, enthusiasts, &c.

Fleat Heraclitus, an rideat Democritus? in attempting to speak of
these symptoms, shall I laugh with Democritus, or weep with
Heraclitus? they are so ridiculous and absurd on the one side, so
lamentable and tragical on the other: a mixed scene offers itself, so
full of errors and a promiscuous variety of objects, that I know not
in what strain to represent it. When I think of the Turkish paradise,
those Jewish fables, and pontifical rites, those pagan superstitions,
their sacrifices, and ceremonies, as to make images of all matter,
and adore them when they have done, to see them, kiss the pyx,
creep to the cross, &c. I cannot choose but laugh with Democritus:
but when I see them whip and torture themselves, grind their souls
for toys and trifles, desperate, and now ready to die, I cannot but
weep with Heraclitus. When I see a priest say mass, with all those
apish gestures, murmurings, &c. read the customs of the Jews'
synagogue, or Mahometa Meschites, I must needs laugh at their
folly, risum teneatis amici? but when I see them make matters of
conscience of such toys and trifles, to adore the devil, to endanger
their souls, to offer their children to their idols, &c. I must needs
condole their misery. When I see two superstitious orders contend
pro aris et focis, with such have and hold, de lana, caprina, some
write such great volumes to no purpose, take so much pains to so
small effect, their satires, invectives, apologies, dull and gross
fictions; when I see grave learned men rail and scold like butter-
women, methinks 'tis pretty sport, and fit for Calphurnius and
Democritus to laugh at. But when I see so much blood spilt, so
many murders and massacres, so many cruel battles fought, &c. 'tis
a fitter subject for Heraclitus to lament. As Merlin when he sat by
the lake side with Vortigern, and had seen the white and red dragon
fight, before he began to interpret or to speak, in fletum prorupit,
fell a weeping, and then proceeded to declare to the king what it
meant. I should first pity and bewail this misery of human kind
with some passionate preface, wishing mine eyes a fountain of
tears, as Jeremiah did, and then to my task. For it is that great
torture, that infernal plague of mortal men, omnium pestium
pestilentissima superstitio, and able of itself alone to stand in
opposition to all other plagues, miseries and calamities whatsoever;
far more cruel, more pestiferous, more grievous, more general,
more violent, of a greater extent. Other fears and sorrows,
grievances of body and mind, are troublesome for the time; but this
is for ever, eternal damnation, hell itself, a plague, a fire: an
inundation hurts one province alone, and the loss may be
recovered; but this superstition involves all the world almost, and
can never be remedied. Sickness and sorrows come and go, but a
superstitious soul hath no rest; superstitione imbutus animus
nunquam quietus esse potest, no peace, no quietness. True religion
and superstition are quite opposite, longe diversa carnificina et
pietas, as Lactantius describes, the one erects, the other dejects;
illorum pietas, mera impietus; the one is an easy yoke, the other an
intolerable burden, an absolute tyranny; the one a sure anchor, a
haven; the other a tempestuous ocean; the one makes, the other
mars; the one is wisdom, the other is folly, madness, indiscretion;
the one unfeigned, the other a counterfeit; the one a diligent
observer, the other an ape; one leads to heaven, the other to hell.
But these differences will more evidently appear by their particular
symptoms. What religion is, and of what parts it doth consist, every
catechism will tell you, what symptoms it hath, and what effects it
produceth: but for their superstitions, no tongue can tell them, no
pen express, they are so many, so diverse, so uncertain, so
inconstant, and so different from themselves. Tot mundi
superstitiones quot coelo stellae, one saith, there be as many
superstitions in the world, as there be stars in heaven, or devils
themselves that are the first founders of them: with such ridiculous,
absurd symptoms and signs, so many several rites, ceremonies,
torments and vexations accompanying, as may well express and
beseem the devil to be the author and maintainer of them. I will
only point at some of them, ex ungue leonem guess at the rest, and
those of the chief kinds of superstition, which beside us Christians
now domineer and crucify the world, Gentiles, Mahometans, Jews,
&c.

Of these symptoms some be general, some particular to each
private sect: general to all, are, an extraordinary love and affection
they bear and show to such as are of their own sect, and more than
Vatinian hate to such as are opposite in religion, as they call it, or
disagree from them in their superstitious rites, blind zeal, (which is
as much a symptom as a cause,) vain fears, blind obedience,
needless works, incredibilities, impossibilities, monstrous rites and
ceremonies, wilfulness, blindness, obstinacy, &c. For the first,
which is love and hate, as Montanus saith, nulla firmior amicitia
quam quae contrahitur hinc; nulla discordia major, quam quae a
religione fit; no greater concord, no greater discord than that which 
proceeds from religion, it is incredible to relate, did not our daily
experience evince it, what factions, quam teterrimae factiones, (as
Rich. Dinoth writes) have been of late for matters of religion in
France, and what hurlyburlies all over Europe for these many years.
Nihil est quod tam impotentur rapiat homines, quam suscepta de
salute opinio; siquidem pro ea omnes gentes corpora et animas
devovere solent, et arctissimo necessitudinis vinculo se invicem
colligare. We are all brethren in Christ, servants of one Lord,
members of one body, and therefore are or should be at least dearly
beloved, inseparably allied in the greatest bond of love and
familiarity, united partakers not only of the same cross, but
coadjutors, comforters, helpers, at all times, upon all occasions: as
they did in the primitive church, Acts the 5. they sold their
patrimonies, and laid them at the apostles' feet, and many such
memorable examples of mutual love we have had under the ten
general persecutions, many since. Examples on the other side of
discord none like, as our Saviour saith, he came therefore into the
world to set father against son, &c. In imitation of whom the devil
belike ( nam superstitio irrepsit verae religionis imitatrix,
superstition is still religion's ape, as in all other things, so in this)
doth so combine and glue together his superstitious followers in
love and affection, that they will live and die together: and what an
innate hatred hath he still inspired to any other superstition
opposite? How those old Romans were affected, those ten
persecutions may be a witness, and that cruel executioner in
Eusebius, aut lita aut morere, sacrifice or die. No greater hate,
more continuate, bitter faction, wars, persecution in all ages, than
for matters of religion, no such feral opposition, father against son,
mother against daughter, husband against wife, city against city,
kingdom against kingdom: as of old at Tentira and Combos:

 "Immortale odium, et nunquam sanabile vulnus,
Inde furor vulgo, quod numina vicinorum
Odit uterque locus, quum solos credit habendos
Esse deos quos ipse colat."--

"Immortal hate it breeds, a wound past cure,
And fury to the commons still to endure:
Because one city t' other's gods as vain
Deride, and his alone as good maintain."

The Turks at this day count no better of us than of dogs, so they
commonly call us giaours, infidels, miscreants, make that their
main quarrel and cause of Christian persecution. If he will turn 
Turk, he shall be entertained as a brother, and had in good esteem,
a Mussulman or a believer, which is a greater tie to them than any
affinity or consanguinity. The Jews stick together like so many
burrs; but as for the rest, whom they call Gentiles, they do hate and
abhor, they cannot endure their Messiah should be a common
saviour to us all, and rather, as Luther writes, "than they that now
scoff at them, curse them, persecute and revile them, shall be
coheirs and brethren with them, or have any part or fellowship with
their Messiah, they would crucify their Messiah ten times over, and
God himself, his angels, and all his creatures, if it were possible,
though they endure a thousand hells for it." Such is their malice
towards us. Now for Papists, what in a common cause, for the
advancement of their religion they will endure, our traitors and
pseudo-Catholics will declare unto us; and how bitter on the other
side to their adversaries, how violently bent, let those Marian times 
record, as those miserable slaughters at Merindol and Cabriers, the
Spanish inquisition, the Duke of Alva's tyranny in the Low
Countries, the French massacres and civil wars. Tantum religio
potuit suadere malorum. "Such wickedness did religion persuade."
Not there only, but all over Europe, we read of bloody battles,
racks and wheels, seditions, factions, oppositions.

 --"obvia signis
Signa, pares aquilas, et pila minantia pilis,"

Invectives and contentions. They had rather shake hands with a
Jew, Turk, or, as the Spaniards do, suffer Moors to live amongst
them, and Jews, than Protestants; "my name" (saith Luther) "is
more odious to them than any thief or murderer." So it is with all
heretics and schismatics whatsoever: and none so passionate,
violent in their tenets, opinions, obstinate, wilful, refractory,
peevish, factious, singular and stiff in defence of them; they do not
only persecute and hate, but pity all other religions, account them
damned, blind, as if they alone were the true church, they are the
true heirs, have the fee-simple of heaven by a peculiar donation, 'tis
entailed on them and their posterities, their doctrine sound, per
funem aureum de coelo delapsa doctrinci, "let down from, heaven
by a golden rope," they alone are to be saved, The Jews at this day
are so incomprehensibly proud and churlish, saith Luther, that soli
salvari, soli domini terrarum salutari volunt. And as Buxtorfius
adds, "so ignorant and self-willed withal, that amongst their most
understanding Rabbins you shall find nought but gross dotage,
horrible hardness of heart, and stupendous obstinacy, in all their
actions, opinions, conversations: and yet so zealous with all, that no
man living can be more, and vindicate themselves for the elect
people of GOD." 'Tis so with all other superstitious sects,
Mahometans, Gentiles in China, and Tartary: our ignorant Papists,
Anabaptists, Separatists, and peculiar churches of Amsterdam, they
alone, and none but they can be saved. "Zealous" (as Paul saith,
Rom. x. 2.) "without knowledge," they will endure any misery, any
trouble, suffer and do that which the sunbeams will not endure to
see, Religionis acti Furiis, all extremities, losses and dangers, take
any pains, fast, pray, vow chastity, wilful poverty, forsake all and
follow their idols, die a thousand deaths as some Jews did to
Pilate's soldiers, in like case, exertos praebentes jugulos, et
manifeste prae se ferentes, (as Josephus hath it) cariorem esse rita
sibi legis patriae observationem, rather than abjure, or deny the
least particle of that religion which their fathers profess, and they
themselves have been brought up in, be it never so absurd,
ridiculous, they will embrace it, and without farther inquiry or
examination of the truth, though it be prodigiously false, they will
believe it; they will take much more pains to go to hell, than we
shall do to heaven. Single out the most ignorant of them, convince
his understanding, show him his errors, grossness, and absurdities
of his sect. Non persuadebis etiamsi persuaseris, he will not be
persuaded. As those pagans told the Jesuits in Japona, they would
do as their forefathers have done: and with Ratholde the Frisian
Prince, go to hell for company, if most of their friends went thither:
they will not be moved, no persuasion, no torture can stir them. So
that papists cannot brag of their vows, poverty, obedience, orders,
merits, martyrdoms, fastings, alms, good works, pilgrimages: much
and more than all this, I shall show you, is, and hath been done by
these superstitious Gentiles, Pagans, Idolaters and Jews: their blind
zeal and idolatrous superstition in all kinds is much at one; little or
no difference, and it is hard to say which is the greatest, which is
the grossest. For if a man shall duly consider those superstitious
rites amongst the Ethnics in Japan, the Bannians in Gusart, the
Chinese idolaters, Americans of old, in Mexico especially,
Mahometan priests, he shall find the same government almost, the
same orders and ceremonies, or so like, that they may seem all
apparently to be derived from some heathen spirit, and the Roman
hierarchy no better than the rest. In a word, this is common to all
superstition, there is nothing so mad and absurd, so ridiculous,
impossible, incredible, which they will not believe, observe, and
diligently perform, as much as in them lies; nothing so monstrous
to conceive, or intolerable to put in practice, so cruel to suffer,
which they will not willingly undertake. So powerful a thing is
superstition. "O Egypt" (as Trismegistus exclaims) "thy religion is
fables, and such as posterity will not believe." I know that in true
religion itself, many mysteries are so apprehended alone by faith,
as that of the Trinity, which Turks especially deride, Christ's
incarnation, resurrection of the body at the last day, quod ideo
credendum (saith Tertullian) quod incredible, &c. many miracles
not to be controverted or disputed of. Mirari non rimari sapientia
vera est, saith Gerhardus; et in divinis (as a good father informs us)
quaedam credenda, quaedam admiranda, &c. some things are to be
believed, embraced, followed with all submission and obedience,
some again admired. Though Julian the apostate scoff at Christians
in this point, quod captivemus intellectum in obsequium fidei,
saying, that the Christian creed is like the Pythagorean Ipse dixit,
we make our will and understanding too slavishly subject to our
faith, without farther examination of the truth; yet as Saint Gregory
truly answers, our creed is altioris praestantiae, and much more
divine; and as Thomas will, pie consideranti semper suppetunt
rationes, ostendentes credibilitatem in mysteriis supernaturalibus,
we do absolutely believe it, and upon good reasons, for as Gregory
well informeth us; Fides non habet meritum, ubi humana ratio
quaerit experimentum; that faith hath no merit, is not worth the
name of faith, that will not apprehend without a certain
demonstration: we must and will believe God's word; and if we be
mistaken or err in our general belief, as Richardus de Sancto
Victore, vows he will say to Christ himself at the day of judgment;
"Lord, if we be deceived, thou alone hast deceived us:" thus we
plead. But for the rest I will not justify that pontificial
consubstantiation, that which Mahometans and Jews justly except
at, as Campanella confesseth, Atheismi triumphat. cap. 12. fol. 125,
difficillimum dogma esse, nec aliud subjectum magis haereticorum
blasphemiis, et stultis irrisionibus politicorum reperiri. They hold
it impossible, Deum in pane manducari; and besides they scoff at
it, vide gentem comedentem Deum suum, inquit quidam Maurus.
Hunc Deum muscae et vermes irrident, quum ipsum polluunt et
devorant, subditus est igni, aquae, et latrones furantur, pixidem
auream humi prosternunt, et se tamen non defendit hic Deus. Qui
fieri potest, ut sit integer in singulis hostiae particulis, idem corpus 
numero, tam multis locis, caelo, terra, &c. But he that shall read
the Turks' Alcoran, the Jews' Talmud, and papists' golden legend,
in the mean time will swear that such gross fictions, fables, vain
traditions, prodigious paradoxes and ceremonies, could never
proceed from any other spirit, than that of the devil himself, which
is the author of confusion and lies; and wonder withal how such
wise men as have been of the Jews, such learned understanding
men as Averroes, Avicenna, or those heathen philosophers, could
ever be persuaded to believe, or to subscribe to the least part of
them: aut fraudem non detegere: but that as Vanninus answers, ob
publicae, potestatis formidinem allatrare philosophi non audebant,
they durst not speak for fear of the law. But I will descend to
particulars: read their several symptoms and then guess.

Of such symptoms as properly belong to superstition, or that
irreligious religion, I may say as of the rest, some are ridiculous,
some again feral to relate. Of those ridiculous, there can be no
better testimony than the multitude of their gods, those absurd
names, actions, offices they put upon them, their feasts, holy days,
sacrifices, adorations, and the like. The Egyptians that pretended so
great antiquity, 300 kings before Amasis: and as Mela writes,
13,000 years from the beginning of their chronicles, that bragged so
much of their knowledge of old, for they invented arithmetic,
astronomy, geometry: of their wealth and power, that vaunted of
20,000 cities: yet at the same time their idolatry and superstition
was most gross: they worshipped, as Diodorus Siculus records, sun
and moon under the name of Isis and Osiris, and after, such men as
were beneficial to them, or any creature that did them good. In the
city of Bubasti they adored a cat, saith Herodotus. Ibis and storks,
an ox: (saith Pliny) leeks and onions, Macrobius,

 "Porrum et caepe deos imponere nubibus ausi,
Hos tu Nile deos colis."--

 (Prudentius. "Having proceeded to deify leeks and onions, you,
oh Egypt, worship such gods.")

Scoffing Lucian in his vera Historia: which, as he confesseth
himself, was not persuasively written as a truth, but in comical
fashion to glance at the monstrous fictions and gross absurdities of
writers and nations, to deride without doubt this prodigious
Egyptian idolatry, feigns this story of himself: that when he had
seen the Elysian fields, and was now coming away, Rhadamanthus
gave him a mallow root, and bade him pray to that when he was in
any peril or extremity; which he did accordingly; for when he came
to Hydamordia in the island of treacherous women, he made his
prayers to his root, and was instantly delivered. The Syrians,
Chaldeans, had as many proper gods of their own invention; see the
said Lucian de dea Syria. Morney cap. 22. de veritat. relig. Guliel.
Stuckius Sacrorum Sacrificiorumque Gentil. descript. Peter Faber
Semester, l. 3. c. 1, 2, 3. Selden de diis Syris, Purchas' pilgrimage,
Rosinus of the Romans, and Lilius Giraldus of the Greeks. The
Romans borrowed from all, besides their own gods, which were
majorum and minorum gentium, as Varro holds, certain and
uncertain; some celestial, select, and great ones, others indigenous
and Semi-dei, Lares, Lemures, Dioscuri, Soteres, and Parastatae,
dii tutelares amongst the Greeks: gods of all sorts, for all functions;
some for the land, some for sea; some for heaven, some for hell;
some for passions, diseases, some for birth, some for weddings,
husbandry, woods, waters, gardens, orchards, &c. All actions and
offices, Pax-Quies, Salus, Libertas, Felicitas, Strenua, Stimula,
Horta, Pan, Sylvanus, Priapus, Flora, Cloacina, Stercutius, Febris,
Pallor, Invidia, Protervia, Risus, Angerona, Volupia, Vacuna,
Viriplaca, Veneranda, Pales, Neptunia, Doris, kings, emperors,
valiant men that had done any good offices for them, they did
likewise canonise and adore for gods, and it was usually done,
usitatum apud antiquos, as Jac. Boissardus well observes, deificare
homines qui beneficiis mortales juvarent, and the devil was still
ready to second their intents, statim se ingessit illorum sepulchris,
statuis, templis, aris, &c. he crept into their temples, statues, tombs,
altars, and was ready to give oracles, cure diseases, do miracles,
&c. as by Jupiter, Aesculapius, Tiresias, Apollo, Mopsus,
Amphiaraus, &c. dii et Semi-dii. For so they were Semi-dii,
demigods, some medii inter Deos et homines, as Max. Tyrius, the
Platonist, ser. 26. et 27, maintains and justifies in many words.
"When a good man dies, his body is buried, but his soul, ex homine
daemon evadit, becomes forthwith a demigod, nothing disparaged
with malignity of air, or variety of forms, rejoiceth, exults and sees
that perfect beauty with his eyes. Now being deified, in
commiseration he helps his poor friends here on earth, his kindred
and allies, informs, succours, &c. punisheth those that are bad and
do amiss, as a good genius to protect and govern mortal men
appointed by the gods, so they will have it, ordaining some for
provinces, some for private men, some for one office, some for
another. Hector and Achilles assist soldiers to this day; Aesculapius
all sick men, the Dioscuri seafaring men, &c. and sometimes upon
occasion they show themselves. The Dioscuri, Hercules and
Aesculapius, he saw himself (or the devil in his likeness) non
somnians sed vigilans ipse vidi:" So far Tyrius. And not good men
only do they thus adore, but tyrants, monsters, devils, (as Stuckius
inveighs) Neros, Domitians, Heliogables, beastly women, and
arrant whores amongst the rest. "For all intents, places, creatures,
they assign gods;"

"Et domibus, tectis, thermis, et equis soleatis
Assignare solent genios"--

saith Prudentius. Cuna for cradles, Diverra for sweeping houses,
Nodina knots, Prema, Pramunda, Hymen, Hymeneus, for
weddings; Comus the god of good fellows, gods of silence, of
comfort, Hebe goddess of youth, Mena menstruarum, &c. male and
female gods, of all ages, sexes and dimensions, with beards,
without beards, married, unmarried, begot, not born at all, but, as
Minerva, start out of Jupiter's head. Hesiod reckons up at least
30,000 gods, Varro 300 Jupiters. As Jeremy told them, their gods
were to the multitude of cities;

"Quicquid humus, pelagus, coelum miserabile gignit
Id dixere deos, colles, freta, flumina, flammas."

"Whatever heavens, sea, and land begat,
Hills, seas, and rivers, God was this and that."

And which was most absurd, they made gods upon such ridiculous
occasions; "As children make babies" (so saith Morneus) , "their
poets make gods," et quos adorant in templis, ludunt in Theatris, as
Lactantius scoffs. Saturn, a man, gelded himself, did eat his own
children, a cruel tyrant driven out of his kingdom by his son
Jupiter, as good a god as himself, a wicked lascivious paltry king of
Crete, of whose rapes, lusts, murders, villainies, a whole volume is
too little to relate. Venus, a notorious strumpet, as common as a
barber's chair, Mars, Adonis, Anchises' whore, is a great she-
goddess, as well as the rest, as much renowned by their poets, with
many such; and these gods so fabulously and foolishly made,
ceremoniis, hymnis, et canticis celebrunt; their errors, luctus et
gaudia, amores, iras, nuptias et liberorum procreationes ( as
Eusebius well taxeth) , weddings, mirth and mournings, loves,
angers, and quarrelling they did celebrate in hymns, and sing of in
their ordinary songs, as it were publishing their villainies. But see
more of their originals. When Romulus was made away by the
sedition of the senators, to pacify the people, Julius Proculus gave
out that Romulus was taken up by Jupiter into heaven, and
therefore to be ever after adored for a god amongst the Romans.
Syrophanes of Egypt had one only son, whom he dearly loved; he
erected his statue in his house, which his servants did adorn with
garlands, to pacify their master's wrath when he was angry, so by
little and little he was adored for a god. This did Semiramis for her
husband Belus, and Adrian the emperor by his minion Antinous.
Flora was a rich harlot in Rome, and for that she made the
commonwealth her heir, her birthday was solemnised long after;
and to make it a more plausible holiday, they made her goddess of
flowers, and sacrificed to her amongst the rest. The matrons of
Rome, as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus relates, because at their
entreaty Coriolanus desisted from his wars, consecrated a church
Fortunes muliebri; and Venus Barbata had a temple erected, for
that somewhat was amiss about hair, and so the rest. The citizens of
Alabanda, a small town in Asia Minor, to curry favour with the
Romans (who then warred in Greece with Perseus of Macedon, and
were formidable to these parts) , consecrated a temple to the City of
Rome, and made her a goddess, with annual games and sacrifices;
so a town of houses was deified, with shameful flattery of the one
side to give, and intolerable arrogance on the other to accept, upon
so vile and absurd an occasion. Tully writes to Atticus, that his
daughter Tulliola might be made a goddess, and adored as Juno and
Minerva, and as well she deserved it. Their holy days and
adorations were all out as ridiculous; those Lupercals of Pan,
Florales of Flora, Bona dea, Anna Perenna, Saturnals, &c., as how
they were celebrated, with what lascivious and wanton gestures,
bald ceremonies, by what bawdy priests, how they hang their noses
over the smoke of sacrifices, saith Lucian, and lick blood like flies
that was spilled about the altars. Their carved idols, gilt images of
wood, iron, ivory, silver, brass, stone, olim truncus eram, &c., were
most absurd, as being their own workmanship; for as Seneca notes,
adorant ligneos deos, et fabros interim qui fecerunt, contemnunt,
they adore work, contemn the workman; and as Tertullian follows
it, Si homines non essent diis propitii, non essent dii, had it not
been for men, they had never been gods, but blocks, and stupid
statues in which mice, swallows, birds make their nests, spiders
their webs, and in their very mouths laid their excrements. Those
images, I say, were all out as gross as the shapes in which they did
represent them: Jupiter with a ram's head, Mercury a dog's, Pan like
a goat, Heccate with three heads, one with a beard, another without;
see more in Carterius and Verdurius of their monstrous forms and
ugly pictures: and, which was absurder yet, they told them these
images came from heaven, as that of Minerva in her temple at
Athens, quod e coelo cecidisse credebant accolae, saith Pausanias.
They formed some like storks, apes, bulls, and yet seriously
believed: and that which was impious and abominable, they made
their gods notorious whoremasters, incestuous Sodomites (as
commonly they were all, as well as Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Mercury,
Neptune, &c.) , thieves, slaves, drudges (for Apollo and Neptune
made tiles in Phrygia) , kept sheep, Hercules emptied stables,
Vulcan a blacksmith, unfit to dwell upon the earth for their
villainies, much less in heaven, as Mornay well saith, and yet they
gave them out to be such; so weak and brutish, some to whine,
lament, and roar, as Isis for her son and Cenocephalus, as also all
her weeping priests; Mars in Homer to be wounded, vexed; Venus
ran away crying, and the like; than which what can be more
ridiculous? Nonne ridiculum lugere quod colas, vel colere quod
lugeas? (which Minutius objects) Si dii, cur plangitis? si mortui,
cur adoratis? that it is no marvel if Lucian, that adamantine
persecutor of superstition, and Pliny could so scoff at them and
their horrible idolatry as they did; if Diagoras took Hercules' image,
and put it under his pot to seethe his pottage, which was, as he said,
his 13th labour. But see more of their fopperies in Cypr. 4. tract, de
Idol. varietat. Chrysostom advers. Gentil. Arnobius adv. Gentes.
Austin, de civ. dei. Theodoret. de curat. Graec. affect. Clemens
Alexandrinus, Minutius Felix, Eusebius, Lactantius, Stuckius, &c.
Lamentable, tragical, and fearful those symptoms are, that they
should be so far forth affrighted with their fictitious gods, as to
spend the goods, lives, fortunes, precious time, best days in their
honour, to sacrifice unto them, to their inestimable loss, such
hecatombs, so many thousand sheep, oxen with gilded horns, goats,
as Croesus, king of Lydia, Marcus Julianus, surnamed ob crebras
hostias Victimarius, et Tauricremus, and the rest of the Roman
emperors usually did with such labour and cost; and not emperors
only and great ones, pro communi bono, were at this charge, but
private men for their ordinary occasions. Pythagoras offered a
hundred oxen for the invention of a geometrical problem, and it
was an ordinary thing to sacrifice in Lucian's time, "a heifer for
their good health, four oxen for wealth, a hundred for a kingdom,
nine bulls for their safe return from Troja to Pylus," &c. Every god
almost had a peculiar sacrifice--the Sun horses, Vulcan fire, Diana
a white hart, Venus a turtle, Ceres a hog, Proserpine a black lamb,
Neptune a bull (read more in Stuckius at large) , besides sheep,
cocks, corals, frankincense, to their undoings, as if their gods were
affected with blood or smoke. "And surely" ( saith he) "if one
should but repeat the fopperies of mortal men, in their sacrifices,
feasts, worshipping their gods, their rites and ceremonies, what
they think of them, of their diet, houses, orders, &c., what prayers
and vows they make; if one should but observe their absurdity and
madness, he would burst out a laughing, and pity their folly." For
what can be more absurd than their ordinary prayers, petitions,
requests, sacrifices, oracles, devotions? of which we have a taste in
Maximus Tyrius, serm. 1. Plato's Alcibiades Secundus, Persius Sat.
2. Juvenal. Sat. 10. there likewise exploded, Mactant opimas et
pingues hostias deo quasi esurienti, profundunt vina tanquam
sitienti, lumina accendunt velut in tenebris agenti (Lactantius, lib.
2. cap. 6) . As if their gods were hungry, athirst, in the dark, they
light candles, offer meat and drink. And what so base as to reveal
their counsels and give oracles, e viscerum sterquiliniis, out of the
bowels and excremental parts of beasts? sordidos deos Varro truly
calls them therefore, and well he might. I say nothing of their
magnificent and sumptuous temples, those majestical structures: to
the roof of Apollo Didymeus' temple, ad branchidas, as Strabo
writes, a thousand oaks did not suffice. Who can relate the glorious
splendour, and stupend magnificence, the sumptuous building of
Diana at Ephesus, Jupiter Ammon's temple in Africa, the Pantheon
at Rome, the Capitol, the Sarapium at Alexandria, Apollo's temple
at Daphne in the suburbs of Antioch. The great temple at Mexico
so richly adorned, and so capacious (for 10,000 men might stand in
it at once) , that fair Pantheon of Cusco, described by Acosta in his
Indian History, which eclipses both Jews and Christians. There
were in old Jerusalem, as some write, 408 synagogues; but new
Cairo reckons up (if Radzivilus may be believed) 6800 mosques;
Fez 400, whereof 50 are most magnificent, like St. Paul's in
London. Helena built 300 fair churches in the Holy Land, but one
Bassa hath built 400 mosques. The Mahometans have 1000 monks
in a monastery; the like saith Acosta of Americans; Riccius of the
Chinese, for men and women, fairly built; and more richly
endowed some of them, than Arras in Artois, Fulda in Germany, or
St. Edmund's-Bury in England with us: who can describe those
curious and costly statues, idols, images, so frequently mentioned
in Pausanias? I conceal their donaries, pendants, other offerings,
presents, to these their fictitious gods daily consecrated. Alexander,
the son of Amyntas, king of Macedonia, sent two statues of pure
gold to Apollo at Delphos. Croesus, king of Lydia dedicated a
hundred golden tiles in the same place with a golden altar: no man
came empty-handed to their shrines. But these are base offerings in
respect; they offered men themselves alive. The Leucadians, as
Strabo writes, sacrificed every year a man, averruncandae, deorum
irae, causa, to pacify their gods, de montis praecipitio dejecerent,
&c. and they did voluntarily undergo it. The Decii did so sacrifice,
Diis manibus; Curtius did leap into the gulf. Were they not all
strangely deluded to go so far to their oracles, to be so gulled by
them, both in war and peace, as Polybius relates (which their
argurs, priests, vestal virgins can witness) , to be so superstitious,
that they would rather lose goods and lives than omit any
ceremonies, or offend their heathen gods? Nicias, that generous and
valiant captain of the Greeks, overthrew the Athenian navy, by
reason of his too much superstition, because the augurs told him it
was ominous to set sail from the haven of Syracuse whilst the
moon was eclipsed; he tarried so long till his enemies besieged
him, he and all his army were overthrown. The Parthians of old
were so sottish in this kind, they would rather lose a victory, nay
lose their own lives, than fight in the night, 'twas against their
religion. The Jews would make no resistance on the Sabbath, when
Pompeius besieged Jerusalem; and some Jewish Christians in
Africa, set upon by the Goths, suffered themselves upon the same
occasion to be utterly vanquished. The superstition of the
Dibrenses, a bordering town in Epirus, besieged by the Turks, is
miraculous almost to report. Because a dead dog was flung into the
only fountain which the city had, they would die of thirst all, rather
than drink of that unclean water, and yield up the city upon any
conditions. Though the praetor and chief citizens began to drink
first, using all good persuasions, their superstition was such, no
saying would serve, they must all forthwith die or yield up the city.
Vix ausum ipse credere (saith Barletius) tantam superstitionem, vel
affirmare levissimam hanc causam tantae rei vel magis ridiculam,
quum non dubitem risum potius quum admirationem posteris
excitaturam. The story was too ridiculous, he was ashamed to
report it, because he thought nobody would believe it. It is stupend
to relate what strange effects this idolatry and superstition hath
brought forth of the latter years in the Indies and those bordering
parts: in what feral shapes the devil is adored, ne quid mali
intentent, as they say; for in the mountains betwixt Scanderoon and
Aleppo, at this day, there are dwelling a certain kind of people
called Coords, coming of the race of the ancient Parthians, who
worship the devil, and allege this reason in so doing: God is a good
man and will do no harm, but the devil is bad and must be pleased,
lest he hurt them. It is wonderful to tell how the devil deludes them,
how he terrifies them, how they offer men and women sacrifices
unto him, a hundred at once, as they did infants in Crete to Saturn
of old, the finest children, like Agamemnon's Iphigenia, &c. At
Mexico, when the Spaniards first overcame them, they daily
sacrificed viva hominum corda e viventium corporibus extracta, the
hearts of men yet living, 20,000 in a year (Acosta lib. 5. cap. 20) to
their idols made of flour and men's blood, and every year 6000
infants of both sexes: and as prodigious to relate, how they bury
their wives with husbands deceased, 'tis fearful to report, and
harder to believe,

 "Nam certamen habent laethi quae viva sequatur
Conjugium, pudor, est non licuisse mori,"

 (Propertius lib. 3. eleg. 12. "There is a contest amongst the living
wives as to which shall follow the husband, and not be allowed to
die for him is accounted a disgrace.") 

and burn them alive, best goods, servants, horses, when a grandee
dies, twelve thousand at once amongst the Tartar', when a great
Cham departs, or an emperor in America: how they plague
themselves, which abstain from all that hath life, like those old
Pythagoreans, with immoderate fastings, as the Bannians about
Surat, they of China, that for superstition's sake never eat flesh nor
fish all their lives, never marry, but live in deserts and by-places,
and some pray to their idols twenty-four hours together without any
intermission, biting of their tongues when they have done, for
devotion's sake. Some again are brought to that madness by their
superstitious priests (that tell them such vain stories of immortality,
and the joys of heaven in that other life) , that many thousands
voluntarily break their own necks, as Cleombrotus Amborciatus,
auditors of old, precipitate themselves, that they may participate of
that unspeakable happiness in the other world. One poisons,
another strangles himself, and the King of China had done as much,
deluded with the vain hope, had he not been detained by his
servant. But who can sufficiently tell of their several superstitions,
vexations, follies, torments? I may conclude with Possevinus,
Religifacit asperos mites, homines e feris; superstitio ex hominibus
feras, religion makes wild beasts civil, superstition makes wise
men beasts and fools; and the discreetest that are, if they give way
to it, are no better than dizzards; nay more, if that of Plotinus be
true, is unus religionis scopus, ut ei quem colimus similes fiamus,
that is the drift of religion to make us like him whom we worship:
what shall be the end of idolaters, but to degenerate into stocks and
stones? of such as worship these heathen gods, for dii gentium
daemonia, but to become devils themselves? 'Tis therefore
exitiosus error, et maxime periculosus, a most perilous and
dangerous error of all others, as Plutarch holds, turbulenta passio
hominem consternans, a pestilent, a troublesome passion, that
utterly undoeth men. Unhappy superstition, Pliny calls it, morte
non finitur, death takes away life, but not superstition. Impious and
ignorant are far more happy than they which are superstitious, no
torture like to it, none so continuate, so general, so destructive, so
violent.

In this superstitious row, Jews for antiquity may go next to
Gentiles: what of old they have done, what idolatries they have
committed in their groves and high places, what their Pharisees,
Sadducees, Scribes, Essei, and such sectaries have maintained, I
will not so much as mention: for the present, I presume no nation
under heaven can be more sottish, ignorant, blind, superstitious,
wilful, obstinate, and peevish, tiring themselves with vain
ceremonies to no purpose; he that shall but read their Rabbins'
ridiculous comments, their strange interpretation of scriptures, their
absurd ceremonies, fables, childish tales, which they steadfastly
believe, will think they be scarce rational creatures; their foolish
customs, when they rise in the morning, and how they prepare
themselves to prayer, to meat, with what superstitious washings,
how to their Sabbath, to their other feasts, weddings, burials, &c.
Last of all, the expectation of their Messiah, and those figments,
miracles, vain pomp that shall attend him, as how he shall terrify
the Gentiles, and overcome them by new diseases; how Michael the
archangel shall sound his trumpet, how he shall gather all the
scattered Jews in the Holy Land, and there make them a great
banquet, "Wherein shall be all the birds, beasts, fishes, that ever
God made, a cup of wine that grew in Paradise, and that hath been
kept in Adam's cellar ever since." At the first course shall be served
in that great ox in Job iv. 10., "that every day feeds on a thousand
hills," Psal. 1. 10., that great Leviathan, and a great bird, that laid
an egg so big, "that by chance tumbling out of the nest, it knocked
down three hundred tall cedars, and breaking as it fell, drowned
one hundred and sixty villages:" this bird stood up to the knees in
the sea, and the sea was so deep, that a hatchet would not fall to the
bottom in seven years: of their Messiah's wives and children; Adam
and Eve, &c., and that one stupend fiction amongst the rest: when a
Roman prince asked of rabbi Jehosua ben Hanania, why the Jews'
God was compared to a lion; he made answer, he compared himself
to no ordinary lion, but to one in the wood Ela, which, when he
desired to see, the rabbin prayed to God he might, and forthwith the
lion set forward. "But when he was four hundred miles from Rome
he so roared that all the great-bellied women in Rome made
abortions, the city walls fell down, and when he came a hundred
miles nearer, and roared the second time, their teeth fell out of their
heads, the emperor himself fell down dead, and so the lion went
back." With an infinite number of such lies and forgeries, which
they verily believe, feed themselves with vain hope, and in the
mean time will by no persuasions be diverted, but still crucify their
souls with a company of idle ceremonies, live like slaves and
vagabonds, will not be relieved or reconciled.

Mahometans are a compound of Gentiles, Jews, and Christians, and
so absurd in their ceremonies, as if they had taken that which is
most sottish out of every one of them, full of idle fables in their
superstitious law, their Alcoran itself a gallimaufry of lies, tales,
ceremonies, traditions, precepts, stolen from other sects, and
confusedly heaped up to delude a company of rude and barbarous
clowns. As how birds, beasts, stones, saluted Mahomet when he
came from Mecca, the moon came down from heaven to visit him,
how God sent for him, spake to him, &c., with a company of
stupend figments of the angels, sun, moon, and stars, &c. Of the
day of judgment, and three sounds to prepare to it, which must last
fifty thousand years of Paradise, which wholly consists in coeundi
et comedendi voluptate, and pecorinis hominibus scriptum,
bestialis beatitudo, is so ridiculous, that Virgil, Dante, Lucian, nor
any poet can be more fabulous. Their rites and ceremonies are most
vain and superstitious, wine and swine's flesh are utterly forbidden
by their law, they must pray five times a day; and still towards the
south, wash before and after all their bodies over, with many such.
For fasting, vows, religious orders, peregrinations, they go far
beyond any papists, they fast a month together many times, and
must not eat a bit till sun be set. Their kalendars, dervises, and
torlachers, &c. are more abstemious some of them, than
Carthusians, Franciscans, Anchorites, forsake all, live solitary, fare
hard, go naked, &c. Their pilgrimages are as far as to the river
Ganges (which the Gentiles of those tracts likewise do) , to wash
themselves, for that river as they hold hath a sovereign virtue to
purge them of all sins, and no man can be saved that hath not been
washed in it. For which reason they come far and near from the
Indies; Maximus gentium omnium confluxus est; and infinite
numbers yearly resort to it. Others go as far as Mecca to Mahomet's
tomb, which journey is both miraculous and meritorious. The
ceremonies of flinging stones to stone the devil, of eating a camel
at Cairo by the way; their fastings, their running till they sweat,
their long prayers, Mahomet's temple, tomb, and building of it,
would ask a whole volume to dilate: and for their pains taken in
this holy pilgrimage, all their sins are forgiven, and they reputed for
so many saints. And diverse of them with hot bricks, when they
return, will put out their eyes, "that they never after see any profane
thing, bite out their tongues," &c. They look for their prophet
Mahomet as Jews do for their Messiah. Read more of their
customs, rites, ceremonies, in Lonicerus Turcic. hist. tom. 1. from
the tenth to the twenty-fourth chapter. Bredenbachius, cap. 4, 5, 6.
Leo Afer, lib. 1. Busbequius Sabellicus, Purchas, lib. 3. cap. 3, et 4,
5. Theodorus Bibliander, &c. Many foolish ceremonies you shall
find in them; and which is most to be lamented, the people are
generally so curious in observing of them, that if the least
circumstance be omitted, they think they shall be damned, 'tis an
irremissible offence, and can hardly be forgiven. I kept in my house
amongst my followers (saith Busbequius, sometime the Turk's
orator in Constantinople) a Turkey boy, that by chance did eat
shellfish, a meat forbidden by their law, but the next day when he
knew what he had done, he was not only sick to cast and vomit, but
very much troubled in mind, would weep and grieve many days
after, torment himself for his foul offence. Another Turk being to
drink a cup of wine in his cellar, first made a huge noise and filthy
faces, "to warn his soul, as he said, that it should not be guilty of
that foul fact which he was to commit." With such toys as these are
men kept in awe, and so cowed, that they dare not resist, or offend
the least circumstance of their law, for conscience' sake misled by
superstition, which no human edict otherwise, no force of arms,
could have enforced.

In the last place are pseudo-Christians, in describing of whose
superstitious symptoms, as a mixture of the rest, I may say that
which St. Benedict once saw in a vision, one devil in the
marketplace, but ten in a monastery, because there was more work;
in populous cities they would swear and forswear, lie, falsify,
deceive fast enough of themselves, one devil could circumvent a
thousand; but in their religious houses a thousand devils could
scarce tempt one silly monk. All the principal devils, I think, busy
themselves in subverting Christians; Jews, Gentiles, and
Mahometans, are extra caulem, out of the fold, and need no such
attendance, they make no resistance, eos enim pulsare negligit,
quos quieto jure possidere se sentit, they are his own already: but
Christians have that shield of faith, sword of the Spirit to resist, and
must have a great deal of battery before they can be overcome.
That the devil is most busy amongst us that are of the true church,
appears by those several oppositions, heresies, schisms, which in
all ages he hath raised to subvert it, and in that of Rome especially,
wherein Antichrist himself now sits and plays his prize. This
mystery of iniquity began to work even in the Apostles' time, many
Antichrists and heretics were abroad, many sprung up since, many
now present, and will be to the world's end, to dementate men's
minds, to seduce and captivate their souls. Their symptoms I know
not how better to express, than in that twofold division, of such as
lead, and are led. Such as lead are heretics, schismatics, false
prophets, impostors, and their ministers: they have some common
symptoms, some peculiar. Common, as madness, folly, pride,
insolency, arrogancy, singularity, peevishness, obstinacy,
impudence, scorn and contempt of all other sects: Nullius addicti
jurare in verba magistri; they will approve of nought but what they
first invent themselves, no interpretation good but what their
infallible spirit dictates: none shall be in secundis, no not in tertiis,
they are only wise, only learned in the truth, all damned but they
and their followers, caedem scripturarum faciunt ad materiam
suam, saith Tertullian, they make a slaughter of Scriptures, and turn
it as a nose of wax to their own ends. So irrefragable, in the mean
time, that what they have once said, they must and will maintain, in
whole tomes, duplications, triplications, never yield to death, so
self-conceited, say what you can. As Bernard (erroneously some
say) speaks of P. Aliardus, omnes patres sic, atque ego sic. Though
all the Fathers, Councils, the whole world contradict it, they care
not, they are all one: and as Gregory well notes "of such as are
vertiginous, they think all turns round and moves, all err: when as
the error is wholly in their own brains." Magallianus, the Jesuit, in
his Comment on 1 Tim. xvi. 20, and Alphonsus de castro lib. 1.
adversus haereses, gives two more eminent notes or probable
conjectures to know such men by, (they might have taken
themselves by the noses when they said it) "First they affect
novelties and toys, and prefer falsehood before truth; secondly,
they care not what they say, that which rashness and folly hath
brought out, pride afterward, peevishness and contumacy shall
maintain to the last gasp." Peculiar symptoms are prodigious
paradoxes, new doctrines, vain phantasms, which are many and
diverse as they themselves. Nicholaites of old, would have wives in
common: Montanists will not marry at all, nor Tatians, forbidding
all flesh, Severians wine; Adamians go naked, because Adam did
so in Paradise; and some barefoot all their lives, because God,
Exod. iii. and Joshua v. bid Moses so to do; and Isaiah xx. was bid
put off his shoes; Manichees hold that Pythagorean transmigration
of souls from men to beasts; "the Circumcellions in Africa, with a
mad cruelty made away themselves, some by fire, water, breaking
their necks, and seduced others to do the like, threatening some if
they did not," with a thousand such; as you may read in Austin (for
there were fourscore and eleven heresies in his times, besides
schisms and smaller factions) Epiphanius, Alphonsus de Castro,
Danaeus, Gab, Prateolus, &c. Of prophets, enthusiasts and
impostors, our Ecclesiastical stories afford many examples; of Elias
and Christs, as our Eudo de stellis, a Briton in King Stephen's time,
that went invisible, translated himself from one to another in a
moment, fed thousands with good cheer in the wilderness, and
many such; nothing so common as miracles, visions, revelations,
prophecies. Now what these brain-sick heretics once broach, and
impostors set on foot, be it never so absurd, false, and prodigious,
the common people will follow and believe. It will run along like
murrain in cattle, scab in sheep. Nulla scabies, as he said,
superstitione scabiosior; as he that is bitten with a mad dog bites
others, and all in the end become mad; either out of affection of
novelty, simplicity, blind zeal, hope and fear, the giddy-headed
multitude will embrace it, and without further examination approve
it.

Sed vetera querimur, these are old, haec prius fuere. In our days we
have a new scene of superstitious impostors and heretics. A new
company of actors, of Antichrists, that great Antichrist himself: a
rope of hopes, that by their greatness and authority bear down all
before them: who from that time they proclaimed themselves
universal bishops, to establish their own kingdom, sovereignty,
greatness, and to enrich themselves, brought in such a company of
human traditions, purgatory, Limbus Patrum, Infantum, and all that
subterranean geography, mass, adoration of saints, alms, fastings,
bulls, indulgences, orders, friars, images, shrines, musty relics,
excommunications, confessions, satisfactions, blind obediences,
vows, pilgrimages, peregrinations, with many such curious toys,
intricate subtleties, gross errors, obscure questions, to vindicate the
better and set a gloss upon them, that the light of the Gospel was
quite eclipsed, darkness over all, the Scriptures concealed, legends
brought in, religion banished, hypocritical superstition exalted, and
the Church itself obscured and persecuted: Christ and his members
crucified more, saith Benzo, by a few necromantical, atheistical
popes, than ever it was by Julian the Apostate, Porphyrius the
Platonist, Celsus the physician, Libanius the Sophister; by those
heathen emperors, Huns, Goths, and Vandals. What each of them
did, by what means, at what times, quibus auxiliis, superstition
climbed to this height, tradition increased, and Antichrist himself
came to his estate, let Magdeburgenses, Kemnisius, Osiander, Bale,
Mornay, Fox, Usher, and many others relate. In the mean time, he
that shall but see their profane rites and foolish customs, how
superstitiously kept, how strictly observed, their multitude of
saints, images, that rabble of Romish deities, for trades,
professions, diseases, persons, offices, countries, places; St. George
for England; St. Denis for France, Patrick, Ireland; Andrew,
Scotland; Jago, Spain; &c. Gregory for students; Luke for painters;
Cosmus and Damian for philosophers; Crispin, shoemakers;
Katherine, spinners; &c. Anthony for pigs; Gallus, geese;
Wenceslaus, sheep; Pelagius, oxen; Sebastian, the plague;
Valentine, falling sickness; Apollonia, toothache; Petronella for
agues; and the Virgin Mary for sea and land, for all parties, offices:
he that shall observe these things, their shrines, images, oblations,
pendants, adorations, pilgrimages they make to them, what
creeping to crosses, our Lady of Loretto's rich gowns, her donaries,
the cost bestowed on images, and number of suitors; St. Nicholas
Burge in France; our St. Thomas's shrine of old at Canterbury;
those relics at Rome, Jerusalem, Genoa, Lyons, Pratum, St. Denis;
and how many thousands come yearly to offer to them, with what
cost, trouble, anxiety, superstition (for forty several masses are
daily said in some of their churches, and they rise at all hours of the
night to mass, come barefoot, &c.) , how they spend themselves,
times, goods, lives, fortunes, in such ridiculous observations; their
tales and figments, false miracles, buying and selling of pardons,
indulgences for 40,000 years to come, their processions on set
days, their strict fastings, monks, anchorites, friar mendicants,
Franciscans, Carthusians, &c. Their vigils and fasts, their
ceremonies at Christmas, Shrovetide, Candlemas, Palm Sunday,
Blaise, St. Martin, St. Nicholas' day; their adorations, exorcisms,
&c., will think all those Grecian, Pagan, Mahometan superstitions,
gods, idols, and ceremonies, the name, time and place, habit only
altered, to have degenerated into Christians. Whilst they prefer
traditions before Scriptures; those Evangelical Councils, poverty,
obedience, vows, alms, fasting, supererogations, before God's
Commandments; their own ordinances instead of his precepts, and
keep them in ignorance, blindness, they have brought the common
people into such a case by their cunning conveyances, strict
discipline, and servile education, that upon pain of damnation they
dare not break the least ceremony, tradition, edict; hold it a greater
sin to eat a bit of meat in Lent, than kill a man: their consciences
are so terrified, that they are ready to despair if a small ceremony
be omitted; and will accuse their own father, mother, brother, sister,
nearest and dearest friends of heresy, if they do not as they do, will
be their chief executioners, and help first to bring a faggot to burn
them. What mulct, what penance soever is enjoined, they dare not
but do it, tumble with St. Francis in the mire amongst hogs, if they
be appointed, go woolward, whip themselves, build hospitals,
abbeys, &c., go to the East or West Indies, kill a king, or run upon
a sword point: they perform all, without any muttering or
hesitation, believe all.

 "Ut pueri infantes credunt signa omnia ahena
Vivere, et esse homines, et sic isti omnia ficta
Vera putant, credunt signis cor inesse ahenis."

"As children think their babies live to be,
Do they these brazen images they see."

And whilst the ruder sort are so carried headlong with blind zeal,
are so gulled and tortured by their superstitions, their own too
credulous simplicity and ignorance, their epicurean popes and
hypocritical cardinals laugh in their sleeves, and are merry in their
chambers with their punks, they do indulgere genio, and make
much of themselves. The middle sort, some for private gain, hope
of ecclesiastical preferment, (quis expedivit psittaco suum [Greek:
chaire]) popularity, base flattery, must and will believe all their
paradoxes and absurd tenets, without exception, and as obstinately
maintain and put in practice all their traditions and idolatrous
ceremonies (for their religion is half a trade) to the death; they will
defend all, the golden legend itself, with all the lies and tales in it:
as that of St. George, St. Christopher, St. Winifred, St. Denis, &c.
It is a wonder to see how Nic. Harpsfield, that Pharisaical impostor,
amongst the rest, Ecclesiast. Hist. cap. 22. saec prim, sex., puzzles
himself to vindicate that ridiculous fable of St. Ursula and the
eleven thousand virgins, as when they live, how they came to
Cologne, by whom martyred, &c., though he can say nothing for it,
yet he must and will approve it: nobilitavit (inquit) hoc saeculum
Ursula cum comitibus, cujus historia utinam tam mihi esset
expedita et certa, quam in animo meo certum ac expeditum est,
eam esse cum sodalibus beatam in coelis virginem. They must and
will (I say) either out of blind zeal believe, vary their compass with
the rest, as the latitude of religion varies, apply themselves to the
times, and seasons, and for fear and flattery are content to subscribe
and to do all that in them lies to maintain and defend their present
government and slavish religious schoolmen, canonists, Jesuits,
friars, priests, orators, sophisters, who either for that they had
nothing else to do, luxuriant wits knew not otherwise how to busy
themselves in those idle times, for the Church then had few or no
open adversaries, or better to defend their lies, fictions, miracles,
transubstantiations, traditions, pope's pardons, purgatories, masses,
impossibilities, &c. with glorious shows, fair pretences, big words,
and plausible wits, have coined a thousand idle questions, nice
distinctions, subtleties, Obs and Sols, such tropological, allegorical
expositions, to salve all appearances, objections, such quirks and
quiddities, quodlibetaries, as Bale saith of Ferribrigge and Strode,
instances, ampliations, decrees, glosses, canons, that instead of
sound commentaries, good preachers, are come in a company of
mad sophisters, primo secundo secundarii, sectaries, Canonists,
Sorbonists, Minorites, with a rabble of idle controversies and
questions, an Papa sit Deus, an quasi Deus? An participet
utramque Christi naturam? Whether it be as possible for God to be
a humble bee or a gourd, as a man? Whether he can produce
respect without a foundation or term, make a whore a virgin? fetch
Trajan's soul from hell, and how? with a rabble of questions about
hell-fire: whether it be a greater sin to kill a man, or to clout shoes
upon a Sunday? whether God can make another God like unto
himself? Such, saith Kemnisius, are most of your schoolmen, (mere
alchemists) 200 commentators on Peter Lambard; (Pitsius catal.
scriptorum Anglic. reckons up 180 English commentators alone, on
the matter of the sentences) , Scotists, Thomists, Reals, Nominals,
&c., and so perhaps that of St. Austin may be verified. Indocti
rapiunt coelum, docti interim descendunt ad infernum. Thus they
continued in such error, blindness, decrees, sophisms, superstitions;
idle ceremonies and traditions were the sum of their new-coined
holiness and religion, and by these knaveries and stratagems they
were able to involve multitudes, to deceive the most sanctified
souls, and, if it were possible, the very elect. In the mean time the
true Church, as wine and water mixed, lay hid and obscure to speak
of, till Luther's time, who began upon a sudden to defecate, and as
another sun to drive away those foggy mists of superstition, to
restore it to that purity of the primitive Church. And after him
many good and godly men, divine spirits, have done their
endeavours, and still do.

 "And what their ignorance esteem'd so holy,
Our wiser ages do account as folly."

But see the devil, that will never suffer the Church to be quiet or at
rest: no garden so well tilled but some noxious weeds grow up in it,
no wheat but it hath some tares: we have a mad giddy company of
precisians, schismatics, and some heretics, even, in our own
bosoms in another extreme. Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria
currunt; ( "Whilst these fools avoid one vice they run into another
of an opposite character.") that out of too much zeal in opposition
to Antichrist, human traditions, those Romish rites and
superstitions, will quite demolish all, they will admit of no
ceremonies at all, no fasting days, no cross in baptism, kneeling at
communion, no church music, &c., no bishops' courts, no church
government, rail at all our church discipline, will not hold their
tongues, and all for the peace of thee, O Sion! No, not so much as
degrees some of them will tolerate, or universities, all human
learning, ('tis cloaca diaboli) hoods, habits, cap and surplice, such
as are things indifferent in themselves, and wholly for ornament,
decency, or distinction's sake, they abhor, hate, and snuff at, as a
stone-horse when he meets a bear: they make matters of conscience
of them, and will rather forsake their livings than subscribe to
them. They will admit of no holidays, or honest recreations, as of
hawking, hunting, &c., no churches, no bells some of them,
because papists use them; no discipline, no ceremonies but what
they invent themselves; no interpretations of scriptures, no
comments of fathers, no councils, but such as their own fantastical
spirits dictate, or recta ratio, as Socinians, by which spirit misled,
many times they broach as prodigious paradoxes as papists
themselves. Some of them turn prophets, have secret revelations,
will be of privy council with God himself, and know all his secrets,
Per capillos spiritum sanctum tenent, et omnia sciunt cum sint asini
omnium obstinatissimi, a company of giddy heads will take upon
them to define how many shall be saved and who damned in a
parish, where they shall sit in heaven, interpret Apocalypses,
(Commentatores praecipites et vertiginosos, one calls them, as well
he might) and those hidden mysteries to private persons, times,
places, as their own spirit informs them, private revelations shall
suggest, and precisely set down when the world shall come to an
end, what year, what month, what day. Some of them again have
such strong faith, so presumptuous, they will go into infected
houses, expel devils, and fast forty days, as Christ himself did;
some call God and his attributes into question, as Vorstius and
Socinus; some princes, civil magistrates, and their authorities, as
Anabaptists, will do all their own private spirit dictates, and
nothing else. Brownists, Barrowists, Familists, and those
Amsterdamian sects and sectaries, are led all by so many private
spirits. It is a wonder to reveal what passages Sleidan relates in his
Commentaries, of Cretinck, Knipperdoling, and their associates,
those madmen of Munster in Germany; what strange enthusiasms,
sottish revelations they had, how absurdly they carried themselves,
deluded others; and as profane Machiavel in his political
disputations holds of Christian religion, in general it doth enervate,
debilitate, take away men's spirits and courage from them,
simpliciores reddit homines, breeds nothing so courageous soldiers
as that Roman: we may say of these peculiar sects, their religion
takes away not spirits only, but wit and judgment, and deprives
them of their understanding; for some of them are so far gone with
their private enthusiasms and revelations, that they are quite mad,
out of their wits. What greater madness can there be, than for a man
to take upon him to be a God, as some do? to be the Holy Ghost,
Elias, and what not? In Poland, 1518, in the reign of King
Sigismund, one said he was Christ, and got him twelve apostles,
came to judge the world, and strangely deluded the commons. One
David George, an illiterate painter, not many years since, did as
much in Holland, took upon him to be the Messiah, and had many
followers. Benedictus Victorinus Faventinus, consil. 15, writes as
much of one Honorius, that thought he was not only inspired as a
prophet, but that he was a God himself, and had familiar
conference with God and his angels. Lavat. de spect. c. 2. part. 8.
hath a story of one John Sartorious, that thought he was the prophet
Elias, and cap. 7. of diverse others that had conference with angels,
were saints, prophets. Wierus, lib. 3. de Lamiis c. 7. makes mention
of a prophet of Groning that said he was God the Father; of an
Italian and Spanish prophet that held as much. We need not rove so
far abroad, we have familiar examples at home: Hackett that said
he was Christ; Coppinger and Arthington his disciples; Burchet and
Hovatus, burned at Norwich. We are never likely seven years
together without some such new prophets that have several
inspirations, some to convert the Jews, some fast forty days, go
with Daniel to the lion's den; some foretell strange things, some for
one thing, some for another. Great precisians of mean conditions
and very illiterate, most part by a preposterous zeal, fasting,
meditation, melancholy, are brought into those gross errors and
inconveniences. Of those men I may conclude generally, that
howsoever they may seem to be discreet, and men of understanding
in other matters, discourse well, laesam habent imaginationem,
they are like comets, round in all places but where they blaze,
caetera sani, they have impregnable wits many of them, and
discreet otherwise, but in this their madness and folly breaks out
beyond measure, in infinitum erumpit stultitia. They are certainly
far gone with melancholy, if not quite mad, and have more need of
physic than many a man that keeps his bed, more need of hellebore
than those that are in Bedlam.





SUBSECT. IV.-- Prognostics of Religious Melancholy.

You may guess at the prognostics by the symptoms. What can these
signs fore tell otherwise than folly, dotage, madness, gross
ignorance, despair, obstinacy, a reprobate sense, a bad end? What
else can superstition, heresy produce, but wars, tumults, uproars,
torture of souls, and despair, a desolate land, as Jeremy teacheth,
cap. vii. 34. when they commit idolatry, and walk after their own
ways? how should it be otherwise with them? what can they expect
but "blasting, famine, dearth," and all the plagues of Egypt, as
Amos denounceth, cap. iv. vers. 9. 10. to be led into captivity? If
our hopes be frustrate, "we sow much and bring in little, eat and
have not enough, drink and are not filled, clothe and be not warm,"
&c. Haggai i. 6. "we look for much and it comes to little, whence is
it? His house was waste, they came to their own houses," vers. 9.
"therefore the heaven stayed his dew, the earth his fruit." Because
we are superstitious, irreligious, we do not serve God as we ought,
all these plagues and miseries come upon us; what can we look for
else but mutual wars, slaughters, fearful ends in this life, and in the
life to come eternal damnation? What is it that hath caused so many
feral battles to be fought, so much Christian blood shed, but
superstition! That Spanish inquisition, racks, wheels, tortures,
torments, whence do they proceed? from superstition. Bodine the
Frenchman, in his method. hist. accounts Englishmen barbarians,
for their civil wars: but let him read those Pharsalian fields fought
of late in France for their religion, their massacres, wherein by their
own relations in twenty-four years, I know not how many millions
have been consumed, whole families and cities, and he shall find
ours to be but velitations to theirs. But it hath ever been the custom
of heretics and idolaters, when they are plagued for their sins, and
God's just judgments come upon them, not to acknowledge any
fault in themselves, but still impute it unto others. In Cyprian's time
it was much controverted between him and Demetrius an idolater,
who should be the cause of those present calamities. Demetrius laid
all the fault on Christians, (and so they did ever in the primitive
church, as appears by the first book of Arnobius) , "that there were
not such ordinary showers in winter, the ripening heat in summer,
so seasonable springs, fruitful autumns, no marble mines in the
mountains, less gold and silver than of old; that husbandmen,
seamen, soldiers, all were scanted, justice, friendship, skill in arts,
all was decayed," and that through Christians' default, and all their
other miseries from them, quod dii nostri a vobis non colantur,
because they did not worship their gods. But Cyprian retorts all
upon him again, as appears by his tract against him. 'Tis true the
world is miserably tormented and shaken with wars, dearth, famine,
fire, inundations, plagues, and many feral diseases rage amongst us,
sed non ut tu quereris ista accidunt quod dii vestri a nobis non
colantur, sed quod a vobis non colatur Deus, a quibus nec
quaeritur, nec timetur, not as thou complainest, that we do not
worship your Gods, but because you are idolaters, and do not serve
the true God, neither seek him, nor fear him as you ought. Our
papists object as much to us, and account us heretics, we them; the
Turks esteem of both as infidels, and we them as a company of
pagans, Jews against all; when indeed there is a general fault in us
all, and something in the very best, which may justly deserve God's
wrath, and pull these miseries upon our heads. I will say nothing
here of those vain cares, torments, needless works, penance,
pilgrimages, pseudomartyrdom, &c. We heap upon ourselves
unnecessary troubles, observations; we punish our bodies, as in
Turkey (saith Busbequius leg. Turcic. ep. 3.) "one did, that was
much affected with music, and to hear boys sing, but very
superstitious; an old sibyl coming to his house, or a holy woman,"
(as that place yields many) "took him down for it, and told him,
that in that other world he should suffer for it; thereupon he flung
his rich and costly instruments which he had bedecked with jewels,
all at once into the fire. He was served in silver plate, and had
goodly household stuff: a little after, another religious man
reprehended him in like sort, and from thenceforth he was served in
earthen vessels, last of all a decree came forth, because Turks
might not drink wine themselves, that neither Jew nor Christian
then living in Constantinople, might drink any wine at all." In like
sort amongst papists, fasting at first was generally proposed as a
good thing; after, from such meats at set times, and then last of all
so rigorously proposed, to bind the consciences upon pain of
damnation. "First Friday," saith Erasmus, "then Saturday," et nunc
periclitatur dies Mercurii) and Wednesday now is in danger of a
fast. "And for such like toys, some so miserably afflict themselves,
to despair, and death itself, rather than offend, and think themselves
good Christians in it, when as indeed they are superstitious Jews."
So saith Leonardus Fuchsius, a great physician in his time. "We are
tortured in Germany with these popish edicts, our bodies so taken
down, our goods so diminished, that if God had not sent Luther, a
worthy man, in time, to redress these mischiefs, we should have
eaten hay with our horses before this." As in fasting, so in all other
superstitious edicts, we crucify one another without a cause,
barring ourselves of many good and lawful things, honest disports,
pleasures and recreations; for wherefore did God create them but
for our use? Feasts, mirth, music, hawking, hunting, singing,
dancing, &c. non tam necessitatibus nostris Deus inservit, sed in
delicias amamur, as Seneca notes, God would have it so. And as
Plato 2. de legibus gives out, Deos laboriosam hominum vitam
miseratos, the gods in commiseration of human estate sent Apollo,
Bacchus, and the Muses, qui cum voluptate tripudia et soltationes
nobis ducant, to be merry with mortals, to sing and dance with us.
So that he that will not rejoice and enjoy himself, making good use
of such things as are lawfully permitted, non est temperatus, as he
will, sed superstitiosus. "There is nothing better for a man, than
that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy
good in his labour," Eccles. ii. 24. And as one said of hawking and
hunting, tot solatia in hac aegri orbis calamitate, mortalibus 
taediis deus objecit, I say of all honest recreations, God hath
therefore indulged them to refresh, ease, solace and comfort us. But
we are some of us too stern, too rigid, too precise, too grossly
superstitious, and whilst we make a conscience of every toy, with
touch not, taste not, &c., as those Pythagoreans of old, and some
Indians now, that will eat no flesh, or suffer any living creature to
be killed, the Bannians about Guzzerat; we tyrannise over our
brother's soul, lose the right use of many good gifts; honest sports,
games and pleasant recreations, punish ourselves without a cause,
lose our liberties, and sometimes our lives. Anno 1270, at
Magdeburg in Germany, a Jew fell into a privy upon a Saturday,
and without help could not possibly get out; he called to his fellows
for succour, but they denied it, because it was their Sabbath, non
licebat opus manuum exercere; the bishop hearing of it, the next
day forbade him to be pulled out, because it was our Sunday. In the
mean time the wretch died before Monday. We have myriads of
examples in this kind amongst those rigid Sabbatarians, and
therefore not without good cause, Intolerabilem pertubationem
Seneca calls it, as well he might, an intolerable perturbation, that
causeth such dire events, folly, madness, sickness, despair, death of
body and soul, and hell itself.





SUBSECT. V.-- Cure of Religious Melancholy.

To purge the world of idolatry and superstition, will require some
monster-taming Hercules, a divine Aesculapius, or Christ himself
to come in his own person, to reign a thousand years on earth
before the end, as the Millenaries will have him. They are generally
so refractory, self-conceited, obstinate, so firmly addicted to that
religion in which they have been bred and brought up, that no
persuasion, no terror, no persecution, can divert them. The
consideration of which, hath induced many commonwealths to
suffer them to enjoy their consciences as they will themselves: a
toleration of Jews is in most provinces of Europe. In Asia they have
their synagogues: Spaniards permit Moors to live amongst them:
the Mogullians, Gentiles: the Turks all religions. In Europe, Poland
and Amsterdam are the common sanctuaries. Some are of opinion,
that no man ought to be compelled for conscience' sake, but let him
be of what religion he will, he may be saved, as Cornelius was
formerly accepted, Jew, Turks, Anabaptists, &c. If he be an honest
man, live soberly, and civilly in his profession, (Volkelius, Crellius,
and the rest of the Socinians, that now nestle themselves about
Krakow and Rakow in Poland, have renewed this opinion) serve
his own God, with that fear and reverence as he ought. Sua cuique
civitati (Laeli) religio sit, nostra nobis, Tully thought fit every city
should be free in this behalf, adore their own Custodes et Topicos
Deos, tutelar and local gods, as Symmachus calls them. Isocrates
adviseth Demonicus, "when he came to a strange city, to worship
by all means the gods of the place," et unumquemque, Topicum
deum sic coli oportere, quomodo ipse praeceperit: which Cecilius
in Minutius labours, and would have every nation sacrorum ritus
gentiles habere et deos colere municipes, keep their own
ceremonies, worship their peculiar gods, which Pomponius Mela
reports of the Africans, Deos suos patrio more venerantur, they
worship their own gods according to their own ordination. For why
should any one nation, as he there pleads, challenge that
universality of God, Deum suum quem nec ostendunt, nec vident,
discurrantem silicet et ubique praesentem, in omnium mores, actus,
et occultas, cogitationes inquirentem, &c., as Christians do: let
every province enjoy their liberty in this behalf, worship one God,
or all as they will, and are informed. The Romans built altars Diis
Asiae, Europae, Lybiae, diis ignotis et peregrinis: others otherwise,
&c. Plinius Secundus, as appears by his Epistle to Trajan, would
not have the Christians so persecuted, and in some time of the reign
of Maximinus, as we find it registered in Eusebius lib. 9. cap. 9.
there was a decree made to this purpose, Nullus cogatur invitus ad
hunc vel illum deorum cultum, "let no one be compelled against his
will to worship any particular deity," and by Constantine in the
19th year of his reign as Baronius informeth us, Nemo alteri
exhibeat molestiam, quod cujusque animus vult, hoc quisque
transigat, new gods, new lawgivers, new priests, will have new
ceremonies, customs and religions, to which every wise man as a
good formalist should accommodate himself.

 "Saturnus periit, perierunt et sua jura,
Sub Jove nunc mundus, jussa sequare Jovis."

 (Ovid. "Saturn is dead, his laws died with him; now that Jupiter
rules the world, let us obey his laws.")

The said Constantine the emperor, as Eusebius writes, flung down
and demolished all the heathen gods, silver, gold statues, altars,
images and temples, and turned them all to Christian churches,
infestus gentilium monumentis ludibrio exposuit; the Turk now
converts them again to Mahometan mosques. The like edict came
forth in the reign of Arcadius and Honorius. Symmachus the orator
in his days, to procure a general toleration, used this argument,
"Because God is immense and infinite, and his nature cannot
perfectly be known, it is convenient he should be as diversely
worshipped, as every man shall perceive or understand." It was
impossible, he thought, for one religion to be universal: you see
that one small province can hardly be ruled by one law, civil or
spiritual; and "how shall so many distinct and vast empires of the
world be united into one? It never was, never will be" Besides, if
there be infinite planetary and firmamental worlds, as some will,
there be infinite genii or commanding spirits belonging to each of
them; and so, per consequens (for they will be all adored) , infinite
religions. And therefore let every territory keep their proper rites
and ceremonies, as their dii tutelares will, so Tyrius calls them,
"and according to the quarter they hold," their own institutions,
revelations, orders, oracles, which they dictate from time to time, or
teach their own priests or ministers. This tenet was stiffly
maintained in Turkey not long since, as you may read in the third
epistle of Busbequius, "that all those should participate of eternal
happiness, that lived a holy and innocent life, what religion soever
they professed." Rustan Bassa was a great patron of it; though
Mahomet himself was sent virtute gladi, to enforce all, as he writes
in his Alcoran, to follow him. Some again will approve of this for
Jews, Gentiles, infidels, that are out of the fold, they can be content
to give them all respect and favour, but by no means to such as are
within the precincts of our own church, and called Christians, to no
heretics, schismatics, or the like; let the Spanish inquisition, that
fourth fury, speak of some of them, the civil wars and massacres in
France, our Marian times. Magillianus the Jesuit will not admit of
conference with a heretic, but severity and rigour to be used, non
illis verba reddere, sed furcas, figere oportet; and Theodosius is
commended in Nicephorus, lib. 12. cap. 15. "That he put all
heretics to silence." Bernard. Epist. 180, will have club law, fire
and sword for heretics, "compel them, stop their mouths not with
disputations, or refute them with reasons, but with fists;" and this is
their ordinary practice. Another company are as mild on the other
side; to avoid all heart-burning, and contentious wars and uproars,
they would have a general toleration in every kingdom, no mulct at
all, no man for religion or conscience be put to death, which
Thuanus the French historian much favours; our late Socinians
defend; Vaticanus against Calvin in a large Treatise in behalf of
Servetus, vindicates; Castilio, &c., Martin Ballius and his
companions, maintained this opinion not long since in France,
whose error is confuted by Beza in a just volume. The medium is
best, and that which Paul prescribes, Gal. i. "If any man shall fall
by occasion, to restore such a one with the spirit of meekness, by
all fair means, gentle admonitions;" but if that will not take place, 
Post unam et alteram admonitionem haereticum devita, he must be
excommunicate, as Paul did by Hymenaeus, delivered over to
Satan. Immedicabile vulnus ense recidendum est. As Hippocrates
said in physic, I may well say in divinity, Quae ferro non curantur,
ignis curat. For the vulgar, restrain them by laws, mulcts, burn their
books, forbid their conventicles; for when the cause is taken away,
the effect will soon cease. Now for prophets, dreamers, and such
rude silly fellows, that through fasting, too much meditation,
preciseness, or by melancholy, are distempered: the best means to
reduce them ad sanam mentem, is to alter their course of life, and
with conference, threats, promises, persuasions, to intermix physic.
Hercules de Saxonia, had such a prophet committed to his charge in
Venice, that thought he was Elias, and would fast as he did; he
dressed a fellow in angel's attire, that said he came from heaven to
bring him divine food, and by that means stayed his fast,
administered his physic; so by the meditation of this forged angel
he was cured. Rhasis an Arabian, cont. lib. 1. cap. 9, speaks of a
fellow that in like case complained to him, and desired his help: "I
asked him" (saith he) "what the matter was; he replied, I am
continually meditating of heaven and hell, and methinks I see and
talk with fiery spirits, and smell brimstone, &c., and am so carried
away with these conceits, that I can neither eat, nor sleep, nor go
about my business: I cured him" (saith Rhasis) "partly by
persuasion, partly by physic, and so have I done by many others."
We have frequently such prophets and dreamers amongst us, whom
we persecute with fire and faggot: I think the most compendious
cure, for some of them at least, had been in Bedlam. Sed de his
satis.





MEMB. II.

SUBSECT. I.-- Religious Melancholy in defect; parties affected,
Epicures, Atheists, Hypocrites, worldly secure, Carnalists; all
impious persons, impenitent sinners, &c.

In that other extreme or defect of this love of God, knowledge,
faith, fear, hope, &c. are such as err both in doctrine and manners,
Sadducees, Herodians, libertines, politicians: all manner of atheists,
epicures, infidels, that are secure, in a reprobate sense, fear not God
at all, and such are too distrustful and timorous, as desperate
persons be. That grand sin of atheism or impiety, Melancthon calls
it monstrosam melancholiam, monstrous melancholy; or venenatam
melancholiam, poisoned melancholy. A company of Cyclops or
giants, that war with the gods, as the poets feigned, antipodes to
Christians, that scoff at all religion, at God himself, deny him and
all his attributes, his wisdom, power, providence, his mercy and
judgment.

 "Esse aliquos manes, et subterranea regna,
Et contum, et Stygio ranas in gurgite nigras,
Atque una transire vadum tot millia cymba,
Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum aere lavantur."

 (Juvenal. "That there are many ghosts and subterranean realms,
and a boat-pole, and black frogs in the Stygian gulf, and that so
many thousands pass over in one boat, not even boys believe,
unless those not as yet washed for money.")

That there is either heaven or hell, resurrection of the dead, pain,
happiness, or world to come, credat Judaeus Apella; for their parts
they esteem them as so many poet's tales, bugbears, Lucian's
Alexander; Moses, Mahomet, and Christ are all as one in their
creed. When those bloody wars in France for matters of religion
(saith Richard Dinoth) were so violently pursued between
Huguenots and Papists, there was a company of good fellows
laughed them all to scorn, for being such superstitious fools, to lose
their wives and fortunes, accounting faith, religion, immortality of
the soul, mere fopperies and illusions. Such loose atheistical spirits
are too predominant in all kingdoms. Let them contend, pray,
tremble, trouble themselves that will, for their parts, they fear
neither God nor devil; but with that Cyclops in Euripides,

"Haud ulla numina expavescunt coelitum,
Sed victimas uni deorum maximo,
Ventri offerunt, deos ignorant caeteros."

"They fear no God but one,
They sacrifice to none.
But belly, and him adore,
For gods they know no more."

"Their God is their belly," as Paul saith, Sancta mater saturitas;--
quibus in solo vivendi causa palato est. The idol, which they
worship and adore, is their mistress; with him in Plautus, mallem
haec mulier me amet quam dii, they had rather have her favour than
the gods'. Satan is their guide, the flesh is their instructor,
hypocrisy their counsellor, vanity their fellow-soldier, their will
their law, ambition their captain, custom their rule; temerity,
boldness, impudence their art, toys their trading, damnation their
end. All their endeavours are to satisfy their lust and appetite, how
to please their genius, and to be merry for the present, Ede, lude,
bibe, post mortem nulla voluptas. ("Eat, drink, be merry; there is no
more pleasure after death.") "The same condition is of men and of
beasts; as the one dieth, so dieth the other," Eccles. iii. 19. The
world goes round,

 --"truditur dies die,
 Novaeque pergunt interire Lunae:"

Hor. l. 2. od. 13. "One day succeeds another, and new moons
hasten to their wane.")

 They did eat and drink of old, marry, bury, bought, sold, planted,
built, and will do still. "Our life is short and tedious, and in the
death of a man there is no recovery, neither was any man known
that hath returned from the grave; for we are born at all adventure,
and we shall be hereafter as though we had never been; for the
breath is as smoke in our nostrils, &c., and the spirit vanisheth as
the soft air." "Come let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, let
us cheerfully use the creatures as in youth, let us fill ourselves with
costly wine and ointments, let not the flower of our life pass by us,
let us crown ourselves with rose-buds before they are withered,"
&c. Vivamus mea Lesbia et amemus, &c. "Come let us take our fill
of love, and pleasure in dalliance, for this is our portion, this is our
lot."

Tempora labuntur, tacitisque senescimus annis. ("Time glides
away, and we grow old by years insensibly accumulating.") For the
rest of heaven and hell, let children and superstitious fools believe
it: for their parts, they are so far from trembling at the dreadful day
of judgment that they wish with Nero, Me vivo fiat, let it come in
their times: so secure, so desperate, so immoderate in lust and
pleasure, so prone to revenge that, as Paterculus said of some
caitiffs in his time in Rome, Quod nequiter ausi, fortiter executi: it
shall not be so wickedly attempted, but as desperately performed,
whatever they take in hand. Were it not for God's restraining grace,
fear and shame, temporal punishment, and their own infamy, they
would. Lycaon-like exenterate, as so many cannibals eat up, or
Cadmus' soldiers consume one another. These are most impious,
and commonly professed atheists, that never use the name of God
but to swear by it; that express nought else but epicurism in their
carriage, or hypocrisy; with Pentheus they neglect and contemn
these rites and religious ceremonies of the gods; they will be gods
themselves, or at least socii deorum. Divisum imperium cum Jove
Caesar habet. "Caesar divides the empire with Jove." Aproyis, an
Egyptian tyrant, grew, saith Herodotus, to that height of pride,
insolency of impiety, to that contempt of Gods and men, that he
held his kingdom so sure, ut a nemine deorum aut hominum sibi
eripi posset, neither God nor men could take it from him. A certain
blasphemous king of Spain (as Lansius reports) made an edict, that
no subject of his, for ten years' space, should believe in, call on, or
worship any god. And as Jovius relates of "Mahomet the Second,
that sacked Constantinople, he so behaved himself, that he believed
neither Christ nor Mahomet; and thence it came to pass, that he
kept his word and promise no farther than for his advantage, neither
did he care to commit any offence to satisfy his lust." I could say
the like of many princes, many private men (our stories are full of
them) in times past, this present age, that love, fear, obey, and
perform all civil duties as they shall find them expedient or
behoveful to their own ends. Securi adversus Deos, securi adversus
homines, votis non est opus, which Tacitus reports of some
Germans, they need not pray, fear, hope, for they are secure, to
their thinking, both from Gods and men. Bulco Opiliensis,
sometime Duke of Silesia, was such a one to a hair; he lived (saith
Aeneas Sylvius) at Vratislavia, "and was so mad to satisfy his lust,
that he believed neither heaven nor hell, or that the soul was
immortal, but married wives, and turned them up as he thought fit,
did murder and mischief, and what he list himself." This duke hath
too many followers in our days: say what you can, dehort, exhort,
persuade to the contrary, they are no more moved,-- quam si dura,
silex aut stet Marpesia cautes, than so many stocks, and stones; tell
them of heaven and hell, 'tis to no purpose, laterem lavas, they
answer as Ataliba that Indian prince did friar Vincent, "when he
brought him a book, and told him all the mysteries of salvation,
heaven and hell, were contained in it: he looked upon it, and said
he saw no such matter, asking withal, how he knew it:" they will
but scoff at it, or wholly reject it. Petronius in Tacitus, when he was
now by Nero's command bleeding to death, audiebat amicos nihil
referentes de immortalitate animae, aut sapientum placitis, sed
levia carmina et faciles versus; instead of good counsel and divine
meditations, he made his friends sing him bawdy verses and
scurrilous songs. Let them take heaven, paradise, and that future
happiness that will, bonum est esse hic, it is good being here: there
is no talking to such, no hope of their conversion, they are in a
reprobate sense, mere carnalists, fleshly minded men, which
howsoever they may be applauded in this life by some few
parasites, and held for worldly wise men. "They seem to me" (saith
Melancthon) "to be as mad as Hercules was when he raved and
killed his wife and children." A milder sort of these atheistical
spirits there are that profess religion, but timide et haesitanter,
tempted thereunto out of that horrible consideration of diversity of
religions, which are and have been in the world (which argument
Campanella, Atheismi Triumphati, cap. 9. both urgeth and answers)
, besides the covetousness, imposture, and knavery of priests, quae
faciunt (as Postellus observes) ut rebus sacris minus faciant fidem;
and those religions some of them so fantastical, exorbitant, so
violently maintained with equal constancy and assurance; whence
they infer, that if there be so many religious sects, and denied by
the rest, why may they not be all false? or why should this or that
be preferred before the rest? The sceptics urge this, and amongst
others it is the conclusion of Sextus Empericus, lib. 3. advers.
Mathematicos: after many philosophical arguments and reasons pro
and con that there are gods, and again that there are no gods, he so
concludes, cum tot inter se pugnent, &c. Una tantum potest esse
vera, as Tully likewise disputes: Christians say, they alone worship
the true God, pity all other sects, lament their case; and yet those
old Greeks and Romans that worshipped the devil, as the Chinese
now do, aut deos topicos, their own gods; as Julian the apostate,
Cecilius in Minutius, Celsus and Porphyrius the philosopher object:
and as Machiavel contends, were much more noble, generous,
victorious, had a more flourishing commonwealth, better cities,
better soldiers, better scholars, better wits. Their gods overcame our
gods, did as many miracles, &c. Saint Cyril, Arnobius, Minutius,
with many other ancients of late, Lessius, Morneus, Grotius de
Verit. Relig. Christianae, Savanarola de Verit. Fidei Christianae,
well defend; but Zanchius, Campanella, Marinus Marcennus,
Bozius, and Gentillettus answer all these atheistical arguments at
large. But this again troubles many as of old, wicked men generally
thrive, professed atheists thrive,

 "Nullos esse Deos, inane coelum, 
Affirmat Selius: probatque, quod se
Factum, dum negat haec, videt beatum."

"There are no gods, heavens are toys,
Selius in public justifies;
Because that whilst he thus denies
Their deities, he better thrives."

This is a prime argument: and most part your most sincere, upright,
honest, and good men are depressed, "The race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong" (Eccles. ix. 11.) , "nor yet bread to the
wise, favour nor riches to men of understanding, but time and
chance comes to all." There was a great plague in Athens (as
Thucydides, lib. 2. relates) , in which at last every man, with great
licentiousness, did what he list, not caring at all for God's or men's
laws. "Neither the fear of God nor laws of men" (saith he) "awed
any man, because the plague swept all away alike, good and bad;
they thence concluded it was alike to worship or not worship the
gods, since they perished all alike." Some cavil and make doubts of
scripture itself: it cannot stand with God's mercy, that so many
should be damned, so many bad, so few good, such have and hold
about religions, all stiff on their side, factious alike, thrive alike,
and yet bitterly persecuting and damning each other; "It cannot
stand with God's goodness, protection, and providence" (as Saint
Chrysostom in the Dialect of such discontented persons) "to see
and suffer one man to be lame, another mad, a third poor and
miserable all the days of his life, a fourth grievously tormented
with sickness and aches, to his last hour. Are these signs and works
of God's providence, to let one man be deaf, another dumb? A poor
honest fellow lives in disgrace, woe and want, wretched he is;
when as a wicked caitiff abounds in superfluity of wealth, keeps
whores, parasites, and what he will himself:" Audis Jupiter haec?
Talia multa connectentes, longum reprehensionis sermonem erga
Dei providentiam contexunt. ( "Oh! Jupiter, do you hear those
things? Collecting many such facts, they weave a tissue of
reproaches against God's providence.") Thus they mutter and object
(see the rest of their arguments in Marcennus in Genesin, and in
Campanella, amply confuted) , with many such vain cavils, well
known, not worthy the recapitulation or answering: whatsoever
they pretend, they are interim of little or no religion.

Cousin-germans to these men are many of our great philosophers
and deists, who, though they be more temperate in this life, give
many good moral precepts, honest, upright, and sober in their
conversation, yet in effect they are the same (accounting no man a
good scholar that is not an atheist) , nimis altum sapiunt, too much
learning makes them mad. Whilst they attribute all to natural
causes, contingence of all things, as Melancthon calls them,
Pertinax hominum genus, a peevish generation of men, that misled
by philosophy, and the devil's suggestion, their own innate
blindness, deny God as much as the rest, hold all religion a fiction,
opposite to reason and philosophy, though for fear of magistrates,
saith Vaninus, they durst not publicly profess it. Ask one of them of
what religion he is, he scoffingly replies, a philosopher, a Galenist,
an Averroist, and with Rabelais a physician, a peripatetic, an
epicure. In spiritual things God must demonstrate all to sense, leave
a pawn with them, or else seek some other creditor. They will
acknowledge Nature and Fortune, yet not God: though in effect
they grant both: for as Scaliger defines, Nature signifies God's
ordinary power; or, as Calvin writes, Nature is God's order, and so
things extraordinary may be called unnatural: Fortune his
unrevealed will; and so we call things changeable that are beside
reason and expectation. To this purpose Minutius in Octavio, and
Seneca well discourseth with them, lib. 4. de beneficiis, cap. 5, 6, 7.
"They do not understand what they say; what is Nature but God?
call him what thou wilt, Nature, Jupiter, he hath as many names as
offices: it comes all to one pass, God is the fountain of all, the first
Giver and Preserver, from whom all things depend," a quo, et per
quem omnia, Nam quocunque vides Deus est, quocunque moveris,
"God is all in all, God is everywhere, in every place." And yet this
Seneca, that could confute and blame them, is all out as much to be
blamed and confuted himself, as mad himself; for he holds fatum
Stoicum, that inevitable Necessity in the other extreme, as those
Chaldean astrologers of old did, against whom the prophet
Jeremiah so often thunders, and those heathen mathematicians,
Nigidius Figulus, magicians, and Priscilianists, whom St. Austin so
eagerly confutes, those Arabian questionaries, Novem Judices,
Albumazer, Dorotheus, &c., and our countryman Estuidus, that
take upon them to define out of those great conjunction of stars,
with Ptolomeus, the periods of kingdoms, or religions, of all future
accidents, wars, plagues, schisms, heresies, and what not? all from
stars, and such things, saith Maginus, Quae sibi et intelligentiis suis
reservavit Deus, which God hath reserved to himself and his
angels, they will take upon them to foretell, as if stars were
immediate, inevitable causes of all future accidents. Caesar
Vaninus, in his book de admirandis naturae Arcanis, dial. 52. de
oraculis, is more free, copious, and open, in this explication of this
astrological tenet of Ptolemy, than any of our modern writers,
Cardan excepted, a true disciple of his master Pomponatius;
according to the doctrine of Peripatetics, he refers all apparitions,
prodigies, miracles, oracles, accidents, alterations of religions,
kingdoms, &c. (for which he is soundly lashed by Marinus
Mercennus, as well he deserves) , to natural causes (for spirits he
will not acknowledge) , to that light, motion, influences of heavens
and stars, and to the intelligences that move the orbs. Intelligentia
quae, movet orbem mediante coelo, &c. Intelligences do all: and
after a long discourse of miracles done of old, si haec daemones
possint, cur non et intelligentiae, coelorum motrices? And as these
great conjunctions, aspects of planets, begin or end, vary, are
vertical and predominant, so have religions, rites, ceremonies, and
kingdoms their beginning, progress, periods, in urbibus, regibus,
religionibus, ac in particularibus hominibus, haec vera ac
manifesta, sunt, ut Aristoteles innuere videtur, et quotidiana docet
experientia, ut historias perlegens videbit; quid olim in Gentili lege
Jove sanctius et illustrius? quid nunc vile magis et execrandum? Ita
coelestia corpora pro mortalium beneficio religiones aedificant, et
cum cessat influxus, cessat lex, ("In cities, kings, religions, and in
individual men, these things are true and obvious, as Aristotle
appears to imply, and daily experience teaches to the reader of
history: for what was more sacred and illustrious, by Gentile law,
than Jupiter? what now more vile and execrable? In this way
celestial objects suggest religions for worldly motives, and when
the influx ceases, so does the law,") &c. And because, according to
their tenets, the world is eternal, intelligences eternal, influences of
stars eternal, kingdoms, religions, alterations shall be likewise
eternal, and run round after many ages; Atque iterum ad Troiam
magnus mittetur Achilles; renascentur religiones, et ceremoniae,
res humanae in idem recident, nihil nunc quod non olim fuit, et post
saeculorum revolutiones alias est, erit, ("And again a great
Achilles shall be sent against Troy: religions and their ceremonies
shall be born again; however affairs relapse into the same track,
there is nothing now that was not formerly and Will not be again,")
&c. idem specie, saith Vaninus, non individuo quod Plato
significavit. These (saith mine author) , these are the decrees of
Peripatetics, which though I recite, in obsequium Christianae fidei
detestor, as I am a Christian I detest and hate. Thus Peripatetics and
astrologians held in former times, and to this effect of old in Rome,
saith Dionysius Halicarnassus, lib. 7, when those meteors and
prodigies appeared in the air, after the banishment of Coriolanus,
"Men were diversely affected: some said they were God's just
judgments for the execution of that good man, some referred all to
natural causes, some to stars, some thought they came by chance,
some by necessity" decreed ab initio, and could not be altered. The
two last opinions of necessity and chance were, it seems, of greater
note than the rest.

 "Sunt qui in Fortunae jam casibus omnia ponunt,
Et mundum credunt nullo rectore moveri,
Natura, volvente vices," &c.

 ( Juv. Sat. 13. "There are those who ascribe everything to
chance, and believe that the world is made without a director,
nature influencing the vicissitudes," &c.)

For the first of chance, as Sallust likewise informeth us, those old
Romans generally received; "They supposed fortune alone gave
kingdoms and empires, wealth, honours, offices: and that for two
causes; first, because every wicked base unworthy wretch was
preferred, rich, potent, &c.; secondly, because of their uncertainty,
though never so good, scarce any one enjoyed them long: but after,
they began upon better advice to think otherwise, that every man
made his own fortune." The last of Necessity was Seneca's tenet,
that God was alligatus causis secundis, so tied to second causes, to
that inexorable Necessity, that he could alter nothing of that which
was once decreed; sic erat in fatis, it cannot be altered, semel jussit,
semper paret Deus, nulla vis rumpit, nullae preces, nec ipsum
fulmen, God hath once said it, and it must for ever stand good, no
prayers, no threats, nor power, nor thunder itself can alter it. Zeno,
Chrysippus, and those other Stoics, as you may read in Tully 2. de
divinatione, Gellius, lib. 6. cap. 2. &c., maintained as much. In all
ages, there have been such, that either deny God in all, or in part;
some deride him, they could have made a better world, and ruled it
more orderly themselves, blaspheme him, derogate at their pleasure
from him. 'Twas so in Plato's time, "Some say there be no gods,
others that they care not for men, a middle sort grant both." Si non
sit Deus, unde mala? si sit Deus, unde mala? So Cotta argues in
Tully, why made he not all good, or at least tenders not the welfare
of such as are good? As the woman told Alexander, if he be not at
leisure to hear causes, and redress them, why doth he reign? Sextus
Empericus hath many such arguments. Thus perverse men cavil. So
it will ever be, some of all sorts, good, bad, indifferent, true, false,
zealous, ambidexters, neutralists, lukewarm, libertines, atheists,
&c. They will see these religious sectaries agree amongst
themselves, be reconciled all, before they will participate with, or
believe any: they think in the meantime (which Celsus objects, and
whom Origen confutes) , "We Christians adore a person put to
death with no more reason than the barbarous Getes worshipped
Zamolxis, the Cilicians Mopsus, the Thebans Amphiaraus, and the
Lebadians Trophonius; one religion is as true as another, new
fangled devices, all for human respects;" great-witted Aristotle's
works are as much authentical to them as Scriptures, subtle
Seneca's Epistles as canonical as St. Paul's, Pindarus' Odes as good
as the Prophet David's Psalms, Epictetus' Enchiridion equivalent to
wise Solomon's Proverbs. They do openly and boldly speak this
and more, some of them, in all places and companies. "Claudius the
emperor was angry with Heaven, because it thundered, and
challenged Jupiter into the field; with what madness! saith Seneca;
he thought Jupiter could not hurt him, but he could hurt Jupiter."
Diagoras, Demonax, Epicurus, Pliny, Lucian, Lucretius,--
Contemptorque Deum Mezentius, "professed atheists all" in their
times: though not simple atheists neither, as Cicogna proves, lib. 1.
cap. 1. they scoffed only at those Pagan gods, their plurality, base
and fictitious offices. Gilbertus Cognatus labours much, and so
doth Erasmus, to vindicate Lucian from scandal, and there be those
that apologise for Epicurus, but all in vain; Lucian scoffs at all,
Epicurus he denies all, and Lucretius his scholar defends him in it:

 "Humana ante oculua foede cum vita jaceret
In terris oppressa gravi cum religione,
Quae caput a coeli regionibus ostendebat,
Horribili super aspectu mortalibus instans," &c.

"When human kind was drench'd in superstition,
With ghastly looks aloft, which frighted mortal men," &c.

He alone, like another Hercules, did vindicate the world from that
monster. Uncle Pliny, lib. 2. cap. 7. nat. hist. and lib. 7. cap. 55, in
express words denies the immortality of the soul. Seneca doth little
less, lib. 7. epist. 55. ad Lucilium, et lib. de consol. ad Martiam, or
rather more. Some Greek Commentators would put as much upon
Job, that he should deny resurrection, &c., whom Pineda copiously
confutes in cap. 7. Job, vers. 9. Aristotle is hardly censured of
some, both divines and philosophers. St. Justin in Peraenetica ad
Gentes, Greg. Nazianzen. in disput. adversus Eun., Theodoret, lib.
5. de curat. graec. affec., Origen. lib. de principiis. Pomponatius
justifies in his Tract (so styled at least) De immortalitate Animae,
Scaliger (who would forswear himself at any time, saith Patritius,
in defence of his great master Aristotle) , and Dandinus, lib. 3. de
anima, acknowledge as much. Averroes oppugns all spirits and
supreme powers; of late Brunus (infelix Brunus, Kepler calls him) ,
Machiavel, Caesar Vaninus lately burned at Toulouse in France,
and Pet. Aretine, have publicly maintained such atheistical
paradoxes, with that Italian Boccaccio with his fable of three rings,
&c., ex quo infert haud posse internosci, quae sit verior religio,
Judaica, Mahometana, an Christiana, quoniam eadem signa, &c.,
"from which he infers, that it cannot be distinguished which is the
true religion, Judaism, Mahommedanism, or Christianity," &c.
Marinus Mercennus suspects Cardan for his subtleties, Campanella,
and Charron's Book of Wisdom, with some other Tracts, to savour
of atheism: but amongst the rest that pestilent book de tribus mundi
impostoribus, quem sine horrore (inquit) non legas, et mundi
Cymbalum dialogis quatuor contentum, anno 1538, auctore
Peresio, Parisiis excusum, &c. And as there have been in all ages
such blasphemous spirits, so there have not been wanting their
patrons, protectors, disciples and adherents. Never so many atheists
in Italy and Germany, saith Colerus, as in this age: the like
complaint Mercennus makes in France, 50,000 in that one city of
Paris. Frederic the Emperor, as Matthew Paris records licet non sit
recitabile (I use his own words) is reported to have said, Tres
praestigiatores, Moses, Christus, et Mahomet, uti mundo
dominarentur, totum populum sibi contemporaneum se duxisse.
(Henry, the Landgrave of Hesse, heard him speak it,) Si principes
imperii institutioni meae adhaererent, ego multo meliorem modum
credendi et vivendi ordinarem.

To these professed atheists, we may well add that impious and
carnal crew of worldly-minded men, impenitent sinners, that go to
hell in a lethargy, or in a dream; who though they be professed
Christians, yet they will nulla pallescere culpa, make a conscience
of nothing they do, they have cauterised consciences, and are
indeed in a reprobate sense, "past all feeling, have given
themselves over to wantonness, to work all manner of uncleanness
even with greediness," Ephes. iv. 19. They do know there is a God,
a day of judgment to come, and yet for all that, as Hugo saith, ita
comedunt ac dormiunt, ac si diem judicii evasissent; ita ludunt ac
rident, ac si in coelis cum Deo regnarent: they are as merry for all
the sorrow, as if they had escaped all dangers, and were in heaven
already:

 --"Metus omnes, et inexorabile fatum
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari."

Virg. "They place fear, fate, and the sound of craving Acheron
under their feet."

Those rude idiots and ignorant persons, that neglect and contemn
the means of their salvation, may march on with these; but above
all others, those Herodian temporizing statesmen, political
Machiavellians and hypocrites, that make a show of religion, but in
their hearts laugh at it. Simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas; they are
in a double fault, "that fashion themselves to this world," which
Paul forbids, and like Mercury, the planet, are good with good, bad
with bad. When they are at Rome, they do there as they see done,
puritans with puritans, papists with papists; omnium horarum
homines, formalists, ambidexters, lukewarm Laodiceans. All their
study is to please, and their god is their commodity, their labour to
satisfy their lusts, and their endeavours to their own ends.
Whatsoever they pretend, or in public seem to do, "With the fool in
their hearts, they say there is no God." Heus tu -- de Jove quid
sentis? "Hulloa! what is your opinion about a Jupiter?" Their words
are as soft as oil, but bitterness is in their hearts; like Alexander VI.
so cunning dissemblers, that what they think they never speak.
Many of them are so close, you can hardly discern it, or take any
just exceptions at them; they are not factious, oppressors as most
are, no bribers, no simoniacal contractors, no such ambitious,
lascivious persons as some others are, no drunkards, sobrii solem
vident orientem, sobrii vident occidentem, they rise sober, and go
sober to bed, plain dealing, upright, honest men, they do wrong to
no man, and are so reputed in the world's esteem at least, very
zealous in religion, very charitable, meek, humble, peace-makers,
keep all duties, very devout, honest, well spoken of, beloved of all
men: but he that knows better how to judge, he that examines the
heart, saith they are hypocrites, Cor dolo plenum; sonant vitium
percussa maligne, they are not sound within. As it is with writers
oftentimes, Plus sanctimoniae, in libello, quam libelli auctore,
more holiness is in the book than in the author of it: so 'tis with
them: many come to church with great Bibles, whom Cardan said
he could not choose but laugh at, and will now and then dare
operam Augustino, read Austin, frequent sermons, and yet
professed usurers, mere gripes, tota vitae ratio epicurea est; all
their life is epicurism and atheism, come to church all day, and lie
with a courtesan at night. Qui curios simulant et Bacchanalia
vivunt, they have Esau's hands, and Jacob's voice: yea, and many of
those holy friars, sanctified men, Cappam, saith Hierom, et cilicium
induunt, sed intus latronem tegunt. They are wolves in sheep's
clothing, Introrsum turpes, speciosi pelle decora, "Fair without,
and most foul within." Latet plerumque sub tristi amictu lascivia, et
deformis horror vili veste tegitur; ofttimes under a mourning weed
lies lust itself, and horrible vices under a poor coat. But who can
examine all those kinds of hypocrites, or dive into their hearts? ]f
we may guess at the tree by the fruit, never so many as in these
days; show me a plain-dealing true honest man: Et pudor, et
probitas, et timor omnis abest. He that shall but look into their
lives, and see such enormous vices, men so immoderate in lust,
unspeakable in malice, furious in their rage, flattering and
dissembling (all for their own ends) will surely think they are not
truly religious, but of an obdurate heart, most part in a reprobate
sense, as in this age. But let them carry it as they will for the
present, dissemble as they can, a time will come when they shall be
called to an account, their melancholy is at hand, they pull a plague
and curse upon their own heads, thesaurisant iram Dei. Besides all
such as are in deos contumeliosi, blaspheme, contemn, neglect
God, or scoff at him, as the poets feign of Salmoneus, that would in
derision imitate Jupiter's thunder, he was precipitated for his pains,
Jupiter intonuit contra, &c. so shall they certainly rue it in the end,
( in se spuit, qui in coelum spuit) , their doom's at hand, and hell is
ready to receive them.

Some are of opinion, that it is in vain to dispute with such
atheistical spirits in the meantime, 'tis not the best way to reclaim
them. Atheism, idolatry, heresy, hypocrisy, though they have one
common root, that is indulgence to corrupt affection, yet their
growth is different, they have divers symptoms, occasions, and
must have several cures and remedies. 'Tis true some deny there is
any God, some confess, yet believe it not; a third sort confess and
believe, but will not live after his laws, worship and obey him:
others allow God and gods subordinate, but not one God, no such
general God, non talem deum, but several topic gods for several
places, and those not to persecute one another for any difference, as
Socinus will, but rather love and cherish.

To describe them in particular, to produce their arguments and
reasons, would require a just volume, I refer them therefore that
expect a more ample satisfaction, to those subtle and elaborate
treatises, devout and famous tracts of our learned divines
(schoolmen amongst the rest, and casuists) that have abundance of
reasons to prove there is a God, the immortality of the soul, &c.,
out of the strength of wit and philosophy bring irrefragable
arguments to such as are ingenuous and well disposed; at the least,
answer all cavils and objections to confute their folly and madness,
and to reduce them, si fieri posset, ad sanam mentem, to a better
mind, though to small purpose many times. Amongst others consult
with Julius Caesar Lagalla, professor of philosophy in Rome, who
hath written a large volume of late to confute atheists: of the
immortality of the soul, Hierom. Montanus de immortalitate
Animae: Lelius Vincentius of the same subject: Thomas Giaminus,
and Franciscus Collius de Paganorum animabus post mortem, a
famous doctor of the Ambrosian College in Milan. Bishop
Fotherby in his Atheomastix, Doctor Dove, Doctor Jackson,
Abernethy, Corderoy, have written well of this subject in our
mother tongue: in Latin, Colerus, Zanchius, Palearius, Illyricus,
Philippus, Faber Faventinus, &c. But instar omnium, the most
copious confuter of atheists is Marinus Mercennus in his
Commentaries on Genesis: with Campanella's Atheismus
Triumphatus. He sets down at large the causes of this brutish
passion, (seventeen in number I take it) answers all their arguments
and sophisms, which he reduceth to twenty-six heads, proving
withal his own assertion; "There is a God, such a God, the true and
sole God," by thirty-five reasons. His Colophon is how to resist and
repress atheism, and to that purpose he adds four especial means or
ways, which who so will may profitably peruse.





SUBSECT. II.-- Despair. Despairs, Equivocations, Definitions,
Parties and Parts affected.

There be many kinds of desperation, whereof some be holy, some
unholy, as one distinguisheth; that unholy he defines out of Tully to
be Aegritudinem animi sine ulla rerum expectatione meliore, a
sickness of the soul without any hope or expectation of
amendment; which commonly succeeds fear; for whilst evil is
expected, we fear: but when it is certain, we despair. According to
Thomas 2. 2ae. distinct. 40. art. 4. it is Recessus a re desiderata,
propter impossibilitatem existimatam, a restraint from the thing
desired, for some impossibility supposed. Because they cannot
obtain what they would, they become desperate, and many times
either yield to the passion by death itself, or else attempt
impossibilities, not to be performed by men. In some cases, this
desperate humour is not much to be discommended, as in wars it is
a cause many times of extraordinary valour; as Joseph, lib. 1. de
bello Jud. cap. 14. L. Danaus in Aphoris. polit. pag. 226. and
many politicians hold. It makes them improve their worth beyond
itself, and of a forlorn impotent company become conquerors in a
moment. Una salus victis nullam sperare salutem, "the only hope
for the conquered is despair." In such courses when they see no
remedy, but that they must either kill or be killed, they take
courage, and oftentimes, praeter spem, beyond all hope vindicate
themselves. Fifteen thousand Locrenses fought against a hundred
thousand Crotonienses, and seeing now no way but one, they must
all die, thought they would not depart unrevenged, and thereupon
desperately giving an assault, conquered their enemies. Nec alia
causa victoriae, (saith Justin mine author) quam quod
desperaverant. William the Conqueror, when he first landed in
England, sent back his ships, that his soldiers might have no hope
of retiring back. Bodine excuseth his countrymen's overthrow at
that famous battle at Agincourt, in Henry the Fifth his time, (cui
simile, saith Froissard, tota historia producere non possit, which no
history can parallel almost, wherein one handful of Englishmen
overthrew a royal army of Frenchmen) with this refuge of despair,
pauci desperati, a few desperate fellows being compassed in by
their enemies, past all hope of life, fought like so many devils; and
gives a caution, that no soldiers hereafter set upon desperate
persons, which after Frontinus and Vigetius, Guicciardini likewise
admonisheth, Hypomnes. part. 2. pag. 25. not to stop an enemy that
is going his way. Many such kinds there are of desperation, when
men are past hope of obtaining any suit, or in despair of better
fortune; Desperatio facit monachum, as the saying is, and
desperation causeth death itself; how many thousands in such
distress have made away themselves, and many others? For he that
cares not for his own, is master of another man's life. A Tuscan
soothsayer, as Paterculus tells the story, perceiving himself and
Fulvius Flaccus his dear friend, now both carried to prison by
Opimius, and in despair of pardon, seeing the young man weep,
quin tu potius hoc inquit facis, do as I do; and with that knocked
out his brains against the door-cheek, as he was entering into
prison, protinusque illiso capite in capite in carceris januam effuso
cerebro expiravit, and so desperate died. But these are equivocal,
improper. "When I speak of despair," saith Zanchie, "I speak not of
every kind, but of that alone which concerns God. It is opposite to
hope, and a most pernicious sin, wherewith the devil seeks to
entrap men." Musculus makes four kinds of desperation, of God,
ourselves, our neighbour, or anything to be done; but this division
of his may be reduced easily to the former: all kinds are opposite to
hope, that sweet moderator of passions, as Simonides calls it; I do
not mean that vain hope which fantastical fellows feign to
themselves, which according to Aristotle is insomnium vigilantium,
a waking dream; but this divine hope which proceeds from
confidence, and is an anchor to a floating soul; spes alit agricolas,
even in our temporal affairs, hope revives us, but in spiritual it
farther animateth; and were it not for hope, "we of all others were
the most miserable," as Paul saith, in this life; were it not for hope,
the heart would break; "for though they be punished in the sight of
men," (Wisdom iii. 4.) yet is "their hope full of immortality:" yet
doth it not so rear, as despair doth deject; this violent and sour
passion of despair, is of all perturbations most grievous, as Patritius
holds. Some divide it into final and temporal; final is incurable,
which befalleth reprobates; temporal is a rejection of hope and
comfort for a time, which may befall the best of God's children,
and it commonly proceeds "from weakness of faith," as in David
when he was oppressed he cried out, "O Lord, thou hast forsaken
me," but this for a time. This ebbs and flows with hope and fear; it
is a grievous sin howsoever: although some kind of despair be not
amiss, when, saith Zanchius, we despair of our own means, and
rely wholly upon God: but that species is not here meant. This
pernicious kind of desperation is the subject of our discourse,
homicida animae, the murderer of the soul, as Austin terms it, a
fearful passion, wherein the party oppressed thinks he can get no
ease but by death, and is fully resolved to offer violence unto
himself; so sensible of his burthen, and impatient of his cross, that
he hopes by death alone to be freed of his calamity (though it prove
otherwise) , and chooseth with Job vi. 8. 9. xvii. 5. "Rather to be
strangled and die, than to be in his bonds." The part affected is the
whole soul, and all the faculties of it; there is a privation of joy,
hope, trust, confidence, of present and future good, and in their
place succeed fear, sorrow, &c. as in the symptoms shall be shown.
The heart is grieved, the conscience wounded, the mind eclipsed
with black fumes arising from those perpetual terrors.





SUBSECT. III.-- Causes of Despair, the Devil, Melancholy,
Meditation, Distrust, Weakness of Faith, Rigid Ministers,
Misunderstanding Scriptures, Guilty Consciences, &c.

The principal agent and procurer of this mischief is the devil; those
whom God forsakes, the devil by his permission lays hold on.
Sometimes he persecutes them with that worm of conscience, as he
did Judas, Saul, and others. The poets call it Nemesis, but it is
indeed God's just judgment, sero sed serio, he strikes home at last,
and setteth upon them "as a thief in the night," 1 Thes. ii. This
temporary passion made David cry out, "Lord, rebuke me not in
thine anger, neither chasten me in thine heavy displeasure; for thine
arrows have light upon me, &c. there is nothing sound in my flesh,
because of thine anger." Again, I roar for the very grief of my
heart: and Psalm xxii. "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me, and art so far from my health, and the words of my crying? I
am like to water poured out, my bones are out of joint, mine heart
is like wax, that is molten in the midst of my bowels." So Psalm
lxxxviii. 15 and 16 vers. and Psalm cii. "I am in misery at the point
of death, from my youth I suffer thy terrors, doubting for my life;
thine indignations have gone over me, and thy fear hath cut me
off." Job doth often complain in this kind; and those God doth not
assist, the devil is ready to try and torment, "still seeking whom he
may devour." If he find them merry, saith Gregory, "he tempts
them forthwith to some dissolute act; if pensive and sad, to a
desperate end." Aut suadendo blanditur, aut minando terret,
sometimes by fair means, sometimes again by foul, as he perceives
men severally inclined. His ordinary engine by which he produceth
this effect, is the melancholy humour itself, which is balneum
diaboli, the devil's bath; and as in Saul, those evil spirits get in as it
were, and take possession of us. Black choler is a shoeing-horn, a
bait to allure them, insomuch that many writers make melancholy
an ordinary cause, and a symptom of despair, for that such men are
most apt, by reason of their ill-disposed temper, to distrust, fear,
grief, mistake, and amplify whatsoever they preposterously
conceive, or falsely apprehend. Conscientia scrupulosa nascitur ex
vitio naturali, complexione melancholica (saith Navarrus cap. 27.
num. 282. tom. 2. cas. conscien.) The body works upon the mind,
by obfuscating the spirits and corrupted instruments, which Perkins
illustrates by simile of an artificer, that hath a bad tool, his skill is
good, ability correspondent, by reason of ill tools his work must
needs be lame and imperfect. But melancholy and despair, though
often, do not always concur; there is much difference: melancholy
fears without a cause, this upon great occasion; melancholy is
caused by fear and grief, but this torment procures them and all
extremity of bitterness; much melancholy is without affliction of
conscience, as Bright and Perkins illustrate by four reasons; and yet
melancholy alone may be sometimes a sufficient cause of this
terror of conscience. Felix Plater so found it in his observations, e
melancholicis alii damnatos se putant, Deo curae, non sunt, nec
praedestinati, &c. "They think they are not predestinate, God hath
forsaken them;" and yet otherwise very zealous and religious; and
'tis common to be seen, "melancholy for fear of God's judgment
and hell-fire, drives men to desperation; fear and sorrow, if they be
immoderate, end often with it." Intolerable pain and anguish, long
sickness, captivity, misery, loss of goods, loss of friends, and those
lesser griefs, do sometimes effect it, or such dismal accidents. Si
non statim relevantur, Mercennus, dubitant an sit Deus, if they be
not eased forthwith, they doubt whether there be any God, they
rave, curse, "and are desperately mad because good men are
oppressed, wicked men flourish, they have not as they think to their
desert," and through impatience of calamities are so misaffected.
Democritus put out his eyes, ne malorum civium prosperos videret
successus, because he could not abide to see wicked men prosper,
and was therefore ready to make away himself, as Agellius writes
of him. Felix Plater hath a memorable example in this kind, of a
painter's wife in Basil, that was melancholy for her son's death, and
for melancholy became desperate; she thought God would not
pardon her sins, "and for four months still raved, that she was in
hell-fire, already damned." When the humour is stirred up, every
small object aggravates and incenseth it, as the parties are addicted.
The same author hath an example of a merchant man, that for the
loss of a little wheat, which he had over long kept, was troubled in
conscience, for that he had not sold it sooner, or given it to the
poor, yet a good scholar and a great divine; no persuasion would
serve to the contrary, but that for this fact he was damned: in other
matters very judicious and discreet. Solitariness, much fasting,
divine meditation, and contemplations of God's judgments, most
part accompany this melancholy, and are main causes, as Navarrus
holds; to converse with such kinds of persons so troubled, is
sufficient occasion of trouble to some men. Nonnulli ob longas
inedias, studia et meditationes coelestes, de rebus sacris et
religione semper agitant, &c. Many, (saith P. Forestus) through
long fasting, serious meditations of heavenly things, fall into such
fits; and as Lemnius adds, lib. 4. cap. 21, "If they be solitary given,
superstitious, precise, or very devout: seldom shall you find a
merchant, a soldier, an innkeeper, a bawd, a host, a usurer, so
troubled in mind, they have cheveril consciences that will stretch,
they are seldom moved in this kind or molested: young men and
middle age are more wild and less apprehensive; but old folks,
most part, such as are timorous and religiously given." Pet.
Forestus observat. lib. 10. cap. 12. de morbis cerebri, hath a fearful
example of a minister, that through precise fasting in Lent, and
overmuch meditation, contracted this mischief, and in the end
became desperate, thought he saw devils in his chamber, and that
he could not be saved; he smelled nothing, as he said, but fire and
brimstone, was already in hell, and would ask them, still, if they did
not smell as much. I told him he was melancholy, but he laughed
me to scorn, and replied that he saw devils, talked with them in
good earnest, Would spit in my face, and ask me if 1 did not smell
brimstone, but at last he was by him cured. Such another story I
find in Plater observat. lib. 1. A poor fellow had done some foul
offence, and for fourteen days would eat no meat, in the end
became desperate, the divines about him could not ease him, but so
he died. Continual meditation of God's judgments troubles many,
Multi ob timorem futuri judicii, saith Guatinerius cap. 5. tract. 15.
et suspicionem desperabundi sunt. David himself complains that
God's judgments terrified his soul, Psalm cxix. part. 16. vers. 8.
"My flesh trembleth for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy
judgments." Quoties diem illum cogito (saith Hierome) toto
corpore contremisco, I tremble as often as I think of it. The terrible
meditation of hell-fire and eternal punishment much torments a
sinful silly soul. What's a thousand years to eternity? Ubi moeror,
ubi fletus, ubi dolor sempiternus. Mors sine morte, finis sine fine; a
finger burnt by chance we may not endure, the pain is so grievous,
we may not abide an hour, a night is intolerable; and what shall this
unspeakable fire then be that burns for ever, innumerable infinite
millions of years, in omne aevum in aeternum. O eternity!

 "Aeternitas est illa vox,
Vox illa fulminatrix,
Tonitruis minacior,
Fragoribusque coeli,

Aeternitas est illa vox,
-- meta carens et orta, &c.
Tormenta nulla territant, 
Quae finiuntur annis;

Aeternitas, aeternitas
Versat coquilque pectus.
Auget haec poenas indies,
Centuplicatque flammas," &c.

 (Drexelius Nicet. lib. 2. cap. 11. "Eternity, that word, that
tremendous word, more threatening than thunders and the
artillery of heaven -- Eternity, that word, without end or origin.
No torments affright us which are limited to years: Eternity,
eternity, occupies and inflames the heart -- this it is that daily
augments our sufferings, and multiplies our heart-burnings a
hundredfold.")

This meditation terrifies these poor distressed souls, especially if
their bodies be predisposed by melancholy, they religiously given,
and have tender consciences, every small object affrights them, the
very inconsiderate reading of Scripture itself, and misinterpretation
of some places of it; as, "Many are called, few are chosen. Not
every one that saith Lord. Fear not little flock. He that stands, let
him take heed lest he fall. Work out your salvation with fear and
trembling, That night two shall be in a bed, one received, the other
left. Strait is the way that leads to heaven, and few there are that
enter therein." The parable of the seed and of the sower, "some fell
on barren ground, some was choked. Whom he hath predestinated
he hath chosen. He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy."
Non est volentis nec currentis, sed miserentis Dei. These and the
like places terrify the souls of many; election, predestination,
reprobation, preposterously conceived, offend divers, with a deal of
foolish presumption, curiosity, needless speculation,
contemplation, solicitude, wherein they trouble and puzzle
themselves about those questions of grace, free will, perseverance,
God's secrets; they will know more than is revealed of God in his
word, human capacity, or ignorance can apprehend, and too
importunate inquiry after that which is revealed; mysteries,
ceremonies, observation of Sabbaths, laws, duties, &c., with many
such which the casuists discuss, and schoolmen broach, which
divers mistake, misconstrue, misapply to themselves, to their own
undoing, and so fall into this gulf. "They doubt of their election,
how they shall know, it, by what signs. And so far forth," saith
Luther, "with such nice points, torture and crucify themselves, that
they are almost mad, and all they get by it is this, they lay open a
gap to the devil by desperation to carry them to hell;" but the
greatest harm of all proceeds from those thundering ministers, a
most frequent cause they are of this malady: "and do more harm in
the church" (saith Erasmus) "than they that flatter; great danger on
both sides, the one lulls them asleep in carnal security, the other
drives them to despair." Whereas, St. Bernard well adviseth, "We
should not meddle with the one without the other, nor speak of
judgment without mercy; the one alone brings desperation, the
other security." But these men are wholly for judgment; of a rigid
disposition themselves, there is no mercy with them, no salvation,
no balsam for their diseased souls, they can speak of nothing but
reprobation, hell-fire, and damnation; as they did Luke xi. 46. lade
men with burdens grievous to be borne, which they themselves
touch not with a finger. 'Tis familiar with our papists to terrify
men's souls with purgatory, tales, visions, apparitions, to daunt
even the most generous spirits, "to require charity," as Brentius
observes, "of others, bounty, meekness, love, patience, when they
themselves breathe nought but lust, envy, covetousness." They
teach others to fast, give alms, do penance, and crucify their mind
with superstitious observations, bread and water, hair clothes,
whips, and the like, when they themselves have all the dainties the
world can afford, lie on a down-bed with a courtesan in their arms:
Heu quantum patimur pro Christo, as he said, what a cruel tyranny
is this, so to insult over and terrify men's souls! Our indiscreet
pastors many of them come not far behind, whilst in their ordinary
sermons they speak so much of election, predestination,
reprobation, ab aeterno, subtraction of grace, preterition, voluntary
permission, &c., by what signs and tokens they shall discern and
try themselves, whether they be God's true children elect, an sint
reprobi, praedestinati, &c., with such scrupulous points, they still
aggravate sin, thunder out God's judgments without respect,
intempestively rail at and pronounce them damned in all auditories,
for giving so much to sports and honest recreations, making every
small fault and thing indifferent an irremissible offence, they so
rent, tear and wound men's consciences, that they are almost mad,
and at their wits' end.

"These bitter potions" (saith Erasmus) "are still in their mouths,
nothing but gall and horror, and a mad noise, they make all their
auditors desperate:" many are wounded by this means, and they
commonly that are most devout and precise, have been formerly
presumptuous, and certain of their salvation; they that have tender
consciences, that follow sermons, frequent lectures, that have
indeed least cause, they are most apt to mistake, and fall into these
miseries. I have heard some complain of Parson's Resolution, and
other books of like nature (good otherwise) , they are too tragical,
too much dejecting men, aggravating offences: great care and
choice, much discretion is required in this kind.

The last and greatest cause of this malady, is our own conscience,
sense of our sins, and God's anger justly deserved, a guilty
conscience for some foul offence formerly committed,-- O miser
Oreste, quid morbi te perdit? (Euripides. "O wretched Orestes,
what malady consumes you?") Or: Conscientia, Sum enim mihi
conscius de malis perpetratis. ("Conscience, for I am conscious of
evil.") "A good conscience is a continual feast," but a galled
conscience is as great a torment as can possibly happen, a still
baking oven, (so Pierius in his Hieroglyph, compares it) another
hell. Our conscience, which is a great ledger book, wherein are
written all our offences, a register to lay them up, (which those
Egyptians in their hieroglyphics expressed by a mill, as well for the
continuance, as for the torture of it) grinds our souls with the
remembrance of some precedent sins, makes us reflect upon,
accuse and condemn our own selves. "Sin lies at door," &c. I know
there be many other causes assigned by Zanchius, Musculus, and
the rest; as incredulity, infidelity, presumption, ignorance,
blindness, ingratitude, discontent, those five grand miseries in
Aristotle, ignominy, need, sickness, enmity, death, &c.; but this of
conscience is the greatest, Instar ulceris corpus jugiter percellens:
The scrupulous conscience (as Peter Forestus calls it) which
tortures so many, that either out of a deep apprehension of their
unworthiness, and consideration of their own dissolute life, "accuse
themselves and aggravate every small offence, when there is no
such cause, misdoubting in the meantime God's mercies, they fall
into these inconveniences." The poet calls them furies dire, but it is
the conscience alone which is a thousand witnesses to accuse us,
Nocte dieque suum gestant in pectore testem. A continual tester to
give in evidence, to empanel a jury to examine us, to cry guilty, a
persecutor with hue and cry to follow, an apparitor to summon us, a
bailiff to carry us, a serjeant to arrest, an attorney to plead against
us, a gaoler to torment, a judge to condemn, still accusing,
denouncing, torturing and molesting. And as the statue of Juno in
that holy city near Euphrates in Assyria will look still towards you,
sit where you will in her temple, she stares full upon you, if you go
by, she follows with her eye, in all sites, places, conventicles,
actions, our conscience will be still ready to accuse us. After many
pleasant days, and fortunate adventures, merry tides, this
conscience at last doth arrest us. Well he may escape temporal
punishment, bribe a corrupt judge, and avoid the censure of law,
and flourish for a time; "for who ever saw" (saith Chrysostom) "a
covetous man troubled in mind when he is telling of his money, an
adulterer mourn with his mistress in his arms? we are then drunk
with pleasure, and perceive nothing:" yet as the prodigal son had
dainty fare, sweet music at first, merry company, jovial
entertainment, but a cruel reckoning in the end, as bitter as
wormwood, a fearful visitation commonly follows. And the devil
that then told thee that it was a light sin, or no sin at all, now
aggravates on the other side, and telleth thee, that it is a most
irremissible offence, as he did by Cain and Judas, to bring them to
despair; every small circumstance before neglected and contemned,
will now amplify itself, rise up in judgment, and accuse the dust of
their shoes, dumb creatures, as to Lucian's tyrant, lectus et candela,
the bed and candle did bear witness, to torment their souls for their
sins past. Tragical examples in this kind are too familiar and
common: Adrian, Galba, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Caracalla, were in
such horror of conscience for their offences committed, murders,
rapes, extortions, injuries, that they were weary of their lives, and
could get nobody to kill them. Kennetus, King of Scotland, when
he had murdered his nephew Malcom, King Duffe's son, Prince of
Cumberland, and with counterfeit tears and protestations
dissembled the matter a long time, "at last his conscience accused
him, his unquiet soul could not rest day or night, he was terrified
with fearful dreams, visions, and so miserably tormented all his
life." It is strange to read what Cominaeus hath written of Louis XI.
that French King; of Charles VIII.; of Alphonsus, King of Naples;
in the fury of his passion how he came into Sicily, and what pranks
he played. Guicciardini, a man most unapt to believe lies, relates
how that Ferdinand his father's ghost who before had died for grief,
came and told him, that he could not resist the French King, he
thought every man cried France, France; the reason of it (saith
Cominseus) was because he was a vile tyrant, a murderer, an
oppressor of his subjects, he bought up all commodities, and sold
them at his own price, sold abbeys to Jews and Falconers; both
Ferdinand his father, and he himself never made conscience of any
committed sin; and to conclude, saith he, it was impossible to do
worse than they did. Why was Pausanias the Spartan tyrant, Nero,
Otho, Galba, so persecuted with spirits in every house they came,
but for their murders which they had committed? Why doth the
devil haunt many men's houses after their deaths, appear to them
living, and take possession of their habitations, as it were, of their
palaces, but because of their several villainies? Why had Richard
the Third such fearful dreams, saith Polydore, but for his frequent
murders? Why was Herod so tortured in his mind? because he had
made away Mariamne his wife. Why was Theodoric, the King of
the Goths, so suspicious, and so affrighted with a fish head alone,
but that he had murdered Symmachus, and Boethius his son-in-law,
those worthy Romans? Coelius, lib. 27. cap. 22. See more in
Plutarch, in his tract De his qui sero a Numine puniuntur, and in his
book De tranquillitate animi, &c. Yea, and sometimes GOD
himself hath a hand in it, to show his power, humiliate, exercise,
and to try their faith, (divine temptation, Perkins calls it, Cas. cons.
lib. 1. cap. 8. sect. 1.) to punish them for their sins. God the
avenger, as David terms him, ultor a tergo Deus, his wrath is
apprehended of a guilty, soul, as by Saul and Judas, which the
poets expressed by Adrastia, or Nemesis:

 "Assequitur Nemesique virum vestigia servat,
Ne male quid facias." --

 ("And Nemesis pursues and notices the steps of men, lest you
commit any evil.")

And she is, as Ammianus, lib. 14. describes her, "the queen of
causes, and moderator of things," now she pulls down the proud,
now she rears and encourageth those that are good; he gives
instance in his Eusebius; Nicephorus, lib. 10. cap. 35. eccles. hist.
in Maximinus and Julian. Fearful examples of God's just judgment,
wrath and vengeance, are to be found in all histories, of some that
have been eaten to death with rats and mice, as Popelius, the
second King of Poland, ann. 830, his wife and children; the like
story is of Hatto, Archbishop of Mentz, ann. 969, so devoured by
these vermin, which howsoever Serrarius the Jesuit Mogunt. rerum
lib. 4. cap. 5. impugn by twenty-two arguments, Tritemius,
Munster, Magdeburgenses, and many others relate for a truth. Such
another example I find in Geraldus Cambrensis Itin. Cam. lib. 2.
cap. 2. and where not?

And yet for all these terrors of conscience, affrighting punishments
which are so frequent, or whatsoever else may cause or aggravate
this fearful malady in other religions, I see no reason at all why a
papist at any time should despair, or be troubled for his sins; for let
him be never so dissolute a caitiff so notorious a villain, so
monstrous a sinner, out of that treasure of indulgences and merits
of which the pope is dispensator, he may have free pardon and
plenary remission of all his sins. There be so many general pardons
for ages to come, forty thousand years to come, so many jubilees,
so frequent gaol-deliveries out of purgatory for all souls, now
living, or after dissolution of the body, so many particular masses
daily said in several churches, so many altars consecrated to this
purpose, that if a man have either money or friends, or will take
any pains to come to such an altar, hear a mass, say so many
paternosters, undergo such and such penance, he cannot do amiss, 
it is impossible his mind should be troubled, or he have any scruple
to molest him. Besides that Taxa Camerae Apostolicae, which was
first published to get money in the days of Leo Decimus, that
sharking pope, and since divulged to the same ends, sets down such
easy rates and dispensations for all offences, for perjury, murder,
incest, adultery, &c., for so many grosses or dollars (able to invite
any man to sin, and provoke him to offend, methinks, that
otherwise would not) such comfortable remission, so gentle and
parable a pardon, so ready at hand, with so small cost and suit
obtained, that I cannot see how he that hath any friends amongst
them (as I say) or money in his purse, or will at least to ease
himself, can any way miscarry or be misaffected, how he should be
desperate, in danger of damnation, or troubled in mind. Their
ghostly fathers can so readily apply remedies, so cunningly string
and unstring, wind and unwind their devotions, play upon their
consciences with plausible speeches and terrible threats, for their
best advantage settle and remove, erect with such facility and
deject, let in and out, that I cannot perceive how any man amongst
them should much or often labour of this disease, or finally
miscarry. The causes above named must more frequently therefore
take hold in others.





SUBSECT. IV.-- Symptoms of Despair, Fear, Sorrow, Suspicion,
Anxiety, Horror of Conscience, Fearful Dreams and Visions.

As shoemakers do when they bring home shoes, still cry leather is
dearer and dearer, may I justly say of those melancholy symptoms:
these of despair are most violent, tragical, and grievous, far beyond
the rest, not to be expressed but negatively, as it is privation of all
happiness, not to be endured; "for a wounded spirit who can bear
it?" Prov. xviii. 19. What, therefore, Timanthes did in his picture of
Iphigenia, now ready to be sacrificed, when he had painted Chalcas
mourning, Ulysses sad, but most sorrowful Menelaus; and showed 
all his art in expressing a variety of affections, he covered the
maid's father Agamemnon's head with a veil, and left it to every
spectator to conceive what he would himself; for that true passion
and sorrow in summo gradu, such as his was, could not by any art
be deciphered. What he did in his picture, I will do in describing
the symptoms of despair; imagine what thou canst, fear, sorrow,
furies, grief, pain, terror, anger, dismal, ghastly, tedious, irksome,
&c. it is not sufficient, it comes far short, no tongue can tell, no
heart conceive it. 'Tis an epitome of hell, an extract, a quintessence,
a compound, a mixture of all feral maladies, tyrannical tortures,
plagues, and perplexities. There is no sickness almost but physic
provideth a remedy for it; to every sore chirurgery will provide a
salve; friendship helps poverty; hope of liberty easeth
imprisonment; suit and favour revoke banishment; authority and
time wear away reproach: but what physic, what chirurgery, what
wealth, favour, authority can relieve, bear out, assuage, or expel a
troubled conscience? A quiet mind cureth all them, but all they
cannot comfort a distressed soul: who can put to silence the voice
of desperation? All that is single in other melancholy, Horribile,
dirum, pestilens, atrox, ferum, concur in this, it is more than
melancholy in the highest degree; a burning fever of the soul; so
mad, saith Jacchinus, by this misery; fear, sorrow, and despair, he
puts for ordinary symptoms of melancholy. They are in great pain
and horror of mind, distraction of soul, restless, full of continual
fears, cares, torments, anxieties, they can neither eat, drink, nor
sleep for them, take no rest,

 "Perpetua impietas, nec mensae tempore cessat,
Exagitat vesana quies, somnique furentes."

"Neither at bed, nor yet at board,
Will any rest despair afford."

Fear takes away their content, and dries the blood, wasteth the
marrow, alters their countenance, "even in their greatest delights,
singing, dancing, dalliance, they are still" (saith Lemnius) "tortured
in their souls." It consumes them to nought, "I am like a pelican in
the wilderness (saith David of himself, temporally afflicted) , an
owl, because of thine indignation," Psalm cii. 8, 10, and Psalm lv.
4. "My heart trembleth within me, and the terrors of death have
come upon me; fear and trembling are come upon me, &c. at
death's door," Psalm cvii. 18. "Their soul abhors all manner of
meats." Their sleep is (if it be any) unquiet, subject to fearful
dreams and terrors. Peter in his bonds slept secure, for he knew
God protected him; and Tully makes it an argument of Roscius
Amerinus' innocency, that he killed not his father, because he so
securely slept. Those martyrs in the primitive church were most
cheerful and merry in the midst of their persecutions; but it is far
otherwise with these men, tossed in a sea, and that continually
without rest or intermission, they can think of nought that is
pleasant, "their conscience will not let them be quiet," in perpetual
fear, anxiety, if they be not yet apprehended, they are in doubt still
they shall be ready to betray themselves, as Cain did, he thinks
every man will kill him; "and roar for the grief of heart," Psalm
xxxviii. 8, as David did; as Job did, xx. 3, 21, 22, &c., "Wherefore
is light given to him that is in misery, and life to them that have
heavy hearts? which long for death, and if it come not, search it
more than treasures, and rejoice when they can find the grave."
They are generally weary of their lives, a trembling heart they
have, a sorrowful mind, and little or no rest. Terror ubique tremor,
timor undique et undique terror. "Fears, terrors, and affrights in all
places, at all times and seasons." Cibum et potum pertinaciter
aversantur multi, nodum in scirpo quaeritantes, et culpam
imaginantes ubi nulla est, as Wierus writes de Lamiis lib. 3. c. 7.
"they refuse many of them meat and drink, cannot rest, aggravating
still and supposing grievous offences where there are none." God's
heavy wrath is kindled in their souls, and notwithstanding their
continual prayers and supplications to Christ Jesus, they have no
release or ease at all, but a most intolerable torment, and
insufferable anguish of conscience, and that makes them, through
impatience, to murmur against God many times, to rave, to
blaspheme, turn atheists, and seek to offer violence to themselves.
Deut. xxviii. 65, 68. "In the morning they wish for evening, and for
morning in the evening, for the sight of their eyes which they see,
and fear of hearts." Marinus Mercennus, in his comment on
Genesis, makes mention of a desperate friend of his, whom,
amongst others, he came to visit, and exhort to patience, that broke
out into most blasphemous atheistical speeches, too fearful to
relate, when they wished him to trust in God, Quis est ille Deus
(inquit) ut serviam illi, quid proderit si oraverim; si praesens est,
cur non succurrit? cur non me carcere, inertia, squalore confectum
liberat? quid ego feci? &c. absit a me hujusmodi Deus. Another of
his acquaintance broke out into like atheistical blasphemies, upon
his wife's death raved, cursed, said and did he cared not what. And
so for the most part it is with them all, many of them, in their
extremity, think they hear and see visions, outcries, confer with
devils, that they are tormented, possessed, and in hell-fire, already
damned, quite forsaken of God, they have no sense or feeling of
mercy, or grace, hope of salvation, their sentence of condemnation
is already past, and not to be revoked, the devil will certainly have
them. Never was any living creature in such torment before, in such
a miserable estate, in such distress of mind, no hope, no faith, past
cure, reprobate, continually tempted to make away themselves.
Something talks with them, they spit fire and brimstone, they
cannot but blaspheme, they cannot repent, believe or think a good
thought, so far carried; ut cogantur ad impia cogitandum etiam
contra voluntatem, said Felix Plater, ad blasphemiam erga deum,
ad multa horrenda perpetranda, ad manus violentas sibi
inferendas, &c., and in their distracted fits and desperate humours,
to offer violence to others, their familiar and dear friends
sometimes, or to mere strangers, upon very small or no occasion;
for he that cares not for his own, is master of another man's life.
They think evil against their wills; that which they abhor
themselves, they must needs think, do, and speak. He gives
instance in a patient of his, that when he would pray, had such evil
thoughts still suggested to him, and wicked meditations. Another
instance he hath of a woman that was often tempted to curse God,
to blaspheme and kill herself. Sometimes the devil (as they say)
stands without and talks with them, sometimes he is within them,
as they think, and there speaks and talks as to such as are
possessed: so Apollodorus, in Plutarch, thought his heart spake
within him. There is a most memorable example of Francis Spira,
an advocate of Padua, Ann. 1545, that being desperate, by no
counsel of learned men could be comforted: he felt (as he said) the
pains of hell in his soul; in all other things he discoursed aright, but
in this most mad. Frismelica, Bullovat, and some other excellent
physicians, could neither make him eat, drink, or sleep, no
persuasion could ease him. Never pleaded any man so well for
himself, as this man did against himself, and so he desperately died.
Springer, a lawyer, hath written his life. Cardinal Crescence died so
likewise desperate at Verona, still he thought a black dog followed
him to his death-bed, no man could drive the dog away, Sleiden.
com. 23. cap. lib. 3. Whilst I was writing this Treatise, saith
Montaltus, cap. 2. de mel. "A nun came to me for help, well for all
other matters, but troubled in conscience for five years last past;
she is almost mad, and not able to resist, thinks she hath offended
God, and is certainly damned." Felix Plater hath store of instances
of such as thought themselves damned, forsaken of God, &c. One
amongst the rest, that durst not go to church, or come near the
Rhine, for fear to make away himself, because then he was most
especially tempted. These and such like symptoms are intended and
remitted, as the malady itself is more or less; some will hear good
counsel, some will not; some desire help, some reject all, and will
not be eased.





SUBSECT. V.-- Prognostics of Despair, Atheism, Blasphemy,
violent death, &c.

Most part these kind of persons make away themselves, some are
mad, blaspheme, curse, deny God, but most offer violence to their
own persons, and sometimes to others. "A wounded spirit who can
bear?" Prov. xviii. 14. As Cain, Saul, Achitophel, Judas,
blasphemed and died. Bede saith, Pilate died desperate eight years
after Christ. Felix Plater hath collected many examples. A
merchant's wife that was long troubled with such temptations, in
the night rose from her bed, and out of the window broke her neck
into the street: another drowned himself desperate as he was in the
Rhine: some cut their throats, many hang themselves. But this
needs no illustration. It is controverted by some, whether a man so
offering violence to himself, dying desperate, may be saved, ay or
no? If they die so obstinately and suddenly, that they cannot so
much as wish for mercy, the worst is to be suspected, because they
die impenitent. If their death had been a little more lingering,
wherein they might have some leisure in their hearts to cry for
mercy, charity may judge the best; divers have been recovered out
of the very act of hanging and drowning themselves, and so
brought ad sanam mentem, they have been very penitent, much
abhorred their former act, confessed that they have repented in an
instant, and cried for mercy in their hearts. If a man put desperate
hands upon himself, by occasion of madness or melancholy, if he
have given testimony before of his regeneration, in regard he doth
this not so much out of his will, as ex vi morbi, we must make the
best construction of it, as Turks do, that think all fools and madmen
go directly to heaven.





SUBSECT. VI.-- Cure of Despair by Physic, Good Counsel,
Comforts, &c.

Experience teacheth us, that though many die obstinate and wilful
in this malady, yet multitudes again are able to resist and
overcome, seek for help and find comfort, are taken e faucibus
Erebi, from the chops of hell, and out of the devil's paws, though
they have by obligation, given themselves to him. Some out of their
own strength, and God's assistance, "Though He kill me," (saith
Job,) "yet will I trust in Him," out of good counsel, advice and
physic. Bellovacus cured a monk by altering his habit, and course
of life: Plater many by physic alone. But for the most part they
must concur; and they take a wrong course that think to overcome
this feral passion by sole physic; and they are as much out, that
think to work this effect by good service alone, though both be
forcible in themselves, yet vis unita fortior, "they must go hand in
hand to this disease:" -- alterius sic altera poscit opem. For physic
the like course is to be taken with this as in other melancholy: diet,
air, exercise, all those passions and perturbations of the mind, &c.
are to be rectified by the same means. They must not be left
solitary, or to themselves, never idle, never out of company.
Counsel, good comfort is to be applied, as they shall see the parties
inclined, or to the causes, whether it be loss, fear, be grief,
discontent, or some such feral accident, a guilty conscience, or
otherwise by frequent meditation, too grievous an apprehension,
and consideration of his former life; by hearing, reading of
Scriptures, good divines, good advice and conference, applying
God's word to their distressed souls, it must be corrected and
counterpoised. Many excellent exhortations, phraenetical
discourses, are extant to this purpose, for such as are any way
troubled in mind: Perkins, Greenham, Hayward, Bright, Abernethy,
Bolton, Culmannus, Helmingius, Coelius Secundus, Nicholas
Laurentius, are copious on this subject: Azorius, Navarrus, Sayrus,
&c., and such as have written cases of conscience amongst our
pontifical writers. But because these men's works are not to all
parties at hand, so parable at all times, I will for the benefit and
ease of such as are afflicted, at the request of some friends,
recollect out of their voluminous treatises, some few such
comfortable speeches, exhortations, arguments, advice, tending to
this subject, and out of God's word, knowing, as Culmannus saith
upon the like occasion, "how unavailable and vain men's councils
are to comfort an afflicted conscience, except God's word concur
and be annexed, from which comes life, ease, repentance," &c.
Presupposing first that which Beza, Greenham, Perkins, Bolton,
give in charge, the parties to whom counsel is given be sufficiently
prepared, humbled for their sins, fit for comfort, confessed, tried
how they are more or less afflicted, how they stand affected, or
capable of good advice, before any remedies be applied: to such
therefore as are so thoroughly searched and examined, I address
this following discourse.

Two main antidotes, Hemmingius observes, opposite to despair,
good hope out of God's word, to be embraced; perverse security
and presumption from the devil's treachery, to be rejected; Illa
solus animae, haec pestis; one saves, the other kills, occidit
animam, saith Austin, and doth as much harm as despair itself,
Navarrus the casuist reckons up ten special cures out of Anton. 1.
part. Tit. 3. cap. 10. 1. God. 2. Physic. 3. Avoiding such objects as
have caused it. 4. Submission of himself to other men's judgments.
5. Answer of all objections, &c. All which Cajetan, Gerson, lib. de
vit. spirit. Sayrus, lib. 1. cons. cap. 14. repeat and approve out of
Emanuel Roderiques, cap. 51 et 52. Greenham prescribes six
special rules, Culmannus seven. First, to acknowledge all help
come from God. 2. That the cause of their present misery is sin. 3.
To repent and be heartily sorry for their sins. 4. To pray earnestly
to God they may be eased. 5. To expect and implore the prayers of
the church, and good men's advice. 6. Physic. 7. To commend
themselves to God, and rely upon His mercy: others, otherwise, but
all to this effect. But forasmuch as most men in this malady are
spiritually sick, void of reason almost, overborne by their miseries,
and too deep an apprehension of their sins, they cannot apply
themselves to good counsel, pray, believe, repent, we must, as
much as in us lies, occur and help their peculiar infirmities,
according to their several causes and symptoms, as we shall find
them distressed and complain.

The main matter which terrifies and torments most that are troubled
in mind, is the enormity of their offences, the intolerable burthen of
their sins, God's heavy wrath and displeasure so deeply
apprehended, that they account themselves reprobates, quite
forsaken of God, already damned, past all hope of grace, incapable
of mercy, diaboli mancipia, slaves of sin, and their offences so
great they cannot be forgiven. But these men must know there is no
sin so heinous which is not pardonable in itself, no crime so great
but by God's mercy it may be forgiven. "Where sin aboundeth,
grace aboundeth much more," Rom. v. 20. And what the Lord said
unto Paul in his extremity, 2 Cor. xi. 9. "My grace is sufficient for
thee, for my power is made perfect through weakness:" concerns
every man in like case. His promises are made indefinite to all
believers, generally spoken to all touching remission of sins that
are truly penitent, grieved for their offences, and desire to be
reconciled, Matt. ix. 12, 13, "I came not to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance," that is, such as are truly touched in
conscience for their sins. Again, Matt. xi. 28, "Come unto me all ye
that are heavy laden, and I will ease you." Ezek. xviii. 27, "At what
time soever a sinner shall repent him of his sins from the bottom of
his heart, I will blot out all his wickedness out of my remembrance
saith the Lord." Isaiah xliii. 25, "I, even I, am He that put away
thine iniquity for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins."
"As a father" (saith David Psal. ciii. 13) "hath compassion on his
children, so hath the Lord compassion on them that fear him." And
will receive them again as the prodigal son was entertained, Luke
xv., if they shall so come with tears in their eyes, and a penitent
heart. Peccator agnoscat, Deus ignoscit. "The Lord is full of
compassion and mercy, slow to anger, of great kindness," Psal. ciii.
8. "He will not always chide, neither keep His anger for ever," 9.
"As high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is His mercy
towards them that fear Him," 11. "As far as the East is from the
West, so far hath He removed our sins from us," 12. Though Cain
cry out in the anguish of his soul, my punishment is greater than I
can bear, 'tis not so; thou liest, Cain (saith Austin) , "God's mercy is
greater than thy sins. His mercy is above all His works," Psal. cxlv.
9, able to satisfy for all men's sins, antilutron, 1 Tim. ii. 6. His
mercy is a panacea, a balsam for an afflicted soul, a sovereign
medicine, an alexipharmacum for all sins, a charm for the devil; his
mercy was great to Solomon, to Manasseh, to Peter, great to all
offenders, and whosoever thou art, it may be so to thee. For why
should God bid us pray (as Austin infers) "Deliver us from all
evil," nisi ipse misericors perseveraret, if He did not intend to help
us? He therefore that doubts of the remission of his sins, denies
God's mercy, and doth Him injury, saith Austin. Yea, but thou
repliest, I am a notorious sinner, mine offences are not so great as
infinite. Hear Fulgentius, "God's invincible goodness cannot be
overcome by sin, His infinite mercy cannot be terminated by any:
the multitude of His mercy is equivalent to His magnitude." Hear
Chrysostom, "Thy malice may be measured, but God's mercy
cannot be defined; thy malice is circumscribed, His mercies
infinite." As a drop of water is to the sea, so are thy misdeeds to
His mercy: nay, there is no such proportion to be given; for the sea,
though great, yet may be measured, but God's mercy cannot be
circumscribed. Whatsoever thy sins be then in quantity or quality,
multitude or magnitude, fear them not, distrust not. I speak not this,
saith Chrysostom, "to make thee secure and negligent, but to cheer
thee up." Yea but, thou urgest again, I have little comfort of this
which is said, it concerns me not: Inanis poenitentia quam sequens
culpa coinquinat, 'tis to no purpose for me to repent, and to do
worse than ever I did before, to persevere in sin, and to return to
my lusts as a dog to his vomit, or a swine to the mire: to what end
is it to ask forgiveness of my sins, and yet daily to sin again and
again, to do evil out of a habit? I daily and hourly offend in
thought, word, and deed, in a relapse by mine own weakness and
wilfulness: my bonus genius, my good protecting angel is gone, I
am fallen from that I was or would be, worse and worse, "my latter
end is worse than my beginning:" Si quotidiae peccas, quotidie,
saith Chrysostom, poenitentiam age, if thou daily offend, daily
repent: "if twice, thrice, a hundred, a hundred thousand times,
twice, thrice, a hundred thousand times repent." As they do by an
old house that is out of repair, still mend some part or other; so do
by thy soul, still reform some vice, repair it by repentance, call to
Him for grace, and thou shalt have it; "For we are freely justified
by His grace," Rom. iii. 24. If thine enemy repent, as our Saviour
enjoined Peter, forgive him seventy-seven times; and why shouldst
thou think God will not forgive thee? Why should the enormity of
thy sins trouble thee? God can do it, he will do it. "My conscience"
(saith Anselm) "dictates to me that I deserve damnation, my
repentance will not suffice for satisfaction: but thy mercy, O Lord,
quite overcometh all my transgressions." The gods once (as the
poets feign) with a gold chain would pull Jupiter out of heaven, but
all they together could not stir him, and yet he could draw and turn
them as he would himself; maugre all the force and fury of these
infernal fiends, and crying sins, "His grace is sufficient." Confer the
debt and the payment; Christ and Adam; sin, and the cure of it; the
disease and the medicine; confer the sick man to his physician, and
thou shalt soon perceive that his power is infinitely beyond it. God
is better able, as Bernard informeth us, "to help, than sin to do us
hurt; Christ is better able to save, than the devil to destroy." If he be
a skilful Physician, as Fulgentius adds, "he can cure all diseases; if
merciful, he will." Non est perfecta bonitas a qua non omnis
malitia vincitur, His goodness is not absolute and perfect, if it be
not able to overcome all malice. Submit thyself unto Him, as St.
Austin adviseth, "He knoweth best what he doth; and be not so
much pleased when he sustains thee, as patient when he corrects
thee; he is omnipotent, and can cure all diseases when he sees his
own time." He looks down from heaven upon earth, that he may
hear the "mourning of prisoners, and deliver the children of death,"
Psal. cii. 19. 20. "And though our sins be as red as scarlet, He can
make them as white as snow," Isai. i. 18. Doubt not of this, or ask
how it shall be done: He is all-sufficient that promiseth; qui fecit
mundum de immundo, saith Chrysostom, he that made a fair world
of nought, can do this and much more for his part: do thou only
believe, trust in him, rely on him, be penitent and heartily sorry for
thy sins. Repentance is a sovereign remedy for all sins, a spiritual
wing to rear us, a charm for our miseries, a protecting amulet to
expel sin's venom, an attractive loadstone to draw God's mercy and
graces unto us. Peccatum vulnus, poenitentia medicinam: sin made
the breach, repentance must help it; howsoever thine offence came,
by error, sloth, obstinacy, ignorance, exitur per poenitentiam, this is
the sole means to be relieved. Hence comes our hope of safety, by
this alone sinners are saved, God is provoked to mercy. "This
unlooseth all that is bound, enlighteneth darkness, mends that is
broken, puts life to that which was desperately dying:" makes no
respect of offences, or of persons. "This doth not repel a fornicator,
reject a drunkard, resist a proud fellow, turn away an idolater, but
entertains all, communicates itself to all." Who persecuted the
church more than Paul, offended more than Peter? and yet by
repentance (saith Curysologus) they got both Magisterium et
ministerium sanctitatis, the Magistery of holiness. The prodigal son
went far, but by repentance he came home at last. "This alone will
turn a wolf into a sheep, make a publican a preacher, turn a thorn
into an olive, make a debauched fellow religious," a blasphemer
sing halleluja, make Alexander the coppersmith truly devout, make
a devil a saint. "And him that polluted his mouth with calumnies,
lying, swearing, and filthy tunes and tones, to purge his throat with
divine Psalms." Repentance will effect prodigious cures, make a
stupend metamorphosis. "A hawk came into the ark, and went out
again a hawk; a lion came in, went out a lion; a bear, a bear; a wolf,
a wolf; but if a hawk came into this sacred temple of repentance, he
will go forth a dove" (saith Chrysostom) , "a wolf go out a sheep, a
lion a lamb. This gives sight to the blind, legs to the lame, cures all
diseases, confers grace, expels vice, inserts virtue, comforts and
fortifies the soul." Shall I say, let thy sin be what it will, do but
repent, it is sufficient. Quem poenitet peccasse pene est innocens.
(Seneca. "He who repents of his sins is well nigh innocent.") 'Tis
true indeed and all-sufficient this, they do confess, if they could
repent; but they are obdurate, they have cauterised consciences,
they are in a reprobate sense, they cannot think a good thought,
they cannot hope for grace, pray, believe, repent, or be sorry for
their sins, they find no grief for sin in themselves, but rather a
delight, no groaning of spirit, but are carried headlong to their own
destruction, "heaping wrath to themselves against the day of
wrath," Rom. ii. 5. 'Tis a grievous case this I do yield, and yet not
to be despaired; God of his bounty and mercy calls all to
repentance, Rom. ii. 4, thou mayst be called at length, restored,
taken to His grace, as the thief upon the cross, at the last hour, as
Mary Magdalene and many other sinners have been, that were
buried in sin. "God" (saith Fulgentius) "is delighted in the
conversion of a sinner, he sets no time;" prolixitas temporis Deo
non praejudicat, aut gravitas peccati, deferring of time or
grievousness of sin, do not prejudicate his grace, things past and to
come are all one to Him, as present: 'tis never too late to repent.
"This heaven of repentance is still open for all distressed souls;"
and howsoever as yet no signs appear, thou mayst repent in good
time. Hear a comfortable speech of St. Austin, "Whatsoever thou
shall do, how great a sinner soever, thou art yet living; if God
would not help thee, he would surely take thee away; but in sparing
thy life, he gives thee leisure, and invites thee to repentance."
Howsoever as yet, I say, thou perceivest no fruit, no feeling, findest
no likelihood of it in thyself, patiently abide the Lord's good
leisure, despair not, or think thou art a reprobate; He came to call
sinners to repentance, Luke v. 32, of which number thou art one;
He came to call thee, and in his time will surely call thee. And
although as yet thou hast no inclination to pray, to repent, thy faith
be cold and dead, and thou wholly averse from all Divine
functions, yet it may revive, as trees are dead in winter, but flourish
in the spring! these virtues may lie hid in thee for the present, yet
hereafter show themselves, and peradventure already bud,
howsoever thou dost not perceive. 'Tis Satan's policy to plead
against, suppress and aggravate, to conceal those sparks of faith in
thee. Thou dost not believe, thou sayest, yet thou wouldst believe if
thou couldst, 'tis thy desire to believe; then pray, "Lord help mine
unbelief:" and hereafter thou shall certainly believe: Dabitur
sitienti, it shall be given to him that thirsteth. Thou canst not yet
repent, hereafter thou shall; a black cloud of sin as yet obnubilates
thy soul, terrifies thy conscience, but this cloud may conceive a
rainbow at the last, and be quite dissipated by repentance. Be of
good cheer; a child is rational in power, not in act; and so art thou
penitent in affection, though not yet in action. 'Tis thy desire to
please God, to be heartily sorry; comfort thyself, no time is
overpast, 'tis never too late. A desire to repent is repentance itself,
though not in nature, yet in God's acceptance; a willing mind is
sufficient. "Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness," Matt. v. 6. He that is destitute of God's grace, and
wisheth for it, shall have it. "The Lord" (saith David, Psal. x. 17)
"will hear the desire of the poor," that is, such as are in distress of
body and mind. 'Tis true thou canst not as yet grieve for thy sin,
thou hast no feeling of faith, I yield; yet canst thou grieve thou dost
not grieve? It troubles thee, I am sure, thine heart should be so
impenitent and hard, thou wouldst have it otherwise; 'tis thy desire
to grieve, to repent, and to believe. Thou lovest God's children and
saints in the meantime, hatest them not, persecutest them not, but
rather wishest thyself a true professor, to be as they are, as thou
thyself hast been heretofore; which is an evident token thou art in
no such desperate case. 'Tis a good sign of thy conversion, thy sins
are pardonable, thou art, or shalt surely be reconciled. "The Lord is
near them that are of a contrite heart," Luke iv. 18. A true desire of
mercy in the want of mercy, is mercy itself; a desire of grace in the
want of grace, is grace itself; a constant and earnest desire to
believe, repent, and to be reconciled to God, if it be in a touched
heart, is an acceptation of God, a reconciliation, faith and
repentance itself. For it is not thy faith and repentance, as
Chrysostom truly teacheth, that is available, but God's mercy that is
annexed to it, He accepts the will for the deed: so that I conclude,
to feel in ourselves the want of grace, and to be grieved for it, is
grace itself. I am troubled with fear my sins are not forgiven,
Careless objects: but Bradford answers they are; "For God hath
given thee a penitent and believing heart, that is, a heart which
desireth to repent and believe; for such an one is taken of him (he
accepting the will for the deed) for a truly penitent and believing
heart."

All this is true thou repliest, but yet it concerns not thee, 'tis
verified in ordinary offenders, in common sins, but thine are of a
higher strain, even against the Holy Ghost himself, irremissible
sins, sins of the first magnitude, written with a pen of iron,
engraven with a point of a diamond. Thou art worse than a pagan,
infidel, Jew, or Turk, for thou art an apostate and more, thou hast
voluntarily blasphemed, renounced God and all religion, thou art
worse than Judas himself, or they that crucified Christ: for they did
offend out of ignorance, but thou hast thought in thine heart there is
no God. Thou hast given thy soul to the devil, as witches and
conjurors do, explicite and implicite, by compact, band and
obligation (a desperate, a fearful case) to satisfy thy lust, or to be
revenged of thine enemies, thou didst never pray, come to church,
hear, read, or do any divine duties with any devotion, but for
formality and fashion's sake, with a kind of reluctance, 'twas
troublesome and painful to thee to perform any such thing, praeter
voluntatem, against thy will. Thou never mad'st any conscience of
lying, swearing, bearing false witness, murder, adultery, bribery,
oppression, theft, drunkenness, idolatry, but hast ever done all
duties for fear of punishment, as they were most advantageous, and
to thine own ends, and committed all such notorious sins, with an
extraordinary delight, hating that thou shouldst love, and loving
that thou shouldst hate. Instead of faith, fear and love of God,
repentance, &c., blasphemous thoughts have been ever harboured
in his mind, even against God himself, the blessed Trinity; the
Scripture false, rude, harsh, immethodical: heaven, hell,
resurrection, mere toys and fables, incredible, impossible, absurd,
vain, ill contrived; religion, policy, and human invention, to keep
men in obedience, or for profit, invented by priests and lawgivers
to that purpose. If there be any such supreme power, he takes no
notice of our doings, hears not our prayers, regardeth them not, will
not, cannot help, or else he is partial, an excepter of persons, author
of sin, a cruel, a destructive God, to create our souls, and destinate
them to eternal damnation, to make us worse than our dogs and
horses, why doth he not govern things better, protect good men,
root out wicked livers? why do they prosper and flourish? as she
raved in the tragedy -- pellices caelum tenent, there they shine,
Suasque Perseus aureas stellas habet, where is his providence?
how appears it?

 "Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet, at Cato parvo,
Pomponius nullo, quis putet esse Deos."

 ("Licinus lies in a marble tomb, but Cato in a mean one;
Pomponius has none, who can think therefore that there are
Gods?")

Why doth he suffer Turks to overcome Christians, the enemy to
triumph over his church, paganism to domineer in all places as it
doth, heresies to multiply, such enormities to be committed, and so
many such bloody wars, murders, massacres, plagues, feral
diseases! why doth he not make us all good, able, sound? why
makes he venomous creatures, rocks, sands, deserts, this earth itself
the muck-hill of the world, a prison, a house of correction?
Mentimur regnare Jovem, &c., with many such horrible and
execrable conceits, not fit to be uttered; Terribilia de fide,
horribilia de Divinitate. They cannot some of them but think evil,
they are compelled volentes nolentes, to blaspheme, especially
when they come to church and pray, read, &c., such foul and
prodigious suggestions come into their hearts.

These are abominable, unspeakable offences, and most opposite to
God, tentationes foedae, et impiae, yet in this case, he or they that
shall be tempted and so affected, must know, that no man living is
free from such thoughts in part, or at some times, the most divine
spirits have been so tempted in some sort, evil custom, omission of
holy exercises, ill company, idleness, solitariness, melancholy, or
depraved nature, and the devil is still ready to corrupt, trouble, and
divert our souls, to suggest such blasphemous thoughts into our
fantasies, ungodly, profane, monstrous and wicked conceits: If they
come from Satan, they are more speedy, fearful and violent, the
parties cannot avoid them: they are more frequent, I say, and
monstrous when they come; for the devil he is a spirit, and hath
means and opportunities to mingle himself with our spirits, and
sometimes more slyly, sometimes more abruptly and openly, to
suggest such devilish thoughts into our hearts; he insults and
domineers in melancholy distempered fantasies and persons
especially; melancholy is balneum diaboli, as Serapio holds, the
devil's bath, and invites him to come to it. As a sick man frets,
raves in his fits, speaks and doth he knows not what, the devil
violently compels such crazed souls to think such damned thoughts
against their wills, they cannot but do it; sometimes more
continuate, or by fits, he takes his advantage, as the subject is less
able to resist, he aggravates, extenuates, affirms, denies, damns,
confounds the spirits, troubles heart, brain, humours, organs,
senses, and wholly domineers in their imaginations. If they proceed
from themselves, such thoughts, they are remiss and moderate, not
so violent and monstrous, not so frequent. The devil commonly
suggests things opposite to nature, opposite to God and his word,
impious, absurd, such as a man would never of himself, or could
not conceive, they strike terror and horror into the parties' own
hearts. For if he or they be asked whether they do approve of such
like thoughts or no, they answer (and their own souls truly dictate
as much) they abhor them as much as hell and the devil himself,
they would fain think otherwise if they could; he hath thought
otherwise, and with all his soul desires so to think again; he doth
resist, and hath some good motions intermixed now and then: so
that such blasphemous, impious, unclean thoughts, are not his own,
but the devil's; they proceed not from him, but from a crazed
phantasy, distempered humours, black fumes which offend his
brain: they are thy crosses, the devil's sins, and he shall answer for
them, he doth enforce thee to do that which thou dost abhor, and
didst never give consent to: and although he hath sometimes so
slyly set upon thee, and so far prevailed, as to make thee in some
sort to assent to such wicked thoughts, to delight in, yet they have
not proceeded from a confirmed will in thee, but are of that nature
which thou dost afterwards reject and abhor. Therefore be not
overmuch troubled and dismayed with such kind of suggestions, at
least if they please thee not, because they are not thy personal sins,
for which thou shalt incur the wrath of God, or his displeasure:
contemn, neglect them, let them go as they come, strive not too
violently, or trouble thyself too much, but as our Saviour said to
Satan in like case, say thou, avoid Satan, I detest thee and them.
Satanae est mala ingerere (saith Austin) nostrum non consentire:
as Satan labours to suggest, so must we strive not to give consent,
and it will be sufficient: the more anxious and solicitous thou art,
the more perplexed, the more thou shalt otherwise be troubled and
entangled. Besides, they must know this, all so molested and
distempered, that although these be most execrable and grievous
sins, they are pardonable yet, through God's mercy and goodness,
they may be forgiven, if they be penitent and sorry for them. Paul
himself confesseth, Rom. xvii. 19. "He did not the good he would
do, but the evil which he would not do; 'tis not I, but sin that
dwelleth in me." 'Tis not thou, but Satan's suggestions, his craft and
subtlety, his malice: comfort thyself then if thou be penitent and
grieved, or desirous to be so, these heinous sins shall not be laid to
thy charge; God's mercy is above all sins, which if thou do not
finally contemn, without doubt thou shalt be saved. "No man sins
against the Holy Ghost, but he that wilfully and finally renounceth
Christ, and contemneth him and his word to the last, without which
there is no salvation, from which grievous sin, God of his infinite
mercy deliver us." Take hold of this to be thy comfort, and
meditate withal on God's word, labour to pray, to repent, to be
renewed in mind, "keep thine heart with all diligence." Prov. iv. 13,
resist the devil, and he will fly from thee, pour out thy soul unto the
Lord with sorrowful Hannah, "pray continually," as Paul enjoins,
and as David did, Psalm i. "meditate on his law day and night."

Yea, but this meditation is that mars all, and mistaken makes many
men far worse, misconceiving all they read or hear, to their own
overthrow; the more they search and read Scriptures, or divine
treatises, the more they puzzle themselves, as a bird in a net, the
more they are entangled and precipitated into this preposterous
gulf: "Many are called, but few are chosen," Matt. xx. 16. and xxii.
14. with such like places of Scripture misinterpreted strike them
with horror, they doubt presently whether they be of this number or
no: God's eternal decree of predestination, absolute reprobation,
and such fatal tables, they form to their own ruin, and impinge
upon this rock of despair. How shall they be assured of their
salvation, by what signs? "If the righteous scarcely be saved, where
shall the ungodly and sinners appear?" 1 Pet. iv. 18. Who knows,
saith Solomon, whether he be elect? This grinds their souls, how
shall they discern they are not reprobates? But I say again, how
shall they discern they are? From the devil can be no certainty, for
he is a liar from the beginning; if he suggests any such thing, as too
frequently he doth, reject him as a deceiver, an enemy of human
kind, dispute not with him, give no credit to him, obstinately refuse
him, as St. Anthony did in the wilderness, whom the devil set upon
in several shapes, or as the collier did, so do thou by him. For when
the devil tempted him with the weakness of his faith, and told him
he could not be saved, as being ignorant in the principles of
religion, and urged him moreover to know what he believed, what
he thought of such and such points and mysteries: the collier told
him, he believed as the church did; but what (said the devil again)
doth the church believe? as I do (said the collier) ; and what's that
thou believest? as the church doth, &c., when the devil could get no
other answer, he left him. If Satan summon thee to answer, send
him to Christ: he is thy liberty, thy protector against cruel death,
raging sin, that roaring lion, he is thy righteousness, thy Saviour,
and thy life. Though he say, thou art not of the number of the elect,
a reprobate, forsaken of God, hold thine own still, hic murus
aheneus esto, let this be as a bulwark, a brazen wall to defend thee,
stay thyself in that certainty of faith; let that be thy comfort, Christ
will protect thee, vindicate thee, thou art one of his flock, he will
triumph over the law, vanquish death, overcome the devil, and
destroy hell. If he say thou art none of the elect, no believer, reject
him, defy him, thou hast thought otherwise, and mayst so be
resolved again; comfort thyself; this persuasion cannot come from
the devil, and much less can it be grounded from thyself? men are
liars, and why shouldst thou distrust? A denying Peter, a
persecuting Paul, an adulterous cruel David, have been received; an
apostate Solomon may be converted; no sin at all but impenitency,
can give testimony of final reprobation. Why shouldst thou then
distrust, misdoubt thyself, upon what ground, what suspicion? This
opinion alone of particularity? Against that, and for the certainty of
election and salvation on the other side, see God's good will toward
men, hear how generally his grace is proposed to him, and him, and
them, each man in particular, and to all. 1 Tim. ii. 4. "God will that
all men be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth." 'Tis a
universal promise, "God sent not his son into the world to condemn
the world, but that through him the world might be saved." John iii.
17. "He that acknowledged himself a man in the world, must
likewise acknowledge he is of that number that is to be saved."
Ezek. xxxiii. 11, "I will not the death of a sinner, but that he repent
and live:" But thou art a sinner; therefore he will not thy death.
"This is the will of him that sent me, that every man that believeth
in the Son, should have everlasting life." John vi. 40. "He would
have no man perish, but all come to repentance," 2 Pet. iii. 9.
Besides, remission of sins is to be preached, not to a few, but
universally to all men, "Go therefore and tell all nations, baptising
them," &c. Matt. xxviii. 19. "Go into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature," Mark xvi. 15. Now there cannot be
contradictory wills in God, he will have all saved, and not all, how
can this stand together? be secure then, believe, trust in him, hope
well and be saved. Yea, that's the main matter, how shall I believe
or discern my security from carnal presumption? my faith is weak
and faint, I want those signs and fruits of sanctification, sorrow for
sin, thirsting for grace, groanings of the spirit, love of Christians as
Christians, avoiding occasion of sin, endeavour of new obedience,
charity, love of God, perseverance. Though these signs be
languishing in thee, and not seated in thine heart, thou must not
therefore be dejected or terrified; the effects of the faith and spirit
are not yet so fully felt in thee; conclude not therefore thou art a
reprobate, or doubt of thine election, because the elect themselves
are without them, before their conversion. Thou mayst in the Lord's
good time be converted; some are called at the eleventh hour. Use,
I say, the means of thy conversion, expect the Lord's leisure, if not
yet called, pray thou mayst be, or at least wish and desire thou
mayst be.

Notwithstanding all this which might be said to this effect, to ease
their afflicted minds, what comfort our best divines can afford in
this case, Zanchius, Beza, &c. This furious curiosity, needless
speculation, fruitless meditation about election, reprobation, free
will, grace, such places of Scripture preposterously conceived,
torment still, and crucify the souls of too many, and set all the
world together by the ears. To avoid which inconveniences, and to
settle their distressed minds, to mitigate those divine aphorisms,
(though in another extreme some) our late Arminians have revived
that plausible doctrine of universal grace, which many fathers, our
late Lutheran and modern papists do still maintain, that we have
free will of ourselves, and that grace is common to all that will
believe. Some again, though less orthodoxal, will have a far greater
part saved than shall be damned, (as Coelius Secundus stiffly
maintains in his book, De amplitudine regni coelestis, or some
impostor under his name) beatorum numerus multo major quam
damnatorum. He calls that other tenet of special "election and
reprobation, a prejudicate, envious and malicious opinion, apt to
draw all men to desperation. Many are called, few chosen," &c. He
opposeth some opposite parts of Scripture to it, "Christ came into
the world to save sinners," &c. And four especial arguments he
produceth, one from God's power. If more be damned than saved,
he erroneously concludes, the devil hath the greater sovereignty!
for what is power but to protect? and majesty consists in multitude.
"If the devil have the greater part, where is his mercy, where is his
power? how is he Deus Optimus Maximus, misericors? &c., where
is his greatness, where his goodness?" He proceeds, "We account
him a murderer that is accessory only, or doth not help when he
can; which may not be supposed of God without great offence,
because he may do what he will, and is otherwise accessory, and
the author of sin. The nature of good is to be communicated, God is
good, and will not then be contracted in his goodness: for how is he
the father of mercy and comfort, if his good concern but a few? O
envious and unthankful men to think otherwise! Why should we
pray to God that are Gentiles, and thank him for his mercies and
benefits, that hath damned us all innocuous for Adam's offence,
one man's offence, one small offence, eating of an apple? why
should we acknowledge him for our governor that hath wholly
neglected the salvation of our souls, contemned us, and sent no
prophets or instructors to teach us, as he hath done to the
Hebrews?" So Julian the apostate objects. Why should these
Christians (Coelius urgeth) reject us and appropriate God unto
themselves, Deum illum suum unicum, &c. But to return to our
forged Coelius. At last he comes to that, he will have those saved
that never heard of, or believed in Christ, ex puris naturalibus, with
the Pelagians, and proves it out of Origen and others. "They" (saith
Origen) "that never heard God's word, are to be excused for their
ignorance; we may not think God will be so hard, angry, cruel or
unjust as to condemn any man indicta causa." They alone (he
holds) are in the state of damnation that refuse Christ's mercy and
grace, when it is offered. Many worthy Greeks and Romans, good
moral honest men, that kept the law of nature, did to others as they
would be done to themselves, as certainly saved, he concludes, as
they were that lived uprightly before the law of Moses. They were
acceptable in. God's sight, as Job was, the Magi, the queen of
Sheba, Darius of Persia, Socrates, Aristides, Cato, Curius, Tully,
Seneca, and many other philosophers, upright livers, no matter of
what religion, as Cornelius, out of any nation, so that he live
honestly, call on God, trust in him, fear him, he shall be saved. This
opinion was formerly maintained by the Valentinian and Basiledian
heretics, revived of late in Turkey, of what sect Rustan Bassa was
patron, defended by Galeatius Erasmus, by Zuinglius in exposit.
fidei ad Regem Galliae, whose tenet Bullinger vindicates, and
Gualter approves in a just apology with many arguments. There be
many Jesuits that follow these Calvinists in this behalf, Franciscus
Buchsius Moguntinus, Andradius Consil. Trident, many schoolmen
that out of the 1 Rom. v. 18. 19. are verily persuaded that those
good works of the Gentiles did so far please God, that they might
vitam aeternam promereri, and be saved in the end. Sesellius, and
Benedictus Justinianus in his comment on the first of the Romans,
Mathias Ditmarsh the politician, with many others, hold a
mediocrity, they may be salute non indigni but they will not
absolutely decree it. Hofmannus, a Lutheran professor of Helmstad,
and many of his followers, with most of our church, and papists,
are stiff against it. Franciscus Collius hath fully censured all
opinions in his Five Books, de Paganorum animabus post mortem,
and amply dilated this question, which whoso will may peruse. But
to return to my author, his conclusion is, that not only wicked
livers, blasphemers, reprobates, and such as reject God's grace, "but
that the devils themselves shall be saved at last," as Origen himself
long since delivered in his works, and our late Socinians defend,
Ostorodius, cap. 41. institut. Smaltius, &c. Those terms of all and
for ever in Scripture, are not eternal, but only denote a longer time,
which by many examples they prove. The world shall end like a
comedy, and we shall meet at last in heaven, and live in bliss
altogether, or else in conclusion, in nihil evanescere. For how can
he be merciful that shall condemn any creature to eternal
unspeakable punishment, for one small temporary fault, all
posterity, so many myriads for one and another man's offence, quid
meruistis oves? But these absurd paradoxes are exploded by our
church, we teach otherwise. That this vocation, predestination,
election, reprobation, non ex corrupta massa, praeviso, fide, as our
Arminians, or ex praevisis operibus, as our papists, non ex
praeteritione, but God's absolute decree ante mundum creatum, (as
many of our church hold) was from the beginning, before the
foundation of the world was laid, or homo conditus, (or from
Adam's fall, as others will, homo lapsus objectum est
reprobationis) with perseverantia sanctorum, we must be certain of
our salvation, we may fall but not finally, which our Arminians will
not admit. According to his immutable, eternal, just decree and
counsel of saving men and angels, God calls all, and would have all
to be saved according to the efficacy of vocation: all are invited,
but only the elect apprehended: the rest that are unbelieving,
impenitent, whom God in his just judgment leaves to be punished
for their sins, are in a reprobate sense; yet we must not determine
who are such, condemn ourselves or others, because we have a
universal invitation; all are commanded to believe, and we know
not how soon or how late our end may be received. I might have
said more of this subject; but forasmuch as it is a forbidden
question, and in the preface or declaration to the articles of the
church, printed 1633, to avoid factions and altercations, we that are
university divines especially, are prohibited "all curious search, to
print or preach, or draw the article aside by our own sense and
comments upon pain of ecclesiastical censure." I will surcease, and
conclude with Erasmus of such controversies: Pugnet qui volet, ego
censeo leges majorum reverenter suscipiendas, et religiose
observandas, velut a Deo profectas; nec esse tutum, nec esse pium,
de potestate publica sinistram concipere aut serere suspicionem. Et
siquid est tyrannidis, quod tamen non cogat ad impietatem, satius
est ferre, quam seditiose reluctari. (Epist. Erasmi de utilitate
colloquior. ad lectorem.-- Let whoever wishes dispute, I think the
laws of our forefathers should be received with reverence, and
religiously observed, as coming from God; neither is it safe or
pious to conceive, or contrive, an injurious suspicion of the public
authority; and should any tyranny, likely to drive men into the
commission of wickedness, exist, it is better to endure it than to
resist it by sedition.)

But to my former task. The last main torture and trouble of a
distressed mind, is not so much this doubt of election, and that the
promises of grace are smothered and extinct in them, nay quite
blotted out, as they suppose, but withal God's heavy wrath, a most
intolerable pain and grief of heart seizeth on them: to their thinking
they are already damned, they suffer the pains of hell, and more
than possibly can be expressed, they smell brimstone, talk
familiarly with devils, hear and see chimeras, prodigious, uncouth
shapes, bears, owls, antiques, black dogs, fiends, hideous outcries,
fearful noises, shrieks, lamentable complaints, they are possessed,
and through impatience they roar and howl, curse, blaspheme, deny
God, call his power in question, abjure religion, and are still ready
to offer violence unto themselves, by hanging, drowning, &c.
Never any miserable wretch from the beginning of the world was in
such a woeful case. To such persons I oppose God's mercy and his
justice; Judicia Dei occulta, non injusta: his secret counsel and just
judgment, by which he spares some, and sore afflicts others again
in this life; his judgment is to be adored, trembled at, not to be
searched or inquired after by mortal men: he hath reasons reserved
to himself, which our frailty cannot apprehend. He may punish all
if he will, and that justly for sin; in that he doth it in some, is to
make a way for his mercy that they repent and be saved, to heal
them, to try them, exercise their patience, and make them call upon
him, to confess their sins and pray unto him, as David did, Psalm
cxix. 137. "Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy judgments."
As the poor publican, Luke xviii. 13. "Lord have mercy upon me a
miserable sinner." To put confidence and have an assured hope in
him, as Job had, xiii. 15. "Though he kill me I will trust In him:"
Ure, seca, occide O Domine, (saith Austin) modo serves animam,
kill, cut in pieces, burn my body (O Lord) to save my soul. A small
sickness; one lash of affliction, a little misery, many times will
more humiliate a man, sooner convert, bring him home to know
himself, than all those paraenetical discourses, the whole theory of
philosophy, law, physic, and divinity, or a world of instances and
examples. So that this, which they take to be such an insupportable
plague, is an evident sign of God's mercy and justice, of His love
and goodness: periissent nisi periissent, had they not thus been
undone, they had finally been undone. Many a carnal man is lulled
asleep in perverse security, foolish presumption, is stupefied in his
sins, and hath no feeling at all of them: "I have sinned" (he saith)
"and what evil shall come unto me," Eccles. v. 4, and "Tush, how
shall God know it?" and so in a reprobate sense goes down to hell.
But here, Cynthius aurem vellit, God pulls them by the ear, by
affliction, he will bring them to heaven and happiness; "Blessed are
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted," Matt. v. 4, a blessed
and a happy state, if considered aright, it is, to be so troubled. "It is
good for me that I have been afflicted," Psal. cxix. "before I was
afflicted I went astray, but now I keep Thy word." "Tribulation
works patience, patience hope," Rom. v. 4, and by such like crosses
and calamities we are driven from the stake of security. So that
affliction is a school or academy, wherein the best scholars are
prepared to the commencements of the Deity. And though it be
most troublesome and grievous for the time, yet know this, it
comes by God's permission and providence; He is a spectator of thy
groans and tears, still present with thee, the very hairs of thy head
are numbered, not one of them can fall to the ground without the
express will of God: he will not suffer thee to be tempted above
measure, he corrects us all, numero, pondere, et mensura, the Lord
will not quench the smoking flax, or break the bruised reed, Tentat
(saith Austin) non ut obruat, sed ut coronet he suffers thee to be
tempted for thy good. And as a mother doth handle her child sick
and weak, not reject it, but with all tenderness observe and keep it,
so doth God by us, not forsake us in our miseries, or relinquish us
for our imperfections, but with all pity and compassion support and
receive us; whom he loves, he loves to the end. Rom. viii. "Whom
He hath elected, those He hath called, justified, sanctified, and
glorified." Think not then thou hast lost the Spirit, that thou art
forsaken of God, be not overcome with heaviness of heart, but as
David said, "I will not fear though I walk in the shadows of death."
We must all go, non a deliciis ad delicias, ("Not from pleasures to
pleasures.") but from the cross to the crown, by hell to heaven, as
the old Romans put Virtue's temple in the way to that of Honour;
we must endure sorrow and misery in this life. 'Tis no new thing
this, God's best servants and dearest children have been so visited
and tried. Christ in the garden cried out, "My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me?" His son by nature, as thou art by adoption
and grace. Job, in his anguish, said, "The arrows of the Almighty
God were in him," Job vi. 4. "His terrors fought against him, the
venom drank up his spirit," cap. xiii. 26. He saith, "God was his
enemy, writ bitter things against him" (xvi. 9.) "hated him." His
heavy wrath had so seized on his soul. David complains, "his eyes
were eaten up, sunk into his head," Ps. vi. 7, "his moisture became
as the drought in summer, his flesh was consumed, his bones
vexed:" yet neither Job nor David did finally despair. Job would
not leave his hold, but still trust in Him, acknowledging Him to be
his good God. "The Lord gives, the Lord takes, blessed be the name
of the Lord," Job. i. 21. "Behold I am vile, I abhor myself, repent in
dust and ashes," Job xxxix. 37. David humbled himself, Psal. xxxi.
and upon his confession received mercy. Faith, hope, repentance,
are the sovereign cures and remedies, the sole comforts in this case;
confess, humble thyself, repent, it is sufficient. Quod purpura non
potest, saccus potest, saith Chrysostom; the king of Nineveh's
sackcloth and ashes "did that which his purple robes and crown
could not effect;" Quod diadema non potuit, cinis perfecit. Turn to
Him, he will turn to thee; the Lord is near those that are of a
contrite heart, and will save such as be afflicted in spirit, Ps. xxxiv.
18. "He came to the lost sheep of Israel," Matt. xv. 14. Si cadentem
intuetur, clementiae manum protendit, He is at all times ready to
assist. Nunquam spernit Deus Poenitentiam si sincere et simpliciter
offeratur, He never rejects a penitent sinner, though he have come
to the full height of iniquity, wallowed and delighted in sin; yet if
he will forsake his former ways, libenter amplexatur, He will
receive him. Parcam huic homini, saith Austin, (ex persona Dei)
quia sibi ipsi non pepercit; ignoscam quia peccatum agnovit. I will
spare him because he hath not spared himself; I will pardon him
because he doth acknowledge his offence: let it be never so
enormous a sin, "His grace is sufficient," 2 Cor. xii. 9. Despair not
then, faint not at all, be not dejected, but rely on God, call on him
an thy trouble, and he will hear thee, he will assist, help, and
deliver thee: "Draw near to Him, he will draw near to thee," James
iv. 8. Lazarus was poor and full of boils, and yet still he relied upon
God, Abraham did hope beyond hope.

Thou exceptest, these were chief men, divine spirits, Deo cari,
beloved of God, especially respected; but I am a contemptible and
forlorn wretch, forsaken of God, and left to the merciless fury of
evil spirits. I cannot hope, pray, repent, &c. How often shall I say
it? thou mayst perform all those duties, Christian offices, and be
restored in good time. A sick man loseth his appetite, strength and
ability, his disease prevaileth so far, that all his faculties are spent,
hand and foot perform not their duties, his eyes are dim, hearing
dull, tongue distastes things of pleasant relish, yet nature lies hid,
recovereth again, and expelleth all those feculent matters by vomit,
sweat, or some such like evacuations. Thou art spiritually sick,
thine heart is heavy, thy mind distressed, thou mayst happily
recover again, expel those dismal passions of fear and grief; God
did not suffer thee to be tempted above measure; whom he loves (I
say) he loves to the end; hope the best. David in his misery prayed
to the Lord, remembering how he had formerly dealt with him; and
with that meditation of God's mercy confirmed his faith, and
pacified his own tumultuous heart in his greatest agony. "O my
soul, why art thou so disquieted within me," &c. Thy soul is
eclipsed for a time, I yield, as the sun is shadowed by a cloud; no
doubt but those gracious beams of God's mercy will shine upon
thee again, as they have formerly done: those embers of faith, hope
and repentance, now buried in ashes, will flame out afresh, and be
fully revived. Want of faith, no feeling of grace for the present, are
not fit directions; we must live by faith, not by feeling; 'tis the
beginning of grace to wish for grace: we must expect and tarry.
David, a man after God's own heart, was so troubled himself;
"Awake, why sleepest thou? O Lord, arise, cast me not off;
wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest mine affliction and
oppression? My soul is bowed down to the dust. Arise, redeem us,"
&c., Ps. xliv. 22. He prayed long before he was heard, expectans
expectavit; endured much before he was relieved. Psal. lxix. 3, he
complains, "I am weary of crying, and my throat is dry, mine eyes
fail, whilst I wait on the Lord;" and yet he perseveres. Be not
dismayed, thou shalt be respected at last. God often works by
contrarieties, he first kills and then makes alive, he woundeth first
and then healeth, he makes man sow in tears that he may reap in
joy; 'tis God's method: he that is so visited, must with patience
endure and rest satisfied for the present. The paschal lamb was
eaten with sour herbs; we shall feel no sweetness of His blood, till
we first feel the smart of our sins. Thy pains are great, intolerable
for the time; thou art destitute of grace and comfort, stay the Lord's
leisure, he will not (I say) suffer thee to be tempted above that thou
art able to bear, 1 Cor. x. 13. but will give an issue to temptation.
He works all for the best to them that love God, Rom. viii. 28.
Doubt not of thine election, it is an immutable decree; a mark never
to be defaced: you have been otherwise, you may and shall be. And
for your present affliction, hope the best, it will shortly end. "He is
present with his servants in their affliction," Ps. xci. 15. "Great are
the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivereth them out of
all," Ps. xxxiv. 19. "Our light affliction, which is but for a moment,
worketh in us an eternal weight of glory," 2. Cor. iv. 18. "Not
answerable to that glory which is to come; though now in
heaviness," saith 1 Pet. i. 6, "you shall rejoice."

Now last of all to those external impediments, terrible objects,
which they hear and see many times, devils, bugbears, and
mormeluches, noisome smells, &c. These may come, as I have
formerly declared in my precedent discourse of the Symptoms of
Melancholy, from inward causes; as a concave glass reflects solid
bodies, a troubled brain for want of sleep, nutriment, and by reason
of that agitation of spirits to which Hercules de Saxonia attributes
all symptoms almost, may reflect and show prodigious shapes, as
our vain fear and crazed phantasy shall suggest and feign, as many
silly weak women and children in the dark, sick folks, and frantic
for want of repast and sleep, suppose they see that they see not:
many times such terriculaments may proceed from natural causes,
and all other senses may be deluded. Besides, as I have said, this
humour is balneum diaboli, the devil's bath, by reason of the
distemper of humours, and infirm organs in us: he may so possess
us inwardly to molest us, as he did Saul and others, by God's
permission: he is prince of the air, and can transform himself into
several shapes, delude all our senses for a time, but his power is
determined, he may terrify us, but not hurt; God hath given "His
angels charge over us, He is a wall round about his people," Psal.
xci. 11, 12. There be those that prescribe physic in such cases, 'tis
God's instrument and not unfit. The devil works by mediation of
humours, and mixed diseases must have mixed remedies. Levinus
Lemnius cap. 57 & 58, exhort. ad vit. ep. instit. is very copious on
this subject, besides that chief remedy of confidence in God,
prayer, hearty repentance, &c., of which for your comfort and
instruction, read Lavater de spectris part. 3. cap. 5. and 6. Wierus
de praestigiis daemonum lib. 5. to Philip Melancthon, and others,
and that Christian armour which Paul prescribes; he sets down
certain amulets, herbs, and precious stones, which have marvellous
virtues all, profligandis daemonibus, to drive away devils and their
illusions. Sapphires, chrysolites, carbuncles, &c. Quae mira virtute
pollent ad lemures, stryges, incubos, genios aereos arcendos, si
veterum monumentis habenda fides. Of herbs, he reckons us
pennyroyal, rue, mint, angelica, peony: Rich. Argentine de
praestigiis daemonum, cap. 20, adds, hypericon or St. John's wort,
perforata herba, which by a divine virtue drives away devils, and is
therefore fuga daemonum: all which rightly used by their suffitus,
Daemonum vexationibus obsistunt, afflictas mentes a daemonibus
relevant, et venenatis fumis, expel devils themselves, and all
devilish illusions. Anthony Musa, the Emperor Augustus, his
physician, cap. 6, de Betonia, approves of betony to this purpose;
the ancients used therefore to plant it in churchyards, because it
was held to be an holy herb and good against fearful visions, did
secure such places as it grew in, and sanctified those persons that
carried it about them. Idem fere Mathiolus in dioscoridem. Others
commend accurate music, so Saul was helped by David's harp.
Fires to be made in such rooms where spirits haunt, good store of
lights to be set up, odours, perfumes, and suffumigations, as the
angel taught Tobias, of brimstone and bitumen, thus, myrrh, briony
root, with many such simples which Wecker hath collected, lib. 15,
de secretis, cap. 15. [Symbol: Jupiter] sulphuris drachmam unam,
recoquatur in vitis albae, aqua, ut dilutius sit sulphur; detur aegro:
nam daemones sunt morbi (saith Rich. Argentine, lib. de praestigiis
daemonum, cap. ult.) Vigetus hath a far larger receipt to this
purpose, which the said Wecker cites out of Wierus, [Symbol:
Jupiter] sulphuris, vini, bituminis, opoponacis, galbani, castorei,
&c. Why sweet perfumes, fires and so many lights should be used
in such places, Ernestus Burgravius Lucerna vitae, et mortis, and
Fortunius Lycetus assigns this cause, quod his boni genii
provocentur, mali arceaniur; "because good spirits are well pleased
with, but evil abhor them!" And therefore those old Gentiles,
present Mahometans, and Papists have continual lamps burning in
their churches all day and all night, lights at funerals and in their
graves; lucernae ardentes ex auro liquefacto for many ages to
endure (saith Lazius) , ne daemones corpus laedant; lights ever
burning as those vestal virgins. Pythonissae maintained heretofore,
with many such, of which read Tostatus in 2 Reg. cap. 6. quaest.
43, Thyreus, cap. 57, 58, 62, &c. de locis infestis, Pictorius Isagog.
de daemonibus, &c., see more in them. Cardan would have the
party affected wink altogether in such a case, if he see aught that
offends him, or cut the air with a sword in such places they walk
and abide; gladiis enim et lanceis terrentur, shoot a pistol at them,
for being aerial bodies (as Coelius Rhodiginus, lib. 1. cap. 29.
Tertullian, Origen, Psellas, and many hold) , if stroken, they feel
pain. Papists commonly enjoin and apply crosses, holy water,
sanctified beads, amulets, music, ringing of bells, for to that end are
they consecrated, and by them baptised, characters, counterfeit
relics, so many masses, peregrinations, oblations, adjurations, and
what not? Alexander Albertinus a Rocha, Petrus Thyreus, and
Hieronymus Mengus, with many other pontificial writers, prescribe
and set down several forms of exorcisms, as well to houses
possessed with devils, as to demoniacal persons; but I am of
Lemnius's mind, 'tis but damnosa adjuratio, aut potius ludificatio, a
mere mockery, a counterfeit charm, to no purpose, they are
fopperies and fictions, as that absurd story is amongst the rest, of a
penitent woman seduced by a magician in France, at St. Bawne,
exorcised by Domphius, Michaelis, and a company of
circumventing friars. If any man (saith Lemnius) will attempt such
a thing, without all those juggling circumstances, astrological
elections of time, place, prodigious habits, fustian, big, sesquipedal
words, spells, crosses, characters, which exorcists ordinarily use,
let him follow the example of Peter and John, that without any
ambitious swelling terms, cured a lame man. Acts iii. "In the name
of Christ Jesus rise and walk." His name alone is the best and only
charm against all such diabolical illusions, so doth Origen advise:
and so Chrysostom, Haec erit tibi baculus, haec turris
inexpugnabilis, haec armatura. Nos quid ad haec dicemus, plures
fortasse expectabunt, saith St. Austin. Many men will desire my
counsel and opinion what is to be done in this behalf; I can say no
more, quam ut vera fide, quae per dilectionem operatur, ad Deum
unum fugiamus, let them fly to God alone for help. Athanasius in
his book, De variis quaest. prescribes as a present charm against
devils, the beginning of the lxvii. Psalm. Exurgat Deus, dissipentur
inimici, &c. But the best remedy is to fly to God, to call on him,
hope, pray, trust, rely on him, to commit ourselves wholly to him.
What the practice of the primitive church was in this behalf, Et quis
daemonia ejiciendi modus, read Wierus at large, lib. 5. de Cura.
Lam. meles. cap. 38. et deinceps.

Last of all: if the party affected shall certainly know this malady to
have proceeded from too much fasting, meditation, precise life,
contemplation of God's judgments (for the devil deceives many by
such means) , in that other extreme he circumvents melancholy
itself, reading some books, treatises, hearing rigid preachers, &c. If
he shall perceive that it hath begun first from some great loss,
grievous accident, disaster, seeing others in like case, or any such
terrible object, let him speedily remove the cause, which to the cure
of this disease Navarras so much commends, avertat cogitationem
a re scrupulosa, (Tom. 2. cap. 27, num. 282. "Let him avert his
thoughts from the painful object.") by all opposite means, art, and
industry, let him laxare animum, by all honest recreations, "refresh
and recreate his distressed soul;" let him direct his thoughts, by
himself and other of his friends. Let him read no more such tracts
or subjects, hear no more such fearful tones, avoid such companies,
and by all means open himself, submit himself to the advice of
good physicians and divines, which is contraventio scrupulorum, as
he calls it, hear them speak to whom the Lord hath given the tongue
of the learned, to be able to minister a word to him that is weary,
whose words are as flagons of wine. Let him not be obstinate,
headstrong, peevish, wilful, self-conceited (as in this malady they
are) , but give ear to good advice, be ruled and persuaded; and no
doubt but such good counsel may prove as preposterous to his soul,
as the angel was to Peter, that opened the iron gates, loosed his
bands, brought him out of prison, and delivered him from bodily
thraldom; they may ease his afflicted mind, relieve his wounded
soul, and take him out of the jaws of hell itself. I can say no more,
or give better advice to such as are any way distressed in this kind,
than what I have given and said. Only take this for a corollary and
conclusion, as thou tenderest thine own welfare in this, and all
other melancholy, thy good health of body and mind, observe this
short precept, give not way to solitariness and idleness. "Be not
solitary, be not idle."

SPERATE MISERI -- UNHAPPY, HOPE.

CAVETE FELICES -- HAPPY, BE CAUTIOUS.

Vis a dubio liberari? vis quod incertum est evadere? Age
poenitentiam dum sanus es; sic agens, dico tibi quod securus es,
quod poenitentiam egisti eo tempore quo peccare potuisti. Austin.
"Do you wish to be freed from doubts? do you desire to escape
uncertainty? Be penitent whilst rational: by so doing I assert that
you are safe, because you have devoted that time to penitence in
which you might have been guilty of sin."


GLOSSARY
Of obsolete words, or words used in an obsolete sense

Abraham Man:A wandering beggar, originally a crippled or insane 
person supported by a monastery who was turned out at the 
Dissolution.
Absterge:To wipe clean
Acherontic:At the point of death
Adust:Dried up or thicker than normal
Agnus castus:The chaste-tree (Vitex Agnuscastus)
Alablastritum:A valuable ointment (of the kind usually kept in an 
alabaster box, hence the name)
Alexipharmacum:An antidote
Alkermes:An insect containing a red dye, related to cochineal
Alterative:A medicine which improves the digestion
Alyppus:An unidentified analgesic plant
Ammi:Bishop-weed (Ammus sp.)
Amort:Dead, lifeless
Amphibological:Ambiguous, equivocal
Antevorta & Postvorta:Two goddesses in Roman mythology; 
Antevorta (The one turned forward) saw all future things but knew 
nothing of the past; Postvorta (the one turned behind) knew all past 
things
Apologue:An allegorical fable
Apophlemgatism:A medicine which clears phlegm form the head
Apparitor:A court officer or bailiff
Aristolochy:Birthwort
Asaftida:Hing, a strong-smelling resin extracted from the plant 
Fniculum ftidum
Asarum:Wild ginger
Asrabecca:Wild ginger
Bangle Away:Fritter away, squander
Barley-breaks:A game of chasing played by couples
Bayard:One who is obstinately ignorant
Benedicta laxativa:A mild laxative medicine 
Bezoar:A stone or hard mass found in the stomachs of certain 
ruminant animals
Blowze:A beggar's wench
Bole:A large pill
Brach:A hound
Bradiopepsia:Slowness of digestion
Braggadocian:A boaster
Brangling:Quarrelsome
Brisk:A smartly dressed person
Brontes :? (perhaps a person who has been branded as punishment 
for a crime?)
Brownbastard:A sweet Spanish wine
Bulk:A bench or trestle outside a shop, where goods are displayed 
during the day, but often used as a sleeping-place by beggars etc. at 
night. 
By-respect:A concealed motive, "hidden agenda"
Cachexia:A disease in which all the bodily parts are corrupt or 
deprived of nourishment
Cacochymia:Corruption of bodily humours
Calamistrate:To curl hair
Calamus aromaticus:Sweet rush
Calastic:Laxative
Calenture:A delirious fever or sunstroke
Camelion:Usually a giraffe; but perhaps here meaning a chameleon 
i.e. one who changes his colour to suit his circumstances
Cample:To quarrel, scold
Cantharides:Spanish fly
Carcase:The framework of a building
Cardiaca:Heartburn or angina
Cark (N.):Anxiety, trouble
Carle (V.):To snarl or growl
Carniola:Slovenia
Caroche:A large, luxurious coach or carriage
Carpet Knight:A knight whose accomplishments are more in the 
boudoir than the battle-field
Carrack:A kind of large cargo ship armed for defence against 
pirates
Cary:Caraway
Cascanet:A box, casket
Castorium:A strong-smelling substance extracted from the anal 
glands of the beaver
Castril:A kestrel
Cataplasm:A plaster or poultice
Catchpole:A bailiff
Cates:Dainty foods
Catoptrics:The optical science of reflection
Cautelous:Cautious
Cerote:An ointment of a very stiff consistency, based on beeswax
Ceruse:White lead (lead carbonate)
Ceterach(e):Scale-fern or Miltwaste 
Chamico:Chamiso (Adenostoma fasciculatum)
Characteristical:Marked with magic symbols
Cheese-trencher:A cheese platter
Chelidony:A stone supposed to be found in the belly of a swallow
Chersonesi:Peninsulas
Cheveril :Pliable, easily stretched
China root:Sarsaparilla
Chirurgery :Surgery
Chitty:Thin, pinched
Choler:Bile
Chuff (N):A boor
Chylus, Chilus:Digested food, as passed from the stomach to the 
gut
Cicuta:Hemlock
Cimmerian :Pitch black, or from the Underworld 
Circumforanean:Wandering, vagabond
Civilian:A lawyer specialising in civil cases
Clancular:Secret, underhand
Clyster:An enema
Cock-Boat:A small rowing-boat
Cocker (V.):To indulge or pamper
Cog:To cheat
Coll:To hug
Collogue:To flatter, fawn on
Colly:Soot or smuts
Colure:One of two great circles which divide the ecliptic into four 
equal parts at the equinox and solstice points
Colutea:Bladder-senna
Combust:(Of the moon or a planet) Invisible because near the sun 
in the sky
Compellations:Words addressed to someone
Compinge:To compress or confine to a small space
Concoction:Digestion of food; generation and development of the 
humours(q.v)
Condites:Preserves or pickles
Cong:A bow or curtsey
Constringed:Compressed or condensed
Constuprate:To rape
Contemn:To despise
Conveyance:Deception, dishonest dealing
Cony-catcher:A swindler
Copyhold:A tenancy at will
Corath:One of the leaders of a rebellion against Moses's rule. See 
Numbers Ch. 16
Cornute:To cuckold
Cornuto:A horned one i.e. a cuckold
Corography, Chorography:An account of a particular country or 
district
Corrival, Co-rival:One of several rivals or competitors
Corrivate:To channel two streams into one, or vice versa.
Corroborative:A strengthening or invigorating medicine
Coulstaff:A pole used to carry heavy objects, which were slung 
from it, and the coulstaff supported on the shoulders of two men
Coulter:The part of a plough which cuts the sod
Cousin-german:A first cousin
Crack:To boast or lie
Cromnyomantia:Fortune-telling with onions
Crudity:Imperfect concoction (q.v) of the humours (q.v.)
Cubbed Up:Cooped up
Cullion:A ballocks (in both senses)
Currier:A tanner or leather-dresser
Cushion dance:A dance in which the women and men alternately 
knelt on a cushion to be kissed. (Also called Princum Prancum)
Cynosure:The North Polar star
Dathan:One of the leaders of a rebellion against Moses's rule. See 
Numbers Ch. 16
Datura:Strammony or thorn-apple
Daucus:Wild carrot
Deccan:Northern India
Defecate (V.):To cleanse of filth
Defecate (Adj.):Not contaminated with filth
Dehort:Dissuade
Deliquium:A fainting fit
Dementate:Demented
Dervise:A dervish
Dia- :Prefix meaning a medicine whose principal ingredient is the 
following part of the word, which is the Latin or Greek name of the 
substance
Diacalaminthes:A medicine whose principal ingredient is calamint
Diacassia:A medicine whose principal ingredient is cassia
Diacatholicon:A medicine compounded of senna,  cassia,  
tamarinds, roots of male fern, rhubarb, liquorice, aniseed, sweet 
fennel, and sugar. 
Diaciminum:A medicine whose principal ingredient is cumin
Diacodium, diacodion:A medicine whose principal ingredient is  
poppies (i.e. opium)
Diacorolli:A medicine whose principal ingredient is coral
Diacydonium:A medicine whose principal ingredient is  quinces
Diagalanga:A medicine whose principal ingredient is galingale
Diamargaritum calidum:A hot medicine whose principal ingredient 
is pearl
Diamargaritum frigidum:A cold medicine whose principal 
ingredient is pearl
Diambra:A medicine whose principal ingredient is ambergris
Diamoscum Dulce:A medicine whose principal ingredient is sweet 
musk
Dianisum:A medicine whose principal ingredient is aniseed
Diapason:A musical octave
Diaphenicum:A medicine whose principal ingredient is dates
Diapolypodion:A medicine whose principal ingredient is polypody 
fern
Diarrhodon:A medicine whose principal ingredient is roses
Diatrion piperion:A medicine compounded from three kinds of 
pepper
Dicteries:Witty quips
Dilection:Spritual love
Dirt dauber:A plasterer esp. one who uses mud to make wattle-and-
daub walls
Distemperature:A disordered condition or ailment of the body
Diverb:A proverb in two contrasting parts
Dodecotemories:The signs of the Zodiac
Donary:A votive offering
Dotterel:A kind of bird (Eudromias morinellus) which allows itself 
to be easily captured
Dragon root:The root of dragonwort, (Dracunculus vulgaris) 
Dram, Drachm:60 grains, or one-eighth of an ounce (3.6 grams 
approx)
Dropax (pl.) Dropaces:A plaster made from pitch
Dummerer:A beggar who pretends to be dumb
Dust-worm:A low or obsequious person
Eben Stone:A very hard black stone
Eclegm:A medicine of a thick consistency, which has to be licked 
off the spoon
Eftsoons:A second time
Electuarium de baccis lauri:A compound of bayleaves and honey
Electuarium de gemmis:A compound of powdered gems and honey
Elogy:A eulogy or brief description of a person
Emblem:A fable
Emmet:An ant
Emmetris:Emerald
Empiric (N.):A quack doctor
Emulgent (Blood Vessels):The blood vessels of the kidneys
Enamourite:A lover
Enarration:A narrative,  exposition
Enthusiast:A fanatic
Enula:Elecampane
Epitheme, (pl.) Epithemata:A moist plaster or poultice
Epithyme:Dodder
Eringos:The candied roots of the sea-holly (Eryngium maritimum)
Errhine, (pl) Errhina :A plug of lint soaked in medicine, for 
insertion into the nose
Etesian wind:A North-Western wind which blows in the 
Mediterranean regions during the Summer
Ethnic:A pagan
Eupatory:Hemp Agrimony
Euripes (pl. Euripi):Sea channel with turbulent and unpredictable 
currents
Evirate:Castrate
Exenterated:Disembowelled
Exolete:Faded, worn out, out-of-date
Exornation:Decoration, embellishment
Facete:Amusing
Fall:A flat collar
Familist:A member of a sect called the Family of Love; they held 
that religion consisted chiefly in the exercise of love.
Feculent:Filthy, polluted
Fieldon:Tillage land
Flaggy:Flabby, limp
Fleer:To grimace
Flet:Flushed
Foalfoot:Either coltsfoot or wild ginger
Frications:Massage
Frontal, frontlet:A plaster applied to the forehead
Fucate:False, counterfeit or painted with cosmetics
Fulgor:Brightness, splendour
Fuliginous:Sooty
Fumados:Smoked pilchards
Funge:A soft-headed person
Furfurs:Dandruff or scurf
Fusled:Confused, muddled
Fustilugs:A fat slovenly woman
Gallimaufry :An assorted mixture
Gargarise:To gargle
Gargarism:A gargle
Gemonian scales:A set of steps in ancient Rome, down which the 
bodies of executed criminals were dragged to be thrown into the 
Tiber
Genethliacal:Astrological
Genist:Broom
Geniture:Horoscope
Gloze:To flatter, explain away, "spin"
Glycypicron:Something both sweet and bitter
Gnatho:A flattering  parasite
Goosecap:A fool
Gossip:A close woman friend of another woman
Grain:One-480th of an ounce (60 milligrams approx)
Grana paradisi:"Grains of Paradise" -- the seeds of amomum or 
bastard cardamom
Gripe (N.):A miser
Grobian:An ill-mannered boor
Gross:A small coin, worth about threepence
Grumel:Gromwell
Gryphe:A griffin or a vulture
Gubber-tushed:Having projecting teeth
Gull:A gullible person
Gymnics:Gymnastics
Gymnosophist:One of a Hindu sect which practised asceticism and 
mysticism
Haberdine :Salt cod
Hredipet:Legacy-hunters
Hamech:A very powerful laxative made from colocynth
Hanea:A unidentified herb
Hardly:Severely
Hemistichium:One half of a line of verse divided by a csura
Hermodactil:Colchicum. 
Hesperus :The Morning star
Heteroclitical:Irregular; deviating from the standard or norm
Hoby :A kind of falcon (Falco subbuteo)
Hog-rubber:A sneaking wretch
Homocentrics:The heavenly spheres
Hone:To whine or moan
Honing:Sighing, moaning
Humour:One of the four fluids of the body governing health etc: 
Blood, Bile, Phlegm, Black bile
Hypochondries:The upper abdomen, between the breast-bone and 
navel
Iatromathematical:Concerned with the mathematics of medicine
Ichneumon:An African mongoose, noted for raiding crocodile nests 
and eating the eggs
Imbonity:Unkindness
In print:Neatly, exactly
Incondite:(of speech) Sudden cries without meaning, as "Oh!" 
"Ah!" "Grr!" etc.
Incult:Barren, uncultivated
Indurate:Hardened
Inescate:To lure with bait
Ingeminate:To repeat
Ingurgitate:To gobble, swallow whole
Insuavity:Surliness
Insult:To domineer, triumph over
Intempestive:Unseasonable, at an inappropriate time
Irrefragable:Undeniable
Irremissible :Unpardonable
Ister:The river Danube
Jet:To swagger
Jument:A beast of burden
Kalendar:One of a Muslim order of mendicant holy men
Keelpins:Skittles
Kell:A caul
Lade:To load with a burden
Ltificans Galeni et Rhasis:"Galen and Rhasis' euphoriant 
medecine"
Lamia:A monster in the form of a woman who sucked the blood of 
children
Landleaper:A vagabond or fugitive
Lapis Armenus:Armenian stone, a blue carbonate of copper 
Lapith:A people of Thessaly
Laplolly:Gruel or broth
Lave-eared:Having large floppy ears
Lax-clothes:Loose-fitting clothes
Lee:A soapy or alkaline solution used for washing
Lenitive:A soothing or gently laxative medicine
Lictor:In Roman times, an official who attended a magistrate and 
carried out his orders to arrest, flog, execute etc. malefactors
Linctures:A linctus, medicine of a thick consistency, which has to 
be licked off the spoon
Livor:A bruise or similar discoloration of the skin; also, malice or 
spite
Luculent:Brilliant, shining
Lusorious:Used in a game
Magistral:A medicine, recommended by an authority, but which is 
not in the official pharmacopia
Malapert:Presumptuous, disrespectful
Malificated:Evil-intentioned
Manamotapa, Monomotopa:An ancient African kingdom in what is 
now Zimbabwe
Mantuan, (The) :Virgil
Maragnan:Maranho, an island near the coast of Brazil
Master of the requests:The head of the Court of Requests, which 
handled petitions directed to the king
Masticatory:A medicine meant to be chewed but not swallowed
Mastives:Mastiffs
Mastupration:Masturbation
Maugre:Despite
Maukin:A slovenly wench
Mediately:Through an intermediary
Merd:A lump of excrement
Merry-Thought:A wishbone
Meseraical, Mesaraic:Of the mesentery, the membranes of the 
abdomen.
Metoposcopy:Telling a person's fortune or character by the 
appearance of his forehead, or face generally
Mewed up:Imprisoned
Minim:One-480th of a fluid ounce i.e. the fluid equivalent of a 
grain (60 microlitres approx)
Minion:Cinnabar (mercuric sulphide) or red lead (lead oxide) -- red 
pigments
Mithridate:A mixture of various ingredients, believed to be a 
universal antidote to poisons
Moabar:Malabar, in India
Mogor:Mogul, or Mughal; the emperor of India
Monocerot:A Rhinoceros
Monomachy:Duel, single combat
Mormeluche:A bogey-man, imaginary fear
Morphew:An ailment which causes scaling of the skin
Mother-in-law:Stepmother
Mouldwarp:A mole (the burrowing animal)
Mulct:A fine or financial penalty
Myrache, Mirach:The abdomen, esp. the part around the stomach
Narsinga:A kingdom in Southern India, including Coromandel and 
adjacent areas
Naught:Unfaithful, wicked
Naumachy:A mock sea-battle presented as a public spectacle
Nectarine:A sweet medicine
Nenuphar:Water-lily
Neoteric:A holder of new religious beliefs
Nepenthes:An unidentified drug, said to banish grief and sorrow
Nodule:A small bag filled with aromatic herbs, spices etc.
Nonage:Childhood
Noremberga:Nuremberg, Gramany
Nova Albion:An unidentified place on the West coast of North 
America visited by Sir Francis Drake in 1579. 
Novitsa:A village in the Ukraine
Nymphea:Water-lily
Obnubilate:Cloud over
Obs and Sols:Logic-chopping, abstruse philosophizing [short for 
Objections and Solutions]
Opiparous:Sumptuous
Opoponax:A strong-smelling resin extracted from the plant 
Opopanax chironium
Oppilations:Obstructions
Oppugner:An adversary
Orbity:Bereavement
Organ:Pennyroyal
Ormus:Hormuz, at the mouth of the Persian Gulf
Ouch:A brooch or ornamental buckle
Oxymel:Vinegar and honey mixed
Painful:Painstaking
Pairmain:A variety of apple
Palladium:A thing which protects against harm (originally the 
statue of the goddess Pallas  in Troy, which was believed to protect 
the city from all dangers)
Pantofle:A slipper
Pantofles:Slippers
Parable (A.):Accessible, Easily obtained, 
Parnetical:Containing advice or exhortations
Parietines:Ruins
Pasquil:A lampoon. It was the custom in Rome to affix lampoons 
to the statue of Pasquil on St. Mark's Day. 
Peckled:Spotted, speckled
Pegu:A area in Burma
Pendant:An offering of the kind hung up in a church
Pepon:A pumpkin
Perici:People who live at the same parallel of latitude
Perstringe:To blind or dazzle; also, to criticise or find fault
Philosophastic:Of or relating to a philosophaster, a shallow or 
pseudo-philosopher
Philtrum:A philter, love-potion
Pickthank:A flatterer, especially one who tries to curry favour by 
tale-bearing
Pigsney:A darling
Pistick nuts:Pistachios
Pittivanted:Having a short pointed "Van Dyke" beard
Pituita:Phlegm
Poke (Bavarian):Goitre
Poller:A plunderer
Polyanthean:(a.) Relating to an anthology; (n.) the compiler or user 
of one
Polygraphy:Writing in code
Pomander:A ball of aromatic herbs etc. 
Populeum:An ointment made of the buds of the Black Poplar. 
Portuous:A breviary
Prank:To dress up, adorn oneself
Precipitate (oneself):To jump from a cliff-top
Precipitium:A precipice
Precisian:A Puritan
Prejudicate :To judge hastily or rashly
Prick-louse:An insulting word for a tailor
Princum prancum:A dance in which the partners knelt alternately 
on a cushion to be kissed, then picked up the cushion and danced 
with it. 
Procacity:Forwardness, pertness
Propend:To hang down
Pruning:(Of a bird) Preening the feathers
Pseudo-Catholic:Roman Catholic (false in Burton's eyes)
Pugil:A three-finger pinch
Punk:A whore (of either sex)
Purley:Purlieu, land around the edges of a forest
Pythonissa, pythoness:A witch or prophetess
Quean:A slut or prostitute
Quevira:A mythical city believed to be in what is now the US state 
of Kansas
Quiloa:Kilwa, Tanzania
Ramsheads:Some medicinal plant (OED says chick-peas, but I can 
find no reference to medicinal use of these)
Rascia:Kosovo
Rash:Rush at, strike, smash
Rebato :A kind of stiff collar
Red-shank:A Scottish Highlander (from their wearing kilts, so their 
legs were red from exposure to the weather)
Rivel:To entangle
Roaring-meg:A very large cannon
Rose-cake:A cake of compressed rose-petals
Ruck:The roc, a mythical giant bird
Ruddleman:A dealer in ochre
Rumney:A sweet wine believed to be from Romania (actually 
Greece)
Sabine:Juniper
Sackbut:A kind of trombone
Sagapenum:A medicinal resin extracted from the plant Ferula 
persica
Salepiece:A sample or display item to attract buyers
Salvatella:A vein in the back of the hand
Sanders:Sandalwood
Satyrion:Orchid
Scabredity:Scabbiness
Scammony:The resin of the plant Convolvulus Scammonia 
Scandia :Scandinavia
Scolopendria:Hart's-tongue Fern
Scordium:Water germander
Scrub (N.):An insignificant or contemptible person
Scruple:20 grains, or one-third of a dram. (1.2 grams approx)
Semiustulation:Half-burning
Serjeant :A court officer whose job it was to arrest people or 
otherwise enforce court orders
Serves:The fruit of the service-tree (Sorbus)
Setting-stick:A rod used for stiffening a ruff
Sharker:A swindler
Shimei:A relative of King Saul, who cursed David and threw 
stones at him. See II Samuel, Ch. 16
Sinapismus:A mustard plaster
Sindaw:Sundew
Six Non-Natural Things:Diet; retention and evacuation; air; 
exercise; sleeping and waking; perturbations of the mind (See Part. 
1 Sec. 2 Memb 1. Subsect 1.)
Sleeveless:Useless, futile
Smaragdes:Emeralds
Smell-feast:A gatecrasher or sponger
Snout-piece:A piggish or pig-faced person
Sod, Sodden:Boiled
Sophy:The Shah of Persia
Spagirically:Alchemically
Spectrum:A ghost 
Spittel:A charity hospital
Sprent:Sprinkled
Springe:A snare for birds
Spruce:Prussia
Squiss'd:Squashed
Staechas, staechados:French Lavender
Stenography:Writing in code or shorthand
Stick Free:(A person) immune to injury by a weapon
Stone-horse:An entire horse i.e. an ungelded stallion 
Stool-Ball:A game like cricket
Stour:A fight
Stramineous:Made of straw, worthless
Strangury:Retention of urine
Struma:Scrofula or goitre
Stupend:Extraordinary
Stut:Stutter
Suffite:A perfume burned or smoked as a medicinal remedy
Suffumigation:Perfuming a room with herbs etc. whose aroma is 
medicinal
Superficies:Surface
Table:A tablet
Terriculament:A bogey-man, imaginary fear
Tester :A witness
Tetric:Bitter, morose
Tetter:A running sore or skin disease
Theologastic:Of or relating to a theologaster, a shallow or pseudo-
theologian
Thistlewarp:A goldfinch
Tiffanies:Fine, almost transparent silk or muslin
Tires:Clothing
Tire-woman:A lady's maid
Tit:A slut
Trencher Chaplain:A chaplain who is one of a rich man's 
household servants
Trenchmore:A lively country dance
Trinoctium:A  festival lasting for three nights
Tropological:Relating to tropology, which is the interpretation of 
Scripture to decide on moral questions
Truss:A baggage
Tulipant:A tulip
Tully:Cicero
Turbith:Jalap
Turgent:Swollen with pride
Twire:To twist
Typmany:A swelling or tumour
Union:A large pearl
Vastity:Desolation
Vatinian :Intense, violent (usually of hatred)
Venditate:To display for sale, or as if for sale
Venerilla:A little Venus
Venery:Sex or the pursuit of it; hunting in general
Verbasco:Mullein
Verjuice:The juice of crab-apples or other sour fruit
Versicolour:Iridescent or of many colours
Vesper:The Evening star
Virginal jack:Part of the musical instrument called a virginal -- the 
upright piece of wood to which the quill which plucked the string 
was attached
Walachia:Romania
Wasters:Stick-fencing
Weele:An eddy or whirlpool
Whittled :Drunk
Withie-wind:The bindweed flower (Calystegia )
Wittol:A man who tolerates his wife's adultery
Wolward (woolward), to go:To wear wool next to the skin, often as 
a penance
Wourts:Worts, i.e. plants, vegetables
Wreeks:Pranks, tricks
Zante:An island in the Ionian sea
Zeilan:Ceylon, Sri Lanka
Zur, Del Zur:The Pacific Ocean


