




THE NEWGATE CALENDAR


Edited by Donal Ó Danachair

Volume 2








Published by the Ex-classics Project, 2009
http://www.exclassics.com
Public Domain


 
Old Newgate Prison



CONTENTS

RICHARD THORNHILL, ESQ Convicted of Manslaughter on 18th of May, 1711, for 
killing Sir Cholmondeley Deering in a Duel	10
TOM GERRARD Taught a Dog to pick Pockets, and was executed for 
Housebreaking at Tyburn in August, 1711	12
WILL MAW Having committed a Robbery, Maw ordered his Wife to organise a 
Mock Funeral, so that People should think he was dead. He was executed at Tyburn 
in October 1711	14
DAVY MORGAN Executed at Presteigne in April, 1712, for murdering Edward 
Williams	15
ELIZABETH MASON Executed for the murder of her godmother, 18th June, 1712	16
ELIZABETH CHIVERS Executed for the murder of her bastard child, 1st August, 
1712	17
COLONEL JOHN HAMILTON Convicted of Manslaughter, 11th of September, 
1712, as Second in a Duel between the Duke of Hamilton and Lord Mahon	19
RICHARD TOWN Executed at Tyburn, December 23, 1712, for Fraudulent 
Bankruptcy	21
JACK BLEWIT Was taken into Slavery by the Blacks on Pirates' Island. After 
gaining his Liberty and returning to England he became a Highwayman. Executed in 
1713 for the Murder of a Farmer's Daughter	23
TOM GRAY Highwayman who set Fire to a Prison. Executed at Tyburn in March, 
1713	26
NED BONNET Took to the Highway because he was ruined by a Fire. Executed at 
Cambridge Castle in March, 1713	28
RICHARD NOBLE Executed at Kingston, March 28, 1713, For the Murder of Mrs. 
Sayer.	29
DICK ADAMS Once pretended to be the Bishop of London's Nephew in order to 
escape from a Man he had robbed. Executed at Tyburn, 1713	35
NED WICKS Highway Robber, executed at Warwick Jail in 1713 for Robbery	38
JACK SHRIMPTON Convicted for Murder and Highway Robberies. Executed at St 
Michael's Hill in September, 1713	40
WILL LOWTHER Executed on Clerkenwell Green for the Murder of Edward Perry, 
December, 1713	42
RODERICK AUDREY With the Assistance of a Sparrow he committed many 
Robberies, and was executed at Tyburn in 1714 at the age of Sixteen	44
MACCARTNEY Hanged at Gloucester Jail in April, 1714, for the Murder of one Mr 
Beachere	46
WILL OGDEN AND TOM REYNOLDS Housebreakers and Highwaymen. Executed 
at Kingston- upon-Thames in April, 1714	48
HENRY PLUNKET Murderer, executed at Tyburn, on the 22nd of September, 1714.
	50
WILLIAM JOHNSON AND JANE HOUSDEN Executed in September, 1714, for the 
Murder of a Turnkey in the Court at the Old Bailey	51
THOMAS DOUGLASS Murderer, executed at Tyburn on the 27th of October, 1714.
	53
WILL CHANCE Robbed his Uncle by Forgery, and then turned Footpad. Was 
executed at Tyburn in April, 1715	54
NATHANIEL PARKHURST, ESQ. Executed for the Murder of Lewis Pleura, 20th 
May, 1715	56
ZACHARY CLARE Highwayman, who was captured after a Fight, and executed 
with James Lawrence in August, 1715, at Warwick Jail	58
THE FIRST REBELLION IN SCOTLAND. Account of the rise and progress of the 
rebellion in Scotland, 1715; With full accounts of the principal traitors who were 
executed.	60
COLONEL HENRY OXBURGH Executed at Tyburn, May 14, 1716, for High 
Treason.	71
RICHARD GASCOIGNE Executed at Tyburn, May 25; 1716, for High Treason.	72
REV. WILLIAM PAUL Executed at Tyburn, July 18, 1716, for High Treason.	73
JOHN HALL, ESQ Executed at Tyburn, July 18,1716, for High Treason.	75
ROBERT WHITTY, FELIX O'HARA, AND JOSEPH SULLIVAN Executed at 
Tyburn, July 18,1716, for High Treason.	78
JAMES GOODMAN Executed March 12, 1716, for Horse Stealing, &c.	79
HENRY POWEL Highwayman, executed at Tyburn, on the 23rd of December, 1715.
	81
JOHN HAMILTON, ESQ. Tried in Scotland for Murder, and beheaded by the 
Maiden, 30th of June, 1716	83
JAMES QUIN, ESQ. The Celebrated Tragedian, tried for Murder at the Old Bailey in 
1717, and convicted of Manslaughter	85
THE MARQUIS DE PALEOTTI An Italian Nobleman, executed at Tyburn for the 
Murder of his Servant, 17th of March, 1718.	87
JOSEPH STILL Executed At Stanford-Hill, March, 22, 1717, For Murder	89
JAMES SHEPPARD Jacobite, who plotted to assassinate King George I. Executed 
17th March, 1718	90
JOHN PRICE, COMMONLY CALLED JACK KETCH A Rogue and Liar, who was 
not believed when he spoke the Truth. He held the Office of Common Hangman, and 
was himself hanged in Bunhill Fields in May, 1718, for murdering a Woman	94
JAMES FILEWOOD ALIAS VILET Convicted of picking Pockets, and sentenced to 
Death. Executed at Tyburn in October, 1718	98
CATHERINE JONES Tried for Bigamy	100
LIEUTENANT EDWARD BIRD Took a Pinch of Snuff just before his Execution at 
Tyburn, on 23rd of February, 1719, for murdering a Waiter	101
MARK ANTHONY DE LA PORTE A Catholic priest, sentenced to life imprisonment 
for performing a Catholic marriage, 4th March 1719	102
NICHOLAS HORNER A Minister's Son who turned Highwayman, and was executed 
3rd of April, 1719	103
THOMAS BUTLER, Esq. Highwayman, executed at Tyburn, on the 8th Of February 
1720.	107
BARBARA SPENCER Executed at Tyburn on the 5th of July, 1721, for Coining. She 
was probably the first Woman to suffer the Death Penalty for what was regarded as 
Treason	108
MATTHEW CLARKE Executed for murder, 28th July, 1721	110
WILLIAM SHAW Executed in 1721 for "Murdering" his Daughter, who, it was 
afterwards proved, committed Suicide	112
JOHN MEFF Executed for Returning from Transportation	114
ARTHUR GRAY Convicted of Burglary	116
NATHANIEL HAWES Highwayman, who underwent Torture for the Sake of his 
Honour. Executed at Tyburn, 21st of December, 1721.	118
ARUNDEL COOKE, ESQ., AND JOHN WOODBURNE The First who suffered 
Death under the Coventry Act. Executed at Bury St Edmunds, 5th of April, 1722	120
JOHN HARTLEY AND THOMAS REEVES Footpads, who were executed at 
Tyburn on the 4th of May, 1722, after One had, by a Ruse, petitioned the King	122
JOHN HAWKINS AND JAMES SIMPSON Highwaymen and Mail Robbers. 
Executed at Tyburn on the 21st of May, 1722	124
WILLIAM BURRIDGE Executed at Tyburn, May 22, 1722, for Horse-stealing.	127
NATHANIEL JACKSON Highwayman, executed at Tyburn, on the 18th of July, 
1722	128
THOMAS BUTLOGE Robber, hanged at Tyburn, for basely betraying his trust, in 
robbing his master, on the 18th of July, 1722	129
MARGARET FISHER Sentenced to death for privately stealing, but afterwards 
pardoned, September, 1722	131
MATTHIAS BRINSDEN Executed for killing his wife.	133
ROBERT WILKINSON, JAMES LINCOLN, AND THOMAS MILKSOP 
Murderers, executed at Tyburn, Sept. 24, 1722.	136
WILLIAM SPIGGOT AND THOMAS PHILLIPS Who suffered the Torture for 
refusing to plead. Executed at Tyburn, 23rd of February, 1723, for Robbery	138
RICHARD OAKEY, JOHN LEVEY, AND MATTHEW FLOOD Executed at 
Tyburn, on the 23rd of February, 1723, for robbery	141
JACOB SAUNDERS Who murdered a Farmer at Caversham, and was arrested at 
Church. Executed in March, 1723	143
CHRISTOPHER LAYER, ESQ. Executed at Tyburn, March 15, 1723, for High 
Treason.	146
WILLIAM BURK After an adventurous Seafaring Life as a Boy he became a Robber, 
and was executed at Tyburn on the 8th of April, 1723	149
SARAH PRIDDON, alias SALLY SALISBURY Convicted of stabbing a gentleman 
in a brothel	151
ALEXANDER DAY, Alias MARMADUKE DAVENPORT, ESQ. A Sharper	154
WILLIAM HAWKSWORTH Soldier, who killed a Civilian with his Musket in St 
James's Park. Executed at Tyburn on the 17th of June, 1723	159
THOMAS ATHOE, THE ELDER, AND THOMAS ATHOE, THE YOUNGER 
Executed for murder	160
CAPTAIN JOHN MASSEY Executed at Execution-Dock, July 26, 1723, for Piracy. 
(A Very Hard Case.)	163
PHILIP ROCHE Executed on 5th of August, 1723, for many Murders on the High 
Seas and Piracy	165
WILLIAM DUCE, JAMES BUTLER, — WADE, and – MEADS A desperate and 
cruel gang of murderers and footpads. Executed at Tyburn, August 14, 1723.	168
HUMPHRY ANGIER Executed at Tyburn, September 9, 1723, for Robbery.	170
RICHARD PARVIN, EDWARD ELLIOT, ROBERT KINGSHELL, HENRY 
MARSHALL, EDWARD PINK, JOHN PINK AND JAMES ANSELL The "Waltham 
Blacks," who were executed at Tyburn, 4th of December, 1723, for Murder and Deer-
Stealing	172
JOHN STANLEY An Insolent Puppy who presumed on his Swordsmanship. Executed 
at Tyburn, 23rd of December, 1723, for murdering his Mistress	175
STEPHEN GARDENER Executed at Tyburn, 3rd of February, 1724, for House-
breaking, after being warned that the Bellman would say his Verses over him	178
JOSEPH BLAKE ALIAS BLUESKIN Made an Unsuccessful Attempt to kill Jonathan 
Wild by cutting his Throat. Executed in November, 1724, at Newgate	180
JACK SHEPPARD A Daring Housebreaker, who made Ingenious Escapes from 
Prison and even tried to foil his Executioner at Tyburn on 16th of November, 1724	183
LEWIS HOUSSART Executed at Swan-Alley, Shoreditch, Dec. 7, 1724, for Murder.
	194
THOMAS PACKER and JOSEPH PICKER Executed at Tyburn February, 1, 1725, 
For Highway Robbery:	198
VINCENT DAVIS Executed at Tyburn, April 3rd, 1725, for the murder of his wife.	200
ROBERT HARPHAM Under the Pretence of making Buttons he made Coins, and 
was executed at Tyburn, 24th of May, 1725	202
JONATHAN WILD Director of a Corporation of Thieves, and a most famous 
Receiver. Executed at Tyburn, 24th of May, 1725	203
EDWARD BURNWORTH, WILLIAM BLEWITT, EMANUEL DICKENSON, 
THOMAS BERRY, JOHN LEGEE, JOHN HIGGS, and —— MARJORAM Another 
gang of murderers and daring robbers.	233
CATHERINE HAYES Who with Others foully murdered her Husband, and was 
burned alive on 9th of May, 1726	239
RICHARD SAVAGE, ESQ. (THE CELEBRATED POET, SON OF THE EARL OF 
RIVERS AND THE UNNATURAL COUNTESS OF MACCLESFIELD), JAMES 
GREGORY, ESQ., AND WILLIAM MERCHANT, ESQ. Murderers who escaped 
Death	247
MARGARET DIXON Who was married a Few Days after she was hanged for 
Murder in 1728	250
EDWARD BELLAMY A Daring Shop-Robber, who was executed at Tyburn On 27th 
of March, 1728	252
JOHN EVERETT Highwayman, Turnkey and Ale-House Keeper. Executed at Tyburn, 
20th of February, 1729	255
MAJOR JOHN ONEBY Who murdered a Man in a Duel and cheated the Gallows, 
1729	259
JAMES CLUFF Murderer, executed at Tyburn, July 25, 1729, on an appeal, after 
being acquitted.	262
JOHN GOW Captain of a notorious Gang of Pirates. Executed at Execution Dock, 
11th of August, 1729 for Piracy	264
JEPHTHAH BIG Executed at Tyburn, Sept. 19, 1729, for sending a letter to extort 
money.	276
FRANCIS CHARTERIS Convicted of using violence to the person of Ann Bond.	278
SIR SIMON CLARKE, BART., AND LIEUTENANT ROBERT ARNOTT 
Convicted as Highwaymen in 1731, but afterwards reprieved	283
ROBERT IRWIN Executed at Tyburn, in the year 1731, for Murder.	284
WILLIAM SMITH A notorious horse-stealer, executed at Chelmsford, April 13, 1731
	285
ROBERT HALLAM Executed for murdering his wife, February 14th, 1732	286
JOHN HEWIT AND ROSAMUND ODERENSHAW Murderers, executed March 29, 
1732	288
JOHN WALLER, alias TREVOR, Pilloried for perjury, and pelted to death by the 
populace, 13th June, 1732	291
ELY HATTON Murderer, executed at Gloucester, August, 1732	293
ELEANOR BEARE (A very curious and wicked case.)	295
JOSEPH POWIS Strolling player turned housebreaker, executed 9th October, 1732
	297
WILLIAM SHELTON Executed at Tyburn, October 9, 1732, for highway robbery.
	308
ISAAC AND THOMAS HALLAM Murderers and Highwaymen, hanged in 
Lincolnshire, 20th of February, 1733, upon the Spot where they committed their 
Crime	312
SARAH MALCOLM Executed for the Murder of a Wealthy Old Lady in the Inns of 
Court, 7th of March, 1733	313
WILLIAM ALCOCK Who first abandoned, and then murdered, his wife. Executed at 
Northampton, March 9, 1733.	316
WILLIAM GORDON Highwayman, on whose body, after execution, an experiment 
was made to bring him to life	318
CAPTAIN JOHN PORTEOUS Convicted of murder, but murdered by the mob	321
JOHN COLLINS Executed for murdering Jane Upcot, and exposing her head on a 
spike, 1737	327
THOMAS CARR, AN ATTORNEY , AND ELIZABETH ADAMS Executed at 
Tyburn, 18th of January, 1738, for Robbery	328
WILLIAM UDALL A Profligate Apprentice, who turned Highwayman. Executed at 
Tyburn, 14th of March, 1738	329
JOHN TOON AND EDWARD BLASTOCK Executed at Tyburn, May 20, 1738, for 
highway robbery.	331
JOSEPH JOHNSON Pickpocket and "Esquire," who swindled many Farmers and was 
executed at Tyburn, 19th of July, 1738, at the Age of Sixty	336
WILLIAM NEWINGTON A Writer, who forged a Draft for One Hundred and 
Twenty Pounds and was executed at Tyburn on 26th of August, 1738	338
JOHN TOTTERDALE Executed at Tyburn, October 5, 1738, for the murder of his 
wife.	340
GEORGE PRICE Sentenced to Death for murdering his Wife, but died of Jail Fever, 
22nd of October, 1738	342
JOHN RICHARDSON AND RICHARD COYLE Pirates, hanged at Execution Dock, 
25th January, 1738	345
GEORGE MANLEY Executed at Wicklow, in Ireland, in August, 1738, for murder.
	355
RICHARD TURPIN A famous Highway Robber, who shot dead one of his own 
Comrades and was executed at York on 7th of April, 1739	357
DAVID ROBERTS Executed for high treason, in diminishing the gold coin of the 
realm, April 3, 1739.	368
ABRAHAM WELLS Executed at Tyburn, May 30, 1739, for horse-stealing.	371
JAMES CALDCLOUGH Executed for Robbery, July 2nd 1739.	373
THOMAS LYMPUS Executed near Wells, in Somersetshire, 21st of September 1739, 
for robbing the Mail.	377
THOMAS BARKWITH An accomplished Scholar and Linguist, who was executed at 
Tyburn 1st of December, 1739, for Robbery	379
EDWARD JOINES Executed for the murder of his wife, December 21, 1739.	381
MARY YOUNG ALIAS JENNY DIVER The Head of a Gang of Thieves of every 
Description. Executed at Tyburn, 18th of March, 1740	384
CHARLES DREW Parricide, executed at St. Edmondsbury, 9th April, 1740	391
ELIZABETH AND MARY BRANCH Mother and Daughter, executed at Ivelchester 
on the 3rd of May, 1740, for murdering a Girl	394
WILLIAM CREAK Mail robber: Executed, much lamented, on Bagshot-heath, and 
his body hung in chains, where he committed the robbery.	396
WILLIAM DUELL Executed for Murder and came to Life again while being 
prepared for Dissection in Surgeons' Hall, 24th of November, 1740	397
GILBERT LANGLEY Transported for robbing a man of three farthings, December, 
1740	398
CAPTAIN SAMUEL GOODERE, A FRATRICIDE; MATTHEW MAHONY AND 
CHARLES WHITE Executed for the Murder of Sir John Dinely Goodere, Bart., at 
the Hot Wells, Bristol, 20th of April, 1741	407
CAPTAIN HENRY SMYTHEE Executed at Dorchester, April 12, 1741, for the 
murder or the female whom he had seduced.	409
JAMES HALL Hanged for Petit-Treason, in the Murder of his Master.	412



RICHARD THORNHILL, ESQ 
Convicted of Manslaughter on 18th of May, 1711, for killing Sir 
Cholmondeley Deering in a Duel

	SIR CHOLMONDELEY DEERING and Mr Richard Thornhill had dined 
together on the 7th of April, 1711, in company with several other gentlemen, at the 
Toy, at Hampton Court, when a quarrel arose, which occasioned the unhappy 
catastrophe that afterwards happened. During the quarrel Sir Cholmondeley struck Mr 
Thornhill, and a scuffle ensuing, the wainscot of the room broke down, and Thornhill 
falling, the other stamped on him, and beat out some of his teeth. The company now 
interposing, Sir Cholmondeley, convinced that he had acted improperly, declared that 
he was willing to ask pardon; but Mr Thornhill said that asking pardon was not a 
proper retaliation for the injury he had received; adding: "Sir Cholmondeley, you 
know where to find me." Soon after this the company broke up, and the two men went 
home in different coaches, without any further steps being taken toward their 
reconciliation.
	On the 9th of April Sir Cholmondeley went to the coffee-house at Kensington 
and asked for Mr Thornhill. He not being there, he went to his lodgings, and the 
servant showed him into the dining-room, to which he ascended with a brace of 
pistols in his hands; and soon afterwards Mr Thornhill, coming to him, asked him if 
he would drink tea, which he declined, but drank a glass of small-beer. After this the 
gentlemen ordered a hackney-coach, in which they went to Tothill Fields, and there 
advanced towards each other, in a resolute manner, and fired their pistols almost in 
the same moment.
	Sir Cholmondeley, being mortally wounded, fell to the ground; and Mr 
Thornhill, after lamenting the unhappy catastrophe, was going away when a person 
stopped him, told him he had been guilty of murder, and took him before a Justice of 
the Peace, who committed him to prison. On the 18th of May, 1711, Richard 
Thornhill, Esq. was indicted at the Old Bailey sessions for this murder In the course of 
this trial the above-recited facts were proved, and a letter was produced, of which the 
following is a copy:-
8th April, 1711 
SIR,-I shall be able to go abroad to-morrow morning, and desire you will give me a 
meeting with your sword and pistols, which I insist on. The worthy gentleman who 
brings you this will concert with you the time and place. I think Tothill Fields will do 
well; Hyde Park will not, at this time of year being full of company. I am, your 
humble servant, 
	RICHARD THORNHILL.
	Mr Thornhill's servant swore that he believed this letter to be his master's 
handwriting; but Mr Thornhill hoped the jury would not pay any regard to this 
testimony, as the boy had acknowledged in court that he never saw him write. Several 
persons of distinction testified that Mr Thornhill was of a peaceable disposition, and 
that, on the contrary, the deceased was of a remarkably quarrelsome temper. On 
behalf of Mr Thornhill it was further deposed that on Sir Cholmondeley being asked if 
he came by his hurt through unfair usage, he replied: "No: poor Thornhill! I am sorry 
for him, this misfortune was my own fault, and of my own seeking; I heartily forgive 
him, and desire you all to take notice of it, that it may be of some service to him, and 
that one misfortune may not occasion another." The jury acquitted Mr Thornhill of the 
murder, but found him guilty of manslaughter; in consequence of which he was 
burned in the hand.
	Of all the vices which disgrace our age and nation that of duelling is one of the 
most ridiculous, absurd, and criminal. Ridiculous, as it is a compliance with a custom 
that would plead fashion in violation of the laws of our country: Absurd, as it 
produces no test by which to determine on the merits of the point in dispute; for the 
aggrieved is equally liable to fall with the aggressor; and Criminal (criminal indeed in 
the highest degree!) as it arises from pre-determined murder on each side. Gentlemen 
talk of the dignity of honour, and the sacredness of character, without reflecting that 
there can be no honour in deliberate murder, no purity of character in a murderer!
	The man who sends a challenge to another, does but say, in other words, 'I am 
a professed murderer. I mean to send you into the other world, with all your 
imperfections on your head. — But I am a man of honour — though I will not take a 
purse, I will cut a throat. I will do every thing in my power to deprive you of life, and 
to make your friends and relations wretched for life. If I fall by your hands, my 
friends will be equally miserahle: — but no matter — the laws of honour demand that 
we should be murderers, and we are both too wise to obey the laws of our God.'
	Horrid practice! disgraceful to our country, and equally contrary to all Divine 
and human institutions! — It is to be hoped the time will come when the legislature 
shall decree that every man who is base enough to send a challenge shall be doomed 
to suffer death as a murderer. Let no fear be entertained that this can derogate from 
our national character of genuine courage. Nothing is more true than the observation 
of the poet, that
Cowards are cruel, but the brave 
Love mercy, and delight to save.


TOM GERRARD 
Taught a Dog to pick Pockets, and was executed for Housebreaking at 
Tyburn in August, 1711

	OF all the two hundred and forty-two malefactors who were executed at 
Tyburn, and elsewhere in and about London, from the beginning of Sir Thomas 
Abney's mayoralty to the end of Sir Richard Hoare's, this Thomas Gerrard was not, 
for the short time he triumphed in his villainy, inferior to any of them for wickedness. 
He was born in the parish of St Giles-in-the-Fields, of good and honest parents, who 
kept the Red Lion Inn in Holborn. He took to the trade of thieving, following it for a 
consider- able time, whereby he had often been in Newgate, and was condemned once 
before he committed the fact for which he at last suffered death.
	One time Gerrard, having committed a great robbery in London, and fearing to 
be apprehended for it, stole a horse worth above thirty pounds and rode into 
Lincolnshire, where, lying at a by-inn within a mile of Grantham, and espying a very 
large punch-bowl made of a new-fashioned mixed metal resembling plate, brought to 
some company, he supposed it to be really silver, and by its bigness to be worth 
nearly sixty pounds. Then going to bed, and observing this bowl to be locked up in a 
closet in the room where he lay, he broke it open in the dead of the night and privately 
carried off the imaginary plate, without his horse, to Newark-upon-Trent, where, 
being made sensible it was not silver, he threw it into the river, but damned himself to 
the very pit of hell for being such a fool as to leave a horse of considerable value for a 
bargain not worth twenty shillings. However, to be revenged on the people, who had 
got sufficient by his covetousness, he went, about a month after, to the house, when it 
was late at night, and setting fire to it burned it down to the ground in less than two 
hours; and by this villainous action ruined a whole family. This base offender had a 
dog, which he had taught to pick pockets as well as the best artist whatever of that 
profession; but after the untimely end of his master, seeking out for another, who 
should he pitch upon but Dr —, the Presbyterian parson, on whom he mightily 
fawned; and being a pretty dog, he was liked by that reverend gentleman, who made 
very much of him, till one day, going through Newgate Street, whilst he went into a 
tobacconist's shop to buy some tobacco, his new dog in the meantime ran into 
Newgate Market and fetched him a purse, in which was betwixt thirty and forty 
shillings, which he received without asking any questions. The old doctor presently 
stepping in somewhere else, the dog ran again to Newgate Market, and fetched him 
another purse, with much such another sum of money, and gave him that too. The 
doctor, looking now on his dog to be a great offender in that kind, as soon as he came 
home called this criminal to justice, and very fairly hanged the poor cur, for fear he 
should at last pick pockets in his meeting-house.
	Though housebreaking was the chief villainy which Tom Gerrard went upon, 
yet sometimes he counterfeited bank- notes, Exchequer bills, malt tickets, bills of sale 
or seamen's tickets, signed with any intricate hand. A certain profane gentleman in 
Leicester Fields once had a parrot, which he taught to swear and curse more than 
anything else. One day it happened that Tom Gerrard, sneaking about dinner-time into 
the parlour where Poll was hanging in a cage, went to the sideboard and took off 
several pieces of plate; but the parrot, having an eye upon him, set up her throat and 
fell a-screaming out: "Thieves, G-d d —-n you! Thieves, thieves, by G-d, make 
haste!" This uproar quickly alarmed the servants, who, running to see the cause of 
Poll's swearing and cursing after this manner, apprehended Tom Gerrard, on whom 
they found half-a-dozen silver spoons, and as many forks of the same metal; for which 
he was burned in the hand. Thomas Gerrard and Tobias Tanner were both indicted for 
breaking open the dwelling-house of William Gardiner, in the night-time, and taking 
from thence eight dozen pairs of worsted stockings, value ten pounds, and eight 
pounds' weight of thread, twenty-five shillings, with other things of value, the goods 
of the said William Gardiner, on the 10th of August, 1710. It appeared that the 
prosecutor, about midnight on the date aforesaid, was knocked up by the watch, and 
found his house broken open and his goods gone. To fix it upon the prisoners, one 
John Audrey, a person concerned with them, deposed that himself, with the prisoners, 
and a person not taken, broke into the prosecutor's shop, through the brickwork under 
a window, about twelve at night, took away the goods, and sold them to Mat Bunch 
for three pounds six shillings, which was equally divided amongst them. Gerrard upon 
his trial confessed the fact; but the evidence being not strong enough against Tanner, 
he was acquitted. Gerrard was accordingly ordered for execution, which he suffered at 
Tyburn, on Wednesday, the 24th of August, 1711, aged twenty-four years.


WILL MAW 
Having committed a Robbery, Maw ordered his Wife to organise a Mock 
Funeral, so that People should think he was dead. He was executed at 
Tyburn in October 1711

	THIS noted villain, aged fifty years when he was hanged, was born at 
Northallerton, in Yorkshire, from whence he came to London, at about twenty years 
of age, and served his apprenticeship with a cabinetmaker, and for a great while 
followed that occupation in the parish of St Giles's Cripplegate, where he dwelt for 
above eighteen years together; and for many years before his death, having left off 
working at his trade, he maintained himself by some illegal ways of living, such as the 
buying of stolen goods, and thereby encouraging thieves and robbers. He had also 
been addicted to coining, and for some of his irregular actions had a fine of ten 
pounds laid upon him in September, 1705, was burned in the hand in April 1710, and 
in September following, and twice ordered to hard labour in Bridewell.
	Having once committed a robbery, for which he was afraid to be apprehended, 
when he lived in Golden Lane he pretended to be very sick at home, and ordered his 
wife to give out that he was dead. His wife, being a cunning baggage, so ordered the 
matter that she cleanly executed his command, bought him a coffin, invited about 
forty or fifty neighbours to the funeral, and followed the corpse in a mournful 
condition, as if her poor husband had been dead indeed. As they were coming by the 
Red Cross ale-house, at the end of Red Cross Street, to St Giles's Churchyard, near 
Cripplegate, some company who were drinking at the door were inquisitive to know 
who was dead, and told it was old Maw, whom they knew very well. About five years 
afterwards one of those persons who were drinking, as aforesaid, was a prisoner in 
Wood Street Compter for debt, and Maw coming in also a little after him the former 
person was so surprised at the latter that at first he had not power to speak to him; but 
at length recovering some courage, as dreading he had seen a ghost, quoth he: "Is not 
your name Maw, sir?" Maw replied: "Yes, sir; as sure as your name is Watkins." The 
other said again: "Why, I thought you had been dead and buried five years ago!" 
"Yes," replied Maw," so I was, in trespasses and sins." "But I mean," said Watkins, 
"laid yourself corporally in the grave." "No," replied Maw, "I was not dead; but being 
at that time under some troubles, I was at the charge of a coffin to save my neck, and 
my wife gave out I was really defunct, supposing then my adversaries would not look 
for me in my grave."
	After a long course of iniquities Maw was at last committed to Newgate 
himself, and at the ensuing sessions convicted of five indictments; and on Wednesday, 
the 29th of October, 1711 , he met with the punishment he so well deserved, at the 
usual place of execution.


DAVY MORGAN 
Executed at Presteigne in April, 1712, for murdering Edward Williams

	DAVY MORGAN was born at Brecknock, the chief town in Brecknockshire, 
in South Wales, whence he came up to London in the quality of a serving-man to a 
Welsh knight, when about eighteen years of age; but young as he was, he quickly 
learned to rob his master of money and clothes, to the value of above ten pounds, and 
then ran away from his service.
	Being now his own master, the company he kept was none of the best, for they 
were all the greatest housebreakers, pickpockets and shoplifters, both in town and 
country; by whose conversation becoming as wicked as the best of them, he had not 
long turned thief before he broke open the house of a Venetian ambassador in Pall 
Mall and robbed him of above two hundred pounds' worth of plate, for which, being 
shortly after apprehended, he was committed to the Gatehouse at Westminster. After 
he had procured his liberty again he broke, one night, into the house of Doctor Titus 
Oates, in Axe Yard, in Westminster, and stood sentinel over that reverend divine 
whilst his comrades rifled most of the rooms; and then, tying him neck and heels, after 
the same manner as they do a soldier, with a couple of muskets which they found in 
the kitchen, Davy very sorely gagged him, saying that if his mouth had been as well 
crammed but a few years ago, he had not sworn so many men's lives away for 
pastime.
	Another time, getting into a gaming-house frequented much by Bully Dawson, 
and perceiving he had won a great deal of money, he requested the favour of speaking 
a word or two with him in the next room. Dawson, taking him to be some chub or 
cully, went along with him, where, shutting the door, Davy pulls out a pistol, and 
presenting it to his breast, quoth he: "I want money, sir, for a very extraordinary 
occasion; therefore deliver what you have without any resistance, for if you make but 
the least noise soever I'll shoot you through the heart, though I were sure to die on the 
spot." Bully Dawson, being strangely surprised at these words, and dreading what a 
desperate man might do in his rage, gave him all his money, which was about 
eighteen guineas. Then, tying him hand and foot, Davy went about his business. By 
that time the bully thought this bold robber was gone, so calling out for help, several 
sharping gamesters came out of the gaming-room to him and, untying him, asked how 
that adventure came to pass. Which Dawson relating through several volleys of loud 
oaths, they fell a-laughing heartily at him, and cried: "Dawson, 'twas a fair nick."
	At last Davy Morgan, having committed a great robbery in London, in 
breaking open a Jew's house in Duke's Place, and taking from thence above two 
thousand pounds in gold, fled into Wales; and in Presteigne, in Radnorshire, did not 
only rob the church of its communion plate, but also broke open the house of one 
Edward Williams, whom he barbarously murdered. But being apprehended at Bristol, 
and sent to jail in the county where he committed this most barbarous crime, he was 
executed at Presteigne, in April, 1712, aged forty-three years, and hanged in chains.


ELIZABETH MASON 
Executed for the murder of her godmother, 18th June, 1712

	THIS wretched woman was born at Melton Mowbray, in Leicestershire, and, 
while very young, was conveyed by her friends to Sutton, near Peterborough, in 
Northamptonshire; from whence, at the age of seven years, she was brought to 
London by Mrs. Scoles, who told her she was her godmother; and with this lady and 
her sister, Mrs. Cholwell, she lived, and was employed in household work; but, 
having conceived an idea that she should possess the fortune of her mistresses on their 
death, she came to the horrid resolution of removing them by poison.
	On Thursday in Easter-week, 1712, being sent of an errand, she went to a 
druggist's shop, where she bought a quantity of yellow arsenic, on the pretence that it 
was to kill rats. On the following morning she mixed this poison with some coffee, of 
which Mrs. Stoles drank, and soon afterwards, finding herself extremely ill, said her 
end was approaching, and expired the next day in great agonies. Mrs. Cholwell 
receiving no injury from what little coffee she drank, the girl determined to renew her 
attempt to poison her; in consequence of which she went again to the same shop about 
a fortnight afterwards, and bought a second quantity of arsenic, which she put into 
some water-gruel prepared for Mrs. Cholwell's breakfast, on the following morning. It 
happening, providentially, that the gruel was too hot, the lady put it aside some time 
to cool, during which time most of the arsenic sank to the bottom. She then drank 
some of it, found herself very ill, and, observing the sediment at the bottom of the 
basin, sent for her apothecary, who gave her a great quantity of oil to drink, by the 
help of which the poison was expelled.
	Unfavourable suspicions now arising against Elizabeth Mason, she was taken 
into custody, and, being carried before two justices of the peace, on the 30th of April, 
she confessed the whole of her guilt, in consequence of which she was committed to 
Newgate.
	On the 6th of June, 1712, she was indicted for the murder of Jane Scoles, by 
mixing yellow arsenic with her coffee; and, pleading guilty to the indictment, she 
received sentence of death, in consequence of which she was executed at Tyburn on 
the 18th of June, 1712.
	In the case of this malefactor we see, in a striking light, the fatal consequences 
of lying; for if, after she had first defrauded her mistresses, she had possessed grace 
sufficient to have acknowledged her crime, she would probably have been forgiven, 
and her repentance would have secured her peace of mind during her future life: but 
the concealing her faults by lying naturally led her to the commission of greater 
crimes, which ended in her final destruction. Of all crimes lying is one of the meanest, 
and ought to be studiously avoided by those who wish to be happy in this world or the 
next. Very true is the observation of the poet:
'But liars we can never trust, 
Tho' they should speak the thing that's true; 
And he that does one fault at first, 
And lies to hide it, makes it two.'


ELIZABETH CHIVERS 
Executed for the murder of her bastard child, 1st August, 1712

	AT the sessions held at the Old Bailey, in the month of July, 1712, Elizabeth 
Chivers was indicted for the wilful murder of her female bastard child, Elizabeth 
Ward, by drowning it in a pond; and, pleading guilty, she received sentence of death.
	This unnatural woman was a native of Spitalfields, but lived at Stepney at the 
time of the commission of the murder. The account she gave of herself after she was 
under sentence of death was as follows — She said that her father dying while she 
was very young, left her in indigent circumstances, which obliged her to go to service 
when she was only fourteen years of age; that she lived in several reputable families, 
in which her conduct was deemed irreproachable.
	When she arrived almost at the age of thirty years, she lived with one Mr. 
Ward, an attorney, who prevailed on her to lie with him; in consequence of which she 
bore the child which she afterwards murdered.
	Finding herself pregnant, she removed from Mr. Ward's to another family, 
where she remained about six weeks, and then took private lodgings; in which she 
was delivered of a girl, who was baptized by the name of Elizabeth Ward. The father, 
agreeable to his promise, provided for the mother and child for about three months, 
when Mrs. Ward, discovering her habitation, exposed her in the neighbourhood, so 
that she was ashamed to make her appearance.
	Enraged by this circumstance, she was tempted to destroy her child on which 
she took it into the fields, and threw it into a pond not far from Hackney; but some 
people near the spot, happening to see what passed, took her into custody, and carried 
her before a magistrate, who committed her to Newgate.
	All the time that she remained in this gloomy prison, her mind seemed to be 
tortured with the most agonizing pains on account of the horrid crime of which she 
had been guilty; and she expressed a sense of her torments in the following striking 
words, which she spoke to a clergyman who attended her: 'Oh, sir! I am lost! I cannot 
pray, I cannot repent; my sin is too great to be pardoned! I did commit it with 
deliberation and choice, and in cold blood: I was not driven to it by necessity. The 
father had all the while provided for me and for the child, and would have done so 
still, had not I destroyed the child, and thereby sought my own destruction.'
	She suffered the dreadful sentence of the law on the 1st of August, 1712.
	It is very remarkable of this woman that she was near thirty years of age 
before she was seduced, and previous to that time her character was unimpeached. 
Hence let young women learn the importance of chastity, and consider how very little 
they have to depend on when the character is once gone. Let men, likewise, he taught 
to reflect what a horrid crime seduction is; and that, when once they tempt a young 
woman to violate her chastity, they are only leading her to the brink of inevitable 
destruction.
	The terrors of conscience this poor creature underwent appear to have been of 
the most dreadful kind, and afford us a shocking idea of the consequences resulting 
from the crime of murder. What a deplorable state must that wretch be in, who 
despairs to so great a degree as to be unable to repent! May God, in his mercy, grant 
that none of the readers of this work may ever have occasion to repent of a crime so 
shocking as murder! Nature revolts at the idea of so enormous an offence; but we 
know not to what lengths our passions may lead us. Let us, therefore, constantly pray 
that we may not be 'led into temptation;' and 'let him that standeth take heed lest he 
fall.'


COLONEL JOHN HAMILTON 
Convicted of Manslaughter, 11th of September, 1712, as Second in a Duel 
between the Duke of Hamilton and Lord Mahon

	NO occurrence, short of a national misfortune, at this time, engaged the public 
equal to the memorable duet between the Duke of Hamilton and Lord Mahon; and no 
crime of this nature was ever committed with more sanguinary dispositions. The 
principals murdered each other, and Mr. Hamilton was one of the seconds.
	John Hamilton, Esq., of St Martin's in the Fields, was indicted at the sessions 
held at the Old Bailey on the 11th of September, 1712, for the murder of Charles Lord 
Mahon, Baron of Oakhampton, on the 15th of November preceding; and at the same 
time he was indicted for abetting Charles Lord Mahon and George Macartney, Esq., 
in the murder of James Duke of Hamilton and Brandon; and having pleaded not guilty 
to these indictments, the witnesses proceeded to give their testimony in substance as 
follows: —
	Rice Williams, footman to Lord Mahon, proved that, his master having met 
the Duke of Hamilton at the chambers of Master in Chancery, on Thursday, the 13th 
of November, misunderstanding arose between them respecting the testimony of an 
evidence: that when his lord came home at night he ordered that no person should be 
admitted to speak with him the next morning except Mr Macartney: that on the 
Saturday morning, about seven o'clock, this evidence, having some suspicion that 
mischief would ensue, went towards Hyde Park, and seeing the Duke of Hamilton's 
coach going that way he got over the Park wall; but just as he arrived at the place 
where the duellists were engaged he saw both the noblemen fall, and two gentlemen 
near them, whom he took to be the seconds, one of whom he knew to be Mr 
Macartney; and the other (but he could not swear it was the prisoner) said: "We have 
made a fine piece of work of it."
	The waiters at two different taverns proved that the deceased noblemen and 
their seconds had been at those taverns, and from what could be recollected from their 
behaviour it appeared that a quarrel had taken place and a duel was in agitation; and 
some of the Duke's servants and other witnesses deposed to a variety of particulars, all 
which tended to the same conclusion.
	But the evidence who saw most of the transaction was William Morris, a 
groom, who deposed that, as he was walking his horses towards Hyde Park, he 
followed a hackney coach with two gentlemen in it, whom he saw alight by the lodge 
and walk together towards the left part of the ring, where they were about a quarter of 
an hour when he saw two other gentlemen come to them: that, after having saluted 
each other, one of them, who he was since told was the Duke of Hamilton, threw off 
his cloak, and one of the other two, who he now understands was Lord Mahon, his 
surtout coat, and all immediately drew: that the Duke and Lord pushed at each other 
but a very little while when the Duke closed, and took the Lord by the collar, who fell 
down and groaned, and the Duke upon him: that just as Lord Mahon was dropping he 
saw him lay hold of the Duke's sword, but could not tell whether the sword was at that 
time in his body; nor did he see any wound given after the closing, and was sure Lord 
Mahon did not shorten his sword. He declared he did not see the seconds fight, but 
they had their swords in their hands, assisting the lords.
	Paul Boussier, a surgeon, swore that, on opening the body of the Duke of 
Hamilton, he found a wound between the second and third ribs, which entered into the 
body, inclining to the right side, which could not be given but by some push from 
above.
	Henry Amie, a surgeon, swore, that he found the Duke of Hamilton had 
received a wound by a push, which had cut the artery and small tendon of his right 
arm; another very large one in his right leg, a small one in his left leg, near the instep; 
and a fourth on his left side, between the second and third ribs, which ran down into 
his body most forward, having pierced the skin of his midriff, and gone through his 
caul; but that the wound in his arm caused his so speedy death; and that he might have 
lived two or three days with the wound in his breast, which wound could not be given 
but by an arm that reached over, or was above him.
	He further deposed, that he also viewed the Lord Mahon's body, and found 
that he had a wound between the short ribs, quite through his belly, and another about 
three inches deep in the upper part of his thigh; a large wound, about four inches 
wide, in his groin, a little higher, which was the cause of his immediate death; and 
another small wound on his left side; and that the fingers of his left hand were cut.
	The defence made by the prisoner was that the Duke called him to go abroad 
with him, but he knew not anything of the matter till he came into the field. Some 
Scottish noblemen and other gentlemen of rank gave Mr Hamilton a very 
advantageous character, asserting that he was brave, honest and inoffensive; and the 
jury, having considered of the affair, gave a verdict of "manslaughter"; in 
consequence of which the prisoner prayed the benefit of the statute, which was 
allowed him.


RICHARD TOWN 
Executed at Tyburn, December 23, 1712, for Fraudulent Bankruptcy

	Notwithstanding the law makes it death to any bankrupt, who shall be 
convicted of fraudulently concealing, embezzling, or making away with any goods or 
money to the value of twenty pounds, yet offences of this nature are constantly 
committed in the most clandestine manner, and too often escape detection.
	On the trial of Richard Town, who was the first that suffered under this Act of 
Parliament, which passed only five years before his execution, a number of witnesses 
were called to prove his being a regular trader, and to make it appear that he had 
committed an act of bankruptcy; but the principal of these was Mr. Hodgson, who 
deposed, that, being sent after the prisoner by the commissioners of bankrupts, he 
apprehended him at Sandwich; and searching him, by virtue of his warrant, found in 
his pocket twenty guineas in gold, and about five pound, seven shillings, and sixpence 
in silver; and that he had three gold rings on his fingers; that he took from him the 
gold, and five pounds in silver, and left him the odd silver.
	Town had intended to sail in a ship which was bound to Amsterdam; but, 
being too late, he went on board a packet-boat bound to Ostend; and, being taken sea-
sick, he went to the side of the vessel; and stooping down, dropped eight hundred 
guineas, which were in two bags between his coat and waistcoat, into the sea.
	A storm arising at sea, the packet-boat was driven back, and obliged to put 
into Sandwich; in consequence of which Town was apprehended by Hodgson, as 
above mentioned.
	When Town was examined before the commissioners, be acknowledged that 
he had ordered Thomas Norris to carry off his books and accounts, plate, and papers 
of value, and like wise to convey a large quantity of tallow, which he supposed was 
then arrived in Holland.
	Now the counsel for Town insisted that, as Norris was a joint agent with him, 
the act of one was the act of both; and that he could not legally be convicted till the 
other (who was then abroad) could be apprehended, and tried with him. But, in order 
to frustrate this argument, it was proved that Town had shipped off large quantities of 
goods on his own account: besides, the circumstance of his being taken at Sandwich, 
by Mr. Hodgson, with more than twenty pounds of his creditors' money in his 
possession, was a sufficient proof of his guilt; wherefore the jury did not hesitate on 
his case, and, he received sentence of death.
	This unhappy man was a native of the county of Oxford, end for some time 
had carried on a considerable business as a tallow-chandler, with great reputation; but 
it appears too evident that be had formed a design of defrauding his creditors, because 
at the time of his absconding, he had considerable property in the funds, and was 
otherwise in good circumstances.
	Before his conviction, he was indulged, with a chamber to himself in the 
press-yard; but after sentence was passed on him, he was put into the condemned 
hole, with the other prisoners: but here he caught a violent cold, which brought on a 
deafness, a disorder to which he had been subject; wherefore, on complaining of this 
circumstance, he was removed to his former apartments.
	While under sentence of death, he refused to acknowledge the justice of his 
sentences declaring that a person whom he had relieved, and preserved from ruin, had 
occasioned his destruction. He attended the devotions of the place, declared that he 
forgave his enemies, and begged that God would like wise forgive them. He was 
exactly forty-one years of age the day of his execution; a circumstance which with 
great composure, he mentioned to the Ordinary of Newgate, on his way to the place of 
execution.


JACK BLEWIT 
Was taken into Slavery by the Blacks on Pirates' Island. After gaining his 
Liberty and returning to England he became a Highwayman. Executed in 
1713 for the Murder of a Farmer's Daughter

	JOHN BLEWIT was born near Bull Inn Court, in the Strand. His father was a 
shoemaker, and bred him up to the same trade. But he had not been bound above three 
years before the old man died, and Jack soon after became too headstrong for his 
mother to manage him. As he advanced in years, so did he in vice. In the reign of 
King James II. he changed what little he had of the Protestant religion for about the 
same quantity of the Roman Catholic, being in hopes of getting himself promoted by 
this compliance with the times. He entered under the Earl of Salisbury against the 
Prince of Orange, by which means he got a horse, and he was a professed lover of 
riding. But he did not long continue in this military station, for upon King William's 
accession to the throne this newly raised regiment, being mostly Papists, was 
presently disbanded, and he was put to new shifts to get his bread. He was resolved to 
try if he could better his fortune at sea; so going on board a ship bound for Guinea, 
sailing to Old Calabar, they entered the river called the Cross river, into Pirates' 
Island, where, after they had taken in their Negroes, and were ready to sail, the master 
called up the boatswain, and three men more, one of whom was Jack, to look out the 
copper bars that were left, and carry them on shore to sell. The boatswain with his 
small company desired they might have arms, not believing the inhabitants were so 
harmless a people as reported. They took with them three muskets and one pistol, and 
so rowed towards the shore; but unhappily their match fell into the water, and the ship 
being fallen down lower towards the sea, and they ashamed to go back without 
dispatching their business, Jack went ashore to the first house to light the match. 
Before he was twenty rods from the water side he was seized on by half a score of 
blacks, or rather tawny Moors, and by them hauled half a mile up into the country, 
and thrown with great violence upon his belly, and so compelled to lie till they had 
stripped him. In the meantime, more company coming, they were so eager for his poor 
canvas apparel that some they tore off, and some they cut off, and therewith several 
pieces of his flesh, to his intolerable pain, and with those rags they made themselves 
little aprons.
	Whilst all this was being done, Jack's clothing being very scarce there, his 
comrades made the best of their way back again to their ship, telling the captain what 
had befallen them, in having Jack taken from them by savage natives. Blewit was now 
sold to a master, who was free to discourse, after he had learned in less than three 
months the Tata language, which is easily attained, being comprehended in few 
words, and all the Negroes speak it. After being four months in the country his master 
presented him to the King of the Buccaneers, whose name was Esme, who 
immediately gave him to his daughter Onijah. When the King went abroad Jack 
attended him as his page of honour throughout the whole circuit of his dominions, 
which was not above twelve miles; yet his Majesty boasted exceedingly of his power 
and strength, and gloried extremely that he had a white man to attend him, whom he 
employed to carry his bows and arrows.
	During all the time Jack was a slave to this prince he never knew him to go 
abroad and come home sober. But after two months' service the King of Calanach, 
called Mancha, hearing of this white, courted his neighbour prince to sell him, and 
accordingly he was sold, for a cow and a goat. This king was sober, free from the 
debaucheries and mischiefs the other was subject to, and would often inquire of him 
concerning the head of his country, and whether the kingdom he was of was bigger 
than his own, whose whole dominions were not above twenty five miles in length and 
fifteen miles in breadth.
	Jack told as much as was convenient, keeping within the bounds of modesty, 
yet relating as much as possible to the honour and dignity of his Queen, informing 
him of the greatness of one of her kingdoms, the several shires and counties it 
contained, with the number of its cities, towns and castles, and strength of each, the 
infinite inhabitants, and valour of her subjects; which so amazed this petty prince that 
he needed to mention no more of her Majesty's glory and dignity. It put him into such 
a profound consternation that he resolved to find out some way to tender his respects 
to this mighty princess, and could study none more convenient than that if he could 
find a passage he would let him go to England, to inform Queen Anne of the great 
favour and respect he had for her, and carry her a present, which should be two 
cabareets, or goats, which they value at a high rate, this king himself having not above 
seventeen or eighteen.
	Though our captive lived happily with this prince, yet his desires and hopes 
were still to return to his native country. At length he promised him that the first 
English ship which came into the roads should have liberty to release or purchase him. 
This much rejoiced Jack's heart, and he now thought every day a year till he could 
hear or see some English ship arrive. The ship came in, the commander whereof was 
Captain Royden, who had put in there for Negroes. The day after his arrival the King 
let Jack go, sending him in a canoe, placed between a Negro's legs, with others to 
guide this small vessel, for fear he should leap overboard and swim to the ship. At a 
distance he hailed her in English, to the great surprise of those within her. The 
Negroes let him stand up and show himself to the captain, to whom he gave an 
account of his slavery; and being redeemed for five iron bars, he was taken on board, 
where the seamen charitably apparelled him (for he was naked) and brought him safe 
to England, after fourteen months' slavery.
	Jack being back home again was resolved never to venture his carcass again at 
sea. Deciding to try his fortune on the highway, he stole a horse out of a field by 
Marylebone. Still wanting a saddle, pistols and other accoutrements, he was obliged to 
sell the horse to buy all materials to make him a complete highwayman, and proposed 
to steal another. To Smithfield he rides to make the best market he could, but he had 
scarce rode a turn or two before the owner came up and challenged his horse; so poor 
Jack, being apprehended, and carried before a magistrate, was committed to Newgate.
	When he was tried, being condemned, he most earnestly begged the Court to 
show him mercy, by transportation, or any other punishment but death. As it was his 
first crime, and the prosecutor had his horse again, it was his good luck to obtain a 
reprieve, and to plead to a pardon, too, within three or four months after his 
confinement. Jack now being at liberty again, he was put to his trumps how to live; 
and though he was unsuccessful in his first attempt at thieving, he would yet venture a 
second time, resolving now to lose the horse or win the saddle. But his thoughts not 
aspiring to great matters, as they did at first, he was resolved to try how Fortune 
would smile on his adventures on the footpad; so one evening, going over Clapham 
Common, he overtook a gentleman riding softly along, whom unawares he knocked 
off his horse, by giving him an unlucky blow under his ear, which killed him. He fell 
to rifling him, and took from him forty guineas and a gold watch worth twenty 
guineas more. When he had done this, putting one of the deceased's feet into one of 
the stirrups, the horse dragged him up and down the Common an hour or two before 
he was taken up. At last, being carried to a house, and the coroner sitting on his body, 
the inquest brought in his death to be occasioned by accidentally falling off his horse, 
though he had lost his watch and money, which they supposed were dropped out of 
his breeches by the position he was in, of his head downwards, whilst he was dragged 
about the Common. Having thus by this complicated piece of villainy lined his 
pockets, Jack made the best of his way to Yorkshire, where, after clothing himself, he 
bought a horse, sword and pistols, and then sought out for new adventures on the 
road. In Hertfordshire, overtaking a farmer's daughter, he shot her through the head 
and robbed her of fourteen pounds in money, which she had that day received for her 
father. The same evening he put up at an inn at Ware, whither a hue and cry coming 
shortly after, he was taken up on suspicion, having some spots of blood on one of the 
lapels of his coat; and being struck then with a remorse of conscience, he confessed 
the murder, and was forthwith carried before a Justice of the Peace, who, after a long 
examination, committed him to Hertford Jail. To drive away sorrow from his breast he 
got drunk every day until the time of his trial, which was in the Lent Assizes, 1713, 
when he was condemned for his life. When he was carried to the place of execution he 
confessed having committed the murder on Clapham Common, as before related, and 
then, after many devout ejaculations, he was turned off, in the forty-fifth year of his 
age.


TOM GRAY 
Highwayman who set Fire to a Prison. Executed at Tyburn in March, 1713

	TOM GRAY was born in the parish of St James's, Clerkenwell, of very honest 
parents, who put him apprentice to a tailor, with whom he served out his time, but not 
without some shrewd suspicion of wronging his master sometimes, which was three 
or four times made up with a sum of money. But when the term of his apprentice ship 
was expired, taking great delight in going to Beveridge's Masquerade School, in 
Short's Gardens, which was the nursery a long time for bringing up a great many 
wicked villains, he there got acquainted with such a pack of rogues that their fellows 
were not to be met with on this side the grave.
	Here Gray, being enamoured with one Pat King, took to such irregularities that 
they soon brought him to be burned in the hand. A little after which disgrace, his 
father dying, and leaving him about eighty or ninety pounds, he had then so much 
thought in him as to quit the society of all his wicked companions, by leaving London 
and going to the city of Oxford, where he kept a victualling house for some years; and 
improving his stock there, he left off that employment and came up to London again, 
where, with what money he had, he set up a salesman's shop in Monmouth Street, in 
the parish of St Giles in the Fields. This occupation he followed about three years, 
when, encumbrances with debt lying very heavy on him, he left his house and quickly 
complied with the wicked insinuations of bad men again, and embraced the unhappy 
opportunities of doing a great deal of mischief to honest people.
	Now he had grown so abominably wicked that he committed not a fact but 
what was worthy of death. Beginning first to go on the footpad, he went one day into 
an inn in Bcaconsfield, where he pulled out an old horseshoe which he had found on 
the road; then, calling for a flagon of ale, he desired the landlady to lend him a frying 
pan, into which he put his horseshoe, and fell to frying it as fast as he could, to the 
great surprise of all the company who were drinking in the kitchen. "But," quoth he, 
"had I now but one slice of bacon with this horseshoe, I should have a dinner fit for a 
prince." There being two or three good flitches on a rack over his head, the landlady 
cut him off a good hand some slice or two, perhaps not so much out of generosity as 
for fear of having her frying pan burned to pieces, for want of butter or dripping with 
the horseshoe.
	"Now," quoth Gray, "had I but two or three eggs too, to fry with my horseshoe 
and bacon, I would not change dinners with the best man in the town." Said an old 
farmer who sat by, and had a bag with fifty pounds in it before him: "I am going 
home, friend, with this money, not above half a quarter of a mile out of the town, and 
if you can stay for your dinner a little till I come back, I'll bring thee a few eggs." 
Gray thanked him very kindly, and setting the frying pan aside for the present, no 
sooner had the old farmer gone away, but he, making some excuse to go into the yard, 
met him backwards over the fields, and pulling out a couple of pistols quoth he to the 
farmer: "Stand, sir." The farmer replied: "Why, how then can I fetch you eggs for 
your horseshoe and bacon?" Said Gray: "Deliver me that bag under your arm, and I 
can buy myself eggs without being beholden to anybody." The farmer made a great 
many words about his money, but Gray offering to shoot him through the head, he not 
only parted with it without any further denial, but also suffered himself to be tied hand 
and foot.
	Gray, having obtained this booty, soon laid out twelve pounds of it for a horse 
and a couple of guineas for two pairs of pocket pistols; and being now (as he thought) 
qualified for a true bred highwayman, his next attempt was upon a Scots pedlar, near 
Cirencester, in Gloucestershire, taking from whom his whole pack, valued at about 
sixty pounds, and a hue and cry being expeditiously sent after him, he was 
apprehended and committed to Gloucester Jail, from whence he made his escape in a 
short time, by setting it on fire, and thereby smothering three of his fellow prisoners to 
death.
	One day, drinking at Pancras, and espying a coach and six horses coming from 
Highgate, he presently mounted, and meeting it in a narrow by-lane attacked the 
gentleman who was in it, from whom he took forty-eight guineas, and then robbed the 
coachman, postilion and two footmen of about fifty shillings. Not far from the same 
place he assaulted a justice of the Peace coming from Hampstead, and taking from 
him a silver watch, and about sixteen shillings, he bade him observe what oaths he 
had sworn (which, to be sure, were not a few), to the end his Worship might make 
him pay for them in case he should ever be brought before him for any 
misdemeanour. He then committed several robberies in company with Edmund Eames 
and William Bigs, particularly on the 2nd of January, 1713, when they stopped a 
coach coming from Hampstead and took from the passengers who were in it about 
one pound, eight shillings. But at last he was apprehended for assaulting and robbing 
one Mrs Baxter, as she was coming from Hampstead towards London in a coach, 
which he stopped near the halfway house and took from her three shillings; also for 
robbing one Mrs Wilson of some money as she was riding to Hampstead; and for 
robbing one Mr Samuel Harding of nine shillings near the halfway house to 
Hampstead.
	For these facts he was committed to Newgate, where his behaviour was very 
abominable and wicked all the while he was under confinement; and though sentence 
of death was passed on him, yet was he so hardened in his sin that he said to the 
ordinary, because he refused to administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to him, 
he would certainly kill him if ever he durst venture to come to pray with him in the 
cart at Tyburn, where he was executed on Wednesday, the 10th of March, 1713, aged 
above fifty years.


NED BONNET 
Took to the Highway because he was ruined by a Fire. Executed at 
Cambridge Castle in March, 1713

	EDWARD BONNET was born of very good and reputable parents in the Isle 
of Ely, in Cambridgeshire, who bestowed some small education upon him, as reading, 
writing and casting accounts. He set up as a grocer in the country, being at one time 
worth above six hundred pounds. He was ruined by a fire, which burned all his goods 
and house to the ground; and not being in a condition to retrieve his loss he came up 
to London, to avoid the importunate duns of creditors, where, lighting into a gang of 
highwaymen, he took to their courses, to raise himself, if possible, once more. Having 
been upon several exploits, wherein he was successful, the sweet profit of his 
enterprises made him so in love with robbing on the highway that he devoted himself 
wholly to it, and committed above three hundred robberies, particularly in 
Cambridgeshire, insomuch that he was much dreaded by the people in that country.
	One time Ned Bonnet, in a rencounter on the road, met with the misfortune of 
having his horse shot under him; whereupon he was obliged to follow his trade on 
foot till he could get another. But it was not long before he took a good gelding out of 
the grounds of a man who since kept the Red Lion Inn in Hounslow upon which, 
riding straight into Cambridgeshire, a gentleman one day over took him on the road 
who was like to have been robbed. Hearing Ned Bonnet to be tuning something of a 
psalm, he thereupon took him to be a godly man, and desired his company to such a 
place, to which he said he was also going (for a highwayman is never out of his way, 
though he is going against his will to the gallows). But at length, Ned, coming to a 
place convenient for this purpose, obliged the gentleman to stand and deliver his 
money; which being above eighty guineas, he had the conscience to give him half a 
crown to bear his charges till he had credit to recruit himself again. This gentleman 
ever after could not endure the tune of a psalm, and had as great an aversion against 
Sternhold, Hopkins, Tate and Brady as the devil has to holy water.
	At length one Zachary Clare, whose father kept a baker's shop at Hackney, 
being apprehended for robbing on the highway and committed to Cambridge Jail, to 
save his own bacon made himself an evidence against Ned Bonnet, who, being 
secured at his lodging in Old Street, was sent to Newgate, and remaining till the 
assizes held at Cambridge, before Mr Baron Lovet, was carried down thither, and 
executed before the castle, on Saturday, the 28th of March, 1713, to the general joy 
and satisfaction of all the people in that country.


RICHARD NOBLE 
Executed at Kingston, March 28, 1713, For the Murder of Mrs. Sayer.

	WE forbear to comment upon that part of this shocking transaction which 
relates to the female sex; and happy should we be, if our duty permitted us to consign 
to oblivion, imputations upon those who were by nature formed to be the friend and 
comfort of man. Richard Noble, we are sorry to say, was an attorney at law, and the 
paramour of Mrs. Sayer, wife of John Sayer, Esq. who was possessed of about one 
thousand pounds a year, and lord of the manor of Biddesden, in Buckinghamshire. 
Mr. Sayer does not appear to have been a man of any great abilities, but was 
remarkable for his good nature and inoffensive disposition. Mrs. Sayer, to whom he 
was married in 1699, was the daughter of Admiral Nevil, a woman of an agreeable 
person and brilliant wit; but of such an abandoned disposition as to be a disgrace to 
her sex. Soon after Mr. Sayer's wedding, Colonel Salisbury married the Admiral's 
widow; but there was such a vicious similarity in the conduct of the mother and 
daughter, that the two husbands had early occasion to be disgusted with the choice 
they had made. Mr. Sayer's nuptials had not been celebrated many days, before the 
bride took the liberty of kicking him, and hinted that she would procure a lover more 
agreeable to her mind. Sayer, who was distractedly fond of her, bore this treatment 
with patience; and at the end of a twelvemonth she presented him a daughter, which 
soon died: but he became still more fond of her after she had made him a father, and 
was continually loading her with presents. Mr. Sayer now took a house in Lisle-street, 
Leicester-fields, kept a coach, and did every thing which he thought might gratify his 
wife: but her unhappy disposition was the occasion of temporary separations. At 
times, however, she behaved with more complaisance to her husband, who had, after a 
while, the honour of being deemed father of another child of which she was delivered; 
and after this circumstance she indulged herself in still greater liberties than before; 
her mother, who was almost constantly with her, encouraging her in this shameful 
conduct. At length a scheme was concerted, which would probably have ended in the 
destruction of Mr. Sayer and Colonel Salisbury, if it had not been happily prevented 
by the prudence of the latter. The Colonel taking an opportunity to represent to Mrs. 
Sayer the ill consequences that must attend her infidelity to her husband, she 
immediately attacked him with the most outrageous language, and insulted him to that 
degree that he threw the remainder of a cup of tea at her. The mother and daughter 
immediately laid hold of this circumstance to inflame the passions of Mr. Sayer, 
whom they at length prevailed on to demand satisfaction of the colonel. The challenge 
is said to have been written by Mrs. Sayer, and when the colonel received it, he 
conjectured that it was a plan concerted between the ladies to get rid of their 
husbands. However, he obeyed the summons, and going in a coach with Mr. Sayer 
towards Montague-House, he addressed him as follows: "Son Sayer, let us come to a 
right understanding of this business. 'Tis very well known that I am a swordsman, and 
I should be very far from getting any honour by killing you. But to come nearer to the 
point in hand, thou shouldst know, Jack, for all the world knows, that thy wife and 
mine are both what they should not be. They want to get rid of us both at once. If thou 
shouldst drop, they'll have me hanged for it after." There was so much of obvious 
truth in this remark, that Mr. Sayer immediately felt its force, and the gentlemen drove 
home together, to the mortification of the ladies. Soon after this affair, Mrs. Sayer 
went to her house in Buckinghamshire, where an intimacy took place between her and 
the curate of the parish, and their amour was conducted with so little reserve, that all 
the servants saw that the parson had more influence in the house than their master. 
Mrs. Sayer coming to London, was soon followed by the young clergyman, who was 
seized with the small- pox, which cost him his life. When he found there was no hope 
of his recovery, he sent to Mr. Sayer, earnestly requesting to see him: but Mrs. Sayer, 
who judged what he wanted, said that her husband had not had the small-pox, and 
such a visit might cost him his life; she therefore insisted that her husband should not 
go; and the passive man tamely submitted to this injunction, though his wife daily 
sent a footman to enquire after the clergyman, who died without being visited by Mr. 
Sayer. This gentleman had not been long dead, before his place was supplied by an 
officer of the guards; but he was soon dismissed in favour of a man of great 
distinction, who presented her with some valuable china, which she pretended was 
won at Astrop Wells. About this time Mr. Sayer found his affairs considerably 
deranged by his wife's extravagance; on which a gentleman recommended him to Mr. 
Richard Noble (the subject of our present consideration), as a man capable of being 
very serviceable to him. His father kept a very refutable coffee-house at Bath, and his 
mother was so virtuous a woman, that when Noble afterwards went to her house with 
Mrs. Sayer, in a coach and six, she shut the door against him. He had been well 
educated, and articled to an attorney of eminence in New Inn, in which he afterwards 
took chambers for himself; but he had not been in any considerable degree of practice 
when he was introduced to Mr. Sayer. Soon after his introduction to Mr. Sayer's 
family he became too intimate with Mrs. Sayer, and, if report said true, with her 
mother likewise. However, these abandoned women had other prospects besides mere 
gallantry, and considering Noble as a man of the world as well as a lover, they 
concerted a scheme to deprive Mr. Sayer of a considerable part of his estate. The 
unhappy gentleman, being perpetually teased by the women, at length consented to 
execute a deed of separation, in which he assigned some lands in Buckinghamshire, to 
the amount of one hundred and fifty pounds a year to his wife, exclusive of fifty 
pounds a year for pin-money; and by this deed he likewise covenanted that Mrs. Sayer 
might live with whom she pleased, and that he would never molest any person on 
account of harbouring her. Mr. Sayer was even so weak as to sign this deed without 
having counsel of his own to examine it. Not long after this, Mrs Sayer was delivered 
of a child at Bath, but that the husband might not take alarm at this circumstance, 
Noble sent him a letter, acquainting him that he was to be pricked down for high 
sheriff of Buckinghamshire; and Mrs. Salisbury urged him to go to Holland to be out 
of the way, and supplied him with some money on the occasion. It does not seem 
probable that Sayer had any suspicion of Noble's criminal intercourse with his wife, 
for, the night before he set out, he presented him with a pair of saddle-pistols and 
furniture worth above forty pounds. Soon after he was gone, Mrs. Sayer's maid, 
speaking of the danger her master might be in at sea, Mrs. Sayer said, "She should be 
sorry his man James, a poor innocent fellow, should come to any harm; but she should 
be glad, and earnestly wished that Mr. Sayer might sink to the bottom of the sea, and 
that the bottom of the ship might come out." Not long after the husband was gone 
abroad, Noble began to give himself airs of greater consequence than he had hitherto 
done. He was solicitor in a cause in the Court of Chancery, in which Mr. Sayer was 
plaintiff, and having obtained a decree, he obliged the trustees nominated in the 
marriage articles to relinquish, and assumed the authority of a sole trustee. Mr. Sayer 
remained in Holland nearly a year, during which time Noble publicly cohabited with 
his wife; and when her husband returned she refused to live with him; but having first 
robbed him of above two thousand pounds, in exchequer bills and other effects, she 
went to private lodgings with Noble, and was shortly after delivered of another child. 
After Mrs. Sayer had thus eloped from her husband, he caused an advertisement to be 
inserted in the newspapers, of which the following is a copy:
	"Whereas, Mary, the wife of John Sayer, Esq. late of Lisle-street, St. Anne's, 
went away from her dwellinghouse, on or about the 23d of May last, in company with 
Elizabeth Nevil, sister to the said Mary, and hath carried away near one thousand 
pounds in money, besides other things of a considerable value, and is supposed to go 
by some other name: he desires all tradesmen and others not to give her any credit, for 
that he will not pay the same."
	While Mrs. Sayer cohabited with Noble, he was constantly supplied with 
money but he was not her only associate at that time, for, during his occasional 
absence, she received the visits of other lovers. Noble now procured an order from the 
Court of Chancery to take Mr. Sayer in execution for four hundred pounds, at the suit 
of Mrs. Salisbury, the consequence of a judgment confessed by him, for form's sake, 
to protect his goods from his creditors while he was in Holland. Mr. Sayer declared 
that the real debt was not more than seventy pounds, though artful management and 
legal expenses had swelled it to the above-mentioned sum. Hereupon Sayer took 
refuge within the rules of the Fleet Prison, and exhibited his bill in chancery for relief 
against these suits, and the deed of separation, which he obtained. In the mean time, 
Mrs. Sayer finding herself liable to be exposed by the advertisement her husband had 
caused to be inserted in the newspapers, she, with her mother, and Noble, took 
lodgings in the Mint, Southwark, which was at that time a place of refuge for great 
numbers of persons of desperate circumstances and abandoned characters. Mr. Sayer 
having been informed of this, wrote several letters to her, promising that he would 
forgive all her crimes, if she would return to her duty; but she treated his letters with 
as much contempt as she had done his person. Hereupon he determined to seize on her 
by force, presuming that he should recover some of his effects if be could get her into 
his custody. He therefore obtained a warrant of a justice of the peace, and taking with 
him two constables, and six assistants, went to the house of George Twyford, in the 
Mint; the constables intimating that they had a warrant to search for a suspected 
person; for if it had been thought that they were bailiffs, their lives would have been 
in danger. Having entered the house, they went to a backroom, where Noble, Mrs. 
Sayer, and Mrs. Salisbury, were at dinner; the door was no sooner open than Noble 
drew his sword, and stabbing Sayer in the left breast, he died on the spot. The 
constables immediately apprehended the murderer and the two women; but the latter 
were so abandoned, that while the peace-officers were conveying them to the house of 
a magistrate, they did little else than lament the fate of Noble.
	Apprehensive that the mob would rise, from a supposition that the prisoners 
were debtors, a constable was directed to carry the bloody sword before them, in 
testimony that murder had been committed, which produced the wished-for effect, by 
keeping perfect peace. The prisoners begged to send for counsel, which being granted, 
Noble was committed for trial, after an examination of two hours; but the counsel 
urged so many arguments in favour of the women, that it was ten o' clock at night 
before they were committed. Soon afterwards this worthless mother and daughter 
applied to the Court of King's Bench to be admitted to bail, which was refused them. 
The coroner's inquest having viewed Mr. Sayer's body, it was removed to his lodgings 
within the rules of the Fleet, in order for interment; and three days afterwards they 
gave a verdict, finding Noble guilty of wilful murder, and the women of having aided 
and assisted him in that murder. On the evening of the 12th of March, 1713, they were 
put to the bar at Kingston, in Surrey, and having been arraigned on the several 
indictments, to which they pleaded not guilty, they were told to prepare for their trials 
by six o' clock on the following morning. Being brought down for trial at the 
appointed time, they moved the court that their trials might be deferred till the 
afternoon, on the plea that some material witnesses were absent: but the court not 
believing their allegations, refused to comply with their request. It was imagined that 
this motion to put off their trials was founded in the expectation that when the 
business at the nisi prius bar was dispatched, many of the jurymen might go home, so 
that when the prisoners had made their challenges, there might not be a number left 
sufficient to try them, by which they might escape till the next assizes, by which time 
they hoped some circumstances would happen in their favour. It being ordered that 
the trials should commence, Mr. Noble and Mrs. Salisbury each challenged twenty of 
the jury, and Mrs. Sayer challenged thirty-five. Here it should be observed, that all 
persons indicted for felony, have a right to challenge twenty jurors, and those indicted 
for petit-treason thirty-five; which may be done without alleging any cause. Happily, 
however, the sheriff had summoned so great a number of jurors, that the ends of 
public justice were not, for the present, defeated. Noble's counsel urged that some of 
the persons who broke into the house might have murdered Mr. Sayer, or, if they had 
not, the provocation he had received might be such as would warrant the jury in 
bringing him guilty of manslaughter only. As the court had sat from six o' clock in the 
morning, till one o' clock the next morning, the jury were indulged with some 
refreshment before they left the bar; and after being out nine hours, they gave their 
verdict that Mr. Noble was "Guilty," and Mrs. Salisbury and Mrs. Sayer were "Not 
Guilty." When Mr. Noble was brought to the bar to receive sentence, he addressed the 
court in the following words:
	"My Lord, 
   I am soon to appear and render an account of my sins to God Almighty. If your 
lordship should think me guilty of those crimes I have been accused, and convicted of 
by my jury, I am then sure your lordship will think that I stand in need of such a 
reparation, such a humiliation for my great offences, such an abhorrence of my past 
life to give me hopes of a future one, that I am not without hopes that it will be a 
motive to your lordship's goodness, that after you have judged and sentenced my body 
to execution, you will charitably, assist me with a little time for the preservation of my 
soul. If I had nothing to answer for but killing Mr. Sayer with precedent malice, I 
should have no need to address myself to your lordship in this manner. It is now too 
late to take advantage by denying it to your lordship, and too near my end to 
dissemble it before God. I know, my lord, the danger, the hell that I should plunge 
myself headlong into; I know I shall soon answer for the truth I am about to say, 
before a higher tribunal, and a more discerning judge than your lordship, which is 
only in heaven. I did not take the advantage to kill Mr. Sayer, by the thought or 
apprehension that I could do it under the umbrage of the laws, or with impunity; 
nothing was more distant from my thoughts than to remove him out of the world to 
enjoy his wife (as was suggested) without molestation. Nor could any one have 
greater reluctance or remorse, from the time of the fact to the hour of my trial, than I 
have had, though the prosecutors reported to the contrary, for which I heartily forgive 
them. My counsel obliged me to say on my trial, that I heard Mr. Sayer's voice before 
he broke open the door; I told them as I now tell your lordship, that I did not know it 
was him, till he was breaking in at the door, and then, and not before, was my sword 
drawn, and the wound given, which wound, as Dr. Garth informed me, was so very 
slight, that it was a thousand to one that he died of it. When I gave the wound, I 
insensibly quitted the sword, by which means I left myself open for him to have done 
what was proved he attempted, and was so likely for him to have effected, viz. to have 
stabbed me; and his failure in the attempt has not a little excited my surprise. When I 
heard the company run up stairs, I was alarmed, and in fear; the landlord telling me 
instantly thereupon, that the house was beset, either for me or himself, added to my 
confusion. I then never thought or intended to do mischief, but first bolted the fore-
door, and then bolted and padlocked the back-door, which was glazed, and began to 
fasten the shutters belonging to it, designing only to screen myself from the violence 
of the tumult. When he broke open the door, and not till then, I perceived and knew he 
was present; and his former threats and attempts, which I so fully proved on my trial, 
and could have proved much fuller, had not Mrs. Salisbury's evidence been taken 
from me, made my fear so great, and the apprehension of my danger so near, that 
what I did was the natural motion of self-defence, and was too sudden to be the result 
of precedent malice; and I solemnly declare, that I did not hear or know from Twyford 
the landlord, or otherwise, that any constable attended the deceased, till after the 
misfortune happened. It was my misfortune, that what I said as to hearing the 
deceased's voice was turned to my disadvantage by the counsel against me, and that I 
was not entitled to any assistance of counsel, to enforce the evidence given for me, or 
to remark upon the evidence given against me: which I don' t doubt would have fully 
satisfied your lordship and the jury, that what happened was more my misfortune, 
than my design or intention. If I had been able, under the concern, to remark upon the 
evidence against me, that Mr. Sayer was but the tenth part of a minute in breaking 
open the door, it could not then well be supposed by the jury, that I was preparing 
myself, or putting myself in order to do mischief, which are acts of forethought and 
consideration; which require much more time than is pretended I could have had from 
the time I discovered Mr. Sayer; for even from his entry into the house, to the time of 
the accident, did not amount, as I am informed, to more than the space of three 
minutes. But I did not discover him before the door gave way. I wish it had been my 
good fortune, that the jury had applied that to me which your lordship remarked in 
favour of the ladies, that the matter was so very sudden, so very accidental and 
unexpected, that it was impossible, to be a contrivance and confederacy, and unlikely 
that they could come to a resolution in so short a time. I don't remember your lordship 
distinguished my case, as to that particular, to be different from theirs, nor was there 
room for it; for it is impossible for your lordship to believe that I dreamt of Mr. 
Sayer's coming there at that time, but on the contrary I fully proved to your lordship, 
that I went there upon another occasion, that was lawful and beneficial to the 
deceased; and I had no more time, to think or contrive, than the ladies had to agree or 
consent. If any thing could be construed favourably on the behalf of such an 
unfortunate wretch as myself, I think the design I had sometime before begun, and 
was about finishing that day, might have taken away all suspicion of malice against 
Mr. Sayer. Must it be thought, my lord, that I only am such a sinner that I cannot 
repent and make reparation to the persons I have injured? It was denied; but I strongly 
solicited a reconciliation between Mr. Sayer and his lady, and if this had tended to 
procure me an easier access to Mrs. Sayer, it would have been such a matter of 
aggravation to me, that it could not have escaped the remark of the counsel against 
me, nor the sharpness of the prosecutors present in court; with both I transacted, and 
to both I appealed, particularly to Mr. Nott, to whom, but the day before this accident, 
I manifested my desire of having them live together again, and therefore, my lord, it 
should be presumed I laboured to be reconciled to, and not to revenge myself on, Mr. 
Sayer. Your lordship, I hope, will observe thus much in my favour, that it was so far 
from being a clear fact, in the opinion of the jury, that they sat up all night, and 
believing there was no malice at that time, told your lordship they intended, and were 
inclined, to find it manslaughter, and, doubting the legality of the warrant, to find it 
special. I hope this will touch your lordship's heart so far, as not to think me so ill a 
man as to deserve (what the best of Christians are taught to pray against) a sudden 
death!— I confess I am unprepared; the hopes of my being able to make a legal 
defence, and my endeavours therein having taken up my time, which I wish I had 
better employed; I beg leave to assure your lordship, upon the words of a dying man, 
that as none of the indirect practices to get or suppress evidence were proved upon 
me, so they never sprang from me: and I can safely say, that my blood, in a great 
measure, will lie at their door who did, because it drew me under an ill imputation of 
defending myself by subornation of perjury. I would be willing to do my duty towards 
my neighbour, as well as God, before I die; I have many papers and concerns (by 
reason of my profession) of my clients in my hands, and who will suffer, if they are 
not put into some order; and nothing but these two considerations could make life 
desirable, under this heavy load of irons, and restless remorse of conscience for my 
sins. A short reprieve for these purposes, I hope will be agreeable to your lordship's 
humanity and Christian virtue, whereupon your lordship's name shall be blest with my 
last breath, for giving me an opportunity of making peace with my conscience and 
God Almighty."
	The last request that Noble made was granted: he was allowed some time to 
settle his spiritual and temporal concerns, and at length suffered at Kingston, on the 
28th of March, 1713, exhibiting marks of genuine repentance. As to the women, they 
were no sooner acquitted, than they set out for London, taking one of the turnkeys 
with them, to protect them from the assaults of the populace, who were incensed in 
the highest degree at the singular enormity of their crimes.


DICK ADAMS 
Once pretended to be the Bishop of London's Nephew in order to escape 
from a Man he had robbed. Executed at Tyburn, 1713

	THIS unhappy person, Richard Adams, was born of very good and reputable 
parents in Gloucestershire, who bestowed some small matter of education upon him, 
as reading, writing and casting of accounts. Coming up to London, he got into the 
service of a great duchess at St James's, in which he continued about two years, when 
for some misdemeanour quitting his place, he contrived to live by his wits.
	Having a general key which opened the lodgings in St James's Palace, he went 
one day to a certain mercer's on Ludgate Hill and desired him to send, with all speed, 
a parcel of the richest brocades and satins, and other silks, he had in his shop, for his 
duchess to make choice of some for an extraordinary occasion. The mercer, knowing 
him to have come often upon such a like errand before, presently sent away several 
pieces by his man and a porter, and being come to St James's, Dick Adams brought 
them up to a door of some of the Royal lodgings, where he ordered them to wait while 
he, seemingly, went to acquaint his duchess of their being without. Coming out again, 
some short time after, quoth he: "Let's see the pieces presently, for my duchess is just 
now at leisure to look on them." So, the mercer's man giving him the whole bundle, he 
conveyed it away backwards, and went clear off through St James's Park. The 
mercer's man and the porter, having waited two or three hours and received no answer 
about their goods, began to make a strict inquiry after them; and finding they were 
tricked, were forced to go home much lighter than they went out.
	About a month after, Dick Adams, having been drinking somewhat hard in the 
city, and forgetting the prank he had played the mercer, came past his house one 
afternoon, and he being accidentally standing at the door, and espying his chapman, 
presently seized him, saying: "Oh, sir, have I caught you? You are a fine spark indeed 
to cheat me out of two hundred pounds' worth of goods; but before I part with you I 
believe I shall make you pay dearly for them." Mr Adams was much surprised at his 
being so suddenly apprehended, and, without doubt, cursed his fate to himself for 
being so forgetful as to come into the very mouth of his adversary; but seeing the late 
Bishop of London at some distance riding along in his coach, and having a good 
presence of mind at the same time, quoth he to the mercer: "I must acknowledge I 
have committed a crime, to which I was forced by mere necessity, but I see my uncle, 
the Bishop of London, is coming this way in his coach; therefore, hoping you'll be so 
civil as not to raise any hubbub of the mob about me, whereby I shall be exposed and 
utterly undone, I'll go speak to his lordship about the matter, if you please to step with 
me and I'll engage he shall make you satisfaction for the damage I've done you."
	The mercer, liking his proposal, and thinking it far better than sending him to 
jail, stepped along with Mr Adams, who boldly called out to the coachman to stop, 
approached the side of the coach, and desired the favour of speaking a few words with 
the Bishop. His lordship, seeing him have the mien and habit of a gentleman, was 
pleased to hear what he had to say; so leaning over his coach door, quoth Adams: 
"Begging your lordship's pardon for my presumption, I make bold to acquaint your 
honour that the gentleman standing behind me is an eminent mercer, keeping house 
just by here, and is a very upright godly man; but being a great reader in books of 
divinity, especially polemical pieces, he hath met therein with some intricate cases, 
which very much trouble him, and his conscience cannot be at rest till his doubts and 
scruples are cleared about them; therefore I humbly request your lordship would 
vouchsafe him the honour of giving him some ease before he runs farther to despair."
	The Bishop, being ready to serve any person in religious matters, ordered 
Adams to bring his friend to him the next day. But said Adams again: "It will be more 
satisfactory to him if your lordship would be pleased to speak yourself to the 
gentleman to wait upon you." Whereupon his lordship beckoned to the mercer, who 
stood some distance off whilst they discoursed together. When he came up to the side 
of the coach, quoth the Bishop: "The gentleman has informed me of all the matter 
about you, and if you please to give yourself the trouble of coming to my house at 
Fulham I will satisfy you then in every point." The mercer, making twenty bows and 
cringes, was very well pleased with his security; and taking Adams to the tavern gave 
him a very good treat.
	Next morning Adams came again to the mercer, who was drawing out his bill 
to give to the Bishop, and pretending that his coming in haste to go along with him to 
his uncle had made him forget to put money in his breeches, he desired the mercer to 
lend him a guinea, and put it down in his bill; which he did very willingly. And then 
taking water, away they went to Fulham, where, acquainting the Bishop's gentleman 
that according to his lordship's order overnight they were come to wait upon him at 
the time appointed, the gentleman introduced them into the hall, and having regaled 
them there with a bottle or two of wine and a neat's tongue, the mercer was admitted 
into his lordship's presence, and in the meantime Mr Adams made the best of his way 
by water again. The mercer being before the Bishop, quoth his lordship: "I understand 
that you are, or at leastwise have been, much troubled. How do you find yourself now, 
sir?" The mercer replied: "My trouble is much abated since your lordship was pleased 
to order me to wait on you." So pulling out a pocket book, he gave his lordship the 
following bill:
Mr. Adams's Bill, 20th of April, 1711

L
s.
d.
For a piece of green flowered brocade, containing 23 yards, L1, 9s. per 
yard
33
7
0
For a piece of white striped damask, containing 20 yards, at 14s. per yard
18
4
0
For a piece of cloth-of-gold tissue, containing 18 yards, at L4, 15s. per 
yard
85
10
0
For a piece of black watered tabby, containing 29 yards, at 4s. 8d. per yard
15
 
4
For a piece of blue satin, containing 21 yards, at 16s. per yard
16
16
0
For a piece of crimson velvet, containing 17 yards, at L1, 
32
6
0
For a piece of yellow silk, containing 25 yards, at 8s. per yard
10
0
0
17th of May. Lent your lordship's nephew
1
1
6
Sum total L
203
19
10
	His lordship, staring upon this large bill, quoth: "What is the meaning of all 
this? The gentleman last night might very well say your conscience could not be at 
rest; and I wonder how it should when you bring a bill to me which I know nothing 
of." Said the mercer then, bowing and scraping: "Your lordship last night was pleased 
to say that you would satisfy me to day." "Yes," replied his lordship, "and so I would, 
as to what the gentleman told me, who said that you, being much troubled about some 
points of religion, desired to be resolved therein; and in order thereto, I appointed you 
to come to me to-day." "Truly," said the mercer again, "your lordship's nephew told 
me otherwise, for he said you would pay me this bill off, which goods, upon my word, 
he had of me, and in a very clandestine manner, if I was to tell your lordship all; but 
only in respect of your honour I would not disgrace your nephew." Quoth his 
lordship: "My nephew! He is none of my nephew. I never, to my knowledge, saw the 
gentleman in my life before." Thus when they came to unriddle the matter on both 
sides they could not forbear laughing, the Bishop at his nephew, and the mercer for 
lending a man who had once cheated him a guinea to cheat him again.
	After this Dick Adams got into the Life Guards, but his extravagance not 
permitting him to live on his pay, he went on the highway. One day he and some of 
his accomplices meeting with a gentleman on the road, took from him a gold watch, 
and a purse in which were one hundred and eight guineas. But Adams, not contented 
with this booty and seeing that the gentleman whom they robbed had a very fine coat 
on, rode a little way back again, and saying to him, "Sir, you have a very good coat 
on, I must make bold to change with you," he stripped him of it and put on his. As the 
gentleman was riding along after he was robbed, hearing something jingle in the 
pocket of the coat which Adams had put on him, felt therein, and, to him great joy, 
found his watch and guineas again, which Adam in the hurry and confusion had 
forgotten to put into the other coat pocket when he changed coats with the gentleman. 
Dick Adams, going out the same day again with his comrades, stopped the Canterbury 
stage coach on the road betwixt Rochester and Sittingbourne, in which were several 
gentlewomen; and for the last mistake they had made they were very severe and 
boisterous upon these passengers. Thus having rifled all the gentlewomen to above the 
value of two hundred pounds in money and goods, they left them to proceed on their 
journey, with very sorrowful hearts for their sad mischance.
	But at last, Dick robbing a man by himself, between London and Brainford, 
the person robbed met with his neighbour on the road, who closely pursued this 
highwayman. He made a running fight of it, shooting Tartar-like behind him; but they 
at last apprehended him, and carried him before a magistrate, who committed him to 
Newgate. Though he was very wicked before his affliction fell upon him, yet whilst 
he lay under condemnation he was very devout. He was executed at Tyburn, in 
March, 1713.


NED WICKS 
Highway Robber, executed at Warwick Jail in 1713 for Robbery

	EDWARD WICKS was born of very good parents, who kept an inn at 
Coventry, and bestowed on him so much education in reading, writing and casting 
accounts as qualified him to be a clerk for extraordinary business. He was an 
exciseman for about fourteen months; but not thinking that a post sufficient enough to 
cheat her Majesty's subjects, he was resolved to impose upon them more, by taking all 
they had on the highway. Being well equipped for such enterprises, he travelled the 
roads to seek his fortune, and had the good luck to commit two robberies without any 
discovery. But the third time, being apprehended for a robbery committed not far from 
Croydon, in Surrey, he was sent to the Marshalsea, in Southwark.
	However, Wicks was not long under confinement before he obtained his 
liberty, by his friends making up the business with his adversary, to whom sixty 
guineas were given for taking from him but thirty shillings. Then, running Jehu-like to 
his destruction as fast as he could, he kept company with one Joe Johnson, alias 
Sanders; with whom going once on the road, they met, between Hounslow and 
Colebrook, with a stage-coach, having four gentlemen in it, who, seeing them come 
pretty near the coach, and perceiving they had masks on, were apprehensive of their 
intention of robbing them; and upon that, to be before-hand with them, one of them 
shot Joe Johnson with a brass piece, or blunderbuss, and lodged seven or eight large 
shot in his body. Wicks now rode clear off, without any hurt, whilst his comrade was 
apprehended, and, on suspicion, sent to Newgate, where he was charged by one Mr 
Woolly with robbing him of a silver watch and some money on the highway; for 
which he was hanged at Tyburn, on Wednesday the 17th of February, 1705, aged 
twenty-two years.
	Another time, Wicks meeting with the late Lord M — on the road betwixt 
Windsor and Colebrook, attended only with a groom and one footman, he 
commanded his lordship to stand and deliver, for he was in great want of money, and 
money he would have before they parted. His honour, pretending to have a great deal 
of courage, swore he should fight for it then. Wicks very readily accepted the 
proposal, and prepared his pistols for an engagement. His lordship, seeing his 
resolution, began to hesitate; which his antagonist perceiving, he began to swagger, 
saying: "All the world knows me to be a man; and though your lordship was 
concerned in the cowardly murdering of M —d, the player, and Captain C —t, yet I'm 
not to be frightened at that; therefore down with your gold, or else expect no quarter."
	His lordship thus meeting with his match, it put him into such a passionate fit 
of swearing that Wicks, not willing to be outdone in any wickedness, said: "My lord, I 
perceive you swear perfectly well extempore. Come, I'll give your honour a fair 
chance for your money, and that is, he that swears best of us two shall keep his own 
and his that loseth." His lordship agreed to that bargain, and threw down a purse of 
fifty guineas, which Wicks matched with a like sum. After a quarter of an hour's 
swearing most prodigiously on both sides, it was left to my lord's groom to decide the 
matter; who said: "Why, indeed, your honour swears as well as ever I heard a person 
of quality in my life; but to give the strange gentleman his due, he has won the wager, 
if it was for a thousand pounds." Whereupon Wicks took up the gold, gave the groom 
a guinea, and rode about his business.
	But not long after this, Wicks, being apprehended in London for a robbery 
done in Warwickshire, was committed to Newgate; from whence attempting to break 
out, he was quickly removed to Warwick jail, where, being tried the next July, he was 
condemned to be hanged. His parents made great intercession for this their only child, 
but in vain, for he was executed on Saturday, the 29th of August, 1713, aged twenty-
nine years.


JACK SHRIMPTON 
Convicted for Murder and Highway Robberies. Executed at St Michael's 
Hill in September, 1713

	JOHN SHRIMPTON was born of good and reputable parents living at Penns, 
near High Wycombe, in Buckinghamshire, who, bestowing so much education upon 
him as might qualify him for a tradesman, put him out an apprentice, when he was 
between fifteen and sixteen years of age, to a soap-boiler in Little Britain, in London; 
but not serving out his apprenticeship there, he was turned over to another soap-boiler 
in Ratcliff Highway. When he was out of his time he went into the army, where he 
was some time in the troop of horse commanded by Major-General Wood; but, not 
finding such preferment as he expected by being a soldier, he came into England and 
took to the highway. He did always the most damage betwixt London and Oxford, 
insomuch that scarce a coach or horseman could pass him without being robbed.
	Some time after committing one robbery, Mr Shrimpton, being in London, 
accidentally lit into the company of the common hangman, where he was taking a 
glass of wine; and coming to the knowledge of his occupation he asked him this 
question "What is the reason, when you perform your office, that you put the knot just 
under the ear? For, in my opinion, was you to fix it in the nape of the neck it would be 
more easy to the sufferer." The hangman replied: "If one Christian may believe 
another, I have hanged a great many in my time, but upon my word, sir, I never had 
any complaint as yet. However, if it should be your good luck to make use of me, I 
shall, to oblige you, be so civil as to hang you after your own way." But Shrimpton, 
not approving of the hangman's civility, told him that he desired none of his favours, 
because they generally proved of a very dangerous consequence.
	Another time, Jack Shrimpton, who also called himself Parker, meeting a 
couple of bailiffs beyond Wycombe carrying a poor farmer to jail, desired to know 
what the debt might be; and being told six pounds odd money, he requested them to 
go with him to the next ale-house and he would pay it. They went along with him, 
where, taking a bond of the farmer, whom he knew very well, he paid the bailiffs their 
prisoner's debts and fees, and then parted. But Jack Shrimpton, waylaying the bailiffs, 
had no more mercy on them than they had on the farmer, for he took away what 
money he paid them, and about forty shillings besides; after which he rode back again 
to the farmer and, regaling him with a treat of a guinea, cancelled his bond, and then 
went in pursuit of new adventures.
	A little while after, Shrimpton, travelling on the road, met with a poor miller 
who was going to turn highwayman himself. Thus roving along, and meeting (as 
above said) with Shrimpton, he held up an oaken plant, for he had no other arms, and 
bade him stand, thinking that word was sufficient to scare any man out of his money. 
Shrimpton, perceiving the simplicity of the fellow, fired a pistol at him, which 
(though he purposely missed him) put our new robber into such an agony that he 
surrendered himself to Shrimpton's mercy; who presently said: "Surely, friend, thou 
art but a young highwayman, or else you would have knocked me down first and bade 
me stand afterwards." The poor miller told him his misfortunes; on which Shrimpton 
took some compassion, and quoth he: "I am a highwayman myself, and am now 
waiting on this road for a certain neighbour of yours, who I expect will come this way 
by and by with six-score pounds; therefore if you will be assisting in the robbery of 
him, you shall have half the booty." The miller was very thankful for this kind offer, 
and resolved to stand by him to the very utmost. Then Shrimpton, having told him 
again that it was not long since he had robbed one of his neighbours of one hundred 
and fifty pounds, further said: "Honest friend, whilst I ride this way, you go that way, 
and if you should meet him whom I have told you of, be sure to knock him down and 
take all he has from him, without telling him why or wherefore; and in case I should 
meet him, I'll serve him with the same sauce."
	They both separated, and went in search of their prey, till at last, upon the 
joining of two roads, they met together again. Shrimpton, wondering why the person 
he wanted did not yet come, ordered the miller to follow him still, saying: "Without 
doubt we shall catch the old cuff anon." But as he was thus encouraging his new 
companion, who was just at his horse's heels, he took up his stick and gave Shrimpton 
such a smart blow betwixt neck and shoulders that he felled him to the ground; being 
then able to deal with him, he robbed him of about fourscore guineas, and bade him 
go quietly about his business, or otherwise he would have him hanged, according to 
his own confession, for lately robbing his neighbour. Thus the biter was bitten; but 
Shrimpton swore he would never more take upon him to teach strangers how to rob on 
the highway.
	This notorious malefactor pursued his wicked courses a long while, till at last, 
being in Bristol, where he resided for some months, he was drinking one night very 
late at a bawdy-house in St James's Churchyard, when a watch-man, going his rounds, 
and hearing a great noise of swearing and cursing in the house, compelled Shrimpton 
to go along with him to the watch-house. As they were going together through Wine 
Street he shot the watch-man through the body and flung his pistol away, that it might 
not be found; but some men, happening to go by at the same time, apprehended 
Shrimpton, and the watch-man dying on the spot, they secured him till morning, 
when, carrying him before a magistrate, he was committed to Newgate, in Bristol, 
where he behaved himself very audaciously.
	At length, being brought to a trial, he was convicted not only for wilful murder 
but also for five robberies on the highway. When he came to the place of execution at 
St Michael's Hill he was turned off without showing any signs of repentance, on 
Friday, the 4th of September, 1713.


WILL LOWTHER 
Executed on Clerkenwell Green for the Murder of Edward Perry, December, 
1713

	THIS offender was born at Whitehaven, in Cumberland, and from his youth 
brought up at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, in Northumberland. He had used the sea for 
almost ten years, and once was (for a little while) master of a small collier, given him 
by his father, trading between Newcastle and London, where, becoming acquainted 
with ill company, and losing his little vessel one night at play, he soon learned the 
most enormous vices of the town, and became as bad as his companions, in going 
very frequently upon the water-pad, or robbing ships as they lay at anchor in the River 
Thames.
	Once Lowther, meeting a great virtuoso belonging to the Royal Society taking 
a serious walk in the fields near Paddington, to meditate on the stupendous works of 
nature, made bold to make him stand till he took twenty-eight guineas from him.
	Not long after this Lowther met with a sad mischance, for going one day to an 
ale-house in Covent Garden, at Christmas time, where a box was put up by the 
servants in one of the back rooms in which he was drinking for customers to put what 
they pleased into it, he, being by himself, heated the poker red-hot, and went to 
unsolder the box as fast as he could, which was filled with gunpowder, by reason two 
or three boxes had been so opened before, and the money taken out. As soon as the 
heat of the poker came to the powder, up flew the box, out fell the money, and the 
noise thereof giving a loud report, the servants went presently into the room, where 
they found Lowther frightened almost out of his wits, with his wig blazing about his 
ears, his neck-cloth all on fire, and his face most sadly burned. However, not pitying 
his mortified condition, they were for carrying him before a magistrate, but making 
the matter up, by paying the servants three pounds ten shillings, he was discharged of 
getting box-money off people without asking them for it, and went about his business.
	Lowther, having once stolen a black pudding in Clare Market and clapped it 
into his bosom, stepped, as he was going along, into Daniel Burge's meeting-house, 
where he placed himself opposite to that reverend don, who was very piously 
delivering a lecture to his zealous congregation, and who in the midst of his eloquent 
discourse, looking wistly towards Lowther, said: "Thou man! fling that black sin out 
of thy bosom." Lowther having a guilty conscience, and really thinking the teacher 
had spoken to him, flung it at his head, saying: "And be poxed to you. I had but one 
black pudding, and you are so unconscionable as to desire it of me." Which 
transaction put the auditors into a sort of a surprise, as well as the doctor.
	Another time Lowther, having stolen a watch, was committed to Newgate, 
where compounding the felony, he then escaped the severity of the law and procured 
his liberty. But Lowther not performing his agreement, his adversary sent him to one 
of the compters, where he was removed by a habeas to Newgate. Here he first became 
acquainted with Dick Keele, with whom, after they had got their liberty, he went a-
thieving, till being sent to Clerkenwell Bridewell, they there bred a riot, in which 
Edward Perry, a servant to Mr Boreman, the keeper, was killed. For this fact both 
these malefactors received sentence of death, and were executed together on 
Wednesday, the 23rd of December, 1713, Lowther being twenty-three years of age.


RODERICK AUDREY 
With the Assistance of a Sparrow he committed many Robberies, and was 
executed at Tyburn in 1714 at the age of Sixteen

	THIS malefactor was so dexterous in thieving that he seemed to have come an 
acute villain into the world. He could scarcely speak plain when he began to practise 
the taking of what was not his own; and so improved himself in the art and mystery of 
thieving that he was hanged a little after he had turned his teens. He would go to 
Chelsea, or Hampstead, or Bow, or Lambeth — east, west, north or south — for he 
was never out of his road, and, carrying a sparrow along with him, would play about a 
house where he saw a sideboard of plate in the parlour, or any other movable, 
teaching the bird to climb the ladder or fly to hat. If the sashes were open, or the street 
door, he would throw in his sparrow, then, following to catch it again, would steal 
away the plate, and leave the sparrow to answer for his master's conduct. But if he 
was seen by anybody in the house before he had finished his work, it was a very 
plausible pretence that his design was no other than running after his bird, as honest 
children will do in such cases.
	Whenever his money was gone he went upon fresh exploits, till all the country 
towns and villages within ten miles of London were sensible that the boy who played 
with the sparrow was a thief. Yet though he was often sent to New Prison and the 
Gatehouse at Westminster, the justices took so much pity on his tender years as not to 
commit him to Newgate, for fear of his being spoiled, though he was already spoiled 
to their hands. This favour still encouraged Roderick in his villainy, till at last he was 
committed to Newgate, whither he went twenty times afterwards, and being tried 
upon a matter of petty larceny, for which the jury found him guilty of tenpence, he 
flung from the bar a shilling to the judge, desiring his Lordship to give him twopence 
for his change; which piece of impudence caused him to be so well flogged that he 
never valued whipping at the cart's tail ever after.
	As he was one day, about dinner time, walking with another through Soho 
Square, espying a great parcel of plate in a remote room of a person of quality's house, 
his mouth so watered at the glittering sight that he could not pass by it with a safe 
conscience; and holding counsel with his comrade about it, he thought it impracticable 
to attempt the taking of it. However, young Audrey would not acquiesce to his 
opinion: have it he would. So desiring his faint hearted comrade, who wore a green 
apron, to lend it him, he presently steps to an oil shop, buys two or three balls of 
whiting, returns to the house he was resolved to attack, and, getting upon the rails, 
falls to cleaning the windows with the whiting and a foul handkerchief with as good 
an assurance as if he had been the butler, or some other servant belonging to the 
family. He was mighty handy about his work, lifting the sashes up and down, and 
going in and out to clean them without any suspicion of people going by, who could 
have no mistrust of his not dwelling there; till at last he cleaned the sideboard of all 
the plate, which he brought away in his apron, to the value of eighty pounds.
	After stealing a box, and plate, and money out of a house in Red Lion Square, 
he was taken in the fact, and committed to Newgate; and when brought on his trial for 
the same was burned in the hand, and ordered to hard labour for two years in 
Bridewell in Clerkenwell. Here he had not been above six months of his time before 
Richard Keele, William Lowther and Charles Houghton were also committed for two 
years, and being shown by young Audrey where the keeper's arms were, the three 
abovesaid persons attempted to break into the room where they lay, but were 
prevented in their design. Nevertheless they made a riot, in which Charles Houghton 
was killed on the spot, Keele lost one of his eyes, and Lowther was desperately 
wounded in the back. On the keeper's side, one Perry, his turnkey, and sutler to the 
prison, was stabbed through the heart with a penknife. Whilst this engagement lasted, 
young Audrey broke into the deceased turnkey's chamber, from whence he stole 
twenty pounds, and then found a way to break out of Bridewell, making way also for 
eighteen or twenty more, who followed their leader; but were as soon retaken, except 
him, who skulked about four or five months before he was apprehended, and that 
upon acting a fresh piece of villainy. Being now committed to Newgate for his last 
time, his thoughts were employed how to break out there too, using some few 
stratagems, but he was unsuccessful in all his attempts.
	When he came before the bench again they knew him very well by his 
impudence, of which he had a good stock; and being found guilty of stealing, after his 
late breaking out of Bridewell, a great quantity of plate, sentence of death was passed 
on him. He owned the sentence passed upon him was just, and confessed above a 
hundred robberies in particular that he had committed, besides acknowledging his 
commission of as many more, which he could not call to mind where. What he stole 
was (as above said) plate and money, to the value of two thousand pounds at times; 
but so profuse had he been with it that he had scarce money enough to buy a coffin.
	At last the fatal day came, in the year 1714, when he was to go from hence and 
be no more seen. Being conveyed in a cart, unpitied by all honest people, to Tyburn, 
he seemed very loath to die; but no reprieve coming, which he expected to the last, in 
consideration of his youth, he departed to the tune of a penitential psalm, being no 
more than sixteen years of age. We must needs say he went very decently to the 
gallows, being in a white waistcoat, clean napkin, white gloves, and having an orange 
in one hand.


MACCARTNEY 
Hanged at Gloucester Jail in April, 1714, for the Murder of one Mr 
Beachere

	MACCARTNEY being left to the wide world, and knowing not what course 
to take for a livelihood, being no scholar, nor brought up to any trade, turned thief at 
once, being so light-fingered that anything was his own which lay within his reach. 
He was a notable house-breaker, and had done many exploits that way; but his 
greatest was in breaking open the house of Sir Thomas Rochford, Lord Chief Baron of 
the Exchequer, in the kingdom of Ireland, whom he and his comrades bound, with his 
lady, back to back, like a spread eagle, and all the men and women servants in the 
house after the same manner, without either shirt or smock upon them; then breaking 
open all trunks, cabinets, escritoires and chests of drawers, they took what plate and 
money they could find, to the value of fourteen hundred pounds.
	After committing this notorious robbery, his country being too hot to hold 
him, he fled into Scotland, where, breaking open a stable belonging to Sir James 
Steward, then her Majesty's advocate for that kingdom, and stealing thence a horse 
and saddle, he came into England and turned highwayman. Being pretty lucky in his 
roguery, he always maintained himself in clothes; so that the handsome appearance 
which he made in his habit, with his fawning, cringing and flattering way, had brought 
him to be acquainted with several creditable gentlemen, to whom he pretended he had 
a very good estate in Ireland. One day Maccartney, with another rogue as good as 
himself, meeting in the Strand one Mr Vaughan, a Welsh gentleman, having about 
four hundred pounds per annum in Pembrokeshire, invited him to drink a pint of wine; 
and, going together to a tavern, whilst they were regaling themselves over a glass of 
claret, quoth Maccartney to his comrade: "I vow this is a fine day; we'll e'en ride both 
of us out this afternoon." Said Mr Vaughan (not in the least mistrusting they were 
highwaymen): "If I had a horse I would ride out with you too, gentlemen." Quoth 
Maccartney: "I'll help you to a horse, sir." And being as good as his word, they all 
three rode towards Romford, beyond which place, about a mile, meeting a coach full 
of passengers, Maccartney and his comrade set upon it.
	Whilst they were robbing them, quoth the Welsh gentleman to himself: "I'll 
not stand idle; I'll e'en be doing something too." So perceiving another coach at a little 
distance behind that which the others had attacked, and in which was only one 
gentleman, with his footman behind, he made up to it, and commanding the coachman 
to stop, he robbed the gentleman of five guineas in gold and forty shillings in silver, 
and rode off.
	Shortly after, going to Bristol, one Mr Beachere of Wiltshire also went down 
to that city in order to go to Ireland, where he unhappily fell into company with 
Maccartney, who was likewise going to that kingdom. In the morning, after their short 
acquaintance overnight, Maccartney calling up the aforesaid Beachere to go down to 
the Pill to embark, when he was on Durham Down, a mile without the city, this Irish 
rogue knocked him down and with a razor cut his throat from ear to ear, and then 
passed over into Wales, and designed for Holyhead. But messengers being sent into 
Wales to inquire at all the ports, heard of, pursued and took him in Brecknockshire, 
with Beachere's clothes and bloody shirt. He was then committed to Gloucester Jail; 
and being convicted for this murder and robbery, he was there executed, on 
Wednesday, 7th of April, 1714, aged twenty-three years, and was afterwards hanged 
in chains on Durham Down.


WILL OGDEN AND TOM REYNOLDS 
Housebreakers and Highwaymen. Executed at Kingston- upon-Thames in 
April, 1714

	THE first of these villains was born in Walnut-Tree Alley, in Tooley Street, in 
Southwark, being a water- man by his calling; and the other was born in Cross-Key 
Alley, in Barnaby Street, being apprentice to a dung-bargeman living between 
Vauxhall and the Nine Elms; but running away from his master before he had served 
his time, and taking ill courses with Ogden, they first robbed several ships, hoys and 
other vessels below bridge, for above two years, when, being very like to have been 
once apprehended for this sort of theft, they left it off and took to housebreaking.
	Several houses they had broken open and robbed in and about the borough of 
Southwark. But at last being apprehended for breaking open a watchmaker's shop in 
the City of London, and stealing from thence twenty-six watches, in company with 
another rogue who made himself an evidence against them, they were committed to 
Newgate and condemned; however they both had the good fortune to be reprieved, 
and in August, 1713, pleaded her Majesty's most gracious pardon, after which they 
obtained their liberty.
	Nevertheless, these hardened rogues, not making good use of that mercy 
which they had received, turned foot-pads, and one of them — namely, Ogden — 
meeting one night, when the moon was up, with a parson who lived at Peckham, 
pretending to be a seaman out of all business and in great distress, humbly begged an 
alms of him; whereupon the parson, taking compassion on the dismal story gave him 
sixpence, and so they parted. The parson had not gone above the length of a field 
before Ogden met again going over a stile, and begging his charity again, quoth the 
gentleman: "You are the most impudent beggar that ever I have met with." Ogden 
then telling him that he was in very great want, and that the sixpence which he gave 
him would not relieve his pressing necessities, he gave him half- a-crown; whereupon 
Ogden said: "These are very sad times, for there's horrid robbing abroad; therefore if 
you have any money about you, you may as well let me have it as another, who 
perhaps may abuse you and, binding you hand and foot, make you lie in the cold all 
night; but if you'll give me your money, I'll take care of you, and conduct you very 
safe home."
	The parson then gave him all his money, which was about forty shillings. 
Quoth Ogden: "I see you have a watch, sir; you may as well let me have that too." The 
parson gave him that also. As they were trudging along, out came two or three fellows 
upon them; but on Ogden crying, "The moon shines bright," they let them pass 
quietly; and shortly after two or three other fellows came suddenly on, to whom also 
Ogden cried, "The moon shines bright," and they also permitted them to pass by. At 
last Ogden brought the parson to his door, where the parson invited him to walk in, 
with a promise that he would not hurt a hair of his head on any account; but Ogden 
refusing the parson's proffer, he called for a bottle of wine, and drank to Ogden, to 
whom he gave the bottle and glass to help himself. But he ran away with them, saying 
he would carry the wine to those who should certainly drink his health.
	Another time Ogden and Reynolds, in company with one John Bradshaw — 
who was grandson of that infamous villain, Serjeant Bradshaw, who passed sentence 
on King Charles I. to be beheaded — were watching for a prey in a wood near 
Shooter's Hill, in Kent, when one Cecilia Fowley, a servant- wench, just come out of 
service, happened to be passing by with a box on her head. Jack Bradshaw went up to 
her by himself, being, as he thought, sufficient enough to deal with her, and took her 
box from her, in which were her clothes and fifteen shillings in money, which she had 
received for a quarter's wages. Whilst he was rifling it, after he had broken it open, a 
hammer being therein, she took it up and struck him on the left temple with it, the 
blow felling him to the ground, on his back. She then seconded it with the claw of the 
hammer, by striking it into his windpipe, of which wound the rogue instantly died. 
Then a gentleman carried the maid before a magistrate, where he was bound for her 
appearance at the assizes held at Rochester in March, 1714, when she came there to 
take her trial, and was acquitted.
	Ogden and Reynolds, pursuing their wicked courses without any fear of the 
laws either of God or man, were at last apprehended for robbing one Simon Hasey 
and one John Boyout, committed to the Marshalsea Prison, in Southwark, and hanged, 
the first aged twenty-five years, the other twenty-two, at Kingston-upon-Thames, on 
Saturday, the 23rd of April, 1714.
	Whilst they were under sentence of death they attempted to break out of the 
stock-house, in which they were confined at Kingston; and as they were riding to the 
place of execution, Ogden flung a handful of money out of the cart to the people, 
saying: "Gentlemen, here is poor Will's farewell." And when he was being turned off 
he gave two extraordinary jerks with his legs, which was much admired by all the 
spectators.


HENRY PLUNKET 
Murderer, executed at Tyburn, on the 22nd of September, 1714.

	IN the case of this gentleman, we have a shocking instance of the danger into 
which our passions lead us. A more unprovoked murder we cannot record. Mr. 
Plunket was a foreigner, born at Saar-Lewis, in the dutchy of Lorraine, and was the 
son of an Irish gentleman, who held the rank of colonel in the French service, and was 
related to Father Plunket, a priest, who was called the Primate of Ireland, and came to 
a fatal end in the year 1679. Young Plunket was made a lieutenant when he was only 
ten years of age, and served under his father in Flanders, Germany, and Italy. He was 
remarkably distinguished for his courage, having never exhibited the least sign of fear 
in all the engagements in which he was concerned.
	Having been a while at Ostend, he came over to England with a gentleman 
named Reynard, having fled from that place on account of having murdered a man.
	He was indicted at the Old Bailey, for the murder of Thomas Brown, by 
cutting his throat with a razor, on the 50th of August, 1714.
	It appeared in the course of the evidence, that the prisoner lodged in the, parish 
of St. Anne, Soho, in the same house with the deceased, who being a peruke-maker by 
trade, Plunket bespoke a wig of him, which Brown finished, and asked seven pounds 
for it, but at length lowered his demand to six: Plunket bid him four pounds for it, but 
was so enraged at what he thought an exorbitant price, that he took up a razor, cut his 
throat, and then made his escape, but was apprehended on the following day.
	As soon as the horrid deed was perpetrated, Brown came down stairs in a 
bloody condition, holding his hands to his throat, on which a surgeon was sent for, 
who dressed dressed his wounds, and gave him some cordials, by which he was so far 
recovered as to be able to describe the prisoner, who, he said, stood behind him, 
pulled back his head, and cut him twice on the throat.
	It was proved that a sword and a pair of gloves belonging to the prisoner were 
found on a bed in the room where Brown was murdered; and Plunket having nothing 
material to urge in his defence, was found guilty, received sentence of death, and was 
executed at Tyburn, on the 22d of September, 1714.
	He professed to die a Roman Catholic; and it was with the utmost difficulty 
that he was brought to confess the justice of the sentence in consequence of which he 
suffered.
	[Note: It must be remembered, that at the commencement of the last century, 
when this foul deed was committed, young gentlemen wore enormous wigs. A 
hundred years reconciled them to their own hair, and the ladies alone now appear in 
wigs.]


WILLIAM JOHNSON AND JANE HOUSDEN 
Executed in September, 1714, for the Murder of a Turnkey in the Court at 
the Old Bailey

  
Johnson murdering the turnkey

	WILLIAM JOHNSON was a native of Northamptonshire, where he served his 
time as a butcher, and removing to London he opened a shop in Newport Market; but 
business not succeeding to his expectation, he pursued a variety of speculations, until 
at length he sailed to Gibraltar, where he was appointed a mate to one of the surgeons 
of the garrison. Having saved some money at this place, he came back to his native 
country, where he soon spent it, and then had recourse to the highway for a supply. 
Being apprehended in consequence of one of his robberies, he was convicted, but 
received a pardon. Previously to this he had been acquainted with Jane Housden, his 
fellow in crime, who had been tried and convicted of coining but had obtained a 
pardon, but who was again in custody for a similar offence. On the day that she was to 
be tried, and just as she was brought down to the bar of the Old Bailey, Johnson called 
to see her; but Mr Spurling, the head turnkey, telling him that he could not speak to 
her till her trial was ended, he instantly drew a pistol and shot Spurling dead on the 
spot, in the presence of the Court and all the persons attending to hear the trials, Mrs 
Housden at the same time encouraging him in the perpetration of this singular murder. 
The event had no sooner happened than the judges, thinking it unnecessary to proceed 
on the trial of the woman for coining, ordered both the parties to be tried for the 
murder; and, there being many witnesses to the deed, they were convicted, and 
received sentence of death.
	From this time to that of their execution, which took place on 19th of 
September, 1714, and even at the place of their death, they behaved as if they were 
wholly insensible of the enormity of the crime which they had committed; and 
notwithstanding the publicity of their offence, they had the confidence to deny it to 
the last moment of their lives. Nor did they show any signs of compunction for their 
former sins. After hanging the usual time, Johnson was hanged in chains near 
Holloway, between Islington and Highgate.


THOMAS DOUGLASS 
Murderer, executed at Tyburn on the 27th of October, 1714.

	This conviction presents another instance of the mischief ensuing from 
drunkenness, which the law, so far from admitting as a palliation, as this unhappy man 
conceived, considers an aggravation of the crime.
	Thomas Douglass was indicted at the Old Bailey, for the murder of William 
Sparks, a seaman, at a public-house in Wapping.
	He was born in the county of Berwick, in Scotland, and having been educated 
by his parents according to the strictly religious plan prevailing in that country, he was 
bound apprentice to a sea-faring person at Berwick, and when he was out of his time, 
he entered on board a ship in the royal navy; and in this station acquired the character 
of an expert and valiant seaman.
	Having served Queen Anne during several engagements in the Mediterranean 
and other seas, he returned to England with Sparks, who was his shipmate, on whom 
he committed the murder we have mentioned.
	It appeared in the course of the evidence, that the parties had been drinking 
together, till they were inflamed with liquor, when the prisoner took up a knife, and 
stabbed the other in such a manner, that he died on the spot. The atrociousness of the 
offence was such, that Douglass was immediately taken into custody, and being 
convicted on the clearest evidence, received sentence of death.
	After conviction, it was a difficult matter to make Douglass sensible of the 
enormity of the crime that he had committed; for he supposed that, as he was drunk 
when he perpetrated the fact, he ought to be considered in the same light as a man 
who is a lunatic. He suffered at Tyburn, on the 27th of October, 1714, and died a 
penitent.


WILL CHANCE 
Robbed his Uncle by Forgery, and then turned Footpad. Was executed at 
Tyburn in April, 1715

	WILLIAM CHANCE was born of mean parents, near Colchester, in Essex, by 
whom he had not the least learning at all bestowed upon him, though he was from his 
very infancy a child who showed a promising genius.
	When he came to be about sixteen years of age he was put out apprentice by 
the parish to a weaver, where he was so unlucky that at the end of three years his 
master gave him his indentures and sent him packing; when, to support himself, he 
took to thieving.
	Surprising Sir Jonathan Thornicroft, Bart., he unawares knocked him off his 
horse and rifled him of a diamond ring worth one hundred and twenty pounds, a gold 
watch worth fifty pounds, and two hundred and ninety guineas. A great noise of this 
robbery being made all over the country, with the promise of a reward of one hundred 
pounds for any who could discover this bold robber, Will fled to a rich uncle's at 
Thetford, to lie there incognito till this hubbub was all over. His uncle was a grazier, 
who caressed and received him with all the tokens of respect that could possibly be 
shown a near relation. While he was here he bargained with his uncle for twenty oxen, 
signing an obligation for the money, which he promised to pay within a month or two; 
then taking leave of his uncle, he hired one to drive the oxen to Norwich. After two or 
three months had expired, the old gentleman, not hearing from him, turned to his 
writings, where he found the nest, but the birds flown; for Will had tempered the ink 
with saltpetre and other corrosive ingredients which eat through the paper. This 
startled the old man so, that he suddenly took pen in hand and wrote a very severe 
letter to his kinsman, threatening him with a course of law.
	He pretended to be greatly concerned at the matter, and summoned his uncle 
to appear at the assizes at Norwich, having in the meantime suborned a false witness 
or two to give evidence to a forged paper wherein his uncle was found to confess 
himself indebted to his father in the sum of six hundred pounds, payable, in case of 
his decease, to this his unlucky son. The usual hand and mark of the uncle were 
artificially counterfeited with a different ink from the body of the obligation, both 
tempered with soot to make them seem of such standing as the date would require. 
Besides this, he had also forged a certain discharge, the tenor whereof was that he had 
received twenty oxen for two hundred pounds of the said six hundred.
	This acquittance was cunningly sealed up and sent to a countryman near 
Colchester, whom he had also hired to be an assistant; and he delivered it to the uncle 
in the presence of the Court. Will, as soon as he saw him begin to open it, prayed the 
Court to examine his papers, which they did, and the discharge made so much for him 
that judgment was passed in his favour, and the defendant constrained not only to 
renounce his pretence but also condemned to pay the remainder of the sum that was 
mentioned in the obligation, which was four hundred pounds.
	At last, having exhausted all his ill gotten money, Will betook himself to 
housebreaking, for which he had been twice committed to Newgate and tried at the 
Old Bailey, but had the good luck to escape hanging because the witnesses were 
defective in their evidence. This success in his roguery did so harden him that there 
was scarce a jail throughout London but what he was more than once a tenant in. He 
was once condemned at Hertford Assizes as a footpad, but his time not being yet 
come he was reprieved, and after an imprisonment of two years and a half he pleaded 
his pardon granted by Queen Anne, and obtained his liberty once more. But not 
making good use of his freedom, and the Royal mercy he received, he pursued his old 
courses and went upon the footpad, till he and another, being apprehended for robbing 
a gentleman near Paddington of a silver-hilted sword and forty-two shillings in 
money, were committed to Newgate, where, his comrade making himself an evidence 
to secure his own neck, Will was convicted, and received sentence of death.
	Whilst he was in the condemned hold he was at first very profligate, swearing, 
cursing, drinking, singing and dancing, to the great hindrance of the other condemned 
malefactors from their devotion. But when the death warrant was brought to the lodge 
of Newgate his countenance changed at the fatal news, and he began to employ the 
little time he was to live in serious meditation of his approaching end, which was on 
Wednesday, the 21st of April, 1715, when he was hanged at Tyburn, aged thirty five 
years.


NATHANIEL PARKHURST, ESQ. 
Executed for the Murder of Lewis Pleura, 20th May, 1715

	IT is somewhat singular that, in our search of the ancient records of crimes and 
punishments, we should find, in chronological order, two murders, stimulated by the 
fumes of intoxication. Of this disgraceful practice — of itself a sin — we could give a 
long lecture; but let these dreadful consequences operate as a caution to drunkards.
	Mr. Parkhurst was indicted at the Old Bailey, for the murder of Lewis Pleura, 
on the 3rd of March, 1715; and a second time indicted on the statute of stabbing; 
when the substance of the evidence given against him ws as follows:
	He was a native of the village of Catesby, near Daventry, in 
Northamptonshire, and was the son of very respectable parents, who, having given 
him the education common in a country academy, sent him to finish his studies at 
Wadham College, in Oxford; but, associating himself with men of an atheistical turn 
of mind, they employed themselves in ridiculing religion, and making a jest of the 
scriptures, and every thing that was held sacred.
	Lewis Pleura, who was born in Italy, had taken upon himself the title of count, 
and subsisted by the practice of gaming, till, being greatly reduced in circumstances, 
he was obliged to take refuge in the Fleet prison, where he became acquainted with 
Mr. Parkhurst.
	Parkhurst, and the deceased Lewis Pleura, having been fellow-prisoners in the 
Fleet for debt, the former, who had sat up drinking till three o'clock in the morning, 
went into a room adjoining that of Mr. Pleura, and said, "Damn you, Sir Lewis, where 
are you?" but, finding he had mistaken the room, he went into the right chamber, and 
said, "Damn you, Sir Lewis, pay me four guineas you owe me." Soon after this the cry 
of murder was heard; when a number of people, repairing to the place, found Pleura 
weltering in his blood on the floor, and Parkhurst over him with his sword, who had 
stabbed him in nearly twenty places.
	A surgeon was immediately sent for, who dressed the deceased, and put him to 
bed; and, as soon as he recovered the use of his speech, he declared that Parkhurst had 
assassinated him. Parkhurst, being taken out of the room, went back again to it, and 
said, "Damn you, Pleura, are you not dead yet?"
	In answer to this evidence against him, he said that he was ignorant of having 
committed the crime, and for two years and a half past had been in a very unhappy 
state of mind; and several witnesses were called to prove that he had done many 
things which seemed to intimate that he was a lunatic; but, on the contrary, other 
evidence deposed that, not long before the murder happened, he had taken such steps 
towards obtaining his liberty as proved that he was in the full use of his intellectual 
faculties. Upon the whole, therefore, the jury found him guilty.
	Soon after this offender had received sentence of death, he began to see the 
error of those opinions he had imbibed, and acknowledged the truth of that religion he 
had ridiculed, and felt the force of its divine precepts. He confessed that the dissolute 
course of life which he had led had wasted his substance, weakened his intellectual 
faculties, and disturbed his mind to such a degree, that, before he committed the 
murder for which he suffered, he had resolved to kill some person or other, and make 
his escape from the Fleet prison, or, if he should be unable to effect this, he intended 
to have been guilty of suicide.
	It is very remarkable of this malefactor, that, on the morning of execution, he 
ordered a fowl to be prepared for his breakfast, of which he seemed to eat with a good 
ap petite, and drank a pint of liquor with it.
	How men can indulge even the idea of feasting, a moment, as it were, before 
they know a disgraceful death must happen, is truly astonishing! Lord Lovat ordered 
his favourite dish to be cooked, and thereof ate greedily, just before his head was 
severed from his body.
	At the place of execution he addressed himself to the populace, intimating 
that, since he had been ill of the small-pox, about twenty years before, his head had 
been affected to such a degree that he was never able to speak long at a time: 
wherefore he said no more, only earnestly requested their prayers for his departing 
soul.
	He was executed at Tyburn on the twentieth of May, 1715, in the thirty-ninth 
year of his age.
	Mr. Parkhurst seems to have owed his destruction to his association with men 
of libertine principles — men who derided religion, and scoffed at holy things. We 
may safely conclude that there is not such a being in the world as an atheist who can 
be happy. The man who denies the existence of that God in whom he lives, moves, 
and has his being, must be extremely wretched in this world, while he is preparing for 
an eternity of wretchedness in the next.
	On the contrary, the man who has a firm faith in the important and all-cheering 
doctrines of Christianity will go through the various scenes of his life with a serene 
composure of mind; he will, as far as lies within his power, discharge his duty to God 
and man, and meet the moment of dissolution in the fullest confidence that his final 
salvation will be perfected through the merits of that Saviour in whom he has trusted.
	After the expulsion of Adam from Paradise, Cain stands the first notorious 
example on record of the sin of murder; a crime of so enormous a magnitude, that no 
language can be found in which to express its malignity. The murderer assumes to 
himself the privilege of Heaven, and presumes to stop the breath of his fellow-
creatures at his own pleasure, and to hurry him into eternity "with all his 
imperfections on his head."
	Let those whom the turbulence of their passions may tempt only to think of 
committing murder reflect that there is a just God who judgeth the earth, and that all 
our most secret actions will be brought to light.


ZACHARY CLARE 
Highwayman, who was captured after a Fight, and executed with James 
Lawrence in August, 1715, at Warwick Jail

	ZACHARY CLARE was a baker's son, born at Hackney, and by his father 
bred up to his trade; but becoming acquainted with Ned Bonnet, who taught him the 
trade of robbing on the highway, they practised it together with good success for three 
or four years in the counties of Hertford and Cambridge, and became such a terror to 
the people of the Isle of Ely that they durst hardly stir out far from home, unless they 
were half a dozen or half a score in a body together. But at length, Clare, being 
apprehended while robbing one day by himself, to save his own neck made himself an 
evidence against Ned Bonnet, who, being apprehended, was committed to Newgate, 
from whence he was conveyed to Cambridge, and there hanged, as before related.
	One would think that the untimely end of his companion would have 
reclaimed him, but instead of being reformed he withdrew himself again from under 
his father's tuition and took to his old courses, with a resolution of never leaving them 
off till he was hanged too. However, dreading a halter, he was resolved to rob by 
stratagem; and accordingly, one afternoon, riding over Bagshot Heath, he falls to 
blowing of a horn, just as if he had been a post, whereupon three or four gentlemen 
then on the road gave him the way, as is usual in such cases, and being not rightly 
acquainted with the place where they were they made what haste they could after him 
for a guide, promising to give him some thing for conducting them to such a town. 
Clare accepted their civility, and being now upon the middle of the aforesaid heath, 
where was a lone house upon the side of the road, pretending to be thirsty, he craved 
the favour of the gentlemen to bestow a little drink upon him, withal saying there was 
a cup of very good liquor. They acquiesced to his request and rode up to the house, 
where a couple of his companions were planted, ready mounted, who attacked the 
gentlemen with sword and pistol with such fury that after a short resistance they 
obliged them to pay their postman about two hundred and thirty pounds for safely 
conducting them into their clutches.
	Shortly after this adventure, being through his extravagance destitute of a 
horse, pistols and accoutrements fitting for a gentleman thief, he put himself into the 
disguise of a porter, with an old frock on his back, leather breeches, a broad belt about 
his middle, a hiving hat on his head, a knot on his shoulders, a small cord (an emblem 
of what would be his fate) at his side, and a sham ticket hanging at his girdle; then, 
going up and down the streets to see how fortune might favour his designs, it was his 
good luck one evening to go through Lombard Street when a gentleman was scaling 
up a couple of hundred pound bags. He took the advantage to walk by just as the 
aforesaid gentleman came to the door, where, calling for a porter, he plied him, and 
the money was delivered to him to carry, along with the gentleman, to one Squire 
Macklethwait's, living near Red Lion Square. But Zachary Clare, being tired of his 
burden, turned up St Martin's le Grand, and made the best of his way to lighten 
himself as soon as he could of his load. Clare, being thus recruited, soon 
metamorphosed his porter's habit into that of a gentleman's; and from a man of 
carriage transformed himself into an absolute highway man again. One of his consorts 
bought him a good horse in West Smithfield, whilst another bought pistols and other 
materials requisite for a person who lives by the words "Stand and deliver."
	Being thus equipped he bade London adieu for ever, for it was the last time he 
ever saw it. His progress now was towards the West of England, where he and his 
associates robbed the Welsh drovers and several wagons, besides coaches; insomuch 
that they were a dread and terror to all those parts which border upon Wales. But 
staying there, till the country was too hot for them they steered their course into 
Warwickshire, where they committed several robberies with very good success, till 
one day Zachary Clare, and only one more in company with him, going to give their 
horses a breathing upon Dunmore Heath, attacked Sir Humphrey Jennison and his 
lady in their coach, who had then above one thousand, one hundred pounds in the seat 
of it, and the knight, being unwilling to lose it, came out to give them battle. An 
engagement began betwixt the highwayman and Sir Humphrey, one of whose two 
footmen was wounded in the arm, and the other had his horse shot in the buttock. But 
still Sir Humphrey's courage was not quelled; he maintained the fight more vigorously 
with what pistols he had till the coachman, discharging a blunderbuss, shot Zachary's 
horse dead on the spot, and himself in the foot. His comrade seeing him dismounted, 
and wounded into the bargain, fled as fast as he could. Clare was now taken, and Sir 
Humphrey, mounting his footman's horse which was not wounded, pursued James 
Lawrence, the highwayman who had left Clare in the lurch, and took him. Then, tying 
them behind one another, they were brought into Warwick, and being examined 
before a magistrate, committed to jail. Now being in close confinement, they made 
several attempts to break open the prison, and in order thereto they had file, chisels, 
ropes and aqua fortis to facilitate their escape. But being detected by one of their 
fellow prisoners they were loaded with the heaviest irons the jail afforded, and were 
also stapled down to the floor; under which strict restraint they continued for above 
four months, when, the assizes coming on, they were both brought to a trial, having a 
great number of indictments exhibited against them, to the great surprise of the whole 
Court, who tried them upon no less than ten, of every one of which the jury found 
them guilty.
	Being condemned, they were remanded back to jail again, and secured in a 
dark dungeon underground, where, instead of preparing for their latter end, they did 
nothing but sing, swear, play at cards and get drunk from morning till night.
	They miserably ended their lives in August, 1715, the first of them aged thirty-
two, and the other twenty six.


THE FIRST REBELLION IN SCOTLAND. 
Account of the rise and progress of the rebellion in Scotland, 1715; With full 
accounts of the principal traitors who were executed.

	WE are now arrived at a very memorable period of the history of England. 
Neither the abdication of the throne by King James II. nor his defeat by King William 
III. at the battle of the Boyne, in Ireland, were admitted by the adherents of the family 
of Stuart, to bar their right to the crown. On the accession of George I. this question 
was in secret agitated with much warmth; when the earl of Mar, a Scotch nobleman of 
great popularity, and secretly a friend to the royal stock of his own country, 
determined upon the attempt to dethrone the king, and to overthrow the constitution. 
This nobleman was farther stimulated to attempt this dangerous measure, from being 
on the accession of the king, deprived of some offices which he held under the Tory 
ministry of Queen Anne; although, had he been permitted to retain them after the 
change of measures which then took place, this rebellion might not have broken out. 
When the earl found he was deprived of all share in the new government, he, in 
revenge, retired to Scotland, where be immediately began to tamper with such lords as 
possessed influence among the people, and found they wanted only a leader to set up 
the standard of the grandson of King James, who, by the Scotch, was hailed as the heir 
to the English throne, but by the government denominated the Pretender.
	An invitation was now sent to the Pretender, who had taken refuge in France, 
to come to Scotland, while the friends to his cause were seducing and enlisting men 
for his service. This was done with all possible secrecy, yet their proceedings were 
soon known by the ministry, as on the 20th of July, 1715, when the king had not then 
reigned a year, he went to the House of Lords, where, having sent for the Commons, 
he told them from the throne, that a plan was on foot to invade the country by the 
Pretender; and that he suspected there were too many abettors of rebellion in this 
country.
	He required, that until the rebellion should be quelled, the act of habeas corpus 
should be suspended, and preparations should to that end be immediately made.
	Orders were issued for the embodying of the militia, the guards were 
encamped in Hyde Park, and several men of war ordered to guard the coasts, and 
intercept the army of the Pretender on his voyage from France to Scotland. Many 
persons were apprehended on suspicion of secretly aiding the rebels, and committed 
to prison.
	Meanwhile the earl of Mar was in open rebellion at the head of an army of 
3000 men, which was rapidly increasing, marching from town to town in Scotland, 
proclaiming the Pretender as King of England and Scotland, by the title of James VIII. 
An attempt was made by stratagem to surprise the castle of Edinburgh. To this end 
some of the king's soldiers were base enough to receive a bribe to admit those of the 
earl of Mar, who were, by means of ladders of rope, to scale the walls, and surprise 
the guard; but the lord justice Clerk having some suspicion of the treachery, seized the 
guilty, some of whom were executed.
	The rebels were greatly chagrined at the failure of their attempt upon 
Edinburgh castle; and the French king, Louis XIV., from whom they hoped for 
assistance, dying about this time, the leaders became disheartened, and contemplated 
the abandonment of their project, until their king could appear in person among them.
	Discontent, however, showed itself in another quarter. In Northumberland the 
spirit of rebellion was fermented by Thomas Forster, then one of the members of 
parliament for that county; and, being joined by several noblemen and gentlemen, 
they attempted to seize the large and commercial town of Newcastle, but were driven 
back by the friends of the government. Forster set up the standard of the Pretender, 
and proclaimed him the lawful King of Britain wherever he went. He next joined a 
body of Scotch troops in rebellion, and marched with them as far as Preston in 
Lancashire, before his career could be stopped by the king's army.
	At this town generals Carpenter and Wills attacked the rebels, who defended 
themselves a while, by firing upon the royal army from windows, and from the tops of 
houses, but the latter proved victorious, though not without the loss of 150 men. They 
made prisoners about 1500, among whom were
English Peers: 
The Earl of Derwentwater, 
The Lord Widdrinaton, 
The Earl of Nithisdale, 
The Earl of Winton, 
The Earl of Carnworth,
Scotch Peers: 
Viscount Kenniure, 
The Lord Nairn
	These noblemen, with about 300 more rebels, were conveyed to London; the 
remainder, taken at the battle of Preston, were sent to Liverpool and its adjacent 
towns. At Highgate, the party intended for trial in London, were met by a strong 
detachment of foot-guards, who tied them back to back, and placed two on each horse, 
and in this ignominious manner were they held to the derision of the populace, until 
the lords were conveyed to the Tower, and the others to Newgate and other prisons.
	On the day after the victory of the English, the earl of Mar, with his followers, 
attempted to cross the Forth, with a view of joining the rebels, collected together in 
England; but a squadron of the British fleet having anchored off Edinburgh, they 
abandoned that design.
Sir John Maenzte, on the part of the Pretender, fortified the town of Inverness; but 
lord Lovat armed his tenants, and drove him from his fortifications. This was a service 
of much import to the royal cause, as the possession of Inverness opened a 
communication between the high and the low lands of Scotland. The earl of 
Scathforth and the marquis of Huntley, appeared in favour of the Pretender; but on the 
earl of Sunderland threatening to fall upon them at the head of his tenants, they laid 
down their arms. Thus we find that the interest of Scotland was divided in the 
question of the right to the British throne. In England there was a vast majority in 
favour of the house of Hanover.
[Note: Lord Lovat — This Scotch nobleman, at this time active in the cause of King 
George, by a strange infatuation, during a subsequent rebellion, on the very same 
cause, took the other side, and fought for the Pretender, was taken, condemned, and 
beheaded on Tower-hill! A particular account of that rebellion we shall, also give, 
with the trials and execution of the rebels.]
	The Pretender, evading the British ships sent to watch his motions, landed 
from a small French vessel, with only six followers. This happened on the 23d of 
December, while the royal army, under the duke of Argyle, were in winter quarters at 
Stirling, and that of the rebels, at Perth. On the 9th of January, 1716, having collected 
a few hundred half-armed Highlanders, the Pretender made a public entry into the 
palace of Scone, the place of coronation of the kings of Scotland, while that country 
was a separate monarchy; assumed the functions of a king, and issued a proclamation 
for his coronation, and another for the convocation of the states.
	These daring proceedings determined the duke of Argyle, who had, been 
joined by general Cadogan, at the head of 6000 Dutch troops, notwithstanding the 
inclemency of the season, to march in pursuit of the rebels, He proceeded to their 
head-quarters at Perth, but they fled on his approach. It appeared that the Pretender 
was encouraged by France to rebel, hoping , thereby to throw the nation into 
confusion, of which that deceitful government would have taken the advantage. To 
meet the expected succours, the Pretender and his adherents went to Dundee, and 
thence to Montrose, where, soon rendered hopeless by no news arriving of the 
approach of the foreigners, they, began to disperse. The king's troops pursued and put 
several to death; but the Pretender, accompanied by the earl of Mar, and some of the 
leaders of the rebellion, had the good fortune to get on board a ship lying before 
Montrose, and, in a dark night, put to sea, escaped the English fleet, and landed in 
France.
	It is now time to return to the captive lords, and the other prisoners, taken at 
the battle of Preston. The House of Commons unanimously agreed to impeach the 
lords, and expel Forster from his seat as one of their members; while the courts of 
common law proceeded with the trials of those of less note. The articles of 
impeachment being sent by the Commons, the Lords sat in judgment, earl Cooper, the 
Lord High Chancellor of England, being constituted Lord High Steward.
	The unfortunate noblemen, except the earl of Winton, pleaded guilty to the 
indictment, but offered pleas of extenuation for their guilt, in hopes of obtaining 
mercy. In that of the earl of Derwentwater, he suggested that the proceedings in the 
House of Commons, in impeaching him, was illegal.
	Proclamation was immediately made for silence, and the Lord High Steward 
proceeded to pass the sentence of the Law, on those who had pleaded guilty, in the 
following words
	"James earl of Derwentwater, William lord Widdrington, William earl of 
Nithisdale, Robert earl of Carnworth, William viscount Kenmure, William lord Nairn:
	"You stand. impeached by the Commons of Great Britain, in parliament 
assembled, of high-treason, in traitorously imagining and compassing the death of his 
most sacred majesty, and in conspiring for that end to levy a bloody and destructive 
war against his majesty, in order to depose and murder him; and in levying war 
accordingly, and proclaiming a pretender to his crown to be king of these realms.
	"Which impeachment, though one of your lordships, in the introduction to this 
plea, supposes to be out of. the ordinary and common course of the law and justice, is 
yet as much a course of proceeding according to the common law, as any other 
whatsoever.
	"If you had been indicted, the indictment must have been removed, and 
brought before the House of Lords, (the parliament sitting.) In that case you had ('tis 
true) been accused only by the grand-jury of one county; in the present, the whole 
body of the commons of Great Britain, by their representatives, are your accusers.
	"And this circumstance is very observable, (to exclude all possible supposition 
of hardship, as to the method of proceeding against you) that, however all great 
assemblies are apt to differ on other points, you were impeached by the unanimous 
opinion of the House of Commons, not one contradicting.
	"They found themselves, it seems, so much concerned in the preservation of 
his most truly sacred majesty, and the Protestant succession (the very life and soul of 
these kingdoms) that they could not omit the first opportunity of taking their proper 
part, in order to so signal and necessary an act of his majesty's justice.
	"And thus the whole body politic of this free kingdom has in a manner rose up 
in its own defence, for the punishment of those crimes, which, it was rightly 
apprehended, had a directs, tendency to the everlasting dissolution of it.
	"To this impeachment you have severally pleaded and acknowledged 
yourselves guilty of the high treason therein contained.
	"Your pleas are accompanied with some variety of matter to mitigate your 
offences, and to obtain mercy.
	"Part of which, as some of the circumstances said to have attended your 
surrender, (seeming to be offered rather as arguments only for mercy, than any thing 
in Mitigation of your preceding guilt) is not proper for me to take notice of.
	"But as to the other part, which is meant to extenuate the crimes of which you 
are convicted, it is fit I should take this occasion to make some observations to your 
lordships upon it, to the end that the judgment to be given against you, may clearly 
appear to be just and righteous, as well as legal; and that you may not remain under 
any fatal error in respect of a greater judicature, by reflecting with less horror and 
remorse on the guilt you have contracted, than it really deserves.
	"It is alleged, by some of your lordships, that you engaged in this rebellion 
without previous concert or deliberation, and without suitable preparations of men, 
horses, and arms.
	"If this should be supposed true, on some of your lordships averring it, I desire 
you to consider, that it exempts you from the circumstance of contriving this treason, 
so it very much aggravates your guilt in that part you have undoubtedly borne in the 
execution of it.
	"For it shews, that your inclinations to rebel were so well known, (which could 
only be from a continued series of your words and actions) that the contrivers of that 
horrid design depended upon you, and therein judged rightly that your zeal to engage 
in this treason was so strong, as to carry you into it on the least warning, and the very 
first invitation: that you would not excuse yourselves by want of preparation, as you 
might have done; and that rather than not have a share in the rebellion, you would 
plunge yourselves into it, almost naked and unprovided for such an enterprise; in 
short, that your Men, horses, and arms, were not so well prepared as they might, and 
would have been, on longer warning; but your minds were.
	"It is alleged also, as an extenuation of your crimes, that no cruel or harsh 
action (I suppose is meant no rapine or plunder, or worse) has been committed by you.
	"This may, in part only, be true: but then your lordships will at the same time 
consider, that the laying waste a tract of land bears but a little proportion, in point of 
guilt, compared with that crime of which you stand convicted; an open attempt to 
destroy the best of kings, to ruin the whole fabric, and raze the very foundations of a 
government, the best suited of any in the world, to perfect the happiness, and, support 
the dignity of human nature. The former offence causes but a mischief that is soon 
recovered, and is usually pretty much confined; the latter, had it succeeded, must have 
brought a lasting and. universal destruction on the whole kingdom.
	"Besides, much of this was owing to accident; your march was so hasty, partly 
to avoid the king's troops, and partly from a vain hope to stir up insurrections in all the 
counties you passed through, that you had not time to spread devastation, without 
deviating from your main, and, as I have observed, much worse design.
	"Farther: 'Tis very surprising that any concerned in this rebellion, should lay 
their engaging in it on the government's doing a necessary and usual act in like cases, 
for its preservation; the giving orders to confine such as were most likely to join in 
that treason: 'tis hard to believe that any one should rebel, merely to avoid being 
restrained from rebelling; or that a gentle confinement would not much better have 
suited a crazy state of health, than the fatigues and inconveniences of such long and 
hasty marches in the depth of winter.
	"Your lordships rising in arms therefore, has much more justified the prudence 
and fitness of those orders, than those orders will in anywise serve to mitigate your 
treason. Alas! happy had it been for all your lordships, had you fallen under so 
indulgent a restraint!
	"When your lordships shall, in good earnest, apply yourselves to think 
impartially on your case, surely you will not yourselves believe that it is possible, in 
the nature of the thing, to be engaged, and continue so long engaged, in such a 
difficult and laborious enterprise, through rashness, surprise, or inadvertency; or that 
had the attack at Preston been less sudden (and consequently the rebels better 
prepared to receive it,) your lordships had been reduced the sooner, and with less, if 
not without any bloodshed.
	"No, my lords, these, and such like, are artful colourings, proceeding from 
minds filled with expectation of continuing in this world, and not from such as are 
preparing for their defence before a tribunal; where the thoughts of the heart, and the 
true springs and causes of action must be laid open.
	"And now, my Lords, having thus removed some false colours you have used, 
to assist you yet farther in that necessary work of thinking on your great offence as 
you ought, I proceed to touch upon several circumstances that seem greatly to 
aggravate your Crime, and which will deserve your most serious consideration.
	"The divine virtues ('tis one of your lordships' own epithets) which all the 
World, as well as your lordships, acknowledge to be in his majesty, and which you 
now lay claim to, ought certainly to have withheld your hands from endeavouring to 
depose, to destroy, to murder, that most excellent prince; so the impeachment speaks, 
and so the law construes your actions: and this is not only true in the notion of law, 
but almost always so in deed and reason. 'Tis a trite, but a very true remark, that there 
are but few hours between kings being reduced under the power of pretenders to their 
crown and their graves. Had you succeeded, his majesty's case would, I fear, have 
hardly been an exception to that general rule, since 'tis highly improbable that flight 
should have saved any of that illustrious and valiant family.
	'Tis a further aggravation of your crime, that his majesty, whom your 
Lordships would have dethroned, affected not the crown by force, or by the arts of 
ambition, but succeeded peaceably and legally to it; and on the decease of her late 
majesty without issue, became undoubtedly the next in course of descent capable of 
succeeding to the crown, by the law and constitution of this kingdom, as it stood 
declared some years before the crown was expressly limited to the house of Hanover. 
This right was acknowledged, and the descent of the crown limited accordingly, by, 
the whole legislature in two successive reigns, and more than once in the latter; which 
your lordships' accomplices are very far from allowing would bias the nation to that 
side.
	"How could it then enter into the heart of man, to think that private persons 
might with a good conscience endeavour to subvert such a settlement, by running to 
tumultuary arms, and by intoxicating the dregs of the people with contradictory 
opinions and groundless slanders; or that God's providence would ever prosper such 
wicked, such ruinous attempts; especially if, in the next place, it be considered, that 
the most fertile inventions, on the side of the rebellion, have not been able to assign 
the least shadow of a grievance as the cause of it: to such poor shifts have they been 
reduced on this head, that, for want of better colours, it has been objected, in a solemn 
manner, by your lordships' associates, to his majesty's government, that his people do 
not enjoy the fruits of peace, as our neighbours have done since the last war: thus they 
first rob us of our peace, and then upbraid us, that we have it not. It is a monstrous 
rebellion, that can find no fault with the government it invades, but what is the effect 
of the rebellion itself!
	"Your lordships will likewise do well to consider what an additional burden 
your treason has made it necessary to impose on the people of this kingdom, who 
wanted, and were about to enjoy some respite: to this end, 'tis well known, that all 
new, or increase of taxes, were the last year carefully avoided, and his majesty was 
contented to have no more forces than were just sufficient to attend his person, and 
shut the gates of a few garrisons.
	"But what his majesty thus did for the ease and quiet of his people, you most 
ungratefully turned to his disadvantage, by taking encouragement from thence, to 
endanger his and his kingdom's safety, and to bring oppression on your fellow-
subjects.
	"Your lordships observe, I avoid expatiating on the miseries of a civil war, a 
very large and copious subject; I shall but barely suggest to you on that head, that 
whatever those calamities may happen to be, in the present case, all who are, at any 
time, or in any place, partakers in the rebellion (especially persons of figure and 
distinction), are in some degree responsible for them: and therefore your lordships 
must not hold yourselves quite clear from the guilt of those barbarities which have 
been lately committed, by such as were engaged in the same treason with you, and not 
yet perfectly reduced, in burning the habitations of their countrymen and thereby 
exposing many thousands to cold and hunger in this rigorous season.
	"I must be so just, to such of your lordships as profess the religion of the 
church of Rome, that you had one temptation, and that a great one, to engage you in 
this treason, which the others had not; in that, it was evident, success on your part 
must for ever have established Popery in this kingdom, and that probably you could 
never have again so fair an opportunity.
	"But then, good God! how must those Protestants be covered with confusion, 
who entered into the same measures, without so much as capitulating for their religion 
(that ever I could find, from any examination I have seen or heard), or so much as 
requiring, much less obtaining a frail promise, that it should be preserved, or even 
tolerated.
	"It is my duty to exhort your lordships thus to think of the aggravations, as 
well as the mitigations (if there be any) of your offences: and I could have the least 
hopes, that the prejudices of habit and education would not be too strong for the most 
earnest and charitable entreaties, I would beg you not to rely any longer on those 
directors of your consciences, by whose conduct you have, very probably, been led 
into this miserable condition; but that your lordships would be assisted by some of 
those pious and learned divines of the church of England, who have constantly borne 
that infallible mark of sincere Christians, universal charity.
	"And now, my lords, nothing remains, but that I pronounce upon you (and 
sorry I am that it falls to my lot to do it) that terrible sentence of the law, which must 
be the same that is usually given against the meanest offender in the like kind.
	"The most ignominious and painful parts of it are usually remitted, by the 
grace of the crown, to persons of your quality; but the law, in this case, being deaf to 
all distinctions of persons, requires I should pronounce, and accordingly it is adjudged 
by this court,
	"That you, James Earl of Derwentwater, William Lord Widdrington, William 
Earl of Nithisdale, Robert Earl of Carnwarth, William Viscount Kenmure, and 
William Lord Nairn, and every of you, return to the prison of the Tower, from whence 
you came; from thence you must be drawn to the place of execution; when you come 
there, you must be hanged by the neck, but not till you be dead; for you must be cut 
down alive; then your bowels must be taken out, and burnt before your faces; then 
your heads must be severed from your bodies, and your bodies divided each into four 
quarters; and these must be at the King's disposal. And God Almighty be merciful to 
your souls."
	After sentence thus passed, the lords were remanded back to the Tower, and 
on the 18th of February orders were sent to the lieutenant of the Tower and sheriffs 
for their execution; and great solicitations were made in favour of them, which not 
only reached the Court, but came down to the two houses of parliament, and petitions 
were delivered in both, which being backed by some, occasioned debates that in the 
House of Commons arose no higher than to occasion a motion for adjournment, 
thereby to prevent any further interposition there; but the matter in the House of Peers 
was carried on with more success, where their petitions were delivered and spoke to, 
and it was carried by nine or ten voices, that the same should be received and read. 
And the question was put, whether the King had power to reprieve, in case of 
impeachment? which being carried in the affirmative, a motion was made to address 
his majesty to desire him to grant reprieve to the lords under sentence; but the movers 
thereof only obtained this clause, viz. " To reprieve such of the condemned lords as 
deserved his mercy; and that the time of the respite should be left to his majesty's 
discretion."
	To which address his majesty replied,
	"That on this, and other occasions, he would do what he thought most 
consistent with the dignity of his crown, and the safety of his people."
	The great parties they had made, as was said, by the means of money, and also 
the rash expressions too common in the mouths of many of their friends, as if the 
government did not dare to execute them, did not a little contribute to the hastening 
their execution; for on the same day the address was presented, the 23d of February, it 
was resolved in council, that the earl of Derwentwater and the lord Kenmure, should 
be beheaded; and the earl of Nithisdale, apprehending he should be included in the 
warrant, made his escape the evening before, in a woman's riding-hood, supposed to 
have been conveyed to him by his mother on a visit.
	In the morning of the 24th of February, three detachments of the life-guards 
went from Whitehall to Tower-hill, and having taken their stations round the scaffold, 
the two lords were brought from the Tower at ten o'clock, and being received by the 
sheriffs at the bar, were conducted to the transport office on Tower-hill; and at the 
expiration of about an hour, the earl of Derwentwater sent word that he was ready; on 
which Sir John Fryer, one of the sheriffs, walked before him to the scaffold, and when 
there, told him he might have what time he pleased to prepare himself for death.
	His lordship desired to read a paper which he had written, the substance of 
which was, that he was sorry for having pleaded guilty; that he acknowledged no king 
but James the Third, for whom he had an inviolable affection, and that these 
kingdoms would never be happy till the ancient constitution was restored; and be 
wished his death might contribute to that desirable end. His lordship professed to die a 
Roman Catholic, and in the postscript to his speech, said, "if that prince, who now 
governs, had given me life I should have thought myself obliged never more to have 
taken up arms against him."
	Sir John Fryer, desiring to have the paper, he said he had sent a copy of it to 
his friends, and then delivered it. He then read some prayers out of two small books, 
and kneeled to try how the block would fit his neck. This being done, he had again 
recourse to his devotions, and having told the executioner that he forgave him, and 
likewise forgave all his enemies, he directed him to strike when he should repeat the 
words "Sweet Jesus," the third time.
	He then kneeled down, and said, "Sweet Jesus! receive my spirit! Sweet Jesus 
be merciful to me; Sweet Jesus" — and appeared to be proceeding in his prayer, when 
his head was struck off at one blow and the executioner taking it up, exhibited it at the 
four corners of the scaffold, saying, "Behold the head of a traitor:— God save King 
George."
	The body was now wrapped up in black baize, and being carried to a coach, 
was delivered to the friends of the deceased; and the scaffold having been cleared, 
fresh baize put on the block, and saw-dust strewed, that none of the blood might 
appear, Lord Kenmure was conducted to the scaffold.
	His Lordship, who was a Protestant, was attended by two clergymen; but he 
declined saying much, telling one of them that he had prudential reasons for not 
delivering his sentiments; which were supposed to arise from his regard to Lord 
Carnworth, who was his brother-in-law, and was then interceding for the royal mercy; 
as his talking in the way that Lord Derwentwater had done might be supposed to 
injure his Lordship with those most likely to serve him,
	Lord Kenmure having finished his devotions, declared that he forgave the 
executioner, to whom he made a present of eight guineas. He was attended by a 
surgeon, who drew his finger over that part of the neck where the blow was to be 
struck; and being executed as Lord Derwentwater had been, his body was delivered to 
the care of an undertaker.
	George Earl of Winton, not having pleaded guilty with the other Lords, was 
brought to his trial on the 15th of March, when the principal matter urged in his 
favour was, that he had surrendered at Preston in consequence of a promise from 
General Wills to, grant him his life: in answer to which it was sworn, that no promise 
of mercy was made, but that the rebels surrendered at discretion.
	The Earl of Winton having left his house, with fourteen or fifteen of his 
servants well mounted and armed joining the Earl Carnworth and Lord Kenmure; his 
proceeding with the rebels through the various stages of their march, and his 
surrendering with the rest, were circumstances fully proved: notwithstanding which 
his counsel moved an arrest of judgment: but the plea on which this motion was 
founded being thought insufficient, his Peers unanimously found him guilty: and then 
the Lord High Steward pronounced sentence on him, after having addressed him in 
the following forcible terms:
	"George Earl of Winton, I have acquainted you, that your Peers have found 
you guilty; that is, in the terms of the law, convicted you of the high treason whereof 
you stand impeached; after your Lordship has moved an arrest of judgment, and their 
lordships have disallowed that motion, that their next step is to proceed to judgment.
	"The melancholy part I am to bear, in pronouncing that judgment upon you, 
since it is His Majesty's pleasure to appoint Me to that office, I dutifully submit to it; 
far, very far, from taking any satisfaction in it.
	"'Till conviction, your Lordship has been spoken to without the least prejudice, 
or supposition of your guilt; but now it must be taken for granted, that your lordship is 
guilty of the high treason whereof you stand impeached.
	"My Lord, this your crime is the greatest known to the law of this kingdom, or 
of any other country whatsoever, and it is of the blackest and most odious species of 
that crime; a conspiracy and attempt, manifested by an open rebellion, to depose and 
murder that sacred person, who sustains, and is the Majesty of the Whole; and from 
whom, as from a, fountain of warmth and glory, are dispersed all the honours, all the 
dignity of the State; indeed the lasting and operative life and vigour of the laws, which 
plainly subsist by a due administration of the executive power.
	"So that attempting this precious life, is really striking at the most noble part, 
the seat of life, and spring of all motion in this government; and may, therefore, 
properly be called a design to murder not only the king, but also,the body politic of 
this kingdom. And this is most evidently true in your Lordship's case, considering 
that, success in your treason must infallibly have established popery, and that never 
fails to bring with it a civil as well as ecclesiastical tyranny; which is quite another 
sort of constitution than that of this kingdom, and cannot take place till the present is 
annihilated.
	This your crime (so I must call it) is the more aggravated, in that where it 
proceeds so far as to take arms openly, and to make an offensive war against lawful 
authority; it is generally (as in your case) complicated with the horrid and crying sin 
of murdering many, who are not only innocent but meritorious; and, if pity be due (as 
I admit it is in some degree) to such as suffer for their own crimes it must be admitted 
a much greater share of compassion is owing to them who have lost their lives merely 
by the crimes of other men.
	"As many have so done in the late rebellion, so many murders have they to 
answer for who promoted it; and your lordship, in examining your conscience, will be 
under a great delusion, if you look at those that fell at Preston, Dumblain, or 
elsewhere, on the side of the laws, and defence of settled order and government, as 
slain in open lawful warfare, even judging of this matter by the law of nations.
	"Alas I my Lord, your crime of high treason is yet made redder by shedding a 
great deal of the best blood in the kingdom; I include in this expression the brave 
common soldiers, as well as those gallant and heroic officers, who continued faithful 
to death, in defence of the laws: for sure but little blood can be better than that, which 
is shed while it is warm, in the cause of the true religion, and the liberties of its native 
country."
	After continuing for some length, much in the same strain as the foregoing 
address, his Lordship pronounced the usual sentence.
	Soon after the passing this sentence, the Earls of Winton and Nithisdale found 
means to escape out of the Tower; and Messrs. Forster and M‘Intosh escaped from 
Newgate: but it was supposed that motives of mercy and tenderness in the Prince of 
Wales, afterwards George the Second, favoured the escape of all these gentlemen.
	This rebellion occasioned the untimely death of many other persons. Five were 
executed at Manchester, six at Wigan, and eleven at Preston; but a considerable 
number were brought to London; and, being arraigned in the Court of Exchequer, 
most of them pleaded guilty, and suffered the utmost rigour of the law.
	It will now be proper that we mention the cases of such other remarkable 
persons who suffered on account of the rebellion; and then we will make some 
general remarks ion the nature and heinousness of that offence.


COLONEL HENRY OXBURGH 
Executed at Tyburn, May 14, 1716, for High Treason.

	HENRY OXBURGH, Esq. the son of a man of considerable property in 
Lancashire, having been educated in the most rigid principles of the Roman Catholic 
religion, was sent abroad while a youth into the service of France, in which he 
acquired the character of a brave and gallant officer.
	At the close of the war he returned to England to see his friends; and, finding 
that the rebels were advancing southwards, he raised a regiment with which he joined 
the main army before it reached Preston. Colonel Oxburgh was the man who ordered 
the rebels to fire on the royal troops, and if his opinion had been taken, the town 
would not have surrendered as soon as it did.
	On his trial he pleaded guilty, but after sentence was passed on him, and he 
found that every application for mercy was unsuccessful, he talked in a strain very 
different from that of a man conscious of any crime. He said he considered the 
Pretender as his lawful sovereign, and never deemed himself the subject of any other 
prince.
	He even asserted that he would have been equally loyal to the Pretender if he 
had been a Protestant.
	This unhappy man seems to have fallen a victim to the prejudices of 
education.


RICHARD GASCOIGNE 
Executed at Tyburn, May 25; 1716, for High Treason.

	THIS unfortunate man was singularly active in fomenting the rebellion. So 
zealous was he in the cause, that he mortgaged his whole estate to supply him with 
money to purchase arms from foreign countries.
	When the rebels marched towards the south of England, he engaged all the 
forces he could, and went and joined them, proclaiming the Pretender king, at every 
stage of his march. He was made prisoner by the king's troops at Preston, at the same 
time as Colonel Oxburgh; and being arraigned before Lord Chief Justice King, in 
Westminster Hall, he pleaded "Not Guilty."
	On his trial it was proved, that some casks of arms which he had purchased 
abroad, were found on board a ship, directed to him; and being found guilty on the 
clearest evidence, sentence of death was passed on him.
	While he lay under sentence of death, his sentiments appeared to be nearly the 
same as those of Colonel Oxburgh: and at the place of execution he declared that he 
did not take up arms with a view to restore the Roman Catholic religion, but solely in 
behalf of James the Third whom he deemed his lawful sovereign.


REV. WILLIAM PAUL 
Executed at Tyburn, July 18, 1716, for High Treason.

	MR. PAUL was born of reputable parents, near Lotterworth, in Leicestershire; 
and having been educated for the pulpit, took the degree of Bachelor of Arts at St. 
John's College, Cambridge. After officiating as a chaplain for two clergymen, the 
Bishop of Oxford presented him to the vicarage of Orton, in his native county, to 
which he was instituted in the year 1709.
	The rebels having reached Preston, Mr. Paul began a journey to meet them; 
but was apprehended on suspicion, and carried before Colonel Noel, a justice of the 
peace, who, finding no just cause of detention, dismissed him; on which he continued 
his journey to Preston, where he read prayers to the rebels three days successively, 
and prayed for the Pretender, by the name of King James, in the parish church.
	A short time before the national forces reached Preston, Mr. Paul quitted that 
place; and, coming to London, disguised himself by wearing coloured clothes, a 
sword, a laced hat, and a full-bottomed wig.
	But he had not been long in this disguise before he was met by Mr. Bird, a 
justice of the peace for Leicestershire, who caused him to be taken into custody, and 
carried to the house of the Duke of Devonshire, who sent him to the secretary of state 
for examination; but, as he refused to make any confession, he was delivered to the 
custody of one of the king's messengers, with whom he remained about a fortnight, 
and was then committed to Newgate.
	He was arraigned at Westminster on the 31st of May, and pleaded "Not 
Guilty:" on which he was remanded to Newgate, and had time allowed him to prepare 
his defence. On his return to prison, he sent for a friend; to whom he said "What must 
I do? I have been this day arraigned, and pleaded Not Guilty, but that will not avail, 
for too much will be proved against me." — To this his friend replied, "I will 
persuade you to nothing; but, in my opinion; the best way is to confess your fault, ask 
pardon, and throw yourself on the king's mercy." Mr. Paul said his counsel advised 
the same, and he was resolved to do so; and when he was again brought again to the 
bar, he retracted his former plea, and pleaded guilty; in consequence of which 
sentence of death was passed on him.
	Being sent back to prison he made every possible interest for the preservation 
.of his life; for he seemed to have a singular dread of death, particularly when 
attended with such disgraceful circumstances as he had reason to apprehend. He wrote 
a petition to. the king, another to the lord chief Justice, and letters to the Archbishop 
of Canterbury, with other letters to clergymen; in all of which he acknowledged his 
crime, and his change of sentiments; and intercedes for mercy, in terms of the most 
abject humiliation.
	In a letter to a female relation, he says, "I am among the number of those who 
are to suffer next Friday. — I cannot think of dying the death of a dog, by the hands of 
a common executioner, with any manner of patience. Transportation, perpetual 
imprisonment, or any other condition of life, will be infinitely preferable to so 
barbarous and insupportable a way of ending it; and means must be found for 
preventing, or I shall anticipate the ignominy of the halter, by laying violent hands on 
myself. Give Mr. C—r to. understand, that he may promise any thing that he shall 
think fit in my name; and that his royal highness the Prince, and his council, shall 
have no cause to repent of their mercy to me."
	All Mr. Paul's petitions, however, proved fruitless; he was ordered for 
execution, and was attended by a nonjuring clergyman, who endeavoured to inspire 
him with an idea of the justice of the cause for which he was to yield his life; he was, 
however, dreadfully affected till within a few days of his death; when he began to 
assume a greater degree of courage.


JOHN HALL, ESQ 
Executed at Tyburn, July 18,1716, for High Treason.

	JOHN HALL, ESQ, was a justice of the peace for the county of 
Northumberland, and having been taken prisoner with the other rebels at Preston, was 
brought to London, and indicted for having joined, aided, and abetted the rebels. Two 
evidences deposed that be was seen at different places with the rebels; but in his 
defence he said, that having been to a Meeting of the justices at Plainfield, he had 
lodged at a friend's house, and that on the following day, while he was stooping on his 
horse's neck, to screen himself from the tempestuous weather, himself and his servant 
were surrounded by the rebels, who forced them away; and that he was unarmed, and 
had only seven shillings and sixpence in his possession.
	Though this circumstance was sworn to by Mr. Hall's servant, yet the Court in 
the charge to the jury observed, that, "If a man was seen with rebels, if it appeared that 
he had frequent opportunities of escaping, and did not do it, but continued by his 
presence to abet and comfort them, it was treason within the, meaning of the law."
	Now as it appeared in evidence that Mr. Hall had liberty to ride out when he 
pleased, and did not seem to be restrained, the jury found him guilty; and when the 
Court passed sentence on him, he said, "God's will be done."
	After conviction he was attended by a nonjuring clergyman; and behaved with 
manly fortitude under his misfortunes: however, he made such interest that he 
obtained five short reprieves, and might possibly have been pardoned; but that having 
written the following speech some weeks before his death, the knowledge thereof is 
supposed to have reached the Court; for when a nobleman made application for 
pardon, he was answered, "By no means, my good Lord: it were a pity Mr. Hall 
should lose the opportunity of leaving such a speech behind him, as he gives out will 
raise the spirits of the whole nation to be of the same mind with him, and will be 
instrumental in bringing in the person whom he calls his lawful sovereign King James 
the Third."
	Mr. Hall was executed at the same time and place with Mr. Paul; and, a few 
minutes before he was turned off; he delivered a paper to the sheriff which is as 
follows:
	"Friends, Brethren, and Countrymen,
	"I am come here to die, for the sake of God, my king, and my country; and I 
heartily rejoice that I am counted worthy of so great an honour: for let not any of you 
think that that I am come to a shameful and ignominious end: the truth and justice of 
the cause for which I suffer makes my death a duty, a virtue, and an honour. 
Remember that I lay down my life for asserting the right of my lawful sovereign king 
James the Third; that I offer myself a victim for the liberties and happiness of my dear 
country, and my beloved fellow-subjects; that I fall a sacrifice to tyranny, oppression, 
and usurpation. In short, consider that I suffer in defence of the command of God, and 
the laws, and hereditary constitution of the land; and then know, and be assured, that I 
am not a traitor, but a martyr.
	"I declare that I die a true and sincere member of the church of England, but 
not of the revolution schismatical church, whose bishops have so rebelliously 
abandoned the king, and so shamefully given up the rights of the church, by 
submitting to the unlawful invalid lay-deprivations of the prince of Orange. The 
communion I die in, is that of the true catholic nonjuring church of England, and I 
pray God to prosper and increase it, and to grant (if it be his good pleasure) that it may 
rise again and flourish..
	"I heartily beg pardon of all whom I have in any manner, and at any time, 
injured and offended. I do particularly implore forgiveness of God and my king, for 
having so far swerved from my duty, as to comply with the usurpation, in swearing 
allegiance to it, and acting in public posts by the usurper's commissions, which were 
void of all power and authority. God knows my heart, I did this at first through 
ignorance and error, but after I had recollected myself, and informed my judgment 
better, I repented and drew my sword for the king, and now submit myself to this 
violent death for his sake. I heartily pray God my patience and my sufferings may 
atone for my former crime; and this I beg through the merits, mediation, and 
sufferings, of my dearest Saviour Jesus Christ.
	"I do sincerely forgive all my enemies, especially those who have either 
caused or increased. the destruction in church or state; I pray God have mercy upon 
them, and spare them, because they are the works of his own hands, and because they 
are redeemed with his Son's most precious blood. I do, particularly, forgive from the 
bottom of my heart, the elector of Brunswick, who murders me; my unjust pretended 
judges and jury, who convicted and condemned me; Mr. Patten and Carnaby, 
evidences who swore against me at my trial. And I do here declare, upon the words of 
a dying man (and all my Northumberland fellow prisoners can testify the same) that 
the evidence they gave was so far from being the truth, the whole truth, and nothing 
but the truth, that, in relation to my indictment, they swore not to one true thing 
against me — but many absolute falsehoods. I pray God forgive them, for I am sure I 
do.
	"Lastly, I forgive all who had a hand in the surrender of Preston, for they have 
surrendered away my life; and I would to God that were the only bad consequence of 
it. But; alas! it is too plain that the surrenderers not only ruined many of his majesty's 
brave and faithful subjects, but gave up their king and country into the bargain; for it 
was then in their power to have restored the king with triumph to his throne, and 
thereby to have made us a happy people. We had repulsed our enemies at every 
attack, and were ready, willing, and able, to have attacked them.
	"On our side, even our common men were brave, courageous, and resolute; on 
the other hand, theirs were directly the contrary, insomuch, that after they had run 
away from our first fire, they could never be brought so much as to endeavour to stand 
a second. This I think myself obliged in justice to mention, that Mr. Wills may not 
impose upon the world, as if he and his troops had conquered us, and gained the 
victory, for the truth is, after we had conquered them, our superiors thought fit to 
capitulate and ruin us; I wish them God's and the king's pardon for it.
	May it please God to bless, preserve, and restore our only rightful and lawful 
sovereign king James the Third; may He direct his counsels, and prosper his arms; 
may He bring him to his kingdom, and set the crown upon his head.
	"May He protect him from the malice of his enemies, and defend him from 
those who for a reward would slay him innocent! May He grant him in health and 
wealth long to live; may He strengthen him, that he may vanquish and overcome all 
his enemies; and finally, when it pleases His infinite wisdom to take him out of this 
world, may He take him to Himself, and reward him with an everlasting crown of 
glory in the next.
	"These my beloved countrymen are the sincere prayers, these the last words of 
me who am now a dying person; and if you have any regard to the last breath of one, 
who is just going out of the world, let me beg of you to be dutiful, obedient, and loyal, 
to your only sovereign liege lord king James the Third; be ever ready to serve him, 
and be sure you never fail to use all your endeavours to restore him; and whatever the 
consequence be, remember that you have a good cause, and a gracious God, and 
expect a recompence from him.
	"To that God, the God of truth, and holiness, the rewarder of all who suffer for 
righteousness' sake, I commend my soul, beseeching him to have mercy upon it, for 
the sake of my dear Redeemer, and merciful Saviour, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen, 
Amen, Amen."
	Postscript.
	"I might reasonably have expected my life would have been saved, since I had 
obtained five reprieves; but I find that the Duke of Hanover, and his evil counsellors 
who guide him, have got so little virtue and honour themselves, that they are resolved 
not to spare my life, because I would not purchase it upon base and dishonourable 
terms. I have reason to think, that at first I could have secured my life and fortune, if I 
would have pleaded guilty; and I doubt not but that I might since have obtained 
favour, if I would have petitioned in a vile, scandalous manner: but I was resolved to 
do nothing whereby I should have disowned my king, and denied my principles; and I 
thank my good God, both for inspiring me with this holy resolution, and for giving me 
the grace to perform it.



ROBERT WHITTY, FELIX O'HARA, AND JOSEPH 
SULLIVAN 
Executed at Tyburn, July 18,1716, for High Treason.

	Among the sufferers in the rebellion were these three, who were apprehended 
in London, enlisting men for the pretender; and though the business in which they 
were engaged was of the most dangerous nature, yet they continued it for some time, 
but were at length apprehended, brought to trial, and being convicted, were executed 
at Tyburn on the 18th of May, 1716.
	Robert Whitty was born in Ireland, and having enlisted for a soldier when 
young, served in an English regiment in Spain, where being wounded, he was brought 
to England, and received the bounty of Chelsea-college, as an out-pensioner.
	Felix O'Hara, who was about 29 years of age, was likewise an Irishman, and 
having lived some time in Dublin as a waiter at a tavern, he saved some money, and 
entered into business for himself; but that not answering as he could have wished, he 
came to London.
	Joseph Sullivan was a native of Munster in Ireland, and about the same age as 
O'Hara. He had for some time served in the Irish brigades, but obtaining his 
discharge, he came to England, and was thought a fit agent to engage in the business 
which cost him and his companions their lives.
	These men denied, at the time of their trial, that they had been guilty of any 
crime; and even at the place of execution they attempted to defend their conduct. They 
all died professing the Roman Catholic religion.
	We have already fully stated the law against treason, in the case of William 
Gregg, the first traitor, whose case came before us in the order we have placed these 
singular series of biography. Any comments upon the cause which stirred up this 
rebellion in Scotland is needless, it being well known that, like the contending parties 
of York and Lancaster, it was a struggle for the crown between the houses of Hanover 
and of the Stuarts. The latter becoming entirely extinct in the death of a Cardinal at 
Rome, the only remaining relative of the family, we are not likely on that score, to be 
again embroiled in civil wars



JAMES GOODMAN 
Executed March 12, 1716, for Horse Stealing, &c.

.	JAMES GOODMAN was a native of Little Harwood, in Buckinghamshire, 
and served his time to a carpenter at Aylesbury. After he was out of his time, he and 
two other young men agreed to have a venison pasty, and make merry; in 
consequence of which they stole a deer; but being taken into custody, one of them 
turned evidence, whereupon Goodman and the other were imprisoned a year in 
Aylesbury gaol.
	After his enlargement, he married and entered into business, which he carried 
on with success for about nine years: but becoming fond of idle company, he was 
soon so reduced in circumstances that himself and his family were brought to ruin.
	Coming to London, he got into company with one Stephens, with whom he 
agreed to commit robberies on the highway. Pursuant to this plan they stopped Philip 
White, between Stratford and Ilford in Essex, and robbed him of his horse, one 
shilling, and his spurs.
	Four days after this robbery, Mr. White saw Goodman on his horse at Bow, in 
the company of Stephens, who was likewise on horseback. Hereupon Mr. White sent 
his servant to demand his horse; on which the robbers galloped off, but were 
immediately pursued by Mr. White and his man. Finding themselves hard pressed, 
they quitted their horses, and ran into the field; when Mr. White gave his servant a 
gun, and bid him follow them. He did so; on which one of them fired twice, and said, 
"d—n it, we'll kill or be killed; we won't be taken alive; our lives are as good as 
theirs." On this Mr. White's servant fired his gun, which was loaded with pebble-
stones, and striking Goodman on the head, he was so stunned that he was easily taken; 
and some other persons now coming up, one of them drew a hanger, and pursued 
Stephens, who submitting after a short resistance, both the prisoners were conveyed to 
Newgate.
	Stephens having been admitted an evidence against Goodman, the latter was 
brought to his trial, when he endeavoured to prove that he was in another place when 
the robbery was committed, and that he had purchased Mr. White's horse; but the jury 
found him guilty, as they did not believe the testimony of his witnesses.
	After conviction he was put into the bail dock, in order to receive sentence, but 
the night being dark, and being assisted by some other prisoners, he got over the 
spikes, and though he was loaded with irons, effected his escape.
	But it was not long before he was re-taken, owing to a very singular 
circumstance. While in custody, he delivered some money to a carrier to take into the 
country to a woman with whom he had cohabited; but the carrier, considering his 
situation, kept the money for his own use.
	Wherefore, about a month after his escape, Goodman went to an alehouse in 
Holborn, and sent for a lawyer, to concert with him how to recover the money of the 
carrier: but some persons in the house happening to know him, went to Newgate, and 
informed the keepers where he was; on which he was taken into custody after a 
desperate resistance; and at the end of the next sessions at the Old Bailey, he received 
sentence of death.
	While he lay in this deplorable situation, he acknowledged his guilt, confessed 
he had committed many robberies, lamented the iniquities of his past life, and wished 
he could make reparation to those whom he had injured.


HENRY POWEL 
Highwayman, executed at Tyburn, on the 23rd of December, 1715.

	At the age of nine years he was placed at Merchant Taylor's School, whence 
he was removed to the care of Dr. Shorter, under whom he obtained a tolerable 
proficiency in the Latin and Greek languages.
	Having made choice of the profession of a surgeon, he was bound at Surgeon's 
Hall, to a gentleman equally eminent for his skill and piety; but giving early proofs of 
the wildness of his disposition, his master predicted the fatal consequence that would 
ensue.
	Powel's father and mother dying soon after he was bound, and his master, 
when he had served six years of his time, he was wholly at his own disposal: a 
circumstance that led to his ruin. He was at this time only eighteen years of age, and 
hitherto had not kept any company that was notoriously wicked. Going now to see a 
young woman who was related to him, she fancied a ring which he had on his finger, 
and wished he would exchange it for hers, which he did; but it appearing to be of less 
value than she imagined, she was base enough, on the following morning, to have him 
seized in his bed, as a proper person to serve the king; and without being permitted to 
send for any friend, he was sent into Flanders as a foot-soldier.
	He twice deserted from the regiment in which he served; but the intercession 
of some of his officers saved him from the customary punishment. When he had been 
a soldier about three years, the regiment was quartered at Nieuport, between Dunkirk 
and Ostend, whence he again deserted, in company with seven other men, who 
travelled into Holland, where they em barked on board a ship bound to England, and 
being landed at Burlington in Yorkshire, Powel came to London.
	Being arrived in the metropolis, he found that he had not one acquaintance left 
who was able and willing to assist him; so that he repented having deserted from the 
army, being reduced to such a situation that he saw no prospect before him but either 
to beg or steal. The first he despised as a mean occupation, and the latter he dreaded 
as equally destructive to his soul and body.
	Hereupon he applied for employment as a porter, and worked at the water-
side, till a fellow induced him to be concerned in stealing some goods, for which the 
other was hanged.
	About this time Powel married a young woman of strict virtue, who finding 
some irregularity in his behaviour, warned him to avoid all evil courses, as they must 
infallibly end in his destruction.
	On the 15th of October, 1715, he went as far as South Mims, in Hertfordshire, 
where he stopped Sarah Maddocks on the highway, and robbed her of two shillings 
and sixpence; for which offence he was apprehended, and being tried at the Old 
Bailey in the following month, he was convicted, received sentence of death, and was 
executed at Tyburn, on the 23d of December, 1715.
	Just before his going to the place of execution, he delivered a paper to the 
Ordinary of Newgate, in which were the following passages: "I account this 
ignominious death as a just judgment for my sins against the Divine Majesty and my 
neighbour; and therefore patiently resign myself to his blessed will, and hope (with 
true repentance and a steadfast faith in Christ Jesus,) he will seal my pardon in 
heaven, before I go hence, and be no more seen; and I bless God I have had more 
consolation under my condemnation, than ever I had these many years; and I hope 
that those who survive me will take warning by my fatal end.
	"I have this comfort, that no man can accuse me of enticing him to the 
commission of such acts; especially one person, who has accused me of it since my 
condemnation; but for the value I have for him, I'll omit his name, and desire him to 
take warning by me; being resolved within myself, that if God had prolonged my 
days, I would relinquish all such courses."


JOHN HAMILTON, ESQ. 
Tried in Scotland for Murder, and beheaded by the Maiden, 30th of June, 
1716

  
The execution of John Hamilton

	THIS offender was born in the country of Clydesdale, and was related to the 
ducal family of Hamilton. His parents, to whom he was an only son, sent him to 
Glasgow to study the law; but the young gentleman's disposition leading him to the 
profession of arms, his friends exerted their interest to procure a commission, but the 
intervention of the crime of which we are about to relate the particulars prevented 
their generous intention taking effect.
	Young Hamilton soon becoming connected with some abandoned young 
gentlemen at Edinburgh lost considerable sums at gaming, and going to his parents for 
more, they supplied him for the present, but said they would not advance him any 
further sums while he continued his dissipated course of life.
	Being possessed of this money, Hamilton went to a village near Glasgow to 
meet his companions at a public-house kept by Thomas Arkle. Having drunk and 
gamed for several successive days and nights, Hamilton's companions left him while 
he was asleep, leaving him to discharge the bill. Exceeding his ability, a quarrel 
ensued between him and Arkle, and while they contended, Arkle stripped Hamilton's 
sword from the scabbard. The latter immediately ran away, but finding he had no 
sword to his scabbard he instantly went back to the house, when, on Arkle calling him 
several scandalous names, he stabbed him so that he instantly expired.
	The daughter of Arkle, being present, attempted to seize Hamilton, in doing 
which she tore off the skirt of his coat, which was left on the floor, together with his 
sword, on his effecting a second escape. This daughter of Arkle was almost blind, but 
her keeping the sword and the skirt of the coat proved the means of bringing Hamilton 
to justice. The murderer, having gone to Leith, embarked on board a ship, and landed 
in Holland, where he continued two years; but his parents dying in the interval he 
returned to Scotland, when he was taken into custody on account of the murder.
	On his trial he pleaded that he was intoxicated at the time the fact was 
committed, to which he was instigated by the extreme ill-usage he had received from 
Arkle. The jury, not allowing the force of these arguments, found him guilty, and he 
was sentenced to be beheaded by the Maiden. After Mr Hamilton received sentence of 
death his friends made great interest to procure a pardon; but their endeavours proved 
ineffectual, and he suffered death on the 30th of June, 1716. At the place of execution 
he owned that he had killed Arkle, but presumed to think he was justified on the 
principle of self-defence.
	Mr Hamilton's case will teach us to reflect on the sad consequences of keeping 
bad company, and an attachment to gaming. But for these vices, he might have lived 
happy in himself, and a credit to the worthy family from which he was descended. 
The youth who will devote those hours to the gaming-table, which he ought to employ 
in the honest advancement of his fortune, can expect only to be reduced to beggary at 
the best: but in a thousand instances, as well as the present, the consequences have 
been much more fatal.
	Hence let young gentlemen learn to shun the gaming-table as they would a 
pestilence; to proceed in the plain path of honour and integrity, and to know that there 
can be no true happiness in a departure from the line of virtue!


JAMES QUIN, ESQ. 
The Celebrated Tragedian, tried for Murder at the Old Bailey in 1717, and 
convicted of Manslaughter

	JAMES QUIN was born in the parish of St Paul, Covent Garden, in the year 
1693. His father was a gentleman of some estate, which he greatly embarrassed from 
a neglect of prudence; but he gave his son, out of the wreck of his fortune, an 
excellent education, which he finished at the University of Dublin.
	From college young Quin was sent to London, in order to study law, and for 
that purpose a set of chambers in the Temple and a library were provided for him. 
Here he fell into that decay which has ever been fatal to many young men on their 
arrival into the great metropolis — dissipated company. Legal authorities were thrown 
aside and the belles lettres substituted. He was oftener seen at the theatres than in 
Westminster Hall. Thus did this thoughtless young man dissipate his time until the 
death of his father, which indeed happened not long after his arrival in London. He 
found his patrimony very small, and that he himself had greatly assisted in reducing it.
	He had made an acquaintance with Booth, Wilkes and Ryan, the first 
performers of those days, and he determined on turning player. In the year 1717, when 
just twenty-four years of age, he was accepted by the managers of the Theatre Royal, 
Drury Lane; but before he could prepare himself for the arduous task of an appearance 
before a British audience he was obliged to fly from England. It appears that he 
formed an acquaintance with a woollen draper in the Strand, whose wife giving him 
encouragement, a criminal correspondence took place; and the guilty pair being, by 
the ill-treated husband, traced to a house of ill-fame, Quin drew his sword and 
wounded him in the thigh. The husband recovered, and commenced an action of crim. 
con., and another for assault, against Quin; who, to avoid the consequences of such 
serious proceedings, privately decamped, and went back to Ireland, where he 
remained until the natural death of the woollen draper.
	We find, great as were his abilities, that he long remained at Drury Lane, to 
use the words of his biographer, "a mere scene-drudge — a faggot of the drama." In 
time he was entrusted with the part of Banquo, in Shakespeare's tragedy of Macbeth, 
and the Lieutenant of the Tower in King Richard the Third. In the absence of a 
principal performer, Mr Rich, manager of the Theatre Royal, Lincoln's Inn Fields, 
with great reluctance substituted Quin in the arduous character of Sir John Falstaff, in 
the comedy of The Merry Wives of Windsor. The audience, who proved better judges 
than the manager, received his whole performance with uncommon applause.
	His fame as an actor now rapidly increased; and upon Booth's infirmities 
obliging him to quit the stage, Quin succeeded to many of his parts, and among the 
rest to that of Cato, a character which had been alone acted by his predecessor, in 
which he was most popular, from the first representation of that admirable tragedy. 
There perhaps never was a dramatic work that engaged the public interest more than 
Cato. The contending parties in politics, on several nights of the first season of its 
appearance, ranged themselves, as in the House of Commons, on each side of the 
theatre, alternately applauding the patriotic and loyal speeches with which it abounds.
	Though Booth was gone, Cato was soon called for, and Quin prepared for this, 
his greatest ordeal. He requested that the bills of the performance might say that "the 
part of Cato would be attempted by Mr Quin," with which the manager complied. The 
audience, pleased with his diffidence, received him with great applause, which 
encouraged him to call forth his utmost exertions. When the body of Cato's dead son, 
who was slain in battle, was brought upon the stage, upon Quin's repeating the line,
"Thanks to the gods, my boy has done his duty," the audience were so struck with 
surprise at his energy, feeling and manner, that, as it were with one accord, they 
exclaimed: "Booth outdone! Booth outdone!" In delivering the celebrated soliloquy in 
the last act the audience (very unusual in tragedy) cried, "Encore! encore!" without 
ceasing, until he repeated it, and the curtain fell under the greatest burst of applause.
	After Quin had become the favourite of the town, in performing Cato, one 
Williams, an inferior actor, came to him on the stage, in the character of a Roman 
messenger, saying, "Caesar sends health to Cato," but he unfortunately pronounced 
Cato "Keeto"; which so affronted Quin that, instead of giving the reply of the author, 
he said: "Would he had sent a better messenger." This so greatly incensed Williams 
that when the scene was concluded he followed Quin into the green-room and 
complained to him of the injury he had sustained in being made contemptible to the 
audience, and thereby hurt in his profession; concluding by demanding satisfaction. 
Quin, instead of either apologising for the affront or accepting the challenge, made 
himself merry with his passion — a treatment which increased it to a degree of frenzy; 
so that, watching under the piazza of Covent Garden, as Quin was returning to his 
lodgings he drew upon him, when the assailed, in defending himself, ran the 
unfortunate Williams through the body, which killed him upon the spot.
	Quin immediately surrendered himself to the laws of his country, and under 
the circumstances here described, which were proved on his trial, we must agree with 
the jury, which found him guilty of manslaughter only.


THE MARQUIS DE PALEOTTI 
An Italian Nobleman, executed at Tyburn for the Murder of his Servant, 17th 
of March, 1718.

  
The Marquis de Paleotti stabbing his Servant

	THIS nobleman was the head of a noble family in Italy, and was brought to a 
disgraceful death through the vice of gambling, with all the aggravated horrors of 
suffering in a strange country; thus doubly disgracing the honours of his house.
	Ferdinando Marquis de Paleotti was born at Bologna. In the reign of Queen 
Anne he was a colonel in the Imperial army. Quitting the army at the Peace of 
Utrecht, he visited England to see his sister; and being fond of an extravagant course 
of life, and attached to gaming, he soon ran into debt for considerable sums. His sister 
paid his debts for some time, till she found it would be a burdensome and endless 
task; and she therefore declined all further interference. Though she declined to assist 
him as usual, he continued his former course of life till he was imprisoned for debt; 
but his sister privately procured his liberty, and he was discharged without knowing 
who had conferred the favour on him.
	The habits of the Marquis, however, were in nowise changed, and one day, 
while walking in the street, he directed his servant, an Italian, to go and borrow some 
money. The servant, having met with frequent denials, declined going; on which the 
Marquis drew his sword and killed him on the spot.
	He was instantly apprehended and committed to prison and being tried at the 
next sessions was convicted on full evidence, and received sentence of death. But the 
Duke of Shrewsbury, his sister's husband, being dead, and the Duchess having little 
interest or acquaintance in England, it appears that no endeavours were used to save 
him from the punishment which awaited him, and he was executed at Tyburn, on the 
17th of March, 1718.
	Italian pride had taken deep root in the mind of this man. He declared it to be 
disgraceful to this country to put a nobleman to death, like a common malefactor, for 
killing his servant; and lamented that our churches, as in Italy, did not offer a 
sanctuary for murderers. Englishmen, however, are thankful that neither of this 
Marquis' desires prevail in their country, where the law makes no distinction in 
offenders. To the last moment the pride of aristocracy was predominant in his mind. 
he petitioned the sheriffs that his body should not be defiled by touching the unhappy 
Englishmen doomed to suffer with him, and that he might die before them, and alone. 
The sheriffs, in courtesy to a stranger, granted this request, and thus, in his last 
struggle, he maintained the superiority of his rank. Vain man! of what avail were his 
titles in the presence of the almighty?



JOSEPH STILL 
Executed At Stanford-Hill, March, 22, 1717, For Murder

	THIS man came to London in search of a livelihood, and for some time 
maintained himself by selling poultry in the streets; but growing weary of that 
employment, he enlisted into the army, in which he continued nine years. Having 
obtained his discharge, he became acquainted with a set of thieves, who committed 
depredations in the neighbourhood of London; and being apprehended, he was tried at 
the Old Bailey, and whipped.
	Soon after he obtained his liberty, he returned to his former way of life; and 
being taken into custody in Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, he was tried, convicted, and 
punished by burning in the hand. After this he began the practice of robbing higglers 
on the highway, and he obtained the appellation of Chicken Joe, from his singular 
dexterity in that employment.
	After continuing in this way of life a considerable time, he commenced 
footpad, and committed a great number of robberies on the roads near town, escaping 
detection for a long while, on account of his wearing a mask over his face.
	At length almost all his companions were hanged, and he was reduced to such 
distress, that he went once more on the road to supply himself with the means of 
procuring the necessaries of life. Having drunk at an ale-house in Kingsland Road till 
his spirits were somewhat elevated, he proceeded to Stoke-Newington, and after 
sauntering awhile in the fields, without meeting with any person whom he durst 
venture to attack, he went into Queen Elizabeth's Walk, behind the church, where he 
saw a gentleman's servant, whose money he demanded. The servant being determined 
not to be robbed, contested the matter with Still, and a battle ensuing, the villain drew 
a knife, and stabbed the footman through the body.
	He immediately ran away; but some people coming by while the footman was 
sensible enough to tell them what had happened, Still was pursued, taken, and brought 
to the spot where the other was expiring; and being searched, the bloody knife with 
which he had committed the deed was found in his pocket. The man died after 
declaring that Still was the murderer; and the latter was committed to Newgate; and 
being indicted at the Old Bailey, the jury did not scruple to find him Guilty, in 
consequence of which he received sentence of death
	


JAMES SHEPPARD 
Jacobite, who plotted to assassinate King George I. Executed 17th March, 
1718

	This trial is a very singular case of treason, and may be considered as an 
appendix to our history of the rebellion. Though the crime for which he was executed, 
was committed three years after it was quelled, yet the same misjudged opinion urged 
this youth to enthusiasm in the cause of the Pretender. It is still more singular, that he, 
neither being a Scotchman born, or in any way interested in the mischiefs which he 
contemplated, should, unsolicited, volunteer in so dangerous a cause. Whence, when 
first apprehended, many were of opinion that he was disordered in the brain; but the 
firmness of his demeanour, during his imprisonment and trial, removed these doubts.
	James Sheppard was the son of Thomas Sheppard, a glover in Southwark; but 
his father dying when he was about five years of age, he was sent to school in 
Hertfordshire, whence his uncle, Dr. Hinchcliffe, removed him to Mitcham, in Surrey, 
and afterwards to Salisbury, where he remained at school three years. Being at 
Salisbury at the time of the rebellion, he imbibed the principles of his schoolfellows, 
many of whom were favourers of the Pretender; and he was confirmed in his 
sentiments by reading some pamphlets which were then put into his hands.
	When he quitted Salisbury, Dr. Hinchcliffe put him. apprentice to Mr. Scott, a 
coach-painter, in Devonshire-street, near Bishopsgate; and he continued in this 
situation about fourteen months, when he was apprehended for the fact which cost 
him his life.
	Sheppard having conceived the idea that it would be a praise-worthy action to 
kill the king, wrote a letter,. which he intended for a nonjuring minister of the name. 
of Leake; but mistaking the spelling, he directed it "to the Reverend Mr. Heath." This 
letter, a copy of which follows, he carried to Mr. Leake's house.
	"Sir,
	"From the many discontents visible throughout this kingdom, I infer, that if the 
prince now reigning could be by death removed, our king being here he might be 
settled on his throne without much loss of blood. For the more ready effecting of this, 
I propose, that if any gentleman will pay for my passage into Italy, and if our friends 
will intrust one so young with letters of invitation to his majesty, I will, on his arrival, 
smite the usurper in his palace. In this confusion, it sufficient, forces may be raised, 
his majesty may appear; if not, he may retreat or conceal himself till a fitter 
opportunity. Neither is it presumptuous to hope that this may succeed, if we consider 
how, easy it is to cut the thread of human life, how great confusion the death of a 
prince occasions in the most peaceful nation, and how mutinous the people are, how 
desirous of a change. But, we will suppose the worst, that I am seized, and by torture 
examined. Now that this may endanger none but myself, it will be necessary that the 
gentleman who defrays my charges to Italy leave England before my departure; that I 
be ignorant of his majesty's abode; that I lodge with some Whig; that you abscond; 
and that this be communicated to none. But be the event as it will, I can expect 
nothing less than a most cruel death; which, that I may the better support, it will be 
requisite that, from my arrival till the attempt, I every day receive the holy sacrament 
from one who shall be ignorant of the design. 
	"JAMES SHEPPARD."
	Mr. Leake was absent when this letter arrived, but on his return he read it; on 
which he said to his daughter and maid-servant, that it was a most villainous letter, 
and not fit to be kept; and, in the height of his resentment, he threw it into the fire, and 
went up into his study; but coming down soon afterwards, his daughter told him that 
she had recollected that the boy who had brought the letter, said he would call for an 
answer on the following Monday.
	Hereupon Mr. Leake determined to make the affair known to Sir John Fryer, a 
neighbouring magistrate, which he did the following morning; when Sir John advised 
him to take the party into custody when he should return for the answer. Sheppard 
came at the time, that he had promised, when Mr. Leake sent for a constable, and had 
him apprehended.
	Being carried before Sir John Fryer, he was asked if he had delivered a letter 
at Mr. Leake's on the preceding Friday, directed to the Rev. Mr. Heath. He answered 
in the affirmative: and being asked if he had a copy of that letter, he said he had no 
copy about him, but he believed he could remember it, so as to write a copy. This 
being done, and he having deliberately read and signed what he had written, was 
committed to the Compter.
	Three gentlemen were now sent to the house of the prisoner's master, and 
being shewn his trunk, they found, among some other papers, a copy of the letter he 
had left at Mr. Leake's, which differed very little from that written at Sir John Fryer's, 
only that these words were added: "How meritorious an act will it be to free these 
nations from an usurpation that they have lain under these nine and twenty years;" and 
it was insinuated that he thought it requisite, that while his majesty (the Pretender) 
should be absent from Avignon, "some person should be found resembling him, that 
should personate him there, lest the rumour of his departure from Avignon should 
awaken this inquisitive and suspicious court."
	Soon after Sheppard's commitment, he was twice examined at the office of 
Lord Sunderland, then Secretary of State when he attempted to justify his conduct, 
and readily signed what he had before written.
	When he was brought to his trial, he behaved in the most firm and composed 
manner; and after the evidence against him was given, and the jury had brought him 
in Guilty of high treason, he was asked why sentence should not be passed on him 
according to law, when he said, "He could not hope for mercy from a prince whom he 
would not own." Then the recorder proceeded to past sentence on him, which he 
prefaced with the following most pathetic speech.
	"James Sheppard, you are convicted according to law of the greatest offence 
against human authority, high treason, in compassing and imagining the death of the 
king. Your intent was to kill, to murder, and basely assassinate his Majesty King 
George, in order to place a Popish Pretender on his throne.
	"It is very surprising, that one so young in years should attempt so wicked an 
enterprise; and it is more amazing that you should still thus defend and justify it, and 
not only think that there is no harm in it, but that the action, if committed, would have 
been meritorious.
	"It was reasonable to think that you had received those impressions which 
incited you to this undertaking, from some of those false and malicious libels which 
have been industriously dispersed, to delude unwary readers, and to alienate the minds 
of his majesty's subjects; and it appears to be so from your own confession, that you 
had imbibed your principles from sermons and pamphlets, which make you think 
King George an usurper, and the pretender your lawful king.
	"Consider, unhappy young man, whether you may not be in an error; and 
what, I now suggest to you is not to reproach you, or to aggravate your crime, but 
proceeds from compassion, and, with a regard to your further consideration before 
you go out of the world; that you may be convinced of your error, and retract it.
	"The notions you entertain are contrary to the sense of the nation, who found, 
by experience, that their religion, their laws, and liberties, were in imminent danger 
from a popish prince, and, therefore they rescued themselves from that danger, and 
excluded papists for the future from the crown; and settled on his majesty and his 
heirs, being protestants; which has been confirmed by many parliaments, and the 
nation feels the good effects of so happy an establishment.
	It seems strange that you should hint at a passage in St. Paul for your 
justification. If he exhorted the Christians to submit to the Roman emperors, even 
though they should be tyrants, how comes it that you, private youth, should not only 
judge of the title of kings, in opposition to the sense. of so many parliaments; but that 
you should, think yourself authorised to murder a prince in peaceable possession of 
the throne, and by whom his subjects are protected in the enjoyment of all their rights 
and privileges, and of every thing that is dear and valuable to mankind.
	"You mention in your papers as if you must expect the most cruel tortures. No, 
unfortunate youth, the king you will not own, uses no cruel tortures to his subjects. He 
is king according to the laws of the land, and by them he governs. And as you have 
transgressed those laws in the highest degree, the public justice requires that you 
should submit to the Sentence ordained for such an offender, which is "That you be 
led from hence to the place from whence you came; from thence you are to be drawn 
upon a hurdle to the place of execution, and there you are to be hanged by the neck, 
and, being alive; to be cut down, your bowels to be taken out of your belly, and there 
burnt, you being alive; your head is to be cut off, and your body to be divided into 
four quarters, and your head and quarters to be disposed of as his majesty shall think 
fit. And God Almighty have mercy on your soul."
	After sentence was passed, Sheppard confessed that the reading some 
sermons, and other pamphlets, had induced him to think that it would be a meritorious 
act to kill the king; and that he was convinced he was the agent destined by 
Providence to accomplish the deed. — The ordinary of Newgate told him, that he 
should have prayed that such wicked sentiments might be removed from his mind. His 
reply was, that "he had prayed; and that in proportion as he prayed, he was so much 
the more encouraged and confirmed in the lawfulness of his design."
	The unhappy youth was now visited by a nonjuring clergyman, between whom 
and the ordinary there were repeated quarrels, which continued almost to the last 
moments of Sheppard's life; for they wrangled even at the place of execution, nor did 
the debate cease till the ordinary quitted the cart, and left the other to instruct and pray 
with the malefactor as he thought proper.
	Sheppard was executed a few hours after the marquis of Paleotti.


JOHN PRICE, COMMONLY CALLED JACK KETCH 
A Rogue and Liar, who was not believed when he spoke the Truth. He held 
the Office of Common Hangman, and was himself hanged in Bunhill Fields 
in May, 1718, for murdering a Woman

  
Jack Ketch arrested while attending a malefactor to the place of execution

	THIS criminal first drew his breath in the fog-end of the suburbs of London, 
and, like Mercury, became a thief as soon as ever he peeped out of the shell. Fortune 
having reduced his miserable parents to such extremity that they could not bestow on 
this their son any education, it was his misfortune to improve himself in all manner of 
wickedness before he had turned seven. So prone was he to vice, that as soon as he 
could speak he would curse and swear with as great a passion and vileness as is 
frequently heard round any gaming-table. Moreover, to this unprofitable talent of 
profaneness he added that of lying.
	When John Price was about eighteen years of age, a gentleman with whom he 
lived in the country turned him out of his service purely on account of his excessive 
lying; when, going towards London, and robbing a market-woman of about eighteen 
shillings, near Brentwood, in Essex, he was taken by some travellers coming suddenly 
on him in the fact, and committed by a magistrate to Chelmsford Jail, and pleading 
guilty at the assizes he received sentence of death. But his late master, being then 
High Sheriff of the county of Essex, and taking compassion on his servant's 
misfortunes, did not permit his sentence to be put into force against him. The sheriff 
said he knew the fellow to be such an unaccountable liar that there was no believing 
one word he said; so his pleading guilty to what was laid to his charge was, in his 
opinion, an eminent sign he ought to be believed innocent of the fact, and he would 
not be guilty of hanging an innocent man for the world. Soon after this escape John 
Price made the best of his way to London, where he associated himself with a tribe of 
pickpockets and gipsies, with whom he ran up and down the country, frequenting all 
fairs and concourses of people, till he was caught diving into a pocket that was not his 
own, and committed to Newgate, in Bristol. Being there severely whipped for his 
fault, he went on board a merchant ship, and afterwards served in two men-of-war; 
but not forbearing to pilfer from the seamen, after having been whipped at a gun, 
pickled with brine, and keel-hauled, he was discharged. Coming ashore at Portsmouth, 
he got to beloved London again, where he would not hearken to any wholesome 
counsel, but resolved to break through all virtuous sentiments, and wholly betake 
himself to all manner of wickedness. Entering himself into a gang of footpads, they 
one night divided themselves into three bands, and an attorney then falling into their 
hands near Hampstead, his money they demanded, with a thousand oaths and curses. 
According to their demand he gave them what money he had about him, which was 
eight guineas, rejoicing howsoever that he had now passed, as he thought, all danger, 
when lo! suddenly, as he came up to the halfway house betwixt that place and 
London, he was again surrounded with a second band of these rogues, who went to 
him and demanded whence he came and where he was going. He related his piteous 
adventure, and into what cruel hands he had fallen. "Cruel!" answered one of the 
gang. "How durst you use these terms! And who made you so bold as to talk to us 
with your hat on? Pray, sir, be pleased henceforward to learn more manners." Saying 
which, they snatched his hat and wig off his head, and took a diamond ring off his 
finger, in all to the value of fifteen pounds. What could our poor lawyer now do? To 
turn back again was to leap out of the frying-pan into the fire, wherefore he faintly 
went on, when scarcely had he got past Kentish Town but the third band, who lay as 
sentinels in this place, made up to him, bringing along with them a man who had not a 
rag of clothes on his back — not so much as a shirt — a dreadful thing, considering 
the time of the year, it being then in the depth of winter. "Sir," said Price (who was in 
this parley), "you'll do a charitable deed to let this poor wretch, whom we have just 
now stripped, have your upper coat, or rather both upper and under, for you see he is 
almost dead with cold." The lawyer would willingly have pleaded that charity begins 
at home, and that every man is bound by the laws of nature to conserve his own being 
rather than another's. But alas! his judges were other kind of men than to be moved by 
the laws of the land or nature either; wherefore they took from him both his coats and 
his waistcoat, telling him it was a favour that they took not from him his life also, 
seeing he had made so much bad use of it.
	Being at last committed to Newgate for petty larceny, he was only whipped at 
the cart's tail, and upon paying his fees obtained his liberty again. Afterwards 
endeavouring to mend his fortune by marriage, he entered into the state of matrimony 
with a young woman called Betty, whose employment was to attend daily at the jail of 
Newgate and run prisoners' errands. By this means and his own good behaviour he 
quickly raised himself to preferment, for he was made hangman for the county of 
Middlesex. But the first day he officiated at the sessions at the Old Bailey, going to 
the Blue Boar ale-house, situated not far from Justice Hall, it was his misfortune to 
have his burning irons picked out of his pocket, for which he was forced to pawn his 
waistcoat to have them back again. However, he soon retrieved this loss, for what 
with slightly putting a "T," which was the only letter he knew in the whole alphabet, 
on a thief's hand, and correcting others with a gentle lash, he redeemed his waistcoat, 
and bought a shirt into the bargain. Moreover, at the first cast of his office he 
performed at Tyburn he made as much off the executed person's clothes among the 
brokers in Monmouth Street and Chick Lane as procured him several drunken bouts.
	Though he was bad enough in many things, yet he had one good principle in 
him while he was hangman, for let him be owing money to anybody, if he could not 
pay them he was very willing to work it out whenever they pleased — a principle 
indeed which every rogue is not endowed with. Whilst he was in this post he took 
upon him a great deal of state, and on every execution day he had as great a levee as 
some persons of quality, being attended on by broom-men for old hats, periwig-
makers for old wigs, brokers for old coats, suits and cloaks, and cobblers for old 
shoes. Indeed he was a man in every way qualified for this station, for he had 
impudence in abundance, cruelty at his finger-ends, drunkenness to perfection, and 
could swear as well without book as within. However, these natural parts could not 
protect him, for several envying his felicity, they endeavoured to lower his top-sail, 
and at last blew him out of the haven of his reputable business by his manifold 
failings.
	Some were glad he was to catch nobody any more at Hyde Park Corner, and 
others as sorry, especially those whom he had often obliged with an old shirt or a 
handkerchief; and indeed that which most troubled him for the loss of his place was 
only that he could not any more send men out of the world without being called to an 
account for it. Now he was left to shift for himself again; and indeed, so long as he 
had any fingers he could make as good a shift as anybody, for there was nothing, 
except it lay out of his reach, but what he made his own.
	What brought him to his end was his going one night over Bunhill Fields in 
his drunken airs, when he met an old woman named Elizabeth White, a watchman's 
wife, who sold pastry-ware about the streets. He violently assaulted her in a barbarous 
manner, almost knocking one of her eyes out of her head, giving her several bruises 
about her body, breaking one of her legs, and wounding her in the belly. Whilst he 
was acting this inhumanity two men came along at the same time, and hearing 
dreadful groans supposed somebody was in distress, and having the courage to pursue 
the sound as well as they could, at last came up to the distressed woman, which made 
Price damn them for their impudence. However they secured him, and brought him to 
the watch-house in Old Street, from whence a couple of watchmen were sent to fetch 
the old woman out of Bunhill Fields, who within a day or two died, under the 
surgeon's hands.
	Price was sent to Newgate, where he seemed to be under a great surprise and 
concern for the death of the woman, till, being tried and condemned for her, he was no 
sooner confined in the condemned hold, than laying aside all thoughts of preparing 
himself for his latter end, he appeared quite void of all grace; and instead of repenting 
for his manifold sins and transgressions, he would daily go up to chapel intoxicated 
with cursed Geneva, comforting himself even to the very last that he should fare as 
well in a future state as those who had gone the same way before him. At length the 
fatal day came wherein he was to bid adieu to the world, which was on Saturday, the 
31st of May, 1718. As he was riding in the cart he several times pulled a bottle of 
Geneva out of his pocket to drink before he came to the place of execution, which was 
in Bunhill Fields, where he committed the murder. Having arrived at the fatal tree, he 
was, upon Mr. Ordinary's examination, found so ignorant on the ground of religion he 
troubled himself not much about it; but valuing himself upon his former profession of 
being hangman, styled himself finisher of the law, and so was turned off the gibbet, 
aged upwards of forty years.
	One would imagine that the dreadful scenes of calamity to which this man had 
been witness, if they had not taught him humanity, would at least have given him 
wisdom enough not to have perpetrated a crime that must necessarily bring him to a 
similarly fatal end to what he had so often seen of others: but perhaps his profession 
tended rather to harden his mind than otherwise.
	The murder of which Price was guilty appears to have been one of the most 
barbarous and unprovoked we ever remember to have read of: and his pretence that he 
was drunk when he perpetrated it was no sort of excuse; since drunkenness itself is a 
crime, and one which frequently leads to the commission of others.
	The lesson to be learnt from the fate of this man is to moderate our passions of 
every kind; and to live by the rules of temperance and sobriety. We are told, from the 
best authority, that "hands that shed innocent blood are an abomination to the Lord."


JAMES FILEWOOD ALIAS VILET 
Convicted of picking Pockets, and sentenced to Death. Executed at Tyburn 
in October, 1718

	THIS fellow was often called Vilet, though Filewood was his right name. He 
was born in the parish of St Peter's, Cornhill. His father was a poulterer, which 
occupation he, and two or three other brothers, pretended originally to follow; but, 
finding that the fiddling work of scalding, picking and gutting cocks and hens and 
other poultry was not so beneficial as picking pockets, they took up that employment, 
knowing there was their ready money as soon as they had done their work.
	As soon as he had listed himself under the banners of wickedness he first went 
a-clouting — that is, picking handkerchiefs out of pockets — in which having pretty 
well improved himself, often after being ducked in a horse-pond, or pumped, he next 
ventured to pick pockets and fobs of money and watches. To which purpose he always 
gave his constant attendance at the King's going to the Parliament House, the Lord 
Mayor's Show, the artillery-men making a mock fight, entries of ambassadors, 
Bartholomew and Southwark Fairs, Drury Lane and Lincoln's Inn playhouses, or any 
other place where a great concourse of people were drawn together upon any 
occasion; and to be sure he never missed going on Sundays to church, though it was 
more to serve the devil than that omnipotent Majesty to whose honour and glory the 
house of prayer is erected; and here he would, as well as pick pockets, change an old 
hat or two for a new one.
	One day this Vilet, meeting with another of his own profession, named Clark 
— "Come, Clark," quoth he, "since we have so happily stumbled upon one another, 
let us take a pint together." "A match," says the other; so they went into a tavern in 
Holborn. Having drunk a bout for a while, when they came to examine their pockets 
they found them- selves deceived, one thinking the one had, and the other thinking the 
other had, money enough to defray the reckoning, when indeed both of them could 
not make above a groat. "Hang it, then," said the inviter, "we had as good be in for a 
great deal as a little." So they called lustily till it came to five or six shillings; then, 
looking out of the window, as if they had been viewing the descent, says one to the 
other: "I have it now." Upon that, knocking, and desiring to speak with the master, up 
he came. "Sir," says Vilet, "we came hither about a mathematical business — to 
measure from your window to the ground. I have laid upon thirteen feet, my friend on 
thirteen feet nine inches; and you are to be judge that I slip not this line" (which was 
packthread upon a piece of brass, which joiners and carpenters use in mensuration) 
"till he goes down to see whether from this knot" (showing it him), "which is just so 
much, it reaches to the ground." The vintner was content. The other sharper, being 
below in the street, cried it did not reach by eleven inches. "Pray, sir," said Vilet to the 
vintner, "hold it here till I step down and see, for I won't believe him." So down he 
went, telling the drawer he had paid his master, and away they both scoured, leaving 
the string for the reckoning.
	He was at length taken in picking a pocket, and though the value he took from 
the person did not come to ten shillings, yet he was convicted thereof; and likewise 
upon another indictment preferred against him by Mrs Frances Baldock, for snatching 
from her a pocket valued at one shilling, and in which were twelve guineas and two 
pistoles, For these facts he received sentence of death at Justice Hall, in the Old 
Bailey; and accordingly, on the 31st of October, 1718, he took shipping at Newgate, 
sailed with a fair wind up Holborn river, and striking against the rock of St Giles's' 
was cast away at Tyburn in the twenty-seventh year of his age.


CATHERINE JONES 
Tried for Bigamy

	CATHERINE JONES was indicted at the Old Bailey, on the 5th of September, 
1719, for marrying Constantine Boone, during the life of her former husband, John 
Rowland.
	Proof was made that she was married to Rowland, in the year 1713, at a house 
in the Mint, Southwark; and that, six years afterwards, while her husband was abroad, 
she was again married, in the same house, to Constantine Boone; but Rowland, soon 
returning to England, caused his wife to be indicted for this crime.
	The prisoner did not hesitate to acknowledge the double marriage, but insisted 
that the latter was illegal, as Boone was an hermaphrodite, and had been shown as 
such at Southwark and Bartholomew fairs, and at other places.
	To prove this a person swore that he knew Boone when a child, that his (or 
her) mother dressed it in girl's apparel, and caused it to be instructed in needle-work, 
till it had attained the age of twelve years, when it turned man, and went to sea.
	These last words were those of the disposition; and the fact was confirmed by 
Boone, who appeared in Court, acknowledged being an hermaphrodite, and having 
been publicly shown in that character.
	Other witnesses deposed that the female sex prevailed over that of the male in 
the party in question; on which the jury acquitted the prisoner.
	It is impossible to describe how much this affair was the subject of the public 
conversation at, and long after, the time that it happened: and it would be idle to make 
any serious remarks on it. We can only express our astonishment that an 
hermaphrodite should think of such a glaring absurdity as the taking of a wife!


LIEUTENANT EDWARD BIRD 
Took a Pinch of Snuff just before his Execution at Tyburn, on 23rd of 
February, 1719, for murdering a Waiter

	MR BIRD was born at Windsor, in Berkshire, and descended of respectable 
parents, who having first sent him to Westminster School, then removed him to Eton 
College. When he had finished his studies he was sent to make the tour of France and 
Italy, and on his return to England was honoured with the commission of a lieutenant 
in a regiment of horse.
	Before he had been long in the army he began to associate with abandoned 
company of both sexes, which finally led to the commission of the crime which cost 
him his life. On the 10th of January, 1719, he was indicted at the Old Bailey for the 
murder of Samuel Loxton. It appeared on his trial that he had taken a woman of the 
town to a house of ill fame in Silver Street, where Loxton was a waiter. Early in the 
morning he ordered a bath to be got ready, but Loxton, being busy, sent another 
waiter, at whom Bird, in a fit of passion, made several passes with his sword, which 
he avoided by holding the door in his hand; but the prisoner ran after him, threw him 
downstairs, and broke some of his ribs. On this the master and mistress of the house 
and Loxton went into the room and attempted to appease him; but Bird, enraged that 
the bath had not been prepared the moment he ordered it, seized his sword, which lay 
by the bedside, and stabbed Loxton, who fell backwards and died immediately; on 
which the offender was taken into custody and committed to Newgate.
	Being convicted on the clearest evidence, he received sentence of death, and 
was ordered for execution on Monday, the 23rd of February. On the night preceding 
his execution he took a dose of poison, but that not operating, as he had expected, he 
stabbed himself in several places. Yet, however, he lived till the morning, when he 
was taken to Tyburn in a mourning coach, attended by his mother and the ordinary of 
Newgate. Being indulged to stay an hour in the coach with his mother, he was put into 
the cart, where he asked for a glass of wine; but being told it could not be had, he 
begged a pinch of snuff, which he took with apparent unconcern, wishing health to 
those who stood near him. He then rehearsed the Apostles' Creed, and, being tied up, 
was launched into eternity on the 23rd of February, 1719, in the twenty-seventh year 
of his age.


MARK ANTHONY DE LA PORTE 
A Catholic priest, sentenced to life imprisonment for performing a Catholic 
marriage, 4th March 1719

	Mark Anthony de la Porte of St Anne's, Westminster, was indicted on March 
4, 1719 for a misdemeanour in that he being a popish priest did exercise part of his 
function here in the parish of St Anns, Westminster by marrying James de Fleury to 
Barbara de la Gard according to the rites of the Church of Rome contrary to the 
statute of W. III. for preventing the growth of Popery.
	James de Fleury deposed, that the prisoner told them he was a priest of the 
Church of Rome and that he married him to Barbara de la Gard on 10th June; that he 
gave him a certificate signed with his own hand and witnessed by several others.
	Roney de la Fontaine and Jane de la Fontaine deposed that they were present 
at the marriage, saw the priest performing his office, and sign the certificate, and that 
they witnessed it themselves.
	Mary Evans deposed that she was present, but did not understand French nor 
Latin, that she saw the form of a marriage ceremony of the ring, joining of hands, &c. 
and witnessed the certificate.
	The certificate being proved, was read in court, wherein the prisoner asserts 
himself to be a Roman priest according to the rites of the Church of Rome, and 
mentions what Romish bishop he received orders from.
	The jury found him guilty; and he was sentenced to perpetual imprisonment in 
such place or places within the kingdom as his Majesty, by the advice of his privy 
council should appoint.


NICHOLAS HORNER 
A Minister's Son who turned Highwayman, and was executed 3rd of April, 
1719

	THIS unhappy wretch was the younger son of the minister of Honiton, in 
Devonshire, and was a very wild untoward child even from infancy. However, his 
indulgent father, in order to provide for him, bestowed as much learning upon him as 
qualified him to be clerk to an attorney in Lion's Inn, in Holywell street, at the end of 
the New Church in the Strand; but he soon falling into extravagant company, and 
addicting himself very much to drunkenness and whoredom, ran away from his master 
before he had served him three years, and betook himself to the highway in order to 
support himself in the pursuit of those vices. He had such ill luck, nevertheless, in his 
new profession, as to be taken in the very first robbery he attempted to commit, and 
accordingly he was sent to Winchester Jail where he remained confined for three 
months before he was brought to trial and condemned. However, his father made such 
interest for him at Court that Queen Anne, who was always known to have a great 
veneration for the clergy, in consideration of his father's being one of that order, was 
prevailed upon to grant him a pardon, upon condition of his being transported out of 
her Majesty's dominions, and not settling in any part of Europe for the term of seven 
years, within six months after his going out of jail.
	During the time of the six months which he was allowed to remain in his 
native country, great interest was also made again to get him off with his 
transportation; but that favour not being obtained, his father sent him to Varujayati, in 
the mission of Madure, on the coast of Coromandel, in the East Indies. In this country 
the natives still retain that barbarous and inhuman custom of obliging women of an 
exalted station to burn themselves with the bodies of their deceased husbands. 
Accordingly, Horner happening to carry with him a wife, an Englishwoman, who was 
a great beauty, she was taken from him and married to an Indian prince, at whose 
death she suffered in the manner aforesaid. After the expiration of the term of seven 
years, for which he was transported, he came back to England, when, his father and 
mother being both dead, he received from their executors five hundred pounds, which 
his parents had bequeathed to him in case he was alive and returned home in such a 
limited time from the making of the will. But the abandoned reprobate, not forgetting 
his former extravagances, nor taking warning by his past sufferings, soon consumed 
all this money, and he had again recourse to the highway.
	One day, being upon his rambles in quest of prey, and coming up with a rich 
farmer — "Well overtaken, friend," said Horner; "methinks you look melancholy: 
pray what may be your affliction? If you are under any misfortunes by crosses and 
losses in the world, perhaps it may be in my power to relieve you." The farmer very 
frankly replied: "Ah! dear sir, were I to say that I have had any losses in the world, I 
should be telling a great lie; for I have been a thriving man all my lifetime, and should 
want for nothing had I but content. But indeed I have crosses enough, through a 
damned scolding wife at home, who, though I am the best of husbands to her, and 
daily do my utmost endeavour to make her and my children happy, yet is she always 
raving and scolding about the house like a madwoman, insomuch that I am daily 
teased out of my life. Nay, if there's any such thing as perpetual motion, as some 
virtuosos affirm, I am sure it is in my wife's tongue; for it never lies still from 
morning till night. Nay, scolding is become so habitual to her that she cannot forbear 
it even in her sleep. Wherefore, could any man tell me a remedy that would cure it, I 
have a hundred pounds about me in gold and silver which I would freely give him 
with all my heart for so great a benefit as I should receive by taming this confounded 
shrew."
	At the mention of the agreeable name of a hundred pounds Horner pricked up 
both his ears and answered: "Sir, I will first tell you the ingredients which enter into 
the composition of a scold, and the cause of a distemper being truly known, 'twill be 
the more easy to complete the cure. You must understand, then, that Nature, in 
making an arrant scold, first took of the tongues and galls of bulls, bears, wolves, 
magpies, parrots, cuckoos and nightingales, each a like number; the tongues and tails 
of vipers, adders, snails and lizards, six apiece; aurum fulminans, aqua fortis and 
gunpowder, of each one pound; the clappers of seventeen bells and the pestles of 
thirty apothecaries' mortars. These being all mixed together, she calcined them in 
Mount Strombolo, and dissolved the ashes in water taken just under London Bridge at 
three-quarters' flood; she then filtrated the whole through the leaves of Calepine's 
Dictionary, to render the operation more verbose, after which she distilled it a second 
time through a speaking trumpet, and closed up the remaining spirits in the mouth of a 
cannon.
	"Then she opened the graves of all newly deceased pettifoggers, mountebanks, 
barbers, coffee-men, newsmongers and fishwives from Billingsgate, and with the skin 
of their tongues made a bladder, which she covered over drum-heads, and filled with 
storms, tempests, whirlwinds, thunder and lightning; and in the last place, to make the 
whole composition the more churlish, she cut a vein under the tongue of the dog-star, 
extracting from thence a pound of the most choleric blood, and then, sublimating the 
spirits, she mixed them up with the foam of a mad dog, and putting all together in the 
fore-mentioned bladder stitched them up therein with the nerves of Socrates' wife."
	"A damned compound indeed this is," rejoined the farmer. "Surely it must be 
impossible at this rate for any man to tame a scold." "Not at all," continued Horner; 
"for when she first begins to be in her fits, which you may perceive by the bending of 
her brows, then apply to her a plaster of good words; after that give her a wheedling 
potion, and if that will not do, take a birch rod and apply the same with a strong arm 
from shoulder to flank, according to art; that will infallibly complete the cure." The 
farmer, being very well pleased with the prescription, not only gave Horner many 
thanks, but a good treat at the next inn they came to. Afterwards they rode on together 
again, and when they came to a convenient place, said Horner: "Will you be pleased 
to pay me now, sir, for the good advice I have given you?" "I thought, sir," answered 
the farmer, "that the treat I gave you in return was sufficient satisfaction." "No, sir," 
quoth Horner, "you promised a hundred pounds, and, d —n me, sir," continued he, 
presenting a pistol to his breast, "deliver your bag this instant, or you are a dead man." 
At this rough compliment the farmer delivered it to him; but not without a hearty 
curse or two, and swearing withal that his wife should pay dearly for it the first time 
he tried the experiment of the birch rod upon her.
	Not long after this exploit Horner met with a gentleman upon Hounslow 
Heath, whom he saluted with the terrifying words: "Stand and deliver." Whereupon 
the person assaulted gave him what money he had about him, amounting to about six 
guineas, and said to him: "Truly, sir, you love money better than I do, to venture your 
neck for it." "I only follow the general way of the world, sir," quoth Horner, which 
now prefers money before either friends or honesty, yea, some before the salvation of 
their souls; for it is the love of gold that makes an unjust judge take a bribe; a corrupt 
lawyer plead a wrong cause in defiance of truth and justice; a physician kill a man 
whom he pretends to cure, without fear of hanging; a surgeon keep a patient long in 
hand, by laying on one plaster to heal, and two to draw his wound. 'Tis gold that 
makes the tradesman tell every day a thousand lies behind the counter, in putting off 
his bad wares; 'tis that makes the butcher blow his veal, the tailor covet so much 
cabbage, the miller take toll twice, the baker wear a wooden cravat, and the 
shoemaker stretch his leather as he does his conscience. In short, 'tis that makes 
gentlemen of the pad, as I am, wear a Tyburn tippet, or old Storey's cap, on some 
country gallows, which all of our noble profession value no more than you, sir, do the 
losing of this small trifle of six guineas." Next day Horner overtook, beyond 
Maidenhead Thicket, a young man and a young woman who were going to be married 
at Henley-upon-Thames, with a couple of bridesmen and bridesmaids.
	These he presently attacked, which put the young people into the utmost 
consternation, especially the intended bride-groom, who told Horner upon what 
design they were going, and added that he would prevent their marriage, at least that 
day, if he took their money from them. But he was inexorable and deaf to all their 
entreaties, and immediately stripped them of every farthing of their coin, to the value 
of twenty guineas, to the no small mortification of the young couple.
	However the ill-natured rogue, not satisfied therewith, demanded also the 
wedding-ring, for which the intended bridegroom entreated him yet more earnestly 
than for his money; but Horner being resolutely bent upon having it, they delivered it 
to him; whereupon he said: "You foolish young devils, do you know what you are 
going about? Are you voluntarily going to precipitate yourselves into inevitable ruin 
and destruction, by running your heads into the matrimonial noose with your eyes 
open? Do you know it is an apprenticeship for life, and a hard one too? You had better 
be ruled by me, and take one another's words; and if you do, you'll find in taking my 
counsel that it is the best day's work you ever did since the hour of your birth."
	Not long after this exploit a lady of distinction, being alone in the stage-coach 
that goes between Colchester and London, was informed by the coachman, as they 
were coming by Braintree, in Essex, that if her ladyship had any things of value about 
her, it would be her best way to secure them as well as she could, for he saw several 
suspicious fellows scouting up and down the heath, whom he mistrusted to be 
highwaymen. Upon this caution the lady put her gold watch, a purse of guineas and a 
very fine suit of laced head-cloths under her seat. This done she dishevelled her hair 
in a very uncouth manner all over her head and shoulders, by which time Horner had 
ridden up to her, and presenting a pistol into the coach demanded her money.
	Hereupon the lady, who was a very fine woman, having great presence of 
mind, bethought herself of acting the part of a lunatic, which she did to the life, for 
opening the coach door and leaping out, and taking Horner by one of his legs, she 
shrieked out in a most piteous and lamentable shrill voice: "Ah! dear Cousin Tom, I 
am glad to see you. I hope you will now rescue me from this rogue of a coachman, 
who is carrying me, by that villain my husband's order, to Bedlam for a madwoman." 
"D —- me," replied Horner, "I am none of your cousin; I don't know you. I believe 
you are mad indeed, so Bedlam is the fittest place for you." "Ah! Cousin Tom," said 
the lady again, "but I will go along with you; I won't go to Bedlam." She then clung 
close to Horner and his horse, and counterfeited lunacy with such dexterity that he 
really thought it natural, and asked the coachman: "Do you know this mad b —h? 
"Yes," replied the coachman, "I know the lady very well she is sadly distracted, for 
she has torn her head-cloths all to pieces and thrown them away as we came along; 
and I am now going with her by her husband's orders to London, to put her into a 
madhouse, where she may be cured; but not into Bedlam, as she supposes." "E'en take 
her then along with you to the devil, if you will," said Horner in a passion, "for I 
thought to have met with a good purchase, and I find now there is nothing to be got of 
this mad toad." So he set spurs to his horse and rode away as fast as he could, for fear 
of being plagued any more with her, for she seemed mighty fond of her cousin, and 
ran a good way after him; but after he was gone out of sight she was better pleased 
with his absence than his company, and got safe to London.
	When attempting to rob a couple of gentlemen in Devonshire Horner was 
taken, and committed to Southgate, in Exeter; and receiving sentence of death he was 
hanged, on Friday, 3rd of April, 1719, aged thirty-two years.


THOMAS BUTLER, Esq. 
Highwayman, executed at Tyburn, on the 8th Of February 1720.

	IDLENESS, the step-mother of dissipation, hath driven many gentlemen by 
education, to commit depredations on the public. This observation is fully verified in 
the life of Mr. Butler. He was a native of Ireland, his father being, an officer in the 
army of king James the II; but king William having defeated that prince at the battle 
of the Boyne, young Butler and his father went with James to France. When the 
rebellion broke out in Scotland the young gentleman was employed as a spy in the 
family of the duke of Ormond, for which he was allowed 20l. a year; but he hereby 
lost the favour of his friends and relations, who espoused a different interest. From 
Paris he went to Holland, where he soon spent most of the money in his possession, 
and then embarked for England.
	On his arrival in this country, being idle and extravagant, he commenced 
highwayman, and went out frequently in company with a man whom he called Jack, 
and who occasionally acted as his servant; and they jointly committed a great number 
of robberies near London, particularly in Kent and Essex.
	When they were in London; and sometimes in a country town, they had the 
genteelest lodging, and then Jack wore a livery, while the 'squire was dressed in a 
most elegant manner, and had all the appearance of a man of fortune.
	By this style of living they continued their depredations on the highway for 
many years; but Butler being at length apprehended, was brought to his trial at the Old 
Bailey, in January, 1720, when he was indicted for robbing Sir Justinian Isham and 
another gentleman on the highway, of a gold watch, a silk night-gown, six Holland 
shirts, and other valuable articles; and was convicted on the clearest evidence.
	The circumstance that led to his detection was, that offering some of the 
effects for sale to a jeweller, he refused to purchase them unless he knew Butler's 
place of residence, which the latter readily told him; and, when his lodgings were 
searched, Sir Justinian's gown was found, and was produced in court. Butler's 
companion, or servant, was in Ireland, at the time of his detection, by which he 
escaped the fate he deserved.
	While Mr. Butler lay under sentence of death, he behaved in a very penitent 
manner. Being a Roman Catholic, he received the sacrament from a priest of his own 
persuasion. It had been reported that he had eight wives; but this he solemnly denied; 
declaring that he was legally married to only one woman.
	This malefactor was executed at Tyburn, on the 8th of February, 1720, at the 
age of forty-two years.


BARBARA SPENCER 
Executed at Tyburn on the 5th of July, 1721, for Coining. She was probably 
the first Woman to suffer the Death Penalty for what was regarded as 
Treason

	BARBARA SPENCER was born in the parish of St Giles without Cripplegate, 
and when young proved to be of a violent temper. At length her mother, finding her 
quite unmanageable at home, put her apprentice to a mantua-maker, who, having 
known her from a child, treated her with great kindness.
	Barbara had served about two years, when on a dispute with her mistress she 
went home to her mother, with whom she had not long resided before she insisted on 
having a maid kept, to which the old woman consented, A quarrel soon happening 
between Barbara and the maid, the mother interposed; on which the daughter left her 
for a time, but soon returned again.
	Not long after this it happened that some malefactors were to be executed at 
Tyburn, and Barbara insisted on going to see the execution. This was prudently 
opposed by her mother, who, struggling to keep her at home, struck her; but the 
daughter, getting out of the house, went to a female acquaintance, who accompanied 
her to Tyburn, and thence to a house near St Giles's Pound, where Barbara made a 
vow that she would never again return to her mother. In this fatal resolution she was 
encouraged by the company present, who persuaded her to believe that she might live 
in an easy manner if she would but follow their way of life. To this she readily agreed; 
and as they were coiners, they employed her in uttering counterfeit money, for which 
she was detected, tried, fined and imprisoned.
	Not taking warning by what had happened, she returned to her old 
connections, commenced coiner herself, and was at length convicted of the crime for 
which she suffered. While under sentence of death she behaved in the most indecent 
and turbulent manner; nor could she be convinced that she had been guilty of any 
crime in making a few shillings. She was for some time very impatient under the idea 
of her approaching dissolution, and was particularly shocked at the thought of being 
burned; but at the place of execution she seemed willing to exercise herself in 
devotion, but was much interrupted by the mob throwing stones and dirt at her.
	She was strangled and burned, and was probably the first woman to suffer this 
punishment for coining, which was then regarded as a treason.
	The unhappy fate of this woman seems to have been occasioned by the 
violence of her temper, and a want of duty to her mother. Hence let all young people 
learn to keep their passions in subjection, and to remember the injunction in the fifth 
commandment; 'Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the 
land which the Lord thy God giveth thee:' for surely no crime is more likely to lead to 
destruction than that of disobedience to parents. It is the inlet to every other vice, and 
the source of a thousand calamities.
Let children that would fear the Lord 
Hear what their teachers say; 
'With rev'rence meet their parents word,  
And with delight obey.
For those who worship God, and give 
Their parents honour due, 
Here on this earth they long shall live, 
And live hereafter too.


MATTHEW CLARKE 
Executed for murder, 28th July, 1721

  
Clarke cutting the servant girl's throat while kissing her

	THIS offender was the son of poor persons at St. Albans, and brought up as a 
plough-boy; but, being too idle to follow his business, be sauntered about the country, 
and committed frequent robberies, spending among women the money he obtained in 
this illegal manner.
	Clarke had art enough to engage the affections of a number of young women, 
to some of whom he promised marriage; and he seems to have intended to have kept 
his word with one of them, and went with her to London to tie the nuptial knot; but, 
going into a goldsmith's shop to buy the ring, he said he had forgot to supply himself 
with money, but would go into the country and fetch it.
	The young woman staid in town while he went to Wilsden Green, with a view 
to commit a robbery, that he might replenish his pocket. As it was now the season of 
hay-making, he met a man, who, wondering that he should be idle, gave him 
employment. Besides the business of farming, his employer kept a public house, and 
had a servant maid, whom Clarke had formerly courted.
	The villain, leaving his fellow-labourers in the field, went to the house, and, 
finding only the girl at home, conversed with her some time; but, having determined 
to rob his employer, he thought he could not do it securely without murdering her; 
and, while she was gone to draw him some beer, he pulled out his knife for this horrid 
purpose; and, when she entered the room, he got up to kiss her, thinking to have then 
perpetrated the deed, but his conscience prevented him: on this he sat down, and 
talked with her some time longer; when he got up, and, again kissing her, cut her 
throat in the same instant.
	Hereupon she fell down, and attempted to crawl to the door, while the blood 
streamed from her throat; on which the villain cut her neck to the bone, and, robbing 
the house of a small sum, ran off towards London, under all the agonizing tortures of 
a wounded conscience.
	Tyburn being in his way to town, he was so terrified at the sight of the 
gallows, that he went back a considerable distance, till, meeting a waggon, he offered 
his service in driving, thinking that his being in employment might prevent his being 
suspected in case of a pursuit. But he had not gone far before some persons rode up, 
and asked him if he had seen a man who might be suspected of a murder. He seemed 
so terrified by the question that the parties could not help noticing his agitation, and, 
on a close inspection, they found some congealed blood on his clothes, to account for 
which be said be had quarrelled and fought with a soldier on the road.
	Being taken into custody, be soon acknowledged his crime, and, being carried 
before a magistrate, he was committed to Newgate; and, when brought to trial, he 
pleaded guilty: in consequence of which he was executed at Tyburn on the 28th of 
July, 1721, and then hung in chains near the spot where be committed the murder.
	There is something dreadfully enormous in the crime for which this man 
suffered. When under sentence of death he was one of the most miserable wretches 
that ever endured a situation so calamitous. Nor is this to be wondered at; for the 
murder he committed was one of the most unprovoked imaginable. It is probable, 
from the affection the poor girl had for him, that she would have lent him a greater 
sum than he obtained by cutting her throat.
	His terrors at the sight of the gallows should teach those who are prompted to 
iniquity to avoid all crimes that may lead to a fatal end. The wicked can never be 
happy; and it is only by a life of integrity, virtue, and piety, that we can hope for the 
blessing of God, the applause of a good conscience, and 'that peace of mind which 
passeth all understanding.'


WILLIAM SHAW 
Executed in 1721 for "Murdering" his Daughter, who, it was afterwards 
proved, committed Suicide

	WILLIAM SHAW was an upholsterer at Edinburgh in the year 1721. He had a 
daughter, Catherine Shaw, who lived with him. She encouraged the addresses of John 
Lawson, a jeweller, to whom William Shaw declared the most insuperable objections, 
alleging him to be a profligate young man, addicted to every kind of dissipation. He 
was forbidden the house; but the daughter continuing to see him clandestinely, the 
father, on the discovery, kept her strictly confined. William Shaw had for some time 
pressed his daughter to receive the addresses of a son of Alexander Robertson, a 
friend and neighbour; and one evening, he being very urgent with her thereon, she 
peremptorily refused, declaring she preferred death to being young Robertson's wife.
	The father grew enraged and the daughter more positive; so that the most 
passionate expressions arose on both sides, and the words "barbarity, cruelty and 
death" were frequently pronounced by the daughter. At length he left her, locking the 
door after him. The greatest part of the buildings at Edinburgh were formed on the 
plan of the chambers in our inns of court; so that many families inhabited rooms on 
the same floor, having all one common staircase. William Shaw dwelt in one of these, 
and only a single partition divided his apartment from that of James Morrison, a 
watch-case maker. This man had indistinctly overheard the conversation and quarrel 
between Catherine Shaw and her father, but was particularly struck with the repetition 
of the above words, she having pronounced them loudly and emphatically. For some 
little time after the father had gone out all was silent, but presently Morrison heard 
several groans from the daughter. Alarmed, he ran to some of his neighbours under 
the same roof. These, entering Morrison's room and listening attentively, not only 
heard the groans, but distinctly heard Catherine Shaw two or three times faintly 
exclaim: "Cruel father, thou art the cause of my death!" Struck with this, they flew to 
the door of Shaw's apartment; they knocked — no answer was given. The knocking 
was still repeated — still no answer. Suspicions had before arisen against the father; 
they were now confirmed. A constable was procured, an entrance forced. Catherine 
was found weltering in her blood, and the fatal knife by her side. She was alive, but 
speechless; but on questioning her as to owing her death to her father she was just 
able to make a motion with her head, apparently in the affirmative, and expired.
	Just at the critical moment William Shaw returned and entered the room. All 
eyes were on him. He saw his neighbours and a constable in his apartment, and 
seemed much disordered thereat; but at the sight of his daughter he turned pale, 
trembled, and was ready to sink. The first surprise, and the succeeding horror, left 
little doubt of his guilt in the breasts of the beholders; and even that little was done 
away with on the constable discovering that the shirt of William Shaw was bloody. He 
was instantly hurried before a magistrate, and, upon the depositions of all the parties, 
committed to prison on suspicion. He was shortly after brought to trial, when, in his 
defence, he acknowledged having confined his daughter to prevent her intercourse 
with Lawson; that he had frequently insisted on her marrying Robertson; and that he 
had quarrelled with her on the subject the evening she was found murdered, as the 
witness Morrison had deposed: but he averred that he left his daughter unharmed and 
untouched, and that the blood found upon his shirt was there in consequence of his 
having bled himself some days before and the bandage becoming untied. These 
assertions did not weigh with the jury, when opposed to the strong circumstantial 
evidence of the daughter's expressions of "barbarity, cruelty, death," and of "Cruel 
father, thou art the cause of my death" — together with that apparently affirmative 
motion with her head, and of the blood so seemingly providentially discovered on the 
father's shirt. On these several concurring circumstances was William Shaw found 
guilty and executed, and was hanged in chains, at Leith Walk, in November, 1721. In 
August, 1722, as a man who had become the possessor of the late William Shaw's 
apartment was rummaging by chance in the chamber where Catherine Shaw died, he 
accidentally perceived a paper which had fallen into a cavity on one side of the 
chimney. It was folded as a letter, which, on being opened, contained the following:-
BARBAROUS FATHER, — 
Your cruelty in having put it out of my power ever to join my fate to that of the only 
man I could love, and tyrannically insisting upon my marrying one whom I always 
hated, has made me form a resolution to put an end to an existence which is become a 
burthen to me. I doubt not I shall find mercy in another world; for sure no benevolent 
being can require that I should any longer live in torment to myself in this! My death I 
lay to your charge: when you read this, consider yourself as the inhuman wretch that 
plunged the murderous knife into the bosom of the unhappy 
CATHERINE SHAW.
	This letter being shown, the handwriting was recognised and avowed to be 
Catherine Shaw's by many of her relations and friends. The magistracy of Edinburgh, 
on a scrutiny, being convinced of its authenticity, they ordered the body of William 
Shaw to be taken from the gibbet and given to his family for interment; and as the 
only reparation to his memory and the honour of his surviving relations they caused a 
pair of colours to be waved over his grave in token of his innocence.


JOHN MEFF 
Executed for Returning from Transportation

	THIS offender had been taken into custody for committing a robbery near 
London; but, as it happened at a time within the limits of an Act of Grace passed in 
the reign of King George the First, it was not thought necessary to indict him, and he 
would have been discharged without further ceremony; but it appeared that he had 
been transported for another crime, and returned before the expiration of his time: 
wherefore he was indicted for this offence, on an act then lately made, "For the 
effectual Transportation of Felons"; and his person being identified, he was found 
guilty, received sentence of death, and was executed at Tyburn on the 11th of 
September, 1721.
	The following is an account which he wrote between his condemnation and 
the day of his execution:
	"I was born in London of French parents, who fled hither for protection when 
the French Protestants were driven out of France by Louis XIV.
	"I was put apprentice to a weaver: my father, having continued about twelve 
years in England, went with the rest of his family to Holland. I served my time 
faithfully, and with the approbation of my master. Soon after I came to work for 
myself I married; but my business not being sufficient to maintain myself, my wife, 
and children, I was willing to try what I could at thieving.
	"I followed this practice until I was apprehended, tried, and condemned, for 
housebreaking; but, as I was going to the place of execution, the hangman was 
arrested, and I was brought back to Newgate. It was thought this was my contrivance, 
to put a stop to public justice; but I was so far from being any ways concerned in it, 
that I knew nothing of it till it was done. This might have been a happy turn for me, if 
I had made a right use of it: for my sentence of death was changed for that of 
transportation. And indeed I took up a solemn resolution to lead an honest and regular 
course of life, and to resist all the persuasions of my comrades to the contrary. But 
this resolution continued but a short time after the fear of death vanished.
	"I believe, however, that if I had been safe landed in America, my ruin might 
have been prevented: but the ship which carried me and the other convicts was taken 
by the pirates. They would have persuaded me and some others to sign a paper, in 
order to become pirates; but we refusing, they put me and eight more ashore on a 
desert uninhabited island, where we must have perished with hunger, if by good 
fortune an Indian canoe had not arrived there. We waited till the Indians had gone up 
the island, and then, getting into the vessel, we sailed from one small island to 
another, till we reached the coast of America.
	"Not choosing to settle in any of the plantations there, but preferring the life of 
a sailor, I shipped myself on board a vessel that carried merchandise from Virginia 
and South Carolina to Barbadoes, Jamaica, and other of his majesty's islands. And 
thus I lived a considerable time; but at last, being over-desirous to see how my wife 
and children fared in England, I was resolved to return at all adventures.
	"Upon my arrival here, I quickly fell into my former wicked practices, and it 
was not long before I was committed to Newgate on suspicion of robbing a person 
near London; but, by the assistance of a certain bricklayer, I broke out of prison and 
went to Hatfield, where I lay concealed for some time; but was at last discovered, and 
taken again by the same bricklayer who had procured my escape. Some evil genius 
attended me. I was certainly infatuated, or I had never continued in a place where I 
was so likely to be discovered.
	"My father is now a gardener at Amsterdam. 'Tis an addition to my misfortune 
that I cannot see him and my mother before I die; but, I hope, when he hears of my 
unhappy end, he will keep my children by my first wife from starving. My present 
wife is able, by her industry, to bring up her own offspring; for she has been an honest 
careful woman, during the nine months I have been married to her, and has often 
pressed me to go over to Ireland, and lead a regular and sober life. It had been well for 
me if I had taken her advice.
	"I have had enough of this restless and tumultuous world, and hope I am now 
going to a better. I am very easy and resigned to the will of Providence, not doubting 
but I have made my Peace with Heaven. I thank God that I have not been molested by 
my fellow-prisoners with the least cursing or swearing in the condemned hole; but 
have had an opportunity of employing every moment of my time in preparing for a 
future state."
	The case of this malefactor is very extraordinary, and perhaps may never be 
equalled by that of any other. The narrow escape he had experienced from the gallows 
ought to have taught him more wisdom than to have returned from transportation 
before the expiration of his time; but one would think there is a fatality attending the 
conduct of some men, who seem resolutely bent on their own destruction.
	One truth, however, is certain. It is easy, by a steady adherence to the rules of 
virtue, to shun that ignominious fate which is the consequence of a breach of the laws 
of God and our country.


ARTHUR GRAY 
Convicted of Burglary

	IN December, 1721, the prisoner was indicted for breaking and entering the 
dwelling house of George Baillie, Esq., in the parish of St. James, Westminster, with 
intent to ravish Grizel, the wife of Alexander Murray.
	Mrs. Murray was the sister of Mrs. Baillie, and lived in the house of her 
brother-in-law, in the absence of her husband, who was a military officer.
	It was sworn on the trial that, about four in the morning of the 14th of October, 
the prisoner entered Mrs. Murray's room, with a drawn sword in one hand and a pistol 
in the other, and threatened to kill her if she made any noise; that she asked him the 
meaning of such a procedure, to which he replied, "Madam, I mean to ravish you, for 
I have entertained a violent passion for you a long time; but, as there is so great a 
difference between your fortune and mine, I despair of enjoying my wishes by any 
means but force."
	On this the lady remonstrated with him; but, persisting in his intention, he laid 
the sword on the bolster, and attempted to pull off the bed-clothes; but Mrs. Murray 
pushed him against the wall, wrenched the pistol out of his hand, and rang the bell; on 
which the prisoner quitted the room; but she followed him to the door, and called out 
murder, by which the family were alarmed.
	The servants now ran to the assistance of the lady, but Gray had got to his own 
room, and thrown himself on the bed with his clothes on; and, having been out in 
company the preceding evening, it does not appear that he was undressed during the 
night.
	Being apprehended, and taken before a magistrate, he confessed that he 
entered the room with an intent to ravish the lady; but this he afterwards steadily 
denied; and various were the opinions of the public respecting his guilt or innocence.
	The prisoner, in his defence, said that, thinking he heard a noise in Mrs. 
Murray's room, he went down stairs and fetched a sword and pistol; and, as the door 
stood partly open, he went in, and, laying down his arms to look behind the bed, Mrs. 
Murray rang the bell, and alarmed the family.
	The jury, having considered the evidence, brought him in guilty, and he 
received sentence of death; but, Mrs. Murray's relations interceding in his behalf, he 
was afterwards pardoned on condition of transportation.
	This affair made a great noise at the time it happened, and many persons did 
not scruple to insinuate that Gray had been admitted to favours which might warrant 
his entering the lady's chamber at any hour.
	The single reflection arising from this story is, that illicit pleasure leads to 
disgrace: there is no doubt but there was some foundation for this prosecution. If Gray 
had been previously too intimate with the lady, she was punished by the exposure of a 
public trial; if otherwise, he was punished for the attempt, in the ignominy of a public 
conviction. Hence let it be learnt that chastity is a virtue which cannot be prized at too 
high a rate.


NATHANIEL HAWES 
Highwayman, who underwent Torture for the Sake of his Honour. Executed 
at Tyburn, 21st of December, 1721.

	NATHANIEL HAWES was a native of Norfolk, in which county he was born 
in the year 1701. His father was a grazier in ample circumstances, but dying while the 
son was an infant, a relation in Hertfordshire took care of his education. At a proper 
age he was apprenticed to an upholsterer in London; but becoming connected with 
people of bad character, and thus acquiring an early habit of vice, he robbed his 
master when he had served only two years of his time, for which he was tried at the 
Old Bailey, and being convicted of stealing to the amount of thirty-nine shillings, was 
sentenced to seven years' transportation. This sentence, however, was not carried into 
execution, owing to the following circumstance. A man named Phillips had 
encouraged the unhappy youth in his depredations, by purchasing, at a very low rate, 
such goods as he stole from his master; but when Hawes was taken into custody he 
gave information of this affair, in consequence of which a search warrant was 
procured, and many effects belonging to Hawes's master were found in Phillips's 
possession. Hereafter application was made to the King, and a free pardon was 
granted to Hawes, whereby he was rendered a competent evidence against Phillips, 
who was tried for receiving stolen goods, and transported for fourteen years. Hawes, 
during his confinement in Newgate, had made such connections as greatly contributed 
to the contamination of his morals; and soon after his release he connected himself 
with a set of bad fellows who acted under the direction of Jonathan Wild, and having 
made a particular acquaintance with one John James, they joined in the commission of 
a number of robberies. After an uncommon share of success for some days they 
quarrelled on the division of the booty, in consequence of which each acted on his 
own account. Some little time after they had thus separated, Hawes, being 
apprehensive that James would impeach him, applied to Jonathan Wild, and informed 
against his old acquaintance, on which James was taken into custody, tried, convicted 
and executed. Notwithstanding this conviction, the Court sentenced Hawes to be 
imprisoned in the New Prison, and that jail was preferred to Newgate because the 
prisoners in the latter threatened to murder Hawes for being an evidence against 
James. Here it should be observed that, by an Act — 4th and 5th of William and Mary 
— for the More Effectual Conviction of Highwaymen, the evidence of accomplices is 
allowed, but the evidence cannot claim his liberty unless two or more of his 
accomplices are convicted, but may be imprisoned during the pleasure of the Court.
	Soon after his commitment Hawes and another fellow made their escape, and 
entering into partnership committed a variety of robberies, particularly on the road 
between Hackney and Shoreditch. This connection, like the former, lasted but a short 
time. A dispute on dividing their ill-gotten gains occasioned a separation; soon after 
which Hawes went alone to Finchley Common, where, meeting with a gentleman 
riding to town, he presented a pistol to his breast and commanded him instantly to 
dismount, that he might search him for his money. The gentleman offered him four 
shillings, on which Hawes swore the most horrid oaths, and threatened instant death if 
he did not immediately submit. The gentleman quitted his horse, and in the same 
moment seized the pistol, which he snatched from the hand of the robber, and 
presenting it at him told him to expect death if he did not surrender himself. Hawes, 
who was now as terrified as he had been insolent, made no opposition; and the driver 
of a cart coming up just at that juncture he was easily made prisoner, conveyed to 
London, and committed to Newgate.
	When the sessions came on, and he was brought to the bar, he refused to plead 
to his indictment, alleging the following reason for so doing: that he would die, as he 
had lived, like a gentleman. "The people," said he, "who apprehended me, seized a 
suit of fine clothes, which I intended to have gone to the gallows in; and unless they 
are returned I will not plead, for no one shall say that I was hanged in a dirty shirt and 
ragged coat." On this he was told what would be the consequence of his contempt of 
legal authority; but this making no impression on him, sentence was pronounced that 
he should be pressed to death. Whereupon he was taken from the court, and, being 
laid on his back, sustained a load of two hundred and fifty pounds' weight about seven 
minutes; but unable any longer to bear the pain he entreated he might be conducted 
back to the court, which being complied with, he pleaded "Not guilty"; but the 
evidence against him being complete, he was convicted and sentenced to die. He was 
executed at Tyburn, on the 21st of December, 1721.


ARUNDEL COOKE, ESQ., AND JOHN WOODBURNE 
The First who suffered Death under the Coventry Act. Executed at Bury St 
Edmunds, 5th of April, 1722

	PREVIOUS to the passing of what was known as the Coventry Act it was 
customary for revengeful men to waylay another and cut and maim him, so that 
though he did not die of such wounds he might remain a cripple during the remainder 
of life, and such case was not then a capital offence. It was also a dangerous practice 
resorted to by thieves, who would often cut the sinews of men's legs, called ham-
stringing, in order to prevent their escape from being robbed.
	Sir John Coventry in the reign of Charles II. having opposed the measures of 
the Court in the House of Commons, in revenge some armed villains attacked him one 
night in Covent Garden, slit his nose and cut off his lips. Shocked by so barbarous a 
deed, the Members of both Houses of Parliment passed an Act, in a few days, by 
which it was ordained that "Unlawfully cutting out or disabling the tongue, of malice 
aforethought or by lying in wait, putting out an eye, slitting the nose or lip, or cutting 
off or disabling any limb or member of any person, with intent to maim or disfigure, 
shall be felony without benefit of clergy." By this law it is likewise enacted that 
"accessories shall likewise be deemed principals."
	Mr Cooke was born at Bury St Edmunds, in the county of Suffolk. His father 
was a man of fortune, and when he had given him a university education he sent him 
to the Temple to study the law, after which he was called to the Bar, and acted as a 
counsellor. After some time he married a young lady, the sister of Mr Crisp, who 
lived in the neighbourhood of his native place. Mr Crisp being a gentleman of large 
property, but in a bad state of health, made his will in favour of Cooke, subject only to 
a jointure for his sister's use, which was likewise to become the property of the 
counsellor in the case of the lady dying before her husband. It was not long after Mr 
Crisp had made his will before he recovered his health in some degree; but he 
continued an infirm man, though he lived a number of years. This partial recovery 
gave great uneasiness to Cooke, who, wishing to possess the estate, was anxious for 
the death of his brother-in-law, though, as he had art enough to conceal his 
sentiments, they appeared to live on tolerable terms. However he at length grew so 
impatient that he could not come into possession by the death of Mr Crisp that he 
resolved to remove him by murder, and for that purpose engaged John Woodburne, a 
labouring man, who had six children, to assist him in the execution of his diabolical 
plan; for which piece of service he promised to give him a hundred pounds. The man 
was unwilling to be concerned in this execrable business; but, reflecting on his 
poverty, the largeness of his family tempted him to comply. On this it was agreed the 
murder should be perpetrated on Christmas evening; and as Mr Crisp was to dine with 
Cooke on that day, and the churchyard lay between one house and the other, 
Woodburne was to wait, concealed behind one of the tombstones, till Cooke gave him 
the signal of attack, which was to be a loud whistle. Crisp came to his appointment, 
and dined and drank tea with his brother-in-law; but declining to stay to supper he left 
the house about nine o'clock, and was almost immediately followed into the 
churchyard by Cooke, who gave the agreed signal. Woodburne quitted his place of 
retreat, knocked down the unhappy man, and cut and maimed him in a terrible 
manner, in which he was abetted by the counsellor.
	Imagining they had dispatched him, Mr Cooke rewarded Woodburne with a 
few shillings and instantly went home; but he had not arrived more than a quarter of 
an hour before Mr Crisp knocked at the door, and entered, covered with wounds, and 
almost dead through loss of blood. He was unable to speak, but by his looks seemed 
to accuse Cooke with the intended murder, and was then put to bed and his wounds 
dressed by a surgeon. At the end of about a week he was so much mended that he was 
removed to his own house. He had no doubt but Cooke was one of the persons who 
had assaulted him, but he resolved not to speak of the affair till future circumstances 
made it necessary for him to inform a court of justice of what had happened. The 
intended assassination having greatly engaged the attention of the neighbours, 
Woodburne was apprehended on suspicion, and making a discovery of the whole 
truth, Cooke was also taken into custody. They were brought to their trials at the next 
assizes, and both convicted.
	When they were called upon to receive sentence of death Cooke desired to be 
heard; and on the Court complying with his request he urged that judgment could not 
pass on the verdict, because the Act of Parliament simply mentions an intention to 
maim or deface, whereas he was firmly resolved to have committed murder. He 
quoted several law cases in favour of the arguments he had advanced, and hoped that 
judgment might be respited till the opinion of the twelve judges could be taken on the 
cause. The Counsel for the Crown opposed the arguments of Cooke. He insisted that 
the crime came within the meaning of the law, and hoped that judgment would pass 
against the prisoners. Lord Chief Justice King, who presided on this occasion, 
declared he could not admit the force of Mr Cooke's plea, consistent with his own 
oath as a judge — "For," said he, "it would establish a principle in the law 
inconsistent with the first dictates of natural reason, as the greatest villain might, when 
convicted of a smaller offence, plead that the judgment must be arrested because he 
intended to commit a greater. In the present instance judgment cannot be arrested, as 
the intention is naturally implied when the crime is actually committed." His Lordship 
said that "Crisp was assassinated in the manner laid in the indictment: it is therefore to 
be taken for granted that the intention was to maim and deface; wherefore the Court 
will proceed to give judgment"; and accordingly sentence of death was passed on 
Cooke and his accomplice.
	A short time before the day of execution Cooke wrote to the sheriff, requesting 
that he might be hanged in the night, to prevent his being exposed to the country 
people, who were expected from all the adjacent towns and villages; and in 
consequence thereof he was hanged at four o'clock in the morning, and Woodburne 
was executed in the afternoon of the same day.


JOHN HARTLEY AND THOMAS REEVES 
Footpads, who were executed at Tyburn on the 4th of May, 1722, after One 
had, by a Ruse, petitioned the King

  
Hartley and Reeves tying the Journeyman to a Tree

	JOHN HARTLEY and Thomas Reeves were indicted at the Old Bailey for 
stopping a journeyman tailor in the fields near Harrow and robbing him of twopence 
and his clothes, and because he had no more money they stripped and beat him most 
inhumanly, and bound him to a tree.
	While he was in this wretched situation some persons who came by unbound 
him and took him to an ale-house, where he told the particulars of the robbery, 
mentioned the colour of his clothes, and described the persons of the robbers to the 
best of his power.
	These circumstances were heard by a fiddler, who, going next day into a 
public-house in Fore Street, saw the fellows offering to sell the tailor's coat. The 
fiddler immediately proposed to be the purchaser, gave earnest for it and, pretending 
he had not money enough, said he would fetch the difference; instead of which he 
brought the party robbed, and he knowing the footpads they were taken into custody. 
The evidence on their trial was so plain that the jury could not hesitate to find them 
guilty; in consequence of which they received sentence of death.
	After conviction their behaviour was unbecoming to persons in their unhappy 
circumstances. That of Reeves was particularly hardened; he would sing and swear 
while the other convicts were at prayers, yet he told the ordinary that he was certain of 
going to heaven.
	The most curious circumstance arising from the detection of these offenders 
was the singular method which Hartley took to save his life. He procured six young 
women, dressed in white, to go to St James's and present a petition on his behalf. The 
singularity of their appearance gained them admission, when they delivered their 
petition, and told the King that if he extended the Royal mercy to the offender they 
would cast lots which should be his wife; but his Majesty said that he was more 
deserving of the gallows than a wife, and accordingly refused their request. As they 
were going to execution the ordinary asked Reeves if his wife had been concerned 
with him in any robberies. "No," said he, "she is a worthy woman, whose first 
husband happening to be hanged, I married her that she might not reproach me by a 
repetition of his virtues." At the fatal tree Reeves behaved in the most hardened 
manner, affected to despise death, and said he believed he might go to heaven from 
the gallows as safely as from his bed.
	These offenders suffered at Tyburn on the 4th of May, 1722.
	We see, in the instance of these malefactors, from what a casual circumstance 
their detection arose. A man hears a description of them in a public house; the next 
day he goes accidentally into another ale-house, where he sees them offering the 
stolen goods for sale; and, by an honest deception, procures their being taken into 
custody. The poor fiddler had no interest in their detection but what arose from his 
abhorrence of vice; yet he was so regardful of what he had heard, that he became the 
immediate instrument of bringing them to justice.
	Hence let us learn to admire the inscrutable mysteries of the providence of 
God, which, as they surpass our finite comprehension, should excite our wonder and 
our gratitude. Nothing can be hid from the all-seeing eye of Heaven; and the man that 
commits a crime with the hope of concealing it does but treasure up a fund of 
uneasiness for his own mind: for, even if the crime should be concealed from the 
public, he will be perpetually harassed with the corroding stings of a guilty 
conscience, and at all times carry with him a hell in his own bosom!


JOHN HAWKINS AND JAMES SIMPSON 
Highwaymen and Mail Robbers. Executed at Tyburn on the 21st of May, 
1722

  
Hawkins & Simpson robbing the Mail

	JOHN HAWKINS was born at Staines, in Middlesex, and for some time lived 
as waiter at the Red Lion, at Brentford; but leaving this place, he then engaged as a 
gentleman's servant. Having been at length in different families, he became butler to 
Sir Dennis Drury, and was distinguished as a servant of very creditable appearance. 
His person was uncommonly graceful and he was remarkably vain of it. He used to 
frequent gaming-tables two or three nights in a week, a practice which led to that ruin 
which finally befell him.
	About this time Sir Dennis had been robbed of a considerable quantity of 
plate; and as Hawkins's mode of life was very expensive it was suspected that he was 
the thief, for which reason he was discharged, without the advantage of a good 
character. Being thus destitute of the means of subsistence, he had recourse to the 
highway, and his first expedition was to Hounslow Heath, where he took eleven 
pounds from the passengers in a coach; but such was his attachment to gaming that he 
repaired directly to London and lost it all. He continued to rob alone for some time, 
and then engaged with other highwaymen; but the same fate still attended him — he 
lost by gaming what he acquired at so much risk, and was frequently so reduced as to 
dine at an eating-house and sneak off without paying his reckoning. Several of his old 
companions having met their deserts at the gallows, he became acquainted with one 
Wilson, a youth of good education, who had been articled to a solicitor in Chancery, 
but had neglected his business through an attachment to the gaming-table. These 
associates, having committed several robberies in conjunction, were tried for one of 
them, but acquitted for want of evidence. After which Wilson went down to his 
mother, who lived at Whitby, in Yorkshire, and continued with her for about a year, 
and then, coming to London, lived with a gentleman of the law. But having lost his 
money in gaming, he renewed his acquaintance with Hawkins, who was now 
concerned with a new gang of villains, one of whom, however, being apprehended, 
impeached the rest, which soon depressed the gang, but not until some of them had 
made their exit at Tyburn; on which Hawkins was obliged to conceal himself for a 
considerable time. But at length he ventured to rob a gentleman on Finchley Common, 
and shot one of his servants too, who died on the spot. His next attack was on the Earl 
of Burlington and Lord Bruce, in Richmond Lane, from whom he took about twenty 
pounds, two gold watches and a sapphire ring. For this ring a reward of one hundred 
pounds was offered to Jonathan Wild, but Hawkins sailed to Holland with it and there 
sold it for forty pounds.
	On his return to England he rejoined his companions, of whom Wilson was 
one, and robbed Sir David Dalrymple of about three pounds, a snuff-box and a 
pocket-book, for which last Sir David offered sixty pounds' reward to Wild; but 
Hawkins's gang having no connection with that villain, who did not even know their 
persons, they sent the book by a porter to Sir David, without expense. They next 
stopped Mr Hyde, of Hackney, in his coach, and robbed him of ten pounds and his 
watch, but missed three hundred pounds which the gentleman then had in his 
possession. After this they stopped the Earl of Westmoreland's coach, in Lincoln's Inn 
Fields, and robbed him of a sum of money, though there were three footmen behind 
the carriage. The footmen called the watch, but on the robbers firing a pistol over their 
heads the guardians of the night decamped. Hawkins had now resolved to carry the 
booty obtained in several late robberies to Holland, but Jonathan Wild, having heard 
of the connection, caused some of the gang to be apprehended, on which the rest went 
into the country to hide themselves. On this occasion Hawkins and Wilson went to 
Oxford, and paying a visit to the Bodleian Library, the former wantonly defaced some 
pictures in the gallery, and one hundred pounds' reward being offered to discover the 
offender, a poor tailor, having been taken up on suspicion narrowly escaped being 
whipped, merely because he was of Whiggish principles.
	Hawkins and his friend returning to London, the latter, coming of age at that 
time, succeeded to a little estate his father had left him, which he sold for three 
hundred and fifty pounds, a small part of which he lent to his companions to buy 
horses, and soon dissipated the rest at the gaming-table. The associates now stopped 
two gentlemen in a chariot on the Hampstead Road, who both fired at once, by which 
three slugs were lodged in Hawkins's shoulder and the highwaymen got to London 
with some difficulty. On Hawkins's recovery they attempted to stop a gentleman's 
coach in Hyde Park, but the coachman driving hastily, Wilson fired, and wounding 
himself in the hand found it difficult to scale the Park wall to effect his escape. This 
circumstance occasioned some serious thoughts in his mind, in consequence of which 
he set out for his mother's house in Yorkshire, where he was kindly received, and 
fully determined never to recur to his former practices. While he was engaged in his 
mother's business, and planning schemes for domestic happiness, he was sent for to a 
public-house, where he found his old acquaintance, Hawkins, in company with one 
George Simpson, another associate, who was a native of Putney, in Surrey. They went 
to London together and formed connections with other thieves, and committed several 
robberies, for which some of the gang were executed. At length it was determined to 
rob the Bristol mail, and they set out on an expedition for that purpose.
	It appeared at the trial that the boy who carried the mail was overtaken at 
Slough by a countryman, who travelled with him to Langley Broom, where a person 
rode up to them and turned back again. When passing through Colnbrook they saw the 
same man again, with two others, who followed them at a small distance, and then 
pulled their wigs over their foreheads, and holding handkerchiefs over their mouths 
came up with them and commanded the post-boy and the countryman to come down a 
lane, when they ordered them to quit their horses; and then Hawkins, Simpson and 
Wilson tied them back to back and fastened them to a tree in a wet ditch, so that they 
were obliged to stand in the water. This being done, they took such papers as they 
liked out of the Bath and Bristol bags, and hid the rest in a hedge. They now crossed 
the Thames, and riding a little way into Surrey put up their horses at an inn in 
Bermondsey Street. Having equally divided the bank-notes, they threw the letters into 
the fire and then went to their lodgings in Green Arbour Court, in the Old Bailey. A 
few days after this, information was given at the Post Office that suspicious people 
frequented the house of Carter, the stable-keeper, at London Wall; accordingly some 
persons were sent thither to make the necessary discoveries. Wilson happened to be 
there at the time and suspected their business, and later he was apprehended and 
conducted to the Post Office. On his first examination he refused to make any 
confession, and on the following day he seemed equally determined to conceal the 
truth, till two circumstances induced him to reveal it. In the first place the Postmaster- 
General promised that he should be admitted an evidence if he would discover his 
accomplices; and one of the clerks, calling him aside, showed him a letter with out 
any name to it, of which the following is a copy: —
SIR, — I am one of those persons who robbed the mail, which I am sorry for; and to 
make amends, I will secure my two companions as soon as may be. He whose hand 
this shall appear to be will, I hope, be entitled to the reward of his pardon.
As Wilson knew this letter to be in Simpson's handwriting, he thought himself 
justified in making a full discovery, which he accordingly did, in consequence of 
which his associates were apprehended at their lodgings in the Old Bailey two days 
afterwards. At first they made an appearance of resistance and threatened to shoot the 
peace officers; but on the latter saying they were provided with arms the offenders 
yielded, and were committed to Newgate. A verdict of guilty was returned against 
both prisoners. They suffered at Tyburn, on the 21st of May, 1722, and were hanged 
in chains on Hounslow Heath.


WILLIAM BURRIDGE 
Executed at Tyburn, May 22, 1722, for Horse-stealing.

	William Burridge was born in Northamptonshire, and served his 
apprenticeship to a carpenter; but being of a wild disposition, his friends determined 
on sending him to sea; accordingly they got him rated as a midshipman, and he sailed 
to the coast of Spain; but soon quitting the naval service, he returned to England, and 
commencing highwayman, committed many robberies on the road to Hampstead, on 
Finchley Common, and in the neighbourhood of Hammersmith. When he first began 
the practice of robbing, he formed a resolution to retire when he had acquired as much 
money as would support him: but this time never arrived; for finding his success by 
no means proportioned to his expectations, he became one of the gang under Jonathan 
Wild, of infamous memory; and was for a considerable time screened from justice by 
that celebrated master of thieves.
	Burridge being confined in New Prison for a capital offence, broke out of that 
gaol; and he was repeatedly an evidence at the Old Bailey, by which means his 
associates suffered the rigour of the law. At length having offended Wild, the latter 
marked him down as one doomed to suffer at the next execution after the ensuing 
sessions at the Old Bailey; which was a common practice with Wild when he grew 
tired of his dependants, or thought they could be no longer serviceable to him. 
Alarmed by this circumstance, Burridge fled into Lincolnshire, where he stole a horse, 
and brought it to London, intending to sell it at Smithfield for present support; but the 
gentleman who lost the horse having sent a full description of it to London, Burridge 
was seen riding on it through the street, and watched to a livery-stable. Some persons 
going to take him, he produced a brace of pistols, threatening destruction to any me 
who came near him; by which he got off; but being immediately pursued, he was 
apprehended in May-Fair, and lodged in Newgate.
	On his trial, a man and a woman swore that they saw him purchase the horse; 
but as there was a material difference in their stories, the court was of opinion that 
they had been hired to swear, and the judge gave directions for their being taken into 
custody for the perjury. The jury did not hesitate to find Burridge guilty; and after 
sentence was passed, his behaviour was extremely devout and he encouraged the 
devotion of others in like unhappy circumstances. He suffered in the 34th year of his 
age; having first warned the spectators to be obedient to their parents and masters, and 
to beware of the crime of debauching young women, which had first led him from the 
path of duty, and finally terminated in his ruin.


NATHANIEL JACKSON 
Highwayman, executed at Tyburn, on the 18th of July, 1722

	NATHANIEL JACKSON was a native of Doncaster, in Yorkshire, whose 
father dying while he was very young, left a sum of money for his use in the hands of 
a relation, who apprenticed him to a silk-weaver in Norwich. He had frequent disputes 
with his master, with whom he lived three years, and then ran away. At length his 
guardian found out his retreat, and sent to inform him, that, as he was averse to 
business, his friends wished that a place might be purchased for him with the money 
left by his father. But Jackson being of an unsettled disposition, enlisted in the army, 
and was sent to Ireland.
	After a while, being disgusted with his low condition, he solicited his 
discharge, which having obtained, he procured some money of his friends, and gave 
fifteen guineas to be admitted into a troop of dragoons; but soon quarrelling with one 
of his comrades, a duel ensued, in which Jackson wounded the other in such a horrid 
manner, that he was turned out of the regiment. He then returned to England, and 
lived some time with his guardian in Yorkshire; being averse to a life of sobriety, he 
afterwards went to London, where he spent, in the most extravagant manner, the little 
money he brought with him.    Reduced to the utmost distress, he casually met John 
Murphy and Neal O'Brian, whom he had known in Ireland. After they had drank 
together, O'Brian produced a considerable sum of money, saying, "You-see how I 
live: I never want money, and if you have but courage, and dare walk with me 
towards Hampstead to-night, I'll shew you how easy it is to get it." As Jackson and 
Murphy were both of dissolute manners, and very poor, they were easily persuaded to 
be concerned in this dangerous enterprise. Between Tottenham-court-road and 
Hampstead they stopped a poor man named Dennis, from whom they took his coat, 
waistcoat, two shirts, thirteen pence in money, and some other trifling articles, and 
then bound him to a tree. No sooner were they gone, than he struggled hard, got loose, 
and meeting a person whom he knew, they pursued them to a night-house in the 
Haymarket, where Murphy and Jackson were taken into custody, but O'Brian made 
his escape. On their trial, as soon as Dennis had given his testimony, they owned they 
fact they had committed, in consequence of which they received sentence of death; 
but Murphy obtained a reprieve. Jackson's brother exerted all his influence to save his 
life; but his endeavours proving ineffectual, he sent him a letter to inform him of it, 
which was written in such an affecting manner as to overwhelm his mind with the 
most poignant affliction. While under sentence of death, Jackson behaved in the most 
penitent manner; confessed the sins of his past life with the deepest signs of 
contrition; was earnest in his devotions, and made every preparation for his 
approaching end. He was executed at Tyburn, on the 18th of July, 1722, having 
suffered for the first robbery he ever committed.


THOMAS BUTLOGE 
Robber, hanged at Tyburn, for basely betraying his trust, in robbing his 
master, on the 18th of July, 1722

	THOMAS BUTLOGE was a native of Ireland, where he received a good 
education, and was then apprenticed to a vintner in Dublin; but the house in which he 
lived not being of the most reputable kind, he became witness to such scenes as had a 
natural tendency to debauch his morals.
	Butloge's master having got considerably in debt, came to England, and 
resided some time in Chester, whither the apprentice was frequently sent with such 
remittances as the wife could spare.
	At length Butloge quitted his service, and came to England, with a view to 
settle there: but being unsuccessful in his endeavours to procure an establishment, he 
returned to Dublin, where he engaged in the service of a shopkeeper, whose daughter 
he soon afterwards married.
	He had now a fair prospect of success before him, as his wife's father proposed 
to have resigned business in his favour; but being of an unsettled disposition, and 
having conceived an idea of making his fortune in England, he could not bring his 
mind to think of the regular pursuit of trade.
	Unhappily for him, while he was amusing himself with the imagination of his 
future greatness, he received a letter from a relation in England. inviting him thither, 
and promising his interest to obtain him a place, on which he might live in a genteel 
manner. Butloge readily accepted this invitation, and immediately embarking for 
England, soon arrived in London.
	He now took lodgings at the court end of the town, and living in a gay style, 
soon spent all the money he had brought with him from Ireland; and his relation not 
being able to obtain the place for him which he had expected, he was reduced to the 
necessity of going to service, on which he entered into that of Mr. Langlie, a French 
gentleman.
	He had not been long in his new place, when Mr. Langlie, going to church on 
a Sunday, recollected that he had forgot to lock his bureau, in which he had deposited 
a sum of money; whereupon he went home, and found Butloge in the room where the 
money was left. When Mr. Langlie had counted his cash, the other asked him if he 
missed any thing, and the master answered, one guinea, which Butloge said he had 
found by the side of the bureau; whereupon his master gave him two shillings, in 
approbation of this instance of his honesty.
	Mr. Langlie went to Chelsea in the afternoon; and during his absence Butloge 
broke open his bureau, robbed it of all the money, and several other valuable effects, 
and then took a horse, which he had hired for a gentleman to go to Chester, and set off 
on his way to Ireland.
	When Mr. Langlie returned in the evening, he discovered the loss he had 
sustained; on which he applied to Lord Gage, who wrote to the postmaster of. Chester 
to stop the delinquent; in consequence of which he was apprehended with the stolen 
goods in his possession, and sent to London to take his trial, which happened soon 
afterwards at the Old Bailey, when he was capitally convicted.
	After he had received sentence of death, he acknowledged that he was not 
tempted by want to the commission of the crime which had brought him into such 
deplorable circumstances; but that the vanity of appearing as a gentleman had been 
one principal instigation; and he was encouraged by the consideration that Mr. 
Langlie would soon return to France, so that there would be no person to prosecute 
him. He submitted to his unhappy lot with resignation, declaring that the thoughts of 
death did not so much terrify him, as the reflection on the disgrace that he had brought 
on his family.
	He was executed at Tyburn, on the 18th of July, 1722, along. with Nathaniel 
Jackson.


MARGARET FISHER 
Sentenced to death for privately stealing, but afterwards pardoned, 
September, 1722

	THIS trial contains nothing in the case itself of import sufficient to be allotted 
a place in these volumes how ever, it presents an extraordinary specimen of the 
Scotch dialect, which those far removed from the Northern extremity of Britain will 
deem a curiosity.
	At the sessions of the Old Bailey in September, 1722, Margaret Fisher was 
tried for privately stealing thirteen guineas from the person of Daniel M'Donald, who 
gave the following evidence, with true Scotch pronunciation and gesticulation:
	'And leek yer loardship, I had just taken my wages, thirteen guineas in goud, 
and was gawn alang King Strate in Westmanster, when I mat wi' this fow quean at the 
bare, and she speird where I was gawn; I taud her hame. She said gen I wad ga wi' hur 
tull Joanny Davis's hoose, she wad gi' me drame, sir, for, in troth, she tuck me for a 
poor gawkey boss-headed chiel, and leek yer loardship. Sa she tuck had o' my haind, 
sad lad me a gat I kenna reet weel. And when we came tull Joanny Davis's hoose, she 
caud for muckle beer and braindy, and gerd me as bung as a swobe, and leek yer 
hoanour. I staid there wi' her a pratty while; and thane, sir, I put my hand in tull my 
bricks, to feel for money to pay the rackoning; but the deel a bawbie could I find, for 
it was aw tint. And when I speird about it, they glowred, and taud me, gen I wanna' 
tack myself awaw, they wad gar me ga, wi' a deel to me; and sa, sir, they dang me su' 
sair, and turned me oot at the back door, intull the strate, and I rambled aboot, and 
con' na' find the hoose agen; and the watchmen met wi' me, and carried me untill the 
roond hoose, And there I taud 'em hoo I bad been roabed. The neist moarning I gaed 
and food oot Joanny Davis's boose, but she was ran awaw, and the prasoner too. But 
at neet, about saven a cloke, I mat wi' this impudent betch at the bare, and tuck her up. 
I ken well enugh that she must ha' my goud, for na saul also wi' me but Toanny Davis, 
wha brote what we cawd for. Let her denee it an she can. Somebody (but I kenna' 
what it was) offered me sax guineas in my haind to make the matter up, but I wanna 
tack it.'
	In her defence the prisoner alleged that, meeting with a coachman and the 
prosecutor, the former asked her to drink; on which they went to the house of Mrs. 
Davis; but that she sat on the opposite side of the room that the prosecutor did, and 
had not robbed him; and that nothing was found upon her when she was searched. The 
jury not believing her allegations, and the prisoner having no person to appear in 
behalf of her character, she was found guilty, and received sentence of death. Having, 
however, pleaded pregnancy, which was confirmed by a jury of matrons, she was 
afterwards pardoned.
	The remark to be made on this ease arises from the folly of those men who 
will suffer themselves to be robbed by the women of the town. Nothing is more 
common than for countrymen to be picked up by these abandoned creatures, who 
entice them to drink, and then strip them of their whole property. One would imagine 
that the repeated accounts of these transactions given in the newspapers might be 
sufficient to guard all men against the artifices of these wretches: but experience 
proves the contrary. It may, therefore, be proper to caution our readers from a higher 
authority than that of the newspapers:
	'My son, attend unto my wisdom; and bow thine ear to my understanding:— 
that thou mayest regard discretion, and that thy lips may keep knowledge:— for the 
lips of a strange woman drop as a honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother than oil:— 
but her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword: her feet go down to 
death; her steps take hold on hell.' — Proverbs.


MATTHIAS BRINSDEN 
Executed for killing his wife.

  
Brinsden stabbing his wife

	THIS offender served his time to a cloth-drawer, in Blackfriars, named Beech, 
who, dying, was succeeded by Mr. Byfleld, who left his business to Brinsden, who 
married Byfield's widow; but how long she lived with him is uncertain.
	After the death of this wife, he married a second, by whom he had ten 
children, some of the elder of whom were brought up to work at his business. At 
length he was seized with a fever so violent that it distracted him, so that he was tied 
down to his bed. This misfortune occasioned such a decay in his trade, that on his 
recovery he carried newspapers, and did any other business he could, to support his 
family.
	Going home about nine o'clock one evening, his wife, who was sitting on a 
bed, suckling a young child, asked him what he should have for supper. To which he 
answered, "Bread and cheese; can't you eat that as well as the children?" She replied, 
"No, I want a bit of meat." "But (said he) I have no money to buy you any." In answer 
to which she said, "You know I have had but little to-day;" and, some farther words 
arising between them, he stabbed her under her left breast with a knife.
	The deed was no sooner perpetrated than one of the daughters snatched the 
infant from the mother's breast, and another cried out, "O Lord! father, you have 
killed my mother." The prisoner now sent for some basilicon and sugar, which he 
applied to the wound, and then made his escape.
	A surgeon, being sent for, found that the wound was mortal, and the poor 
woman died soon after he came, and within half an hour of the time the wound was 
given.
	In the interim the murderer had retreated to the house of Mr. King, a barber, at 
Shadwell; whence, on the following day, he sent a letter to one of his daughters, and 
another to a woman of his acquaintance; and in consequence of these letters he was 
discovered, taken into custody, carried before a magistrate, and committed to take his 
trial for the murder.
	When on trial, he urged, in his defence, that his wife was in some degree 
intoxicated, that she wanted to go out and drink with her companions, and that, while 
he endeavoured to hinder her, she threw herself against the knife, and received an 
accidental wound.
	However, the evidence against him was so clear, that his allegations had no 
weight, and he received sentence of death. After conviction he became serious and 
resigned; and being visited by one of his daughters, who had given evidence against 
him, he took her in his arms, and said, "God forgive me, I have robbed you of your 
mother: be a good child, and rather die than steal: never be in a passion; but curb your 
anger, and honour your mistress: she will be as a father and mother to you. Farewell, 
my dear child; pray for your father, and think of him as favourably as you can."
	On his way to the place of execution, the daughter above mentioned was 
permitted to go into the cart, to take her last farewell of him, — a scene that was 
greatly affecting to the spectators.
	As some reports very unfavourable to this malefactor had been propagated 
during his confinement, he desired the Ordinary of Newgate to read the following 
speech just before he was launched into eternity.
	'I was born of kind parents, who gave me learning: I went apprentice to a fine-
drawer. I had often jars, which might increase a natural waspishness in my temper. I 
fell in love with Hannah, my last wife, and after much difficulty won her, she having 
five suitors courting her at the same time. We had ten children (half of them dead), 
and I believe we loved each other dearly; but often quarrelled and fought.
	'Pray, good people, mind, I had no malice against her, nor thought to kill her 
two minutes before the deed; but I designed only to make her obey me thoroughly, 
which the Scripture says all wives should do. This I thought I had done when I cut her 
skull on Monday, but she was the same again by Tuesday.
	'Good people, I request you to observe, that the world has spitefully given out, 
that I carnally and incestuously lay with my eldest daughter. I here solemnly declare, 
as I am entering into the presence of God, I never knew whether she was a man or a 
woman since she was a babe. I have often taken her in my arms, often kissed her, 
sometimes given her a cake or a pie, when she did any particular service beyond what 
came to her share; but never lay with her, or carnally knew her, much less had a child 
by her. But when a man is in calamities, and is hated like me, the women will make 
surmises be certainties.
	'Good Christians, pray for me! I deserve death: I am willing to die; for, though 
my sins are great, God's mercies are greater.'
	He was executed at Tyburn, on the 24th of September, 1722.
	If any credit is to be given to Brinsden's last solemn declaration, his wife, as 
well as himself, seems to have been of an unhappy disposition, since they could not 
refrain from quarrelling, though they had a sincere regard for each other. We fear this 
is but too commonly the case in the married state; but it is a lamentable consideration 
that those who have engaged to be the mutual comfort and support of each other, 
through life, should render the rugged path still more difficult by their mutual 
contentions and animosities.
	It is the part of a husband to protect his wife from every injury and insult; to be 
at once a father and a guardian to her; and, so far from ill-treating her himself, he 
ought to be particularly watchful that she be not ill used by others: the tenderer sex 
have a natural claim to the protection of the more robust. Indeed it would appear that 
one reason for Providence bestowing superior strength on the man, was for the 
defence and protection of the woman.
	On the other hand women should be grateful for this protection; and, in the 
emphatical words of St. Paul, wives should learn to be 'obedient to their husbands in 
all things.'
Such duty as the subject owes the prince, 
Ev'n such a woman oweth to her husband: 
And when she's froward, peevish, sullen, sour, 
What is she but a foul contending rebel, 
And graceless traitor to her loving lord? 
	— SHAKESPEARE
	It is a very unfortunate circumstance when persons of opposite sentiments 
happen to be united in wedlock: but, even in this case, people of sense and humanity 
will learn to bear with the failings of each other, considering that much allowance is 
to be made for their own faults. They will endeavour to make the lot which has 
befallen them more supportable than it otherwise would be; and, in time, by the 
constant wish to please, they may even conciliate the affections of each other, and 
mutual happiness may arise where it is least expected.
	In general, however, a coincidence of temper and a purity of manners, added 
to a sacred regard to religious duties, are the greatest security for happiness in the 
married state. Beautiful are the lines of the poet:
Two kindest souls alone should meet, 
'Tis friendship makes their bondage sweet, 
And feeds their mutual loves: 
Bright Venus, on her rolling throne, 
Is drawn by gentlest birds alone, 
And Cupids yoke the doves.


ROBERT WILKINSON, JAMES LINCOLN, AND 
THOMAS MILKSOP 
Murderers, executed at Tyburn, Sept. 24, 1722.
	THESE offenders were tried for a murder, which arose from the following 
circumstance:
	Having agreed to commit a robbery together, they stopped a gentleman's coach 
on the road to Kensington, robbed him of a sum of money, and ran off. Soon 
afterwards meeting a Chelsea pensioner, who had a gun in his hand, they ordered him 
to deliver it; but the man refusing to do it, Wilkinson stabbed him repeatedly through 
the back with the hanger; and when they saw the man was dead, they hastily 
decamped, committed some robberies on coaches on the road, and then went to 
London.
	On the following day they were apprehended, and committed to prison; and 
being soon afterwards brought to their trial at the Old Bailey, they were convicted, 
and received sentence of death.
	It will be now proper to give such an account of these offenders as we have 
been able to collect. Robert Wilkinson was the son of poor parents in St. Giles's, and, 
having missed the advantages of education, became an associate of coachmen, 
carmen, and others the lowest of the people. At length he grew to be a dexterous 
boxer, and frequented Hockley-in-the-Hole, and other blackguard places in the 
neighbourhood of London. After this he commenced footpad, and committed a great 
variety of robberies, attended with many circumstances of cruelty. Frequently did he 
knock men down with bludgeons; and when he had robbed women, it was a common 
practice with him to strip them naked, bind them to trees, and leave them in that 
calamitous situation.
	He continued this way of life alone for some years, and then connected 
himself with the other villains whose names are mentioned in this narrative.
	James Lincoln was likewise born of mean parents, nor was any more care 
taken of his education than of Wilkinson's. For some time he served the hackney 
coachmen and carmen, and afterwards committed an immense number of footpad 
robberies on the roads near London; and so frequent were his depredations of this 
kind, that honest men were afraid to pass alone about their lawful business.
	He had been so successful in his adventures, and had so often escaped 
detection, that he grew so hardened, as to watch four nights at the end of Queen-street, 
Lincoln's-inn-fields, to rob the Duke of Newcastle of his george, though he knew that 
his grace had always a number of servants in his train.
	Being disappointed of this booty, he went on foot to Hyde-park, where he 
robbed a gentleman in his carriage, and eluded all pursuit. The money he acquired by 
his robberies was spent in the most extravagant manner; and, at length, he became 
acquainted with the other subjects of this narrative, and was concerned in the crime 
which ended in their mutual ruin.
	Thomas Milksop was a native of London, and was bound apprentice to a 
vintner, in which station he became familiar to some scenes of irregularity that had a 
natural tendency to corrupt his morals. When the term of his apprenticeship was 
expired, he attached himself to some abandoned women, and got connected with an 
infamous gang of housebreakers and other thieves, who committed numberless 
depredations on the public.
	Milksop having, by one of his night-robberies, acquired a considerable sum of 
money, bought a horse, and rode out in the character of a highwayman; but not 
meeting any success in this way, he returned to his former practices, and then engaged 
with a gang, of which Wilkinson and Lincoln were two, and was concerned in a great 
number of other facts, besides that which brought him to a fatal end.
	The behaviour of these malefactors under sentence of death was rather 
hardened. They had been guilty of a great number of offences, for which they did not 
appear to have a proper concern. Such was the conduct of Wilkinson, that the 
Ordinary of Newgate refused to administer the sacrament to him; on which he said, if 
he was not allowed to go to heaven with others, he would find the way alone. Lincoln 
professed himself a Roman Catholic; and Milksop, among his other offences, 
particularly lamented the committing a rape on a poor woman whom he robbed near 
Caen-wood.


WILLIAM SPIGGOT AND THOMAS PHILLIPS 
Who suffered the Torture for refusing to plead. Executed at Tyburn, 23rd of 
February, 1723, for Robbery

  
The Punishment for Refusing to Plead

	WILLIAM SPIGGOT and Thomas Phillips were indicted at the Old Bailey for 
committing several robberies on the highway, but they refused to plead unless the 
effects taken from them when they were apprehended were returned; but this being 
directly contrary to an Act — the 4th and 5th of King William and Queen Mary —- 
entitled "An Act for Encouraging the Apprehending of Highwaymen," the Court 
informed them that their demand could not be complied with.
	Still, however, they refused to plead, and no arguments could convince them 
of the absurdity of such an obstinate procedure; on which the Court ordered that the 
judgment ordained by law in such cases should be read, which is to the following 
purpose:--
	"That the prisoner should be sent to the prison from whence he came, and put 
into a mean room, stopped from the light, and shall there be laid on the bare ground, 
without any litter, straw, or other covering, or without any garment about him, except 
something to hide his privy members. He shall lie upon his back; his head shall be 
covered and his feet shall be bare. One of his arms shall be drawn with a cord to one 
side of the room, and the other arm to the other side, and his legs shall be served in the 
like manner. Then there shall be laid upon his body as much iron or stone as he can 
bear, and more. And the first day after he shall have three morsels of barley bread, 
without any drink; and the second day he shall be allowed to drink as much as he can 
at three times of the water that is next the prison- door, except running water, without 
any bread; and this shall be his diet till he dies; and he against whom this judgment 
shall be given forfeits his goods to the King." 
[This Act becoming barbarous to Englishmen, in 1772 it was determined that persons 
refusing to plead should be deemed guilty, as if convicted by a jury: an alteration that 
does honour to modern times]
	The reading of this sentence producing no effect, they were ordered back to 
Newgate, there to be pressed to death. But when they came to the press-room Phillips 
begged to be taken back to plead — a favour that was granted, though it might have 
been denied to him — but Spiggot was put under the press, where he continued half-
an-hour with three hundred and fifty pounds' weight on his body; but on the addition 
of fifty pounds more he likewise begged to plead. In consequence thereof they were 
again brought back, and again indicted, when, the evidence being clear and positive 
against them, they were convicted, received sentence of death, and were executed, 
along with Oakey, Levey and Flood.
	William Spiggot, who was about twenty-seven years of age when he suffered, 
was a native of Hereford, but coming to London, he apprenticed himself to a 
cabinetmaker. He was a married man, and had three children living at the time of his 
fatal exit. He and Phillips were hanged for robbing Charles Sybbald on Finchley 
Common, and were convicted principally on the evidence of Joseph Linsey, a 
clergyman of abandoned character, who had been of their party. One Burroughs, a 
lunatic, who had escaped from Bedlam, was likewise concerned with them, but 
afterwards publicly spoke of the affair, which occasioned their being taken into 
custody; and when it was known that Burroughs was disordered in his mind, he was 
sent back to Bedlam.
	Thomas Phillips, aged thirty-three years, was a native of Bristol, totally 
uneducated, and being sent to sea when very young, he served under Lord Torrington, 
when he attacked and took the Spanish fleet in the Mediterranean Sea, near the 
harbour of Cadiz. [The unfortunate Admiral Byng, whose case will be given in due 
course in this work, was the son of this gallant nobleman]
	Phillips returning to England, became acquainted with Spiggot and Linsey, in 
company with whom he committed a great number of robberies on the highway. 
Phillips once boasted that he and Spiggot robbed above an hundred passengers one 
night, whom they obliged to come out of different waggons, and having bound them, 
placed them by each other on the side of the road: but this story is too absurd to be 
believed.
	While under sentence of death, Phillips behaved in the most hardened and 
abandoned manner; he paid no regard to any thing that the minister said to him, and 
swore or sung songs while the other prisoners were engaged in acts of devotion; and, 
towards the close of his life, when his companions became more serious, he grew still 
more wicked; and yet, when at the place of execution, he said, "he did not fear to die, 
for he was in no doubt of going to heaven."


RICHARD OAKEY, JOHN LEVEY, AND MATTHEW 
FLOOD 
Executed at Tyburn, on the 23rd of February, 1723, for robbery

	At this time London and its environs were infested with desperate gangs of 
villains, of which a felon of the name of Blake was the Macheath; and in which 
character he was known as Captain Blueskin. In a few pages we shall give the 
particulars of this depredator; who, on the present occasion, owed his escape alone to 
his baseness in impeaching his associates in villainy.
	Oakey, Levey, and Flood, three of this gang, were of the meanest origin, the 
first being apprenticed to a tailor, from whom he soon ran away. The other two were 
miserable, ignorant, yet most dangerous wretches, and from childhood were 
pickpockets. With such as these Oakey associated himself, and for some time 
procured a miserable subsistence by picking of pockets; and lie afterwards proceeded 
to the practice of cutting off the pockets of women. In order to do this effectually, one 
of them used to trip up the women's heels, while the other cut off the pocket: and they 
generally got out of the reach of detection before the party robbed could recover her 
legs.
	Many of Oakey's associates belonged to Jonathan Wild's gang, who caused 
several of them to be executed, when he could make no further advantage of them. 
Having thus lost many of his old acquaintance, he became connected with a woman of 
the town, who taught him the following singular method of robbery: in their 
excursions through the streets the woman went a little before Oakey, and when she 
observed a lady walking near where a coach was turning, she used to catch her in her 
arms, crying, 'Take care, Madam, you will be run over!' and in the interim Oakey was 
certain to cut off her pocket. But this way of life did not last long, for this abandoned 
woman died soon after, in consequence of some bruises she received from a man 
whom she had ill-treated; and, on her death, Oakey followed the practice of snatching 
off pockets without a partner, and became one of the most dexterous in his profession. 
Not long after this, he became acquainted with several housebreakers, who persuaded 
him to follow their course of life, as more profitable than stealing of pockets. In the 
first attempt they were successful; but the second, in which two others were 
concerned with him, was the breaking open a shop in the Borough, from whence they 
stole a quantity of calimancoes; for which offence Oakey was apprehended; on which 
he impeached his accomplices, one of whom was hanged, and the other transported, 
on Ins evidence.
	Deterred from the thoughts of housebreaking by this adventure, he returned for 
a while to his old employment, and then became acquainted wit h a man called Will 
the Sailor, when their plan of robbery was this: Will, who wore a sword, used to 
affront persons in the streets, and provoke them till they stripped to fight with him, 
and then Oakey used to decamp with their clothes.
	However, these associates in iniquity soon quarrelled, and parted; and Oakey, 
who by this time was an accomplished thief, entered into Jonathan Wild's gang, 
among whom were John Levey, Matthew Flood, and Blueskin. These men were for 
some time the terror of travellers near London. Among other atrocious robberies, they 
stopped a coach between Camberwell and London, in which were five men and a 
woman. The men said they would deliver their money, but begged they would not 
search, as the lady was with child. Blueskin, holding a hat, received the money the 
passengers put into it, which appeared to be a considerable sum, but, on examination, 
it was found to be chiefly halfpence. The gang suspected that Blueskin had defrauded 
them, as it was not the first time he had cheated his fellow thieves: but they were 
greatly mortified that they had neglected to search the coach, when they afterwards 
learned there were three hundred pounds in it.
	Some time after this Oakey, Levey, Flood, and Blueskin stopped Colonel 
Cope and Mr Young, in a carriage, on their return from Hampstead, and robbed them 
of their watches, rings, and money. Information of this robbery was sent to Jonathan 
Wild, who caused the parties to be apprehended; and Blueskin being admitted an 
evidence, they were tried, convicted, sentenced, and ordered for execution. After 
conviction, their behaviour was exceedingly proper for persons in their calamitous 
situation. Oakey said that what gave him more concern than all his other offences 
was, the burning a will that he found with some money and rings in a pocket which he 
had cut from a lady's side; a circumstance which proved highly detrimental to the 
owner.


JACOB SAUNDERS 
Who murdered a Farmer at Caversham, and was arrested at Church. 
Executed in March, 1723

	THIS inhuman wretch was born at Reading, in Berks. His father was a wool-
comber, and had the character of an honest man, but was blamed for not restraining 
him enough in his youth, for he discovered his evil inclinations as soon as he was 
capable of action, by pilfering and cheating his companions on every occasion.
	Jacob was brought up to his father's trade, but work was not at all agreeable to 
him. He chose much rather to be in the street, or at the head of any party in robbing 
orchards, hen-roosts, etc. — crimes which are commonly the forerunners of greater 
villainies. By these methods our young wool-comber came to be looked upon as a 
vagabond while he was yet a boy and under the tuition of his father. When he came to 
be about twenty years of age nothing would serve his turn but matrimony. So he 
looked out for one who might be suitable. At last he got acquainted with one 
Elizabeth Grey, with whom he soon struck up a match. The woman had no bad 
character before, but had been employed in chair-work by a great many people in the 
town. Nor was she ever charged with anything after this, but only the concealing of 
his crimes too long; which might admit of some excuse, considering that she was his 
wife. His reputation daily grew worse and worse a long time before the unhappy 
accident that brought him to his end.
	There was one Mr Blagrave, a farmer, who lived in Oxfordshire, about two 
miles from Reading (the River Thames, which divides Berkshire and Oxfordshire, 
running just by the said town), a man of plentiful fortune and a generous soul, beloved 
by all both on account of his justice and his open free deportment on every occasion. 
It was this gentleman's misfortune one Saturday, which is the market-day, to bring a 
large quantity of corn to Reading and sell it together, receiving about sixty pounds in 
payment. Saunders, by some means or other, got intelligence of this affair; and 
knowing that Mr Blagrave commonly stayed pretty late in town to drink with his 
friends, the devil put it into his head to dog him the remaining part of the day. Mr 
Blagrave, in the evening, went to the sign of the Catherine Wheel, as usual, and stayed 
there till he was a little in liquor, though not so much but he remembered his charge of 
money, and gave it to the landlady. Jacob knew nothing of this last particular, though 
he was now in the house; so that when he observed Mr Blagrave's condition he 
resolved to follow him over the fields and take the opportunity of murdering him, for 
the sake of his money.
	Mr Blagrave saw the villain come in and sit down in the public-house; upon 
which he asked him, with his usual good nature, how he did, ordering the people of 
the house at the same time to bring him liquor, and paying for what he drank.
	About eleven at night Mr Blagrave left the house, with intent to go home. He 
crossed the meadows to Caversham, which is about a mile, and went through the 
village very safely, without suspecting in the least that he was pursued. Jacob kept all 
the way within hearing of the unhappy gentleman. When he came to Caversham he 
took a large rugged club out of a baker's wood-stack, having before no weapon, 
wherewith to perpetrate the horrid deed. As soon as they had got through the village 
the villain mended his pace till he came up to Mr Blagrave's heels, whose security in 
himself still hindered him from taking any notice of a man behind him. At last, when 
they were within less than a mile of Mr Blagrave's habitation, Saunders stepped up, 
just as he was crossing a stile, struck him on the head with his faggot-stick, and laid 
him flat on the ground, still continuing to beat him in a most barbarous manner, till he 
thought him quite dead. Yet, even then, he was afraid to search his pockets till he had 
pulled off his own garters and bound him hand and foot. So unmanly and suspicious is 
the nature of cruelty. How the monster was disappointed when, upon examination, he 
found only a shilling and some halfpence instead of sixty or seventy pounds! Yet 
there was no remedy; all he could do was to abuse the poor bruised, mangled and, as 
he thought, dead body a little more; which he did by beating it again with his club and 
stamping upon it with his feet. After he had done all this he went home to bed, not 
speaking a word of the affair to his wife, who, nevertheless, observed him to be more 
uneasy than ordinary.
	Mr Blagrave, however, was not quite dead, though he lay without either sense 
or motion till he was found in the morning, by some who knew him, and carried home 
to his house, where surgeons were sent for immediately. These gave their opinion that 
it was impossible for him to recover, though he might probably live some days, as his 
constitution was very strong. It happened as they said, though all the time he 
continued he was never able to give any account of his misfortune sufficient to fix the 
murder upon any particular person. Yet as it had been observed that Jacob Saunders 
was at the ale-house while Mr Blagrave was there, and that he went out much about 
the same time with him, these circumstances, together with his bad character, created 
a suspicion of him. This grew so strong that, before Sunday in the afternoon, some 
persons in the town made it their business to find him out and observe his motions, 
when they saw him, contrary to his custom, go to church, and look more heavy and 
dull than usual, though he had always a downward countenance, almost sufficient to 
have informed people what he was, and bade them beware of him.
	While he was at church these persons went to the Mayor, and told him of their 
suspicions, together with what they had observed and heard; desiring he might be 
apprehended and examined. The Mayor accordingly granted his warrant, and the 
officers were sent with it to the church door, where they seized him as he came out, 
and committed him to the compter. In the meantime another warrant was granted to 
take up his wife, in order to their being examined separately; and she was put into 
another room of the same prison, so that they could not converse together. The Mayor 
and some of his brethren went that same evening to the compter. When Jacob was 
examined he strongly denied the fact, but seemed very much confused. His wife 
confessed what time he came home, and the disorder he was in; and when the garters 
with which Mr Blagrave's hands had been bound were shown her, she owned that she 
believed they were her husband's garters. They were both ordered to be kept for 
further examination.
	Before next day Jacob found means to get out of the prison, but went no 
farther than his father's, where he was found, hidden in an obscure garret, to which he 
had conveyed himself without his father's knowledge. Upon fresh examination he 
confessed the fact, and told where he had thrown the club with which he performed it. 
They found the stick at the place he directed them to; whereupon he was committed to 
the county jail. Understanding that when two or three are concerned in any felony or 
murder, he that impeaches the rest saves his own life, it came into his head to fix this 
bloody deed upon two other men whose characters were not sufficient to secure them 
from being suspected. Accordingly he made affidavit before a justice, who came to 
see him, against these two persons, who were thereupon seized, and sent immediately 
to prison. They lay in jail almost the whole of a very cold winter for a fact of which 
they were entirely innocent, merely through the unparalleled wickedness of Saunders, 
which prompted him to stick at nothing.
	At Reading Assizes, the March following, these men were set at liberty, and 
Jacob, within two days after, was carried to Oxford, under a strong guard, the fatal 
club being all the way borne before him. He was sentenced to be hanged in chains at 
the spot where the shocking deed was perpetrated. However, as this place was near 
the village of Caversham, the inhabitants prevailed to have it done on a heath about 
four miles higher in Oxfordshire, called Gallows-Tree Common, from a tree in it, one 
arm of which grows into another tree, and forms the likeness of a gallows. Here a 
gibbet was erected. On Monday, about the middle of March, 1723, the wretch was 
brought to his execution. He was turned off without any pity, and immediately after 
he was dead he was hung up in irons.


CHRISTOPHER LAYER, ESQ. 
Executed at Tyburn, March 15, 1723, for High Treason.

	HERE we again find a hidden spark in the hotbed of rebellion, shooting out of 
its expiring embers. This man, like all rebels, was a mere enthusiast, plotting deep 
mischief, but like Colonel Despard, hereafter named, without a shadow of possibility 
to carry his wickedness into effect.
	Mr. Layer was born of very respectable parents, and received a very liberal 
education, which being completed at the university, he was entered a student to the 
honourable society of the Inner Temple. After the customary time he was called to the 
bar, entered on the profession of a counsellor at law, and had so much practice, that he 
seemed to be in the high road of making a large fortune.
	Francis Atterbury, Bishop of Rochester, had been disabled from holding his 
preferments in the church, by an act of parliament passed in the year 1722, and was 
banished from England for life, for his treasonable practices; and about this period 
several other persons were concerned in similar designs, among whom counsellor 
Layer was one of the most distinguished.
	This infatuated man made a journey to Rome, where he held several 
conferences with the Pretender, to whom he promised that he would effect so secret a 
revolution in England, that no person in authority should be apprized of the scheme 
till it had actually taken place.
	Impressed with the idea that it was possible to carry his scheme into execution, 
he came to England with a determination to effect it. His plan was to hire an assassin 
to murder the king, on his return from Kensington; and this being done, the other 
parties engaged in the plot, were to seize the guards; and the Prince of Wales and his 
children, and the great officers of state were to be seized and confined during the 
confusion that such an event would naturally produce.
	Among others concerned in this strange scheme was Lord Grey, an ancient 
nobleman of the Roman Catholic religion, who died a prisoner in the Tower, before 
the necessary legal proceedings against him could take place.
	Mr. Layer having settled a correspondence with several Roman Catholics, 
non-jurors, and other persons disaffected to the government, he engaged a small 
number of disbanded soldiers, who were to be the principal actors in the intended 
tragedy. The counsellor met these soldiers at a public-house at Stratford, in Essex, 
where he gave them the necessary instructions for seizing the king on his return from 
the palace, and even fixed on the day when the plan was to be carried into execution.
	Some of the people of the public-house having overheard the conversation, 
spoke of it publicly in the neighbourhood; and some other circumstances of suspicion 
arising, Mr. Layer was taken into custody by one of the king's messengers, in 
consequence of a warrant from the secretary of state.
	At this time Mr. Layer had two women in keeping, one in Southampton-
buildings, and the other in Queen-street, to both of whom he had given intimations of 
the scheme he had in hand. The lodgings of these women were searched, such a 
number of treasonable papers being found, that the intentions of the counsellor 
appeared evident. When he was apprized that his papers were seized, and the women 
bound to give evidence against him, he dispatched a messenger to the secretary of 
state, informing him that he would make a discovery of all he knew, if he might be 
permitted the use of pen, ink, and paper. This requisition was instantly complied with, 
and it was the prevailing opinion that he would have been admitted an evidence 
against his accomplices, if he had made the promised discovery: but it will appear that 
he had no such intention.
	Behind the house of the messenger in which he was confined, there was a 
yard, which communicated with the yard of a public-house adjoining, and Mr. Layer 
thought, if he could get from his confinement, it would be no difficult matter to escape 
through the taproom of the ale-house, where it was not probable that he should be 
known.
	Having digested his plan, he cut the blankets of his bed into pieces, and tied 
them together, and in the dusk of the evening dropped from his window; but falling on 
a bottle-rack in the yard, he overset it; and the noise occasioned by the breaking of the 
bottles was such that the family was alarmed; but Layer escaped during the confusion 
occasioned by this incident.
	Almost distracted by the loss of his prisoner, the messenger went in search of 
him, and finding that he had taken a boat at the Horse-ferry, Westminster, he crossed 
the water after him, pursued him through St: George's Fields, and caught him at 
Newington Butts. Having brought him back to his house, and guarded him properly 
for that night, he was examined by the secretary of state on the following day, and 
committed to Newgate.
	The king and council now determined that no time should be lost in bringing 
Layer to trial; wherefore a writ was issued from the crown office, directed to the 
sheriff of Essex, commanding him to empanel a grand jury, to inquire into such bills 
as should be presented against the prisoner; in consequence of which the jury met at 
Rumford, and found a bill against him for high treason, which was returnable in the 
court of King's-bench.
	Soon after the bill was found, the trial came on before Sit John Pratt, lord chief 
justice and the other judges of that court. Mr. Layer had two counsellors to plead for 
him, and they urged every possible argument that could be thought of in his behalf; 
contesting every minute circumstance with the counsel for the crown, during a trial 
that lasted sixteen hours; but at length the jury found the prisoner Guilty, after having 
been out of court about an hour.
	When the prisoner was brought up to receive sentence, his counsel made 
another effort in his behalf, by urging the informality of some of the legal proceedings 
against him; but their arguments being thought insufficient, the sentence ordained by 
the law was passed on.
	As he had some important affairs to settle, from the nature of his profession, 
the court did not order his execution till more than two months after he had been 
condemned; and the king repeatedly reprieved him, to prevent his clients being 
sufferers by his affairs being left in a state of confusion.
	After conviction, Mr. Layer was committed to the Tower, and at length the 
sheriffs of London and Middlesex received a warrant to execute the sentence of the 
law; in consequence of which he was drawn on a sledge to Tyburn, dressed in a suit of 
black full trimmed, and a tie-wig.
	At the place of execution, he was assisted in his devotions by a non-juring 
clergyman; and when these were ended, he spoke to the surrounding multitude, 
declaring that he deemed King James (so he called the pretender) his lawful 
sovereign. He said that King George was an usurper, and damnation would be the fate 
of those who supported his government. He insisted that the nation would never be in 
a state of peace till the Pretender was restored; and therefore advised the people to 
take up arms in his behalf: he professed himself willing to die for the cause; and 
expressed great hopes that Providence would effectually support the right heir to the 
throne on some future occasion, though himself had failed of being the happy 
instrument of placing him thereon.
	After he was hanged, his body being quartered, his head was placed over 
Temple-bar.


WILLIAM BURK 
After an adventurous Seafaring Life as a Boy he became a Robber, and was 
executed at Tyburn on the 8th of April, 1723

	WILLIAM BURK was born in the parish of St Catherine's, and near the 
Tower of London. Having reached the eleventh year of his age, he was guilty of some 
faults that required severe chastisement, which having received, he ran away from 
school and went to the water side, inquiring for a station on board a ship. A man 
observing his inclination took him down to the Nore, and put him on board the 
Salisbury man-of-war.
	The mother, learning where her darling boy had gone, followed him on board 
the ship, and endeavoured to prevail on him to return, but in vain, for the youth was 
obstinately bent on a seafaring life.
	In about a fortnight the ship sailed for Jamaica, and during the voyage had an 
engagement with a Spanish galleon, which she took, after a bloody and obstinate 
fight, in which young Burk was wounded. After this they met with another galleon, 
which they took without the loss of a man , but a woman, the only one on board, 
having the curiosity to look on the deck, lost her life by a chain shot, which severed 
her head from her body. The common men shared each fifteen pounds prize money on 
these captures, but some of the principal officers got sufficient to make them easy for 
life.
	The ship was stationed for three years in the West Indies, during which time 
Burk learned the art of stealing every thing that he could secrete without detection. At 
Jamaica there was a woman who had been transported from Newgate some years 
before, but having married a planter, who soon died, she was left in affluent 
circumstances, and took a tavern. Wanting a white servant, she prevailed on the 
captain to let Will attend her customers.
	The boy was pleased with his new situation, and might have continued in it as 
long as he was on the island, but he could not refrain from defrauding his mistress; but 
she herself had been a thief, and soon detected him. Thereupon he fell on his knees 
and begged pardon, which was granted; but he was ordered to depart the house 
immediately.
	Alarmed at the danger from which he had escaped he seems to have formed a 
temporary resolution to live honestly in future, and with that view shipped himself for 
Maryland, where a merchant would have employed him but the captain he sailed with 
would not permit him to accept the offer. Hence he made a voyage to the coast of 
Guinea, where he had a very narrow escape of being murdered by the natives, who 
killed several of his shipmates. On the return of his ship from Guinea to England the 
weather was so bad that they were five months on their voyage, to the port of Bristol, 
during which they suffered innumerable hardships. Their provisions were so reduced 
that they were almost famished, the allowance of each man for the whole day being 
not so much as he could eat at two mouthfuls; and at length they were obliged to fast 
five days successively.
	However they reached the port in safety; and, notwithstanding the miseries 
they had endured, the captain resolved on another voyage to Guinea, in which Burk 
accompanied him. Having purchased a number of slaves they set sail for the West 
India islands, but during the voyage the Negroes concerted a scheme to make 
themselves masters of the ship, and would probably have carried it into execution but 
that one of their associates betrayed them; in consequence of which they were more 
strictly confined than they had hitherto been.
	Burk sailed from the West Indies to England, where he entered on board a man 
of war and sailed up the Baltic, and afterwards to Archangel, to the north of Russia, 
where his sufferings from the extremity of the cold and other circumstances were so 
severe that on his return to England he determined to abandon the life of a sailor. 
Being now quite out of all honest methods of getting his bread, he took to robbing 
passengers in and near Stepney; but he continued his depredations on the public only 
for a short time, being apprehended for committing the fourth robbery.
	He was indicted at the sessions held at the Old Bailey in February, 1723, for 
robbing William Fitzer on the highway, and again, on the same day, for robbing 
James Westwood; and being found guilty on both indictments he received sentence of 
death.
	There was something remarkably cruel in the conduct of this malefactor, for 
he carried a hedge bill with him, to terrify the persons he stopped; and one old man 
hesitating to comply with his demand, he cut him so that he fell to the ground.
	After conviction he became sensible of the enormity of his crimes, received 
the Sacrament with great devotion, and declared that if he obtained mercy from God it 
must be through the merits of Jesus Christ. He was executed at Tyburn, on the 8th of 
April, 1723, in the twenty third year of his age.


SARAH PRIDDON, alias SALLY SALISBURY 
Convicted of stabbing a gentleman in a brothel

  
Sally Salisbury stabbing a gentleman in a brothel

	THERE is no state in human nature so wretched as that of the prostitute. 
Seduced, abandoned to fate, the unhappy female falls a prey to want; or she must 
purchase existence at a price degrading, in the last degree, to the mind of sensibility. 
Subject to the lust and debauchery of every thoughtless blockhead, she becomes 
hardened in shame. Hence modesty is put to the blush by the obscenity of those, once 
pure as our own darling daughters. Every public place swarms with this miserable set 
of beings, so that parents dread to indulge their children with even the sight of a moral 
stage performance. The unhappy prostitute, heated by drink, acquires false spirits, in 
order to inveigle men to her purpose; and, in so doing, she too often takes apparent 
satisfaction in annoying, by looks and gestures, often by indecent words, the virtuous 
part of the audience. The law, while it assumes the guardianship of youth by 
suppressing immorality, still permits these wantons to rove, uncontrolled, among the 
virtuous as well as the profligate. There ought, in public at least, some bounds to be 
set — some check to the pernicious example. They may surely be restrained, at least 
to the outward show of decency, when in mixed company.
	Yet, says the philanthropist, they demand our pity. They do indeed! The cause, 
while nature progresses, cannot be removed; but the legislature might do more to 
regulate the evil than is done in this country. It is by some held a necessary evil, 
tending, in its utmost extent, even to the benefit of the yet virtuous female; but a mind 
once formed by precept and good example will ever repel a liberty attempted by a 
profligate man; they are cowards when reproved by virtuous indignation.
	We can only accord our tribute of pity to them, though about to give the 
effects of prostitution in its greatest extent, by quoting the words of the poet, as 
applied to the miseries of the unhappy Jane Shore:
'When she was mine, no arm came ever near her; 
I thought the gentlest breath of heaven 
Too rough to blow upon her. 
Now, sad and shelterless, perhaps she wanders, 
And the rain drops from some penthouse 
On her wretched head, drenches her locks, 
And kills her with the cold.'
	On the 24th of April, 1723, Sarah Priddon was indicted at the Old Bailey, for 
making a violent assault on the Hon. J— F—, and stabbing him with a knife in his left 
breast, and giving him a wound of which he long languished, with an intent to kill and 
murder him.
	Mrs. Priddon, or rather Salisbury (for that was the name by which she was best 
known), was a woman of the town, who was well acquainted with the gentleman 
whom she wounded. It appeared on the trial that Mr. F. having gone to the Three Tuns 
tavern in Chandos Street, Covent Garden, about midnight, Sally followed him thither 
soon afterwards. The drawer, after he had waited on Mr. F. went to bed; but at two in 
the morning he was called up, to draw a pint of Frontiniac for Mrs. Salisbury. This he 
did, and carried it to her with a French roll and a knife. The prisoner was now in 
company and conversation with Mr. F. and the drawer heard them disputing about an 
Opera ticket, which he had presented to her sister; and, while they were talking, she 
stabbed him; on which he put his hand to his breast, and said, 'Madam, you have 
wounded me.'
	No sooner had she committed the fact than she appeared sincerely to regret 
what she had done: she sent for a surgeon, who finding it necessary to extend the 
wound, that the blood might flow outwardly, she seemed terrified, and, calling out 'O 
Lord! what are you doing?' fainted away.
	On her recovery, she asked Mr. F. how he did; to which he answered, 'Very 
bad, and worse than you imagine.' She endeavoured to console him in the best manner 
she could, and, after some time, the parties went away in separate chairs; but not till 
the wounded gentleman had forgiven her, and saluted her as a token of that 
forgiveness.
	The counsel for the prisoner endeavoured to prove that she had no Intention of 
wounding him with malice prepense; and that what she did arose from a sudden start 
of passion, the consequence of his having given an Opera ticket to her sister, with a 
view to ingratiate her affections, and debauch her.
	The counsel for the Crown ridiculed this idea, and insinuated that a woman of 
Mrs. Salisbury's character could not be supposed to have any very tender regard for 
her sister's reputation. They allowed that Mr. F. had readily forgiven her at the time; 
but insisted that this was a proof of the placability of his temper, and no argument in 
her favour.
	They said that, if the gentleman had died of the wound, she would have been 
deemed guilty of murder, as she had not received the least provocation to commit the 
crime; and that the event made no difference with respect to the malignity of her 
intentions.
	The jury, having considered the circumstances of the case, found her guilty of 
assaulting and wounding Mr. F. but acquitted her of doing it with an intent to kill and 
murder him. In consequence hereof she was sentenced to pay a fine of one hundred 
pounds, to be imprisoned for a year, and then to find security for her good behaviour 
for two years; but, when she had suffered about nine months' imprisonment, she died 
in Newgate, and was buried in the church-yard of St. Andrew, Holborn.


ALEXANDER DAY, Alias MARMADUKE DAVENPORT, 
ESQ. 
A Sharper

	THE mode of plunder practised by this villain at the time of committing his 
depredations was not common; but now the great metropolis of our country abounds 
with such insidious robbers. This kind of thieving, in modern times is called 
SWINDLING, and the latter part of our pages will adduce instances of the tricks of 
sharpers, passing almost credibility. The fellow now before us was, however, 
circumstances considered, an adept, and, like our modern swindlers, had a fictitious 
name; an accomplice, sometimes acting as his footman; a hired horse; and borrowed 
carriage.
	The great qualifications, or leading and indispensable attributes, of a sharper 
or swindler, are, to possess a genteel exterior, a demeanour apparently artless, and a 
good address.
	Among the various classes of sharpers may be reckoned those who obtain 
licenses to become pawnbrokers, and bring disgrace upon the reputable part of the 
trade by every species of fraud which can add to the distresses of those who are 
compelled to raise money in this way; for which purpose there are abundance of 
opportunities. Swindling pawnbrokers of this class are uniformly receivers of stolen 
goods; and, under the cover of their license, do much mischief to the public. The evil 
arising from them might, in a great measure, be prevented by placing the power of 
granting licenses in a general board of police; and rendering it necessary for all 
persons to produce a certificate of character before they can obtain such license, and 
also to enter into recognizance for good behaviour.
	Also sharpers who obtain licenses to be hawkers and pedlars; under the cover 
of which every species of villainy is practised upon the country people, as well as 
upon the unwary in the metropolis, and all the great towns in the kingdom. The 
artifices by which they succeed are various, as for example, by fraudulent raffles, 
where plated goods are exhibited as silver, and where the chances are exceedingly 
against the adventurers; by selling and uttering base money, and frequently forged 
bank notes, which make one of the most profitable branches of their trade; by dealing 
in smuggled goods, thereby promoting the sale of articles injurious to the revenue, 
besides cheating the ignorant with regard to their value; by receiving stolen goods, to 
be disposed of in the country, by which discoveries are prevented, and assistance 
afforded to common thieves and stationary receivers; by purchasing stolen horses in 
one part of the country and disposing of them in another, in the course of their 
journeys; in accomplishing which, so as to elude detection, they have great 
opportunities, by gambling with E-O tables at fairs and horse-races.
	A number of other devices might be pointed out, which render this class of 
men great nuisances in society, and show the necessity of either suppressing them 
totally (for, in fact, they are of little use to the public), or of limiting the licenses only 
to men of good character; to be granted by a general board of police, under whose 
control they should be placed, while they enter at the same time into a recognizance in 
a certain sum, with one surety for good behaviour; by which the honest part would be 
retained, to the exclusion of the fraudulent.
	Also sharpers known by the name of duffers, who go about from house to 
house, and attend public houses, inns, and fairs, pretending to sell smuggled goods, 
such as India handkerchiefs, waistcoat patterns, muslins, &c. By offering their goods 
for sale, they are enabled to discover the proper objects which may be successfully 
practised upon in various ways; and, if they do not succeed in promoting some 
gambling scheme, by which the party is plundered of his money, they seldom fail 
passing forged country bank notes, or base coin, in the course of their dealings.
	In London a number of female sharpers also infest public places. They dress 
elegantly, personate women of fashion, attend masquerades, and even go to Court. 
These, from their effrontery, actually get into the circle, where their wits and hands 
are employed in obtaining diamonds, and whatever other articles of value, capable of 
being concealed, are found to be most accessible.
	The wife of a well-known sharper is said to have appeared at Court, dressed in 
a style of peculiar elegance; while the sharper himself is supposed to have gone in the 
dress of a clergyman. According to the information of a noted receiver, they pilfered 
to the value of L.1700 on the king's birthday, 1795, without discovery or suspicion.
	Houses are kept where female cheats dress and undress for public places. 
These sharpers generally attend all masquerades, in different characters, where they 
seldom fail to get clear off with a considerable booty.
	The first deception which we find played off by Alexander Day was to take an 
elegant house in Queen Square, and then to send his pretended footman to a livery 
stable, to inquire the price of a pair of horses, which he himself afterwards agreed to 
purchase, and then desired the stable-keeper to recommend him a coachman, a man 
rather lusty, as he had a suit of livery clothes of a large size by him.
	The man was accordingly recommended; but, when the livery was tried on, 
Day observed, that, as they did not fit him, he would send into the country for his own 
coachman; but this objection was obviated by the footman, who saying that the 
clothes would fit, with a small alteration, the 'squire consented to hire the man.
	When the stable-keeper saw the coachman he had recommended, he inquired 
to what places he had driven his new master; and, being informed to the Duke of 
Montague's, and other persons of rank, he seemed satisfied, though he had begun to 
form ideas unfavourable to his new customer.
	Mr. Day, having kept his coach and horses something more than a week, gave 
orders to be driven to a coffee-house in Red Lion Square, where he drank half a pint 
of wine at the bar, and asked if some gentlemen were come, whom he expected to 
supper. Being answered in the negative, he went out at the back door without paying 
for his wine, and said he would return in a few minutes.
	The coachman waited a long time: but, his master not coming back, he drove 
to the stable-keeper's, who seemed glad to have recovered his property out of such 
dangerous hands.
	It seems that Day made no small use of this coach while it was in his 
possession. He drove to the shop of a lace-merchant, named Gravestock, and asked 
for some Spanish point; but, the dealer having none of that kind by him, the 'squire 
ordered fifty-five pounds' worth of gold lace to be sent to his house in Queen Square. 
When Gravestock's servant carried the lace, Day desired him to tell his master to call, 
as he was in want of lace for some rich liveries, but he must speak with his tailor 
before he could ascertain the quantity wanted. Mr. Gravestock attended his new 
customer, who gave him so large an order for lace, that if he had executed it, he must 
have been a very considerable loser, and the 'squire's liveries would have been gayer 
than those of any nobleman in London: however, on the following day, he carried 
some lace of the sort he had left before; nor did he forget to take his bill with him; but 
the person who should have paid it had decamped.
	The next trick practised by our adventurer was as follows: he went to the 
house of Mr. Markham, a goldsmith, and ordered a gold equipage worth L.50. 
Markham carried home the equipage, and had the honour to drink tea with the 
supposed Mr. Davenport, who ordered other curious articles; among the rest, a chain 
of gold for his squirrel.
	Mr. Markham observing that the squirrel wore a silver chain, which he had 
sold to a lady not long before, began to suspect his new customer; and, waiting on the 
lady, inquired if she knew Marmaduke Davenport, Esq. She answered in the negative; 
on which Markham mentioned the circumstance that had arisen, and described the 
person of the defrauder. The lady now recollected him, and said that his name was 
Alexander Day, and that he had cheated her of property to a considerable amount. In 
consequence of this information, Markham arrested the sharper, and recovered his 
property.
	On another occasion, Day went in his carriage to the shop of a linen-draper, 
named Scrimshaw, agreed for linen to the amount of L.48 and ordered a large quantity 
to be sent to his house on the following day, when he would pay for the whole. The 
first parcel was delivered, but the purchaser had decamped when the linen-draper 
went with the second.
	After this he went to the shop of a tea-dealer, named Kenderick, and ordered 
tea to the amount of L.26. The tea was sent in, and the proprietor called for payment, 
when Day gave him orders for a farther quantity, which he pretended to have forgot 
before, and told him to call the next morning, when he should be paid for it by the 
steward. The honest tea-dealer called the next day, but neither the 'squire nor steward 
were to be found.
	His next adventure was contrived to defraud Mr. Hinchcliffe, a silk-mercer. 
Day, going to his shop in his absence, left word for him to call at his house to receive 
a large order. The mercer went, and saw a carriage at the door; and, being told that the 
'squire had company, he waited a short time, during which the servant took care to 
inform him that Mr. Davenport was the son of a baronet of Yorkshire, and possessed a 
large fortune in that county.
	When he saw the supposed Mr. Davenport, he was told that he wanted some 
valuable silks, and wished that a quantity might be sent for him, to select such as he 
approved. Mr. Hinchcliffe said that the choice would be much better made by fixing 
on the patterns at his shop.
	Hereupon Day took the mercer in his coach, and on their way talked of his 
father, Sir Marmaduke, and of other people of rank; and said he was on the point of 
marriage with the daughter of Counsellor Ward, and, as he should be under the 
necessity of furnishing a house in London, he should want mercery goods to a large 
amount.
	When they came to the mercer's shop, Day selected as many damasks, &c. for 
bed furniture and hangings, as were worth a thousand pounds. It looks as if 
Hinchcliffe had now some suspicions; for he told him that the ladies were the best 
judges of such articles, and asked if he had not a lady of his acquaintance, whom he 
could consult. He readily answered that he had, and mentioned a Lady Davenport as 
his relation, saying, "Send the silks to my house, and I will take her opinion of them."
	Mr. Hinchcliffe said he would send them, and permitted him to take with him 
two pieces of brocade, worth about thirty pounds; but, desirous to know more of his 
customer before he trusted him with the whole property, he went to Counsellor Ward, 
and found that his daughter was already married to a gentleman of the name of 
Davenport. Here upon the mercer went to the house of the supposed 'squire, but he 
was gone off with what property he had obtained.
	It was likewise discovered that our adventurer, having casually met, at a 
coffee-house, the Mr. Davenport who had married the daughter of Counsellor Ward, 
had prevailed on him to call him cousin, on the pretence that they must be related, 
because, as he alleged, their coats of arms were the same.
	After a course of fraud, Day was taken into custody in the month of May, 
1723, on suspicion of his having robbed the mail; but it proved that he was not the 
man: however, there were six indictments brought against him for the defrauds.
	In his defence he pleaded that his intention was to have paid for the goods he 
had purchased on credit; and he asserted that he possessed an estate in the county of 
Durham, which he had mortgaged for L.1200; but no credit could be given to his 
allegations; nor, even if he had possessed such an estate, would it have appeared that 
he acted on an honest principle.
	After a long trial he was convicted, and sentenced to suffer two years' 
imprisonment in Newgate, to stand twice in the pillory, to pay a fine of L.200 and to 
give security for his good behaviour for two years after the term of his imprisonment 
should be expired.
	As it is one professed design of this publication to guard innocent people 
against the schemes of the artful and designing, we would earnestly recommend it to 
people in trade never to give credit to strangers from the speciousness of their 
appearance, or the plausibility of their behaviour.
	The villain who can defraud a coach-maker out of a carriage, or even raise 
money to hire one of an elegant appearance, has nothing to do but take genteel 
lodgings, and put an accomplice or two into livery, and his scheme usually succeeds. 
The splendid appearance of the supposed master, and the artful puffs of the servants, 
generally serve to lull suspicion asleep.
	When inquiry is made into the character of a person who is supposed to be a 
man of honour and fortune, the inquirer should consider whether the person who gives 
him this character is deserving of that of an honest man: for these artful rogues, when 
they find any person is suspicious of them, have a method of referring to as great 
rogues as themselves for a character. The tradesman, then, who would not be imposed 
on, should take characters only from respectable people, who will never deceive him, 
unless they have been deceived themselves.


WILLIAM HAWKSWORTH 
Soldier, who killed a Civilian with his Musket in St James's Park. Executed 
at Tyburn on the 17th of June, 1723

	THIS criminal was born of reputable parents, who gave him such an education 
as was proper to qualify him for a creditable trade; but being of a disposition too 
unsettled to think of business, he enlisted in London as a soldier in the Foot Guards. 
At this period party disputes ran very high, and the soldiers were frequently the 
subjects of the contempt and derision of the populace. While Hawksworth was 
marching with other soldiers to relieve the guard in St James's Park a man named 
Ransom, who had a woman in his company, jostled him, and cried: "What a stir is 
here about King George's soldiers!" Hawksworth quitted his rank and gave the 
woman a blow on the face. Irritated thereby, Ransom called him a puppy, and 
demanded the reason of his behaviour to her.
	The term of reproach enraged Hawksworth to such a degree that he knocked 
the other down with his musket, and then the soldiers marched on to relieve the guard. 
In the meantime the crowd of people gathered round Ransom, and, finding he was 
much wounded, put him in a chair and sent him to a surgeon, who examined him and 
found his skull fractured to such a degree that there were no hopes of his recovery; 
and he died in a few hours. Thereupon a person who had been a witness to what 
passed in the Park went to the Savoy, and, having learned the name of the offender, 
caused Hawksworth to be taken into custody, and he was committed to Newgate. 
Being brought to his trial at the following sessions, the colonel whom he had served 
gave him an excellent character; but the facts were so clearly proved that the jury 
could not do otherwise than convict him, and judgment of death was passed 
accordingly. A few minutes before he was executed he made a speech to the 
surrounding multitude, advising them to keep a strict guard over their passions; he 
lamented the situation of the common soldiers, who are considered cowards if they do 
not resent an injury, and if they do, are liable to endure legal punishment for the 
consequences that may arise from such resentment. However, he advised his brethren 
of the army to submit with patience to the indignities that might be offered, and trust 
to the goodness of God to recompense their sufferings.


THOMAS ATHOE, THE ELDER, AND THOMAS ATHOE, 
THE YOUNGER 
Executed for murder

	THIS murder was attended with shocking barbarity; and, when we have to 
relate that it was committed by father and son, the relation becomes additionally 
painful. A solitary murder is sufficiently detestable; but when it is proved that a parent 
advises, aids, and abets his child in the horrid purpose, we are shocked at the extent of 
human depravity.
	The elder Athoe was a native of Carew, in Pembrokeshire, where he rented 
above a hundred pounds per annum, and had lived in such a respectable way, that in 
the year 1721 he was chosen mayor of Tenby, and his son a bailiff of the same 
corporation; though they did not live in this place, but at Mannerbeer, two miles 
distant from it.
	George Merchant (of whose murder they were convicted) and his brother 
Thomas were nephews, by the mother's side, to the elder Athoe, their father having 
married his sister.
	On the 23d of November, 1722, a fair was held at Tenby, where the Athoes 
went to sell cattle, and there met with George Merchant and his brother Thomas. A 
quarrel arose between the younger Athoe and George Merchant, on an old grudge, 
respecting their right to part of an estate; when a battle ensued, in which George had 
the advantage, and beat young Athoe. The elder Athoe, taking the advice of an 
attorney on what had passed, would have persuaded him to bring an action; to which 
he replied, 'No, no, we won't take the law; but we'll pay them in their own coin.'
	Late in the evening, after the fair was ended, the Merchants left the town; but 
the Athoes, going to the inn, inquired of the ostler which way they went. He gave 
them the best information in his power, on which they immediately mounted, and 
followed them. The brothers stopped on the road, at a place called Holloway's Water, 
to let their horses drink. In the mean time they heard the footsteps of other horses 
behind them, and, turning about, saw two men riding at a small distance. It was too 
dark for them to know the parties, but they presently heard the voice of old Athoe.
	Knowing that he had sworn revenge, and dreading the consequence that would 
probably ensue, they endeavoured to conceal themselves behind a bridge, but they 
were discovered by the splashing of their horses' feet in the water. The Athoes riding 
up with large sticks, the younger said to George Merchant, 'I owe thee a pass, and 
now thou shalt have it;' and immediately knocked him off his horse.
	In the interim, old Athoe attacked Thomas Merchant, and beat him likewise 
from his horse, calling out, at the same time, 'Kill the dogs! kill the dogs!' The 
brothers begged hard for their lives, but they pleaded to those who had no idea of pity. 
The elder Athoe seized Thomas Merchant in the tenderest part, and squeezed him in 
so violent a manner that human nature could not long have sustained the pain; while 
the younger Athoe treated George Merchant in a similar way, and carried his revenge 
to such a length that it is not possible to relate the horrid deed with decency. When he 
had completed his execrable purpose, be called out to his father, saying, 'Now I have 
done George Merchant's business.'
	A great effusion of blood was the consequence of this barbarity; but his savage 
revenge was not yet glutted: seizing George Merchant by the nose with his teeth, he 
bit it off, and then strangled him, by tying a handkerchief tight round his neck.
	This done, the murderers quitted the spot; but some persons coming by took 
the Merchants to an adjacent house, and sent for a surgeon, who dressed the wound of 
Thomas, but found that George was dead. The surgeon declared that the blows be had 
received were sufficient to have killed six or seven men; for he had two bruises on his 
breast, three large ones on his head, and twenty-two on his back.
	The elder Athoe was taken into custody on the following day, but the son had 
fled to Ireland: however, those who had been concerned in favouring his escape wore 
glad to use their endeavours to get him back again. The murder was committed in 
Pembrokeshire, but the prisoners were removed by a writ of Habeas Corpus to 
Hereford, and, on the 19th March, 1723, they were indicted for the murder.
	On the trial, the principal evidence against them was the surviving brother, 
who was even then so weak as to be indulged to sit down while he gave his evidence; 
but the jury, though satisfied of the commission of the murder, entertained a doubt 
whether the prisoners could be legally tried in any county but that in which the crime 
was committed; on which they brought in a special verdict: whereupon the case was 
referred to the determination of the twelve judges; and the prisoners, being brought up 
to London, were committed to the King's Bench prison, where they remained till the 
22d of June, 1723, and were then taken to the Court of King's Bench, in Westminster 
Hall; when, a motion being made by counsel in arrest of judgment, the Court directed 
that an act of the 33d of Henry VIII. should be read, in which is a clause, ordaining 
that 'All murders and robberies committed in, on, or about the borders of Wales, shall 
be triable in any county of England where the criminal shall be taken; and that the 
Court of King's Bench shall have power to move, by writ of Habeas Corpus, any 
prisoner confined in Wales to the next county of England, to be tried.'
	In consequence hereof, the Court proceeded to give judgment, and the 
prisoners were remanded to the King's Bench prison.
	Between this and the time of their execution they were visited by Mr. Dyche, 
the chaplain of the prison, and by several other divines. They continued to flatter 
themselves with the hope of life till the warrant came down for their execution, and 
endeavoured to extenuate the crime by a variety of frivolous pretences, respecting 
disputes between them and the deceased.
	On the 28th of June they received the sacrament with great devotion, and did 
the same again on the morning of their execution. Their behaviour at the place of 
death is thus recorded by the minister who attended them: 'On Friday, the 5th of July, 
1723, about eleven o'clock in the morning, they were conveyed in a cart to the place 
of execution. When they came to the fatal tree, they behaved themselves in a very 
decent manner, embracing each other with the utmost tenderness and affection; and, 
indeed, the son's hiding his face, bedewed with tears, in his father's bosom,, was, 
notwithstanding the barbarous action they had committed, a very moving spectacle. 
They begged of all good people to take warning by their ignominious death; and were 
turned off, crying, "Lord, have mercy upon us! Christ, have mercy upon us!" The 
bodies were brought from the place of execution in two hearses to the Falcon inn, in 
Southwark, in order to be buried in St. George's church-yard.'
	They suffered at a place called St. Thomas's Watering, a little below Kent 
Street, in Surrey, the father being fifty-eight years old, and the son within one day of 
twenty-four, at the time of their deaths.
	We shall seldom hear of a murder so barbarous, so deliberate, so unprovoked, 
as this in question. Little, surely, need be said to deter any of our readers from the 
slightest idea of being guilty of a crime of so atrocious a nature; nor need we add any 
thing to our former remark on so heinous an offence as that of imbruing our hands in 
the blood of our fellow-creatures. Be it sufficient to remark that there is a just God 
who judgeth the earth, and that all our most secret actions are open to his sight. From 
his view our most careful precautions cannot screen, nor can the darkness of night 
cover us. Let us then learn so to conduct ourselves as not to blush to stand in the 
presence of our God. Happy the man who, fortified by religious considerations, can 
arrive at this degree of Christian perfection!


CAPTAIN JOHN MASSEY 
Executed at Execution-Dock, July 26, 1723, for Piracy. (A Very Hard Case.)

	IN transcribing the record and particulars of this truly unfortunate man, we had 
no conception that he would have appeared among those who suffered the extreme 
sentence of the law. Indeed, we rather thought his conduct, making allowance for the 
critical way in which he was situated, meritorious, than really guilty; but; when we 
found that he actually pleaded guilty to the charge laid against him in the indictment, 
we were left in wonder at the mysterious ways of Providence.
	Captain Massey was the son of a gentleman of fortune, who gave him an 
excellent education. When young, though somewhat wild and wavering in his mind, 
yet we find no flagitious conduct imputed to him. He grew weary of home, and 
thirsted to taste the pleasures of a world in which he was doomed to act an unhappy 
part. His father procured him a commission in the army; he served with great credit as 
lieutenant, under the command of the Duke of Marlborough, during the wars in 
Flanders, in the reign of Queen Anne. On his return to England, he conducted himself 
with great decency, but became acquainted with a woman of bad character, to whom 
he was so much attached that he would undoubtedly have married her, if his father, 
who got intelligence of the affair, had not happily broke off the connection. After this 
he went with his regiment to Ireland, where he lived for some time in a dissolute 
manner, but at length got appointed to the rank of lieutenant and engineer to the Royal 
African Company, and sailed in one of their ships to direct the building of a fort. The 
ship being ill supplied with provisions, and those of the worst kind, the sufferings of 
the crew were inexpressibly great. Every Officer on board died except Massey, and 
many of the soldiers likewise fell a sacrifice to the scandalous neglect. Those who 
lived to get on shore drankso greedily of the fresh water, that they were thrown into 
fluxes, which destroyed them in such a rapid manner, that only Captain Massey and a 
very few of his people were left alive. These, being totally unable to build a fort, and 
seeing no prospect of relief, began to abandon themselves to despair; but at this time a 
vessel happening to come near the shore, they made signals of distress; on which a 
boat was sent off to their relief. They were no sooner on board, than they found the 
vessel was a pirate; and, distressed as they had been, perhaps too hastily engaged in 
their lawless plan, or appeared so to do, rather than run the hazard of perishing on 
shore. Sailing from hence, they took several prizes and though the persons made 
prisoners were not used with cruelty, Mr. Massey had so true a sense of the illegality 
of the proceedings in which he was concerned, that his mind was perpetually 
tormented with the idea of the fatal consequences that might ensue. At length the ship 
reached Jamaica, when Mr. Massey seized the first opportunity of deserting, and, 
repairing to the governor, he gave such information, that the crew of the pirate vessel 
were taken into custody, convicted, and hanged. Massey might have been provided for 
by the governor, who treated him with singular respect, on account of his services to 
the public, but he declined his generous offers, through an anxiety to visit his native 
country. On his sailing for England, the governor gave him recommendatory letters to 
the lords of the admiralty; but, astonishing as it may seem, instead of being caressed, 
he was taken into custody, and committed till a sessions of admiralty was held for his 
trial, when he pleaded guilty, and received sentence of death. As his case was 
remarkable, the public entertained no doubt but that he would have been pardoned; 
however, a warrant was sent for his execution, and he made the most solemn 
preparation for his approaching fate. Two clergymen attended him at the place of 
execution, where he freely acknowledged his sins in general, was remarkably fervent 
in his devotions, and seemed perfectly resigned to his fatal destiny. Though the 
captain pleaded guilty at his trial, for guilty in some measure he was, yet his joining 
the pirates was evidently an act of necessity, not of choice; add to which, his 
subsequent conduct at Jamaica proved that he took the earliest opportunity to abandon 
his late companions, and bring them to justice; a conduct by which he surely merited 
the thanks of his country, and not the vengeance of the law. We sincerely hope that no 
future king will under such circumstances, sign a warrant for execution.


PHILIP ROCHE 
Executed on 5th of August, 1723, for many Murders on the High Seas and 
Piracy

  
Roche and his Villainous Companions Throwing their Victims Overboard

	WE have already commented upon the foul crime of piracy. The account now 
to be given of this atrocious offender will show to what a horrid pitch it has been 
carried; and happy should we feel ourselves if we could add that this was a singular 
case. In latter years we find that murder, foul as that committed by Roche, was 
practised on board of one of our men-of-war, in which Captain Pigot, her commander, 
was barbarously killed; and the mutinous crew seized the frigate, and delivered her to 
the enemy.
	This detested monster, Philip Roche, was a native of Ireland, and, being 
brought up to a seafaring life, served for a considerable time on board some coasting 
vessels, and then sailed to Barbados on board a West Indiaman. Here he endeavoured 
to procure the place of a clerk to a factor, but failing in this he went again to sea, and 
was advanced to the station of a first mate.
	He now became acquainted with a fisherman named Neale, who hinted to him 
that large sums of money might be acquired by insuring ships and then causing them 
to be sunk, to defraud the insurers. Roche was wicked enough to listen to this horrid 
tale, and becoming acquainted with a gentleman who had a ship bound for Cape 
Breton he got a station on board, next in command to the captain, who, having a high 
opinion of him, trusted the ship to his management, directing the seamen to obey his 
commands.
	If Roche had entertained any idea of sinking the ship, he seemed now to have 
abandoned it; but he had brought on board with him five Irishmen, who were 
concerned in the shocking tragedy that ensued.
	When they had been only a few days at sea the plan was executed as follows. 
One night, when the captain and most of the crew were asleep, Roche gave orders to 
two of the seamen to furl the sails, which being immediately done, the poor fellows no 
sooner descended on to the deck than Roche and his hellish associates murdered them 
and threw them overboard. At this instant a man and a boy at the yard-arm, observing 
what had passed, and dreading a similar fate, hurried towards the topmast-head, when 
one of the Irishmen, named Cullen, followed them, and seizing the boy threw him into 
the sea. The man, thinking to effect at least a present escape, descended to the main 
deck, where Roche instantly seized him, murdered him, and then threw him 
overboard. The noise occasioned by these transactions alarming the sailors below, 
they hurried up with all possible expedition; but they were severally seized and 
murdered as fast as they came on deck, being first knocked on the head, and then 
thrown into the sea. At length the master and mate came on the quarterdeck, when 
Roche and his villainous companions seized them and, tying them back to back, 
committed them to the merciless waves.
	These execrable murders being perpetrated, the murderers ransacked the 
chests of the deceased, then sat down to regale themselves with liquor; and while the 
profligate crew were carousing they determined to commence as pirates, and that 
Roche should be the captain, as the reward of his superior villainy.
	They had intended to have sailed up the Gulf of St Lawrence, but as they were 
within a few days' sail of the British Channel when the bloody tragedy was acted, and 
finding themselves short of provisions, they put into Portsmouth, and giving the 
vessel a fictitious name they painted her afresh, and then sailed for Rotterdam. At this 
city they disposed of their cargo and took in a fresh one. Here they were unknown; 
and an English gentleman, named Annesley, shipped considerable property on board, 
and took his passage with them for the Port of London; but the villains threw this 
unfortunate gentleman overboard after they had been only one day at sea.
	When the ship arrived in the River Thames, Mr Annesley's friends made 
inquiry after him, in consequence of his having sent letters to England describing the 
ship in which he proposed to embark; but Roche denied any knowledge of the 
gentleman, and even disclaimed his own name. Notwithstanding his confident 
assertions it was rightly presumed who he was, and a letter which he sent to his wife 
being stopped, he was taken into custody. Being carried before the Secretary of State 
for examination, he averred that he was not Philip Roche, and said that he knew no 
person of that name. Hereupon the intercepted letter was shown him, on which he 
instantly confessed his crimes, and was immediately committed to take his trial at the 
next Admiralty Sessions.
	It was intimated to Roche that he might expect a pardon if he would impeach 
any three persons who were more culpable than himself, so that they might be 
prosecuted to conviction; but not being able to do this he was brought to his trial, and 
found guilty. Judgment of death was awarded against him.
	After conviction he professed to be of the Roman Catholic faith, but was 
certainly no bigot to that religion, since he attended the devotions according to the 
Protestant form. He was hanged at Execution Dock, on the 5th of August, 1723, but 
was so ill at the time, that he could not make any public declaration of the abhorrence 
of the crime for which he suffered.
	It is impossible to read this shocking narrative without execrating the memory 
of the wretches whose crimes gave rise to it. History has not furnished us with any 
account of what became of the wicked accomplices of Roche; but there can be little 
doubt of their having dragged on a miserable existence, if they did not end their lives 
at the gallows.
	The mind of the guilty must be perpetually racked with torment; and the 
murderer who is permitted to live does but live in wretchedness and despair. His days 
must be filled with anxiety, and his nights with torture.
	From the fate of the miserable subject of this narrative, let our sailors be taught 
that an honest pursuit of the duties of their station is more likely to ensure happiness 
to them than the possession of any sum of money unlawfully obtained. Our brave tars 
are not, from their situation in life, much accustomed to the attendance on religious 
duties: but it can cost them no trouble to recollect that to "do justice and love mercy" 
is equally the character of the brave man and the Christian.



WILLIAM DUCE, JAMES BUTLER, — WADE, and – 
MEADS 
A desperate and cruel gang of murderers and footpads. Executed at Tyburn, 
August 14, 1723.

	THE reader has doubtless observed that this work shews that there are 
different grades of thieves. The boy, when abandoned to profligacy, commences his 
career by picking pockets, and a single handkerchief is then the extent of his hopes. 
Hardening with his years, he advances a step in villainy, and becomes a footpad, the 
most cruel description of robbers. If success should, for a while, attend his enormities, 
he proceeds to steal a horse, and throwing away the footpad's bludgeon or knife, he 
appears mounted on the highway, armed with a brace of pistols. Arrived now at the 
highest rank of thievery, he despises the lower posts, and stiles himself a gentleman 
highwayman. To do honour to his post, he scorns to use that violence where there is 
no show of resistance, which, as a footpad, he exercised often through wantonness. 
His fame, if industrious, however, sooner reaches the knowledge of the myrmidons of 
justice, than if he had grovelled as a foot-robber; and his career is happily thus sooner 
at an end..
	Duce was a native of Wolverhampton, and by trade a buckle-maker, which he 
followed some time in London; but being imprisoned in Newgate for debt, he there 
made connexions which greatly tended to the corruption of his manners.
	He was no sooner at large than he commenced pad, and, in company with 
another man, robbed a gentleman in Chelsea-fields, of four guineas; after this he 
connected himself with John Dyer and James Butler, in concert with whom he 
committed a variety of robberies. Their plan was to go out together, but one only to 
attack the party intended to be robbed; giving a signal for his accomplices to come up 
if any resistance should be made.
	After committing a variety of robberies in the neighbourhood of London, they 
joined in a scheme, with four other villains, to rob Lady Chudleigh, between Hyde-
Park-Corner and Kensington; but her ladyship's footman shot one of the gang, named 
Rice, through the head, which prevented the intended depredation.
	Their robberies had now been so numerous, that, the neighbourhood of 
London became unsafe for them; wherefore they went on the Portsmouth road, where 
they committed a variety of robberies, and even proceeded to the perpetration of 
murder, with a view to prevent detection.
	Meeting Mr. Bunch, a farmer, near a wood on the road side, they robbed him 
of his money, and then dragging him into the wood, they stripped him.
	Darker, Wade, and, Meads, three of the gang, were hanged at Winchester; but 
Butler was sent to take his trial at the Old Bailey, for robberies committed in the 
county of Middlesex.
	James Butler was the son of reputable parents, of the parish of St. Ann, Soho, 
and apprenticed to a silversmith; but being of an ungovernable disposition, his parents 
were obliged to send him to sea. After making several voyages, as an apprentice to the 
captain, he ran from the ship at Boston, in New England, and went to New York, 
where he entered on board another ship, from which he likewise ran away, and 
embarked in a third vessel bound to Martinique. This he also quitted, in a dispute with 
the captain, and then sailed to Jamaica, where he was impressed into the royal navy, 
and served under the celebrated Admiral Vernon.
	On his return to England, he married a girl of Wapping, and having soon spent 
the little money he brought home with him, he engaged with the gang we have 
mentioned, with whom he was likewise concerned in several other robberies,
	These appear to have been very desperate villains. On the road to Gravesend, 
they stopped four gentlemen, who refusing to be robbed, Meads, one of those hanged 
at Winchester, shot a servant who attended them, in the breast, so that he died in a few 
days. Disappointed of their booty in this attempt, their passions were so irritated, that, 
meeting a gentleman on horseback, they fired, and wounded him in the head and 
breast, and the next day he expired.
	They committed other robberies, attended with circumstances of cruelty, but it 
will be now proper to mention those for which they suffered. Butler having been 
acquitted at the Old Bailey of the crime for which he was transmitted from 
Winchester, he, Duce, and Dyer, immediately renewed their depredations on the road. 
Meeting Mr. Holmes near Buckingham House, they robbed him of his money, hat, 
and handkerchief, which laid the foundation of one of the indictments against them.
	On the following evening they stopped a hackney-coachman near Hampstead, 
and robbed him of nine shillings, after the coachman had told them that the words 
"stand and deliver," were sufficient to hang a man. Jonathan Wild being informed of 
these robberies, caused the offenders to be apprehended at a house kept by Duce's 
sister. Dyer being admitted an evidence, Duce and Butler were brought to their trial, 
when the latter pleaded guilty to both the indictments; and the former, after spending 
some time in denying the robberies, and arraigning the conduct of Jonathan Wild, was 
found guilty, and both of them received sentence of death.
	After conviction their behaviour was more resigned and devout than could 
have been expected from men, whose repeated crimes might be supposed to have 
hardened their hearts, and death appeared to them in all its horrors. Butler was a 
Roman Catholic, and Duce a Protestant. The latter was urged by the ordinary to 
discover the names of some of his old accomplices, but this he refused to do, because 
they had left their practices, and lived honest lives.
	A few moments before they were launched into eternity, Butler declared that 
the circumstances of cruelty with which their crimes had been attended, gave him 
more pains than the thoughts of death; and Duce acknowledged the enormity of his 
offences, and begged the forgiveness of all whom he had injured.


HUMPHRY ANGIER 
Executed at Tyburn, September 9, 1723, for Robbery.

	HUMPHRY ANGIER was a native of Ireland, born near Dublin, but his 
parents removing to Cork, put him apprentice to a cooper in that city. He had not been 
long in this station before his master desired to get rid of him, on account of his 
untoward disposition. Thus discharged, he lived the life of a vagabond for two years, 
and his father apprehending that he would come to a fatal end, brought him to 
England in the eighteenth year of his age. Still, however, he continued his dissipated 
course of life, till having got considerably in debt, he enlisted for a soldier, to avoid 
being lodged in prison. As this happened in the year 1715, he was sent into Scotland 
to oppose the rebels; but robbing a farmer in that country, he was punished by 
receiving five hundred lashes, in consequence of the sentence of a court-martial. The 
rebellion ended, Angier came to London, and obtained his discharge. Here be became 
acquainted with William Duce, (see previous case) whose sister he married at an 
alehouse in the verge of the Fleet. After this he enlisted a second time, and the 
regiment being ordered to Vigo, he took his wife with him. The greater part of the 
Spaniards having abandoned the place, Angier obtained a considerable sum by 
plunder. On his return to England he, became acquainted with Butler's associates, and 
was concerned with them in several of their lawless depredations, but refused to have 
any share in acts of barbarity. Angier now kept a house of ill fame, which was 
resorted to by the other thieves; and one night after they had been out on one of their 
exploits, Meads told the following horrid tale: "We have been out; and the best fun of 
all was, an engagement with a smock-faced shoe-maker, whom we met on the Kentish 
road. We asked him how far he was going, and he said he was just married, and going 
home to see his relations. After a little more discourse, we persuaded him to turn 
rather out of the road to look for a bird's nest, which as soon as he had done, we 
bound and gagged him, after which we robbed him, and were going away; but I being 
in a merry humour, and, wanting to have a little diversion, turned about with my 
pistol, and shot him through the head." Bad as Angier was in other respects, he was 
shocked at this story, told his companions, there was no courage in cruelty, and from 
that time refused to drink with any of them. After this he kept a house, of ill fame near 
Charing-Cross letting lodgings to thieves, and receiving stolen goods. While in this 
way of life he went to see an execution at Tyburn, and did not return till four o'clock 
the next morning, when, during his absence, an affair happened, which was attended 
with troublesome consequences. A Dutch woman meeting with a gentleman in the 
streets, conducted him to Angier's house, where he drank so freely that he fell asleep, 
and the woman robbing him of his watch and money, made her escape. The 
gentleman awaking when Angier returned, charged him with the robbery, in 
consequence of which he was committed to prison, but was afterwards discharged, 
the. grand jury not finding the bill against him. Soon after his wife was indicted for 
robbing a gentleman of his watch and a guinea; but was fortunate enough to be 
acquitted for want of evidence. The following accident happened about the same time: 
A woman named Turner had drunk so much at Angier's house that he conducted her 
up to bed; but while he was in the room with her, his wife entered in a rage, and 
demanding of her how she could presume to keep company with her husband, 
attacked and beat the woman. William Duce being in the house, went up to interfere; 
but the disturbance was by this time so great, that it was necessary to send for a 
constable. The officer no sooner arrived, than Mrs. Turner charged Angier and his 
wife with robbing her, on which they were taken into custody and committed; but 
when they were brought to trial, they were acquitted, as there was no proof of any 
robbery, to the satisfaction of the jury. Dyer, who was evidence against Duce and 
Butler, lived at this time with Angier as a waiter; and the master and the man used 
occasionally to commit footpad robberies together; for which they were several times 
apprehended, and tried at the Old Bailey, but acquitted, as the prosecutors could not 
swear to their persons. Angier's character now grew so notorious, that no person of 
any reputation would be seen in the house; and the expenses attending his repeated 
prosecutions were so great, that he was compelled to decline business. After this, he 
kept a gin-shop in Short's gardens, Drury-lane; and this house was frequented by 
company of the same kind as those he had formerly entertained, particularly, parson 
Lindsey. Lindsey having prevailed on a gentleman to go to this house, made him 
drunk, and then robbed him of several valuable articles; but procuring himself to be 
admitted an evidence, charged Angier and his wife with the robbery. They had again 
the good fortune to escape, the character of Lindsey being at this time so infamous, 
that the court and jury paid no regard to any thing he said. Soon after, however, Mrs. 
Angier was transported for picking a gentleman's pocket, and her husband was 
convicted on two capital indictments; the one for robbing Mr. Lewin, the city marshal, 
near Hornsey, of ten guineas; and some silver; and the other for robbing a waggoner 
near Knightsbridge. On both these trials, Dyer, who was concerned in the robberies, 
was admitted an evidence against Angier. After conviction, he was visited by numbers 
of persons; whose pockets had been picked of valuable articles, in the hope of getting 
some intelligence of the property they had lost; but he said, "he was never guilty of 
such mean practices as picking of pockets, and all his associates were above it, except 
one Hugh Kelly, who was transported for robbing a woman of a shroud, which she 
was carrying home to cover her deceased husband."


RICHARD PARVIN, EDWARD ELLIOT, ROBERT 
KINGSHELL, HENRY MARSHALL, EDWARD PINK, 
JOHN PINK AND JAMES ANSELL 
The "Waltham Blacks," who were executed at Tyburn, 4th of December, 
1723, for Murder and Deer-Stealing

THESE men belonged to a gang of daring plunderers, who carried on their 
depredations with such effrontery that it was found necessary to enact the law 
hereafter recited, in order to bring them to condign punishment; and it was not long 
after it was in force before it took due effect upon them. Having blackened their faces, 
they went in the daytime to the parks of the nobility and gentry, whence they 
repeatedly stole deer, and at length murdered the Bishop of Winchester's keeper on 
Waltham Chase; and from the name of the place, and their blacking their faces, they 
obtained the name of the "Waltham Blacks."
	The following is the substance of the Act of Parliament on which they were 
convicted: "After the first day of June, 1723, any person appearing in any forest, 
chase, park, etc., or in any highroad, open heath, common or down, with offensive 
weapons, and having his face blacked, or otherwise disguised, or unlawfully and 
wilfully hunting, wounding, killing or stealing any red or fallow deer, or unlawfully 
robbing any warren, etc., or stealing any fish out of any river or pond, or (whether 
armed or disguised or not) breaking down the head or mound of any fishpond, 
whereby the fish may be lost or destroyed; or unlawfully and maliciously killing, 
maiming or wounding any cattle, or cutting down or otherwise destroying any trees 
planted in any avenue, or growing in any garden, orchard or plantation, for ornament, 
shelter or profit; or setting fire to any house, barn or outhouse, hovel, cock-mow or 
stack of corn, straw, hay or wood; or maliciously shooting at any person in any 
dwelling-house or other place; or knowingly sending any letter without any name, or 
signed with a fictitious name, demanding money, venison or other valuable thing, or 
forcibly rescuing any person being in custody for any of the offences before 
mentioned, or procuring any person by gift, or promise of money, or other reward, to 
join in any such unlawful act, or concealing or succouring such offenders when, by 
Order of Council, etc., required to surrender, shall suffer death."
	The offence of deer-stealing was formerly only a misdemeanour at common 
law; but the act of parliament above-mentioned has been rendered perpetual by a 
subsequent statute: it therefore behoves people to be cautious that they do not 
endanger their lives, while they think they are committing what they may deem an 
inferior offence. We will now give such particulars as we have been able to obtain 
respecting the malefactors in question.
	RICHARD PARVIN was heretofore the master of a public-house in 
Portsmouth, which he had kept with reputation for a considerable time, till he was 
imprudent enough to engage with the gang of ruffians who practised the robbing 
noblemen's and gentlemen's parks through the country. The reader is already apprized 
that it was the custom of these fellows to go disguised. Now a servant-maid of 
Parvin's having left his house during his absence, had repaired to an alehouse in the 
country; and Parvin calling there on his return from one of his dishonest expeditions, 
the girl discovered him; in consequence of which he was committed to Winchester 
Gaol, by the mayor of Portsmouth, till his removal to London for trial.
	EDWARD ELLIOT was an apprentice to a tailor at Guildford, and was very 
young when he engaged with the gang, whose orders he implicitly obeyed, till the 
following circumstance occasioned his leaving them. Having met with two 
countrymen who refused to enter into the society, they dug holes in the ground, and 
placed the unhappy men in them, up to their chins, and had they not been relieved by 
persons who accidentally saw them, they must have perished. Shocked by this deed, 
Elliot left them, and for some time served a lady as a footman; but on the day the 
keeper was murdered he casually met them in the fields, and, on their promise that no 
harm should attend him, he unhappily consented to bear them company.
	Having provided themselves with pistols, and blacked their faces with 
gunpowder, they proceeded to their lawless depredations; and while the rest of the 
gang were killing of deer, Elliot went in search of a fawn; but while he was looking 
for it, the keeper and his assistants came up, and took him into custody. His associates 
were near enough to see what happened; and immediately coming to his assistance, a 
violent affray ensued, in which the keeper was shot by Henry Marshall, so that he died 
on the spot, and Elliot made his escape; but he was soon afterwards taken into 
custody, and lodged in the gaol of Guildford.
	ROBERT KINGSHELL, who was a native of Farnham in Surrey, was placed 
by his parents with a shoemaker; but being too idle to follow his profession, he was 
guilty of many acts of irregularity, before he associated himself with the Waltham 
Blacks, with whom he afterwards suffered. While he was in bed on the night 
preceding the fatal murder, one of the gang awaked him, by knocking at his window; 
on which he arose, and went with him to join the rest of the deer-stealers.
	HENRY MARSHALL was a man distinguished for his strength and agility: 
we have no account of the place of his birth, or the manner of his education; but it is 
reasonable to think that the latter was of the inferior kind, since he appears to have 
been chiefly distinguished by his skill in the vulgar science of bruising. He was once 
the occasion of apprehending a highwayman, who had robbed a coach, by giving him 
a single blow which broke his arm. He seems to have been one of the most daring of 
the Waltham Blacks, and was the man who shot the chase-keeper, as above-
mentioned.
	EDWARD PINK and JOHN PINK were brothers, who spent the former part 
of their lives as carters, at Portsmouth, and had maintained the character of honest 
men till they became weak enough to join the desperate gang of deer stealers.
	It now remains to speak only of JAMES ANSEL, who likewise lived at 
Portsmouth. We are not informed in what way he had originally supported himself; 
but for some years before he joined the desperate gang above-mentioned he was a 
highwayman; and had been concerned with the Waltham Blacks about two years 
before the commission of the murder which cost them their lives.
	By a vigilant exertion of the civil power, all the above-mentioned offenders 
were taken into custody, and it being thought prudent to bring them to trial in London, 
they were removed thither under a strong guard, and lodged in Newgate.
	On the 13th of November, 1723, they were brought to their trial in the court of 
King's Bench, and being convicted on the clearest evidence, were found guilty, and 
sentenced to die; and it was immediately ordered that they should suffer on the fourth 
of the next month. One circumstance was very remarkable on this occasion: — the 
judge had no sooner pronounced the sentence, than Henry Marshall, the man who had 
shot the keeper, was immediately deprived of the use of his tongue; nor did he recover 
his speech till the day before his death.
	After passing the solemn sentence the convicts behaved in a manner equally 
devout and resigned, were regular in their devotions, and prepared themselves for 
eternity with every mark of unfeigned contrition. They received the sacrament before 
they left Newgate, acknowledged the justice of the sentence against them, and said 
they had been guilty of many crimes besides that for which they were to suffer.
	At the place of execution they were so dejected as to be unable to address the 
populace; but they again confessed their sins, and recommended their souls to God, 
beseeching his mercy, through the merits of Christ, with the utmost fervency of 
devotion.
	These malefactors were hanged at Tyburn, on the 4th of December, 1723.
	A very short, though important lesson, may be learnt from the fate of these 
unhappy men. Idleness must have been the great source of their lawless depredations, 
which at length ended in murder. No man, however successful in the profession, can 
expect to get as much profit by deer-stealing, as by following his lawful business. The 
truth is, that, in almost every instance, it costs a man more pains to be a rogue than to 
be honest. Exclusive of the duties of religion, young persons cannot learn a more 
important maxim than that in the scripture; 'the hand of the diligent maketh rich.'
	In this place it may not be improper to make a single remark on the game laws. 
These are supposed to be, possibly not without reason, severe: it is contended that 
those animals which are wild by nature are equally the property of every man. Perhaps 
this is the truth: but persons in the lower ranks of life should remember, that when 
laws are once enacted, THEY MUST BE OBEYED. Safety lies in acquiescence with, 
not in opposition to, legal institutions.


JOHN STANLEY 
An Insolent Puppy who presumed on his Swordsmanship. Executed at 
Tyburn, 23rd of December, 1723, for murdering his Mistress

	JOHN STANLEY was the son of an officer in the army, and born in the year 
1690, at Duce Hall, in Essex, a seat that belonged to Mr Palmer, who was his uncle by 
his mother's side. Young Stanley, being the favourite of his father, was taught the art 
of fencing when he was no more than five years of age; and other officers likewise 
practising the same art with him, he became a kind of master of the sword when he 
was but a mere boy, for to stimulate his courage it was common for those who fenced 
with him to give him wine or other strong liquors.
	In consequence of this treatment the boy grew daring and insolent beyond 
expression, and at length behaved with so uncommon a degree of audacity that his 
father deemed him a singular character of bravery.
	While he was very young, Mr Stanley was ordered to join his regiment in 
Spain, and took his son with him, and in that country he was a spectator of several 
engagements; but his principal delight was in trampling on the bodies of the deceased 
after the battles were ended.
	From Spain the elder Stanley was ordered to Ireland, whither he took his son, 
and there procured for him an ensign's commission; but the young gentleman, 
habituating himself to extravagant company, spent much more money than the 
produce of his commission, which he soon sold, and then returned to England and 
abandoned himself to the most dissolute course of life. At length, after a scene of riot 
in London, he went with one of his associates to Flanders, and thence to Paris; and 
Stanley boasted not a little of the favours he received among the French ladies, and of 
the improvements he had made in the science of fencing.
	On his return to England the opinion he conceived of his skill in the use of the 
sword made him insufferably vain and presuming. He would frequently intrude 
himself into company at a tavern, saying he had come to make himself welcome, and 
would sit down at the table without further ceremony. The company would sometimes 
bear with his insolence for the sake of peace, but when this was the case, it was a 
chance if he did not pretend to have received some affront, and, drawing his sword, 
walk off while the company was in confusion. It was not always, however, that 
matters ended thus, for sometimes a gentleman of spirit would take the liberty of 
kicking our hero out of the house.
	As he was returning from a gaming-house which he frequented in Covent 
Garden he met a Mr Bryan, of Newgate Street, and his sister, Mrs Maycock, the wife 
of a mercer on Ludgate Hill. Stanley rudely ran against the man and embraced the 
woman, on which a quarrel arose; but this subsiding, Stanley insisted on seeing the 
parties home. This he did, and spent the evening with them; and from this 
circumstance a fatal connection arose, as will appear in the sequel.
	Stanley, having made an acquaintance with the family, soon afterwards met 
Mrs Maycock at the house of a relation in Red Lion Street, Holborn. In a short time, 
Mr Maycock removing into Southwark, the visits of our captain were admitted on a 
footing of intimacy.
	The husband dying soon after this connection, Stanley became more at liberty 
to pay his addresses to the widow, and he was admitted to repeat his visits at his own 
convenience. At this time a young fellow who had served his apprenticeship with the 
late Mr Maycock, and who was possessed of a decent fortune to begin the world, paid 
his addresses to the young widow; but she preferred a licentious life with Stanley to a 
more virtuous connection. Soon after this she quitted her house in Southwark, and the 
lovers spent their time at balls, plays and assemblies till her money was dissipated, 
when he did not scruple to insinuate that she had been too liberal with her favours to 
other persons. In the meantime she bore him three children, one of whom was living 
at the time of the father's execution. Stanley continuing his dissolute course of life, his 
parents became very uneasy, afraid of the fatal consequences that might ensue; and 
his father, who saw too late the wrong bias he had given to his education, procured 
him the commission of a lieutenant, to go to Cape Coast Castle, in the service of the 
African Company.
	The young fellow seemed so pleased with this appointment that his friends 
conceived great hopes that he would reform. Preparations being made for his voyage, 
and the Company having advanced a considerable sum, he went to Portsmouth, in 
order to embark; but he had been only a few days in that town when he was followed 
by Mrs Maycock, with her infant child. She reproached him with baseness, in first 
debauching and then leaving her to starve; and employing all the arts she was mistress 
of to divert him from his resolution, he gave her half the money which belonged to the 
Company, and followed her to London with the rest.
	Shocked with the news of this dishonourable action, the father took to his bed 
and died of grief. Young Stanley appeared greatly grieved at this event, and to divert 
his chagrin he went to Flanders, where he stayed a considerable time, when he 
returned to England and lived in as abandoned a manner as before.
	One night Mrs Maycock, having been to visit a gentleman, was returning 
through Chancery Lane, in company with another woman and Mr Hammond, of the 
Old Bailey, when Stanley, in company with another man, met the parties, and he and 
his companion insisted on going with the women. Hammond hereupon said the ladies 
belonged to him; but Mrs Maycock, now recognising Stanley, said: "What, Captain, is 
it you?" He asked her where she was going: she said to Mr Hammond's, in the Old 
Bailey. He replied that he was glad to meet her, and would go with her. As they 
walked down Fleet Street, Stanley desired his companion to go back and wait for him 
at an appointed place; and as the company was going forward, Stanley struck a man 
who happened to be in his way, and kicked a woman on the same account.
	Having arrived at Hammond's house, the company desired Stanley to go 
home; but this he refused, and Mrs Maycock going into the kitchen he pushed in after 
her, and, some words having passed between them, he stabbed her, so that she died in 
about an hour and a half.
	The offender, being taken into custody, was brought to his trial at the Old 
Bailey, where some witnesses endeavoured to prove that he was a lunatic; but the jury 
considering his extravagant conduct as the effect of his vices only, and the evidence 
against him being positive, he was found guilty, and received sentence of death. He 
was executed at Tyburn, on 23rd of December, 1723.


STEPHEN GARDENER 
Executed at Tyburn, 3rd of February, 1724, for House-breaking, after being 
warned that the Bellman would say his Verses over him

THIS malefactor was born in Moorfields, and after associating with blackguard boys 
in the streets was driven home through sheer hunger. He went to sea on a corn vessel, 
the master of which traded to France and Holland. Being an idle and useless hand, he 
was treated so roughly by his shipmates that he grew heartily tired of a seafaring life; 
and on his return from the first voyage he promised the utmost obedience if his friends 
would permit him to remain at home.
	This was readily complied with, in the hope of his reformation, and he was 
now put to a waterman; but being impatient of restraint he soon quitted his service and 
engaged with dissolute fellows in the neighbourhood of Moorfields, with whom he 
played at cards, dice, etc., till he was stripped of what little money he had, and then 
commenced as pickpocket.
	His first attempt of this kind was at the Guildhall, during the drawing of the 
lottery, when he took a wig out of a man's pocket; but though he was detected in the 
offence, the humanity of the surrounding multitude permitted his escape. This 
circumstance encouraged him to continue his practice, and about a month afterwards 
he was detected in picking another pocket, and, notwithstanding his protestations of 
innocence, underwent the discipline of the horsepond. Soon afterwards he became 
acquainted with two notorious housebreakers named Garraway and Sly, who offered 
to take him as a partner; but he rejected their proposals till one night when he had lost 
all his money and most of his clothes at cards; then he went to his new acquaintances, 
and agreed to be concerned in their illicit practices.
	Gardener having now been for some time acquainted with a woman who kept 
a public-house in Fleet Lane, and who was possessed of some money, proposed to 
marry her, with the view of obtaining her property; and, the woman listening to his 
offer, they were married by one of the Fleet parsons. The money Gardener obtained 
with his spouse was soon spent in extravagance, and not long afterwards they were 
apprehended on suspicion of felony and conducted to St Sepulchre's watch-house; 
however, the charge against them not being validated, it was necessary to dismiss 
them, but before they were set at liberty the constable said to Gardener: "Beware how 
you come here again, or this bellman will certainly say his verses over you"; for the 
bellman happened to be at that time in the watch-house. Gardener was greatly affected 
when the constable told him that the bellman would say his verses over him; but the 
impression it made on his mind soon wore off, and he quickly returned to his vicious 
practices.
	A short time after this adventure Gardener fell into company with one Rice 
Jones, and they agreed to go together on the "passing lay," which is an artifice 
frequently practised, and though the sharpers are often taken into custody, and their 
tricks exposed in the newspapers, yet there are repeatedly found people weak enough 
to submit to the imposition.
	Our adventurers were very successful at different places, particularly at 
Bristol; but in this last place Jones bilked Gardener in such a manner as to prove that 
there is no truth in the observation of "honour among thieves"; for Jones, after having 
defrauded a country gentleman of a gold watch and chain, a suit of laced clothes, and 
about a hundred guineas, gave no share of the booty to Gardener. This induced the 
latter to think of revenge, but he disguised his sentiments, and they went together to 
Bath, where they remained some time and then proceeded on their journey; but on the 
morning on which they set out, Gardener stole an iron pestle from the inn where they 
lay, and concealed it in his boot, with the intention of murdering his companion when 
they should come to an unfrequented place. On their journey Gardener generally kept 
behind Jones, and twice took out the pestle with the intention of perpetrating the 
murder; but, his resolution failing him, he at length dropped it in the road, 
unperceived by his companion. A few days afterwards these companions in iniquity 
parted; and on this occasion Jones said: "Hark ye, Gardener, whither are you going?" 
"To London," said he. "Why, then," replied Jones, "you are going to be hanged."
	Soon after his arrival in London he robbed a house in Addle Hill, but was not 
apprehended for it, and a short time after he broke open the house of Mrs Roberts, and 
carried off linen to the amount of twenty-five pounds. In this robbery he was assisted 
by John Martin, and both the offenders, being soon afterwards taken into custody, 
were brought to trial, capitally convicted, and received sentence of death; but Martin 
was afterwards reprieved, on condition of transportation for fourteen years.
	After sentence of death Gardener resigned himself to his fate and before he 
quitted Newgate on the day of execution he dressed himself in a shroud, in which he 
was executed, refusing to wear any other clothes, though the weather was intensely 
cold.


JOSEPH BLAKE ALIAS BLUESKIN 
Made an Unsuccessful Attempt to kill Jonathan Wild by cutting his Throat. 
Executed in November, 1724, at Newgate

	JOSEPH BLAKE, better known by his nickname of Blueskin, from his dark 
countenance, always deserves to be remembered as one who studiously took the paths 
of infamy in order to become famous.
	By birth he was a native of the City of London. His parents, being persons in 
tolerable circumstances, kept him six years at school, where he did not learn half so 
much from his master as he did evil from his school-fellow, William Blewit, from 
whose lessons he copied so well that all his education signified nothing. He absolutely 
refused, when he came from school, to go to any employment, but, on the contrary, 
set up for a robber when he was scarcely seventeen; and from that time to the day of 
his death was unsuccessful in all his undertakings, hardly ever committing the most 
trivial fact but he experienced for it either the humanity of the mob or of the keepers 
of Bridewell, out of which, or some other prison, he could hardly keep his feet for a 
month together.
	He fell into the gang of Lock, Wilkinson, Carrick, Lincoln, and Daniel Carroll. 
Being out one night with this gang, they robbed one Mr Clark of eight shillings and a 
silver hilted sword, just as candles were going to be lighted. A woman, looking 
accidentally out of a window, perceived it, and cried out "Thieves!" Wilkinson fired a 
pistol at her, which (very luckily), upon her drawing in her head, grazed the window, 
and did no other mischief. Blake was also in the company of the same gang when they 
attacked Captain Langley at the corner of Hyde Park Road as he was going to the 
camp; but the Captain behaved himself so well, that notwithstanding they shot several 
times through and through his coat, yet they were not able to rob him. Not long after 
this Wilkinson, being apprehended, impeached a large number of persons, and with 
them Blake and Lock. Lock thereupon made a fuller discovery than the other before 
Justice Blackerby, in which information there was contained no less than seventy 
robberies, upon which he also was admitted a witness; and having named Wilkinson, 
Lincoln, Carrick and Carroll, with himself, to have been the five persons who 
murdered Peter Martain, the Chelsea pensioner, by the Park wall, Wilkinson 
thereupon was apprehended, tried and convicted, notwithstanding the information he 
had before given, which was thereby totally set aside.
	Blake himself also became now an evidence against the rest of his 
companions, and discovered about a dozen robberies which they had committed. 
Amongst these there was a very remarkable one. Two gentlemen in hunting-caps were 
together in a chariot on the Hampstead Road, from whom they took two gold watches, 
rings, seals and other things to a considerable value; and Junks, alias Levey, laid his 
pistol down by the gentlemen all the while he searched them, yet they wanted either 
the courage or the presence of mind to seize it and prevent their losing things of so 
great value. Not long after this Oakey, Junks and this Blake stopped a single man with 
a link before him in Fig Lane, and he not surrendering so easily as they expected, 
Junks and Oakey beat him over the head with their pistols, and then left him wounded 
in a terrible condition, taking from him one guinea. A short time after this Junks, 
Oakey and Flood were apprehended and executed for robbing Colonel Cope and Mr 
Young of that very watch for which Carrick and Malony had been before executed, 
Joseph Blake being the evidence against them.
	After this hanging work of his companions he thought himself not only 
entitled to liberty but reward. Therein, how ever, he was mightily mistaken, for, not 
having surrendered willingly and quietly, but being taken after long resistance and 
when he was much wounded, there did not seem to be the least foundation for this 
confident demand. He remained still a prisoner in the Wood Street Compter, 
obstinately refusing to be transported for seven years, till at last procuring two men to 
be bound for his good behaviour, he was carried before a worthy alderman of the City 
and there discharged. At which time somebody there present asking how long might 
be given him before they should see him again at the Old Bailey, a gentleman made 
answer, "In about three sessions," which time it seems he guessed very right; for the 
third sessions from thence Blake was indeed brought to the bar.
	No sooner was he at liberty than he was employed at robbing; and having 
picked up Jack Sheppard for a companion, they went out together to search for prey in 
the fields. Near the halfway house to Hampstead they met with one Pargitar, pretty 
much in liquor, whom Blake immediately knocked down into the ditch, where he 
would inevitably have perished had not Jack Sheppard kept his head above the mud 
with great difficulty. For this fact, the next sessions after it happened, two brothers 
(Brightwells) in the Guards were tried, and if a number of men had not sworn them to 
have been on duty at the time the robbery was committed they would certainly have 
been convicted, the evidence of the prosecutor being direct and full. The elder 
Brightwell died in a week after he was released from his confinement, and so did not 
live to see his innocence fully cleared by the confession of Blake.
	He behaved with great impudence at his trial, and when he found nothing 
would save him he took the advantage of Jonathan Wild's coming to speak with him 
to cut the said Wild's throat a large gash from the ear beyond the windpipe; of which 
wound Wild languished a long time. And happy had it been for him if Blake's wound 
had proved fatal, for then Jonathan would have escaped death by a more 
dishonourable wound in the throat than that of a penknife. But the number of his 
crimes and the spleen of his enemies procured him a worse fate. Whatever Wild might 
deserve of others, he seems to have merited better usage from this Blake; for while he 
continued a prisoner in the compter, Jonathan was at the expense of curing a wound 
he had received, allowed him three shillings and sixpence a week, and after his last 
misfortune promised him a good coffin, actually furnished him with money to support 
him in Newgate, and several good books if he had made use of them. But because he 
freely declared to "Blueskin" there was no hope of getting him transported, the 
murderous villain determined to take away his life, and was so far from showing any 
signs of remorse when he was brought up again to Newgate that he declared that if he 
had thought of it before, he would have provided such a knife as would have cut off 
his head.
	At the time he received sentence there was a woman also condemned, and they 
being placed, as usual, in what is called the Bail Dock at the Old Bailey, Blake offered 
such rudeness to the woman that she cried out and alarmed the whole bench. All the 
time he lay under condemnation he appeared utterly thoughtless and insensible of his 
approaching fate. Though from the cutting of Wild's throat and some other barbarities 
of the same nature he acquired amongst the mob the character of a brave fellow, yet 
he was in himself but a mean spirited, timorous man, and never exerted himself but 
through either fury or despair. He wept much at the chapel before he was to die; and 
though he drank deeply to drive away fear, yet at the place of execution he wept 
again, trembled, and showed all the signs of a timorous confusion as well he might, 
who had, lived wickedly, and trifled with his repentance to the grave. There was 
nothing in his person extra ordinary: a dapper, well set up fellow, of great strength and 
great cruelty; equally detested by the sober part of the world for the audacious 
wickedness of his behaviour, and despised by his companions for the villainies he 
committed even against them. He was executed in the twenty-eighth year of his age, 
on the 11th of November, 1724


JACK SHEPPARD 
A Daring Housebreaker, who made Ingenious Escapes from Prison and 
even tried to foil his Executioner at Tyburn on 16th of November, 1724

  
Portrait of Jack Sheppard

	ALTHOUGH only in the twenty-third year of his age when he was executed at 
Tyburn, on the 16th of November, 1724, Jack Sheppard had become so notorious as a 
housebreaker and prison-breaker that his exploits were the talk of all ranks of society. 
A great warrior could not have received greater attention than this famous criminal. 
Books and pamphlets were written about him; a pantomime at Drury Lane, called 
Harlequin Sheppard, was based on the story of his adventures, and so was a three-act 
farce, called The Prison-Breaker. Dozens of songs and glees referred to his prowess, 
and clergymen preached sermons about him. Sir James Thornhill, the celebrated 
painter who decorated the dome of St Paul's Cathedral, painted his portrait, from 
which engravings in mezzotinto were made. On this subject a poet, whose name is not 
given, wrote the following lines: —
"Thornhill, 'tis thine to gild with fame  
The obscure, and raise the humble name;  
To make the form elude the grave,  
And Sheppard from oblivion save.
Though life in vain the wretch implores,  
An exile on the farthest shores,  
Thy pencil brings a kind reprieve,  
And bids the dying robber live.
This piece to latest time shall stand,  
And show the wonders of thy hand:  
Thus former masters graced their name,  
And gave egregious robbers fame.
Apelles Alexander drew,  
Caesar is to Aurelius due;  
Cromwell in Lely's works doth shine,  
And Sheppard, Thornhill, lives in thine."
	John Sheppard was born in Spitalfields in the year 1702. His father, who was a 
carpenter, bore the character of an honest man; yet he had another son, named 
Thomas, who, as well as Jack, turned out a thief. The father dying while the boys 
were very young, they were left to the care of the mother, who placed Jack at a school 
in Bishopsgate Street, where he remained two years, and was then put apprentice to a 
carpenter. He behaved with decency in this place for about four years, when, 
frequenting the Black Lion ale-house, in Drury Lane, he became acquainted with 
some abandoned women, among whom the principal was Elizabeth Lyon; otherwise 
called "Edgworth Bess," from the town of Edgworth, where she was born.
	While he continued to work as a carpenter, he often committed robberies in 
the houses where he was employed, stealing tankards, spoons and other articles, 
which he carried to Edgworth Bess; but not being suspected of having committed 
these robberies, he at length resolved to commence housebreaking. Exclusive of 
Edgworth Bess, he was acquainted with a woman named Maggot, who persuaded him 
to rob the house of Mr Bains, a piece-broker in White Horse Yard; and Jack, having 
brought away a piece of fustian from thence (which he deposited in his trunk), went 
afterwards at midnight, and taking the bars out of the cellar window entered, and stole 
goods and money to the amount of twenty-two pounds, which he carried to Maggot. 
As Sheppard did not go home that night, nor the following day, his master suspected 
that he had made bad connections, and searching his trunk found the piece of fustian 
that had been stolen; but Sheppard, hearing of this, broke open his master's house in 
the night and carried off the fustian, lest it should be brought in evidence against him. 
Sheppard's master sending intelligence to Mr Bains of what had happened, the latter 
looked over his goods and, missing such a piece of fustian as had been described to 
him, suspected that Sheppard must have been the robber, and determined to have him 
taken into custody; but Jack, hearing of the affair, went to him and threatened a 
prosecution for scandal, alleging that he had received the piece of fustian from his 
mother, who bought it for him in Spitalfields. The mother, with a view to screen her 
son, declared that what he had asserted was true, though she could not point out the 
place where she had made the purchase. Though this story was not credited, Mr Bains 
did not take any further steps in the affair.
	Sheppard's master seemed willing to think well of him, and he remained some 
time longer in the family; but after associating himself with the worst of company, 
and frequently staying out the whole night, his master and he quarrelled, and the 
headstrong youth totally absconded in the last year of his apprenticeship and became 
connected with a set of villains of Jonathan Wild's gang. Jack now worked as a 
journeyman carpenter, with a view to the easier commission of robbery; and being 
employed to assist in repairing the house of a gentleman in Mayfair he took an 
opportunity of carrying off a sum of money, a quantity of plate, some gold rings and 
four suits of clothes. Not long after this Edgworth Bess was apprehended and lodged 
in the roundhouse of the parish of St Giles's, where Sheppard went to visit her, and the 
beadle refusing to admit him he knocked him down, broke open the door, and carried 
her off in triumph — an exploit which acquired him a high degree of credit with the 
women of abandoned character.
	In the month of August, 1723, Thomas Sheppard, the brother of Jack, was 
indicted at the Old Bailey for two petty offences, and being convicted was burned in 
the hand. Soon after his discharge he prevailed on Jack to lend him forty shillings and 
take him as a partner in his robberies. The first act they committed in concert was the 
robbing of a public-house in Southwark, whence they carried off some money and 
wearing apparel; but Jack permitted his brother to reap the whole advantage of this 
booty.
	Not long after this the brothers, in conjunction with Edgworth Bess, broke 
open the shop of Mrs Cook, a linen-draper in Clare Market, and carried off goods to 
the value of fifty-five pounds; and in less than a fortnight afterwards stole some 
articles from the house of Mr Phillips, in Drury Lane.
	Tom Sheppard, going to sell some of the goods stolen at Mrs Cook's, was 
apprehended and committed to Newgate, when, in the hope of being admitted an 
evidence, he impeached his brother and Edgworth Bess; but they were sought for in 
vain.
	At length James Sykes — otherwise called "Hell and Fury" — one of 
Sheppard's companions, meeting with him in St Giles's, enticed him into a public-
house, in the hope of receiving a reward for apprehending him; and, while they were 
drinking, Sykes sent for a constable, who took Jack into custody, and carried him 
before a magistrate, who, after a short examination, sent him to St Giles's Round- 
house; but he broke through the roof of that place and made his escape in the night.
	Within a short time after this, as Sheppard and an associate named Benson 
were crossing Leicester Fields, the latter endeavoured to pick a gentleman's pocket of 
his watch, but, failing in the attempt, the gentleman called out: "A pickpocket!" — on 
which Sheppard was taken and lodged in St Ann's Roundhouse, where he was visited 
by Edgworth Bess, who was detained on suspicion of being one of his accomplices.
	On the following day they were carried before a magistrate, and, some persons 
appearing who charged them with felonies, they were committed to New Prison; and 
as they passed for husband and wife they were permitted to lodge together in a room 
known by the name of Newgate Ward.
	Sheppard being visited by several of his acquaintances, some of them 
furnished him with implements to make his escape, and early in the morning, a few 
days after his commitment, he filed off his fetters and, having made a hole in the wall, 
he took an iron bar and a wooden one out of the window; but as the height from which 
he was to descend was twenty-five feet he tied a blanket and sheet together, and, 
making one of them fast to a bar in the window, Edgworth Bess first descended, and 
Jack followed her. Having reached the yard, they had still a wall of twenty- two feet 
high to scale; but climbing up by the locks and bolts of the great gate, they got quite 
out of the prison, and effected a perfect escape.
	Sheppard's fame was greatly celebrated among the lower order of people by 
this exploit; and the thieves of St Giles's courted his company. Among the rest, one 
Charles Grace, a cooper, begged that he would take him as an associate in his 
robberies, alleging as a reason for this request that the girl he kept was so extravagant 
that he could not support her on the profits of his own thefts. Sheppard did not hesitate 
to make this new connection; but at the same time said that he did not admit of the 
partnership with a view to any advantage to himself, but that Grace might reap the 
profits of their depredations.
	Sheppard and Grace making acquaintance with Anthony Lamb, an apprentice 
to a mathematical instrument-maker, near St Clement's Church, it was agreed to rob a 
gentleman who lodged with Lamb's master, and at two o'clock in the morning Lamb 
let in the other villains, who stole money and effects to a large amount. They put the 
door open, and Lamb went to bed to prevent suspicion; but notwithstanding this his 
master did suspect him, and had him taken into custody, when he confessed the whole 
affair before a magistrate, and being committed to Newgate he was tried, convicted, 
and received sentence to be transported. On the same day Thomas Sheppard (the 
brother of Jack) was indicted for breaking open the dwelling-house of Mary Cook and 
stealing her goods; and, being convicted, was sentenced to transportation.
	Jack Sheppard not being in custody, he and "Blueskin," another notorious 
thief, who was executed a few days before Sheppard met his fate, committed a 
number of daring robberies, and sometimes disposed of the stolen goods to William 
Field. Jack used to say that Field wanted courage to commit a robbery, though he was 
as great a villain as ever existed.
	Sheppard and "Blueskin" hired a stable near the Horse Ferry, Westminster, in 
which they deposited their stolen goods till they could dispose of them to the best 
advantage, and in this place they put the woollen cloth which was stolen from Mr 
Kneebone; for Sheppard was concerned in this robbery, and at the sessions held at the 
Old Bailey, in August, 1724, he was indicted for several offences, and among the rest 
for breaking and entering the house of William Kneebone and stealing one hundred 
and eight yards of woollen cloth and other articles; and, being capitally convicted, 
received sentence of death.
	We must now go back to observe that Sheppard and "Blueskin" had applied to 
Field to look at these goods and procure a customer for them, and he promised to do 
so; nor was he worse than his word, for in the night he broke open their warehouses 
and stole the ill-gotten property, and then gave information against them to Jonathan 
Wild, in consequence of which they were apprehended. On Monday, the 30th of 
August, 1724, a warrant was sent to Newgate for the execution of Sheppard, with 
other convicts under sentence of death.
	It is proper to observe that in the old jail of Newgate there was within the 
lodge a hatch, with large iron spikes, which hatch opened into a dark passage, whence 
there were a few steps into the condemned hold. The prisoners being permitted to 
come down to the hatch to speak with their friends, Sheppard, having been supplied 
with instruments, took an opportunity of cutting one of the spikes in such a manner 
that it might be easily broken off. On the evening of the above-mentioned 30th of 
August, two women of Sheppard's acquaintance going to visit him, he broke off the 
spike and, thrusting his head and shoulders through the space, the women pulled him 
down, and he effected his escape, notwithstanding some of the keepers were at that 
time drinking at the other end of the lodge. On the day after his escape he went to a 
public-house in Spitalfields, whence he sent for an old acquaintance, one Page, a 
butcher in Clare Market, and advised with him how to render his escape effectual for 
his future preservation. After deliberating on the matter they agreed to go to Warnden, 
in Northamptonshire, where Page had some relations; and they had no sooner resolved 
than they made the journey: but Page's relations treating him with indifference, they 
returned to London, after being absent only about a week.
	On the night after their return, as they were walking up Fleet Street together, 
they saw a watchmaker's shop open, and only a boy attending. Having passed the 
shop, they turned back, and Sheppard, driving his hand through the window, stole 
three watches, with which they made their escape.
	Some of Sheppard's old acquaintances informing him that strict search was 
being made for him, he and Page retired to Finchley, in the hope of lying there 
concealed till the diligence of the jail-keepers should relax; but the keepers of 
Newgate, having intelligence of their retreat, took Sheppard into custody and 
conveyed him to his old lodgings. Such steps were now taken as were thought would 
be effectual to prevent his future escape. He was put into a strong-room called the 
"Castle", handcuffed, loaded with a heavy pair of irons, and chained to a staple fixed 
in the floor. Nonetheless, he contrived to escape from this durance. We here give his 
own account of the matter: —
	"As my last escape from Newgate, out of the strong room called the Castle, 
had made a greater noise in the world than any other action of my life, I shall relate 
every minute circumstance thereof, as far as I am able to remember.
	"After I had been made a public spectacle of for many days together, with my 
legs chained together, loaded with heavy irons and stapled down to the floor, I 
thought it was not altogether impracticable to escape if I could but be furnished with 
proper implements; but, as every person that came near me was carefully watched, 
there was no possibility of any such assistance, till one day in the absence of my 
jailers, looking about the floor, I spied a small nail within reach, and with that, after a 
little practice, I found the great horse padlock that went from the chain to the staple in 
the floor might be unlocked, which I did afterward at pleasure; and was frequently 
about the room and several times slept on the barracks when the keepers imagined I 
had not been out of my chair. But being unable to pass up the chimney and void of 
tools, I remained where I was, till being detected in these practices by the keepers, 
who surprised me one day before I could fix myself to the staple in the manner as they 
had left me, I showed Mr Pitt, Mr Rouse and Mr Parry my art and before their faces 
unlocked the padlock with the nail; and, though people have made such an outcry 
about it, there is scarce a smith in London but what may easily do the same thing. 
However, this called for a further security of me. Till now, I had remained without 
handcuffs, but a jolly pair was provided for me.
	"Mr Kneebone was present when they were put on. I with tears begged his 
intercession to the keepers to preserve me from those dreadful manacles, telling him 
my heart was broken and that I should be much more miserable than before. Mr 
Kneebone could not refrain from shedding tears himself and did use his good offices 
with the keepers to keep me from them, but all to no purpose. On they went, though at 
the time I despised them and well knew that with my teeth only I could take them off 
at pleasure. But this was to lull them into a firm belief that they had effectually 
frustrated all attempts to escape for the future. The turnkey and Mr Kneebone had not 
been gone down stairs an hour when I made an experiment and got off my handcuffs, 
and before they visited me again I put them on and industriously rubbed and fretted 
the skin on my wrists, making them very bloody, as thinking (if such a thing was 
possible to be done) to move the turnkeys to compassion, but rather to confirm them 
in their opinion; but, though this had no effect upon them, it wrought much upon the 
spectators and drew from them not only much pity but quantities of silver and copper. 
I wanted a still more useful metal, a crow, a chisel, a file and a saw or two, these 
weapons being more useful to me than all the mines of Mexico; but there was no 
expecting any such utensils in my circumstances.
	"Wednesday the 14th of October the sessions beginning, I found there was not 
a moment to be lost; and the affair of Jonathan Wild's throat, together with the 
business at the Old Bailey, having sufficiently engaged the attention of the keepers, I 
thought then was the time to push. Thursday the 15th at about two in the afternoon, 
Austin, my old attendant, came to bring my necessaries and brought up four persons, 
namely, the keeper of Clerkenwell Bridewell, the clerk of Westminster gatehouse and 
two others. Austin, as it was his usual custom, examined the irons and hand cuffs and 
found all safe and firm, and then left me; and he may remember that I asked him to 
come again to me the same evening, but I neither expected or desired his company; 
and happy was it for the poor man that he did not interfere while I had the large iron 
bar in my hand, though I once had a design to have barricaded him or any others from 
coming into the room while I was at work, but then considering that such a project 
would be useless, I let fall that resolution.
	"As near as I can remember, just before three in the afternoon I went to work, 
taking off first my handcuffs; next with main strength I twisted a small iron link of the 
chain between my legs asunder, and the broken pieces proved extreme useful to me in 
my design. The fetlocks I drew up to the calves of my legs, taking off before that my 
stockings, and with my garters made them firm to my body to prevent them shackling. 
I then proceeded to make a hole in the chimney of the Castle about three foot wide 
and six foot high from the floor, and with the help of the broken links aforesaid 
wrenched an iron bar out of the chimney, of about two feet and an half in length and 
an inch square: a most notable implement. I immediately entered the Red Room 
directly over the Castle, where some of the Preston rebels had been kept a long time 
agone; and as the keepers say, the door had not been unlocked for seven years; but I 
intended not to be seven years in opening it. I went to work upon the nut of the lock 
and with little difficulty got it off and made the door fly before me. In this room I 
found a large nail which proved of great use in my farther progress. The door of the 
entry between the Red Room and the chapel proved an hard task, it being a laborious 
piece of work; for here I was forced to break away the wall and dislodge the bolt 
which was fastened on the other side. This occasioned much noise, and I was very 
fearful of being heard by the Master Side debtors. Being got to the chapel, I climbed 
over the iron spikes and with ease broke one of them off for my further purposes, and 
opened the door on the inside. The door going out of the chapel to the leads, I stripped 
the nut from off the lock, as I had done before from that of the Red Room, and then 
got into the entry between the chapel and the leads and came to another strong door, 
which being fastened by a very strong lock, there I had like to have stopped, and it 
being full dark, my spirits began to fail me, as greatly doubting of succeeding; but 
cheering up, I wrought on with great diligence, and in less than half an hour, with the 
main help of the nail from the Red Room and the spike from the chapel, wrenched the 
box off and so made the door my humble servant.
	"A little further in my passage, another stout door stood in my way, and this 
was guarded with more bolts, bars and locks than any I had hitherto met with. I had by 
this time great encouragement, as hoping soon to be rewarded for all this toil and 
labour. The clock at St Sepulchre's was now going the eighth hour, and this proved a 
very useful hint to me soon after. I went first upon the box and the nut, but found it 
labour in vain; and then proceeded to attack the fillet of the door. This succeeded 
beyond expectation, for the box of the lock came off with it from the main post. I 
found my work was near finished and that my fate soon would be determined.
	"I was got to a door opening in the lower leads, which being only bolted on the 
inside, I opened it with ease and then clambered from the top of it to the higher leads 
and went over the wall. I saw the streets were lighted, the shops being still open, and 
therefore began to consider what was necessary to be further done, as knowing that 
the smallest accident would still spoil the whole workmanship, and was doubtful on 
which of the houses I should alight. I found I must go back for the blanket which had 
been my covering anights in the Castle, which I accordingly did, and endeavoured to 
fasten my stockings and that together, to lessen my descent, but wanted necessaries so 
to do and was therefore forced to make use of the blanket alone. I fixed the same with 
the chapel spike into the wall of Newgate and dropped from it on the turner's leads, a 
house adjoining to the prison.
	"'Twas then about nine of the clock and the shops not yet shut in. It fortunately 
happened that the garret door on the leads was open. I stole softly down about two 
pair of stairs and then heard company talking in a room, the door open. My irons gave 
a small clink, which made a woman cry, 'Lord, what noise is that?' A man replied, 
'Perhaps the dog or cat.' And so it went off. I returned up to the garret and laid myself 
down, being terribly fatigued, and continued there for about two hours and then crept 
down once more to the room where the company were and heard a gentleman taking 
his leave, being very importunate to be gone, saying he had disappointed friends by 
not going home sooner. In about three quarters more, the gentleman took leave and 
went, being lighted down stairs by the maid, who, when she returned, shut the 
chamber door. I resolved at all hazards to follow, and slipped downstairs, but made a 
stumble against a chamber door. I was instantly in the entry and out at the street door, 
which I was so unmannerly as not to shut after me. I was once more, contrary to my 
own expectation and that of all mankind, a free man.
	"I passed directly by St Sepulchre's watch-house, bidding them good morrow, 
it being after twelve, and down Snow Hill, up Holborn, leaving St Andrew's watch on 
my left, and then again passed the watch-house at Holborn Bar and made down Gray's 
Inn Lane into the Fields, and at two in the morning came to Tottenham Court and 
there got into an old house in the fields where cows had sometime been kept, and laid 
me down to rest and slept well for three hours. My legs were swelled and bruised 
intolerably, which gave me great uneasiness; and, having my fetters still on, I dreaded 
the approach of the day, fearing then I should be discovered. I began to examine my 
pockets and found myself master of between forty and fifty shillings. I had no friend 
in the world that I could send to or trust with my condition. About seven on Friday 
morning, it began raining and continued so the whole day, insomuch that not one 
creature was to be seen in the fields. I would freely have parted with my right hand for 
a hammer, a chisel and a punch. I kept snug in my retreat till the evening, when after 
dark I ventured into Tottenham and got to a little blind chandler's shop and there 
furnished myself with cheese and bread, small beer and other necessaries, hiding my 
irons with a great coat as much as possible. I asked the woman for a hammer, but 
there was none to be had, so I went back very quietly to my dormitory and rested 
pretty well that night and continued there all Saturday. At night, I went again to the 
chandler's shop and got provisions and slept till about six the next day, which being 
Sunday, I began with a stone to batter the basils of the fetters in order to beat them 
into a large oval and then to slip my heels through.
	"In the afternoon, the master of the shed or house came in and, seeing my 
irons, asked me, 'For God's sake, who are you?' I told him 'an unfortunate young man 
who had been sent to Bridewell about a bastard child, as not being able to give 
security to the parish, and had made my escape'. The man replied, if that was the case 
it was a small fault indeed, for he had been guilty of the same things himself formerly; 
and withal said, however, he did not like my looks, and cared not how soon I was 
gone.
	"After he was gone, observing a poor-looking man like a joiner, I made up to 
him and repeated the same story, assuring him that twenty shillings should be at his 
service if he could furnish me with a smith's hammer and a punch. The man proved a 
shoemaker by trade, but willing to obtain the reward immediately borrowed the tools 
of a blacksmith his neighbour and likewise gave me great assistance, and before five 
that evening I had entirely got rid of those troublesome companions my fetters, which 
I gave to the fellow, besides his twenty shillings, if he thought fit to make use of them.

  
A shoemaker freeing Sheppard from his irons

	"That night, I came to a cellar at Charing Cross and refreshed very 
comfortably with roast veal, etc., where about a dozen people were all discoursing 
about Sheppard, and nothing else was talked on whilst I stayed amongst them. I had 
tied an handkerchief about my head, tore my woollen cap in many places, as likewise 
my coat and stockings, and looked exactly like what I designed to represent, a beggar 
fellow.
	"The next day, I took shelter at an alehouse of little or no trade in Rupert 
Street, near Piccadilly. The woman and I discoursed much about Sheppard. I assured 
her it was impossible for him to escape out of the kingdom, and that the keepers 
would have him again in a few days. The woman wished that a curse might fall on 
those who should betray him. I continued there till the evening, when I stepped 
towards the Haymarket and mixed with a crowd about two ballad-singers, the subject 
being about Sheppard. And I remember the company was very merry about the 
matter.
	"On Tuesday, I hired a garret for my lodging at a poor house in Newport 
Market, and sent for a sober young woman who for a long time had been the real 
mistress of my affections, who came to me and rendered all the assistance she was 
capable of afford ing. I made her the messenger to my mother, who lodged in Clare 
Street. She likewise visited me in a day or two after, begging on her bended knees of 
me to make the best of my way out of the kingdom, which I faithfully promised; but I 
cannot say it was in my intentions heartily to do so.
	"I was oftentimes in Spitalfields, Drury Lane, Lewkenor's Lane, Parker's Lane, 
St Thomas Street, etc., those having been the chief scenes of my rambles and 
pleasures.
	"I had once formed a design to have opened a shop or two in Monmouth Street 
for some necessaries, but let that drop and came to a resolution of breaking the house 
of the two Mr Rawlins brothers, pawnbrokers in Drury Lane, which accordingly I put 
in execution and succeeded, they both hearing me rifling their goods as they lay in 
bed together in the next room. And though there were none others to assist me, I 
pretended there was, by loudly giving out directions for shooting the first person 
through the head that presumed to stir: which effectually quieted them while I carried 
off my booty — with part whereof on the fatal Saturday following, being the 31st of 
October, I made an extraordinary appearance and from a carpenter and butcher was 
now transformed into a perfect gentleman; and in company with my sweetheart 
aforesaid and another young woman her acquaintance went into the City and were 
very merry together at a public house not far from the place of my old confinement. 
At four that same afternoon, we all passed under Newgate in a hackney coach, the 
windows drawn up, and in the evening I sent for my mother to the Shears alehouse in 
Maypole Alley near Claremarket, and with her drank three quarterns of brandy; and 
after leaving her I drank in one place or other about the neighbourhood all evening, 
till the evil hour of twelve, having been seen and known by many of my acquaintance, 
all of them cautioning me and wondering at my presumption to appear in that manner. 
At length, my senses were quite overcome with the quantities and variety of liquors I 
had all the day been drinking of, which paved the way for my fate to meet me. When 
apprehended, I do protest, I was altogether incapable of resisting and scarce knew 
what they were doing to me, and had but two second-hand pistols scarce worth 
carrying about me."
	His fame was now so much increased by his exploits that he was visited by 
great numbers of people, and some of them of the highest quality. He endeavoured to 
divert them by a recital of the particulars of many robberies in which he had been 
concerned; and when any nobleman came to see him he never failed to beg that they 
would intercede with the King for a pardon, to which he thought that his singular 
dexterity gave him some pretensions. Having been already convicted, he was carried 
to the bar of the Court of King's Bench on the 10th of November, and the record of 
the conviction being read, and an affidavit being made that he was the same John 
Sheppard mentioned in the record, sentence of death was passed upon him by Mr 
Justice Powis, and a rule of court was made for his execution on the Monday 
following.
	He regularly attended the prayers in the chapel; but, though he behaved with 
decency there, he affected mirth before he went thither, and endeavoured to prevent 
any degree of seriousness among the other prisoners on their return.
	Even when the day of execution arrived Sheppard did not appear to have given 
over all expectations of eluding justice; for having been furnished with a penknife he 
put it in his pocket, with the view, when the melancholy procession came opposite 
Little Turnstile, of cutting the cord that bound his arms, and throwing himself out of 
the cart among the crowd, to run through the narrow passage where the sheriff's 
officers could not follow on horseback; and he had no doubt but that he should make 
his escape, with the assistance of the mob.
	It is not impossible that this scheme might have succeeded; but before 
Sheppard left the press-yard one Watson, an officer, searching his pockets, found the 
knife, and was cut with it so as to occasion a great effusion of blood.
	Sheppard had yet a further view to his preservation, even after execution; for 
he desired his acquaintances to put him into a warm bed as soon as he should be cut 
down, and try to open a vein, which he had been told would restore him to life.
	He behaved with great decency at the place of execution, and confessed 
having committed two robberies for which he had been tried and acquitted. He 
suffered in the twenty-third year of his age. He died with difficulty, and was much 
pitied by the surrounding multitude. When he was cut down his body was delivered to 
his friends, who carried him to a public-house in Long Acre, whence he was removed 
in the evening and buried in the churchyard of St Martin's-in-the-Fields.
	The Sunday following the parishioners heard the following sermon on the 
occasion of Sheppard's escape: —
	"Now, my beloved, what a melancholy consideration it is, that men should 
shew so much regard for the preservation of a poor perishing body, that can remain at 
most but for a few years; and at the same time be so unaccountably negligent of a 
precious soul, which must continue to the age of eternity! Oh, what care! what pains! 
what diligence! and what contrivances are made use of for, and laid out upon, these 
frail and tottering tabernacles of clay: when, alas! the nobler part of us is allowed so 
very small a share of our concern that we scarce will give ourselves the trouble of 
bestowing a thought upon it.
	"We have a remarkable instance of this in a notorious malefactor, well known 
by the name of Jack Sheppard! What amazing difficulties has he overcome, what 
astonishing things has he performed, for the sake of a stinking, miserable carcass, 
hardly worth hanging? how dexterously did he pick the padlock of his chain with a 
crooked nail? How manfully did he burst his fetters asunder, climb up the chimney, 
wrench out an iron bar, break his way through a stone wall and make the strong doors 
of a dark entry fly before him, till he got upon the leads of the prison? and then, fixing 
a blanket to the wall with a spike he stole out of the chapel, how intrepidly did he 
descend to the top of the turner's house, and how cautiously pass down the stairs and 
make his escape at the street door?
	"Oh, that ye were all like Jack Sheppard! — Mistake me not, my brethren, I 
don't mean in a carnal but in a spiritual sense, for I mean to spiritualize these things. 
— What a shame it would be if we should not think it worth our while to take as much 
pains and employ as many deep thoughts to save our souls, as he has done to preserve 
his body.
	"Let me exhort ye, then, to open the locks of your hearts with the nail of 
repentance; burst asunder the fetters of your beloved lusts; mount the chimney of 
hope, take from hence the bar of good resolution, break through the stone wall of 
despair and all the strong holds in the dark entry of the valley of the shadow of death; 
raise yourself to the leads of divine meditation; fix the blanket of faith with the spike 
of the church; let yourselves down to the turner's house of resignation and descend 
the stairs of humility. So shall you come to the door of deliverance from the prison of 
iniquity and escape the clutches of that old executioner and devil, who goeth about 
like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour."



LEWIS HOUSSART 
Executed at Swan-Alley, Shoreditch, Dec. 7, 1724, for Murder.

	THIS malefactor was born at Sedan, in France; but his parents being 
Protestants, quitted that kingdom, in consequence of an edict of Lewis the Fourteenth, 
and settled in Dutch Brabant.
	Young Houssart's father placed him with a barber-surgeon at Amsterdam, with 
whom he lived a consderable time, and then served as a surgeon on board a Dutch 
ship, which he quitted through want of health, and came to England. He had been a 
considerable time in this country when he became acquainted with Ann Rondeau, 
whom he married at the French church in Spitalfields. Having lived about three years 
with his wife at Hoxton, he left her with disgust, and going into the city, passed for a. 
single man, working as a barber and hair-dresser; and getting acquainted with a Mrs. 
Herb, of Prince's-street, Lothbury, he married her at St. Antholin's church.
	No sooner was the ceremony performed, than the company went to drink some 
wine at an adjacent tavern, when the parish clerk observed that Houssart changed 
countenance, and some of the company asked him if he repented his bargain; to which 
he answered in the negative.
	It appears as if, even at this time, he had come to a resolution. of murdering his 
first wife; for he had not been long married before his second charging him with a 
former matrimonial connexion, he desired her to be easy, for she would be convinced, 
in a short time, that he had no other wife but herself.
	During this interval his first wife lived with her mother in Swan-alley, 
Shoreditch, and Mrs. Houssart being in an ill state of health, her husband called upon 
her about a fortnight before the perpetration of the murder, and told her he would 
bring her something to relieve her: and the next day he gave her a medicine that had 
the appearance of conserve of roses, which threw her into such severe convulsion fits, 
that her life was despaired of for some hours; but at length she recovered.
	This scheme failing, Houssart determined to murder her, to effect which, and 
conceal the crime, he took the following method:
	Having directed his second wife to meet him at the Turk's Head in 
Bishopsgate-street, she went thither and waited for him. In the mean time he dressed 
himself in a white great coat, and walked out with a cane in his hand, and a sword by 
his side. Going to the end of Swan-alley, Shoreditch, he gave a boy a penny to go into 
the lodgings of his first wife, and her mother, Mrs. Rondeau, and tell the old woman 
that a gentleman wanted to speak with her at the Black Dog in Bishopsgate-street.
	Mrs. Rondeau saying she would wait on the gentleman, Houssart hid himself 
in the alley, till, the boy told him she was gone out, and then went to his wife's room 
and cut her throat with a razor, and thus murdered, she was found by her mother on 
her return from the Black Dog, after enquiring in vain for the gentleman who was said 
to be waiting for her.
	In the interim Houssart went to his other wife at the Turk's Head, where he 
appeared much dejected, and had some sudden starts of passion. The landlady of the 
house, who was at supper with his wife, expressing some surprise at his behaviour, he 
became more calm, and said he was only uneasy lest her husband should return, and 
find him so meanly dressed; and soon after this Houssart and his wife went home.
	Mrs. Rondeau having found her daughter murdered, as above-mentioned, went 
to her son, to whom she communicated the affair: and he having heard that Houssart 
lodged in Lothbury, took a constable, went thither, and said he was come to 
apprehend him on suspicion of having murdered his wife; on which he laughed 
loudly, and asked if any thing in his looks indicated that he could he guilty of such a 
crime.
	Being committed to Newgate, he was tried at the next sessions at the Old 
Bailey, but acquitted for want of the evidence of the boy, who was not found till a 
considerable time afterwards: but the court ordered the prisoner to remain in Newgate 
to take his trial for bigamy.
	In consequence hereof he was indicted at the next sessions, when full proof 
was brought of both his marriages; but an objection was made by his counsel, on a 
point of law, "Whether he could be guilty of bigamy, as the first marriage was 
performed by a French minister, and he was only once married according to the form 
of the church of England." On this the jury brought in a special verdict, subject to the 
determination of the twelve judges.
	While Houssart lay in Newgate waiting this solemn award, the boy whom he 
had employed to go into the house of Mrs. Rondeau, and who had hitherto kept secret 
the whole transaction, being in conversation with his mother, asked her what would 
become of the boy if he should be apprehended. The mother told him he would be 
only sworn to tell the truth. "Why (said he) I thought they would hang him:" but the 
mother satisfying him that there was no danger of any such consequence, and talking 
farther with him on the subject, he confessed that he was the boy who went with the 
message.
	Hereupon he was taken to Solomon Rondeau, brother of the deceased, who 
went with him to a justice of peace, and the latter ordered a constable to attend him to 
New-gate, where he fixed on Houssart as the person who had employed him in the 
manner above-mentioned.
	In consequence hereof, Solomon Rondeau lodged an appeal against the 
prisoner; but it appearing that there was some bad Latin in it, no proceedings could be 
had thereon; and therefore another appeal was lodged the next sessions, when the 
prisoner urging that he was not prepared for his trial, he was yet indulged till a 
subsequent sessions.
	The appeal was brought in the name of Solomon Rondeau, as heir to the 
deceased; and the names John Doe and Richard Roe were entered in the common 
form, as pledges to prosecute.
	When, the trial came on, the counsel for the prisoner stated the following 
pleas, in bar to, and abatement of, the proceedings: —
	I. That besides the appeal, to which he now pleaded, there was another yet 
depending, and undetermined.
	II. A misnomer, because his name was not Lewis but Louis.
	III. That the addition of labourer was wrong, for he was not a labourer, but, a 
barber-surgeon.
	IV. That there were no such persons as John Doe and Richard Roe, who were 
mentioned as pledges in the appeal.
	V. That Henry Rondeau was the brother and heir to the deceased; that 
Solomon Rondeau was not her brother and heir, and therefore was not the proper 
appellant; and
	VI. That the defendant was not guilty of the facts charged in the appeal.
	The counsel for the appellant replied to these several pleas in substance as 
follows:—
	To the first that the former appeal was already quashed, and therefore could 
not be depending and undetermined.
	To the second, that it appeared that the prisoner had owned to the name of 
Lewis, by pleading to it on two indictments, the one for bigamy and the other for 
murder; and his hand-writing was produced, in which he had spelt his name Lewis; 
and it was likewise proved that he had usually answered to that name.
	To the third, it was urged that, on the two former indictments, he had pleaded 
to the condition of labourer; and a person swore that the prisoner worked as a 
journeyman or servant, and did not carry on his business as a master.
	To the fourth it was urged, that there were two such persons in Middlesex as 
John Doe and Richard Roe, the one a weaver, and the other a soldier; and this fact was 
sworn to.
	In answer to the fifth, Ann Rondeau, the mother of the deceased, swore that 
she had no children except the murdered party, and Solomon Rondeau, the appellant: 
that Solomon was brother and heir to the deceased, which Henry Rondeau was not, 
being only the son of her husband by a former wife.
	With regard to the last article, respecting his being not guilty, that was left to 
be determined by the opinion. of the jury.
	Hereupon the trial was brought on, and the same witnesses being examined as 
on the former trial, to which that of the boy was added, the jury determined that the 
prisoner was guilty, in consequence of which he received sentence of death.
	His behaviour after conviction was very improper for one in his melancholy 
situation; and, as the day of execution drew nearer, he became still more thoughtless, 
and more hardened, and frequently declared that he would cut his throat, as the jury 
had found him guilty of cutting that of his wife.
	His behaviour at the place of execution was equally hardened. He refused to 
pray with the ordinary of Newgate and another clergyman, who kindly attended to 
assist him in his devotions.	


THOMAS PACKER and JOSEPH PICKER 
Executed at Tyburn February, 1, 1725, For Highway Robbery:

	THOMAS PACKER was a native of London, his father being a shoemaker in 
Butcher-hall-lane, Newgate-street. He was bound apprentice to the master of the Ship 
Tavern at Greenwich; But not being content in his situation, he was turned over to a 
vinter, who kept the Rummer Tavern, near Red-lion-square; and having served the 
rest of his time, he lived as a waiter in different places.
	He had not been long out of his time before he married; but the expenses of his 
new connection, added to those arising from the extravagance of his disposition, soon 
reduced him to circumstances of distress.
	Joseph Picken was likewise a native of London, being the son of a tailor in 
Clerkenwell; but his father dying while he was an infant, be was educated by his 
mother, who placed him with a vinter near Billingsgate, with whom he served an 
apprenticeship, after which he married, and kept the tap of the Mermaid Inn at 
Windsor: but his wife being a bad manager, and his business much neglected, he was 
soon reduced to the utmost extremity of poverty.
	Being obliged even to sell his bed, and sleep on the floor, his wife advised him 
to go on the highway, to supply their necessities. Fatally for him, he listened to her 
advice, and repaired to London, where, on the following day, he fell into company 
with Packer, who had been an old acquaintance:
	The poverty of these unhappy men tempted them to make a speedy resolution 
of committing depredations on the public; in consequence of which they hired horses, 
as to go to Windsor; but instead thereof they rode towards Finchley; and in a road 
between Highgate and Hornsey, they robbed two farmers, whom they compelled to 
dismount, and turned their horses loose.
	Hastening to London with their ill-gotten booty, they went to a public house in 
Monmouth-street, where one of them taking his handkerchief out of his pocket, 
accidentally drew out his pistol with it, which being remarked by a person in 
company, he procured a peace officer, who took them into custody on suspicion.
	Having been lodged in the Round House for that night, they were taken before 
a magistrate on the following day; and being separately examined, disagreed much in 
their tale; and the parties who had been robbed attending, and swearing to their 
persons, they were committed for trial.
	When they were brought to the bar, they endeavoured to prove that they were 
absent from the spot at the time the robbery was committed: but failing in this, a 
verdict of guilty was given against them; and they received sentence of death.
	After conviction they behaved with every sign of contrition. Picken was in a 
very bad state of health almost the whole time he lay under sentence of death; and 
complained much of the ingratitude of his wife, who first advised him to the 
commission of the crime, yet never visited him during his miserable confinement in 
Newgate. These unhappy men prepared to meet their fate with decent resignation, and 
received the sacrament with every sign of genuine devotion.
	They were so shocked at the idea of their approaching dissolution, that they 
trembled with the dreadful apprehension, and were unable to give that advice to the 
surrounding multitude, which, however, might be easily implied from their. pitiable 
condition.
	This robbery, for any thing that appeared to the contrary, being their first 
offence against the law, these unfortunate men were, surely, objects of royal 
clemency. In more merciful times, like the present, we are of opinion that our king 
would at least have remitted their punishment; but most likely have granted them a 
pardon.


VINCENT DAVIS 
Executed at Tyburn, April 3rd, 1725, for the murder of his wife.

	WHENEVER a man ill treats a woman, who by every action of her life shows 
herself his friend, the partner of his toil, and the consoler of his mind, under worldly 
misfortunes, it is abominable; but what punishment awaits the execrable wretch who 
sheds the blood of such a wife? Such however, shocking to relate, befel the wife of 
this abhorred murderer, who appears to have possessed qualities, deserving the 
protection of a good man. We have already, in the duty we owe the reader, had 
occasion to present too many instances of the flagitious conduct of females; but to the 
good, we would repeat, after the excellent Poet Otway, —
"There's in you all that we believe in heaven, 
Amazing brightness, purity, and truth,  
Eternal joy, and everlasting love."
	This shocking sinner, who followed the trade of a butcher in Smithfield, 
behaved with cruelty to his wife, and though he had been married some years, 
accustomed himself to keep company with women of ill fame.
	Going out one Sunday morning he staid till noon; and coming home to dinner 
went out again soon afterwards, and was directly followed by his wife, who found 
him drinking with some bad women at a house in Pye-corner; and coming home, 
mentioned this circumstance to her neighbours. Soon afterwards the husband returned; 
and using some threatening expressions, the wife desired a lodger in the same house 
to go down stairs with her, lest he should beat her. The woman accordingly attended 
her, and was witness to Davis's beating her in a barbarous manner, and threatening to 
murder her because she had interrupted him while in the company of the other 
women. Hereupon the wife ran away, and secreted herself for a time; but returning to 
her lodgings, begged admission into her landlady's room, who hid her behind the bed. 
In the interim the husband had been out; but, returning, went to bed, and when his 
wife thought he was asleep, she went in the room to search his pockets, in. which she 
found only a few halfpence, and coming down stairs said that her husband had laid a 
knife by the bedside, from which she concluded that he had an intention of murdering 
her.
	Mrs. Davis being concealed during the night, the landlady went into her 
husband's room in the morning, and said, "What do you mean by threatening to 
commit murder in my house?" On this he snatched up, his knife; and the landlady 
taking hold of a small cane, he took it from her, saying he valued it as his life; as he 
kept it to beat his wife with.
	In the evening of this day the wife and landlady finding him at the before-
mentioned house in Pye-corner, he beat his wife most severely; on which the landlady 
advised Mrs. Davis to swear the peace against him, and have him imprisoned, as she 
had done on a similar occasion. About an hour after this he went home, and said to his 
wife, "What business have you here, or any where in my company?—-You shall 
follow me no more for I am married to little Jenny."
	The wife, who seems to have had more love for him than such a miscreant 
deserved, said she could not help it, but she would drink with him and be friends; and 
on his taking his supper to an alehouse, she followed him; but soon returned with her 
hands bloody, saying he had cut her fingers.
	On his return he directed his wife to light him to his room, which she did, and 
earnestly entreated him to be reconciled to her; but instead of making any kind of 
reply, he drew his knife, and following her into the landlady's room, he there stabbed 
her in the breast.
	Thus wounded, the poor wretch ran down stairs, and was followed by the 
murderer: She was sheltered in a neighbouring house, where sitting down, and pulling 
off her stomacher, she bled to death in about half an hour.
	In the interim the landlady called the watchman, who soon apprehended Davis 
and conducted him to the house where the dead woman lay; on which he said, "Betty, 
won't you speak to me?" A woman who was present said, "You will find to your 
sorrow, that she will never speak more;" and to this the murderer replied, "Well, I 
know I shall be hanged; and I would as soon suffer for her as another."
	Being committed to the care of a peace officer, he was conveyed to prison, in 
his way to which he said; "I have killed the best wife in the world, and I am certain of 
being hanged; but for God's sake don't let me be anatomized."
	When he was brought to his trial, the above recited facts were proved by the 
testimony of several witnesses; and on the jury pronouncing the verdict of Guilty, he 
execrated the court with the most profane imprecations.
While he lay under sentence of death, he affected a false bravery; but when orders 
were given for his execution, his assumed courage left him, and he appeared greatly 
terrified, as well indeed he might at his approaching fate. He had such a dread of 
falling into the hands of the surgeons, that he sent letters to several of his 
acquaintance, begging they would rescue his body if any attempt should be made to 
take it away.
	He behaved in the most gloomy and reserved manner at the place of execution. 
It was our intention to have commented, at some length, on the unmanly and inhuman 
crime, of a man murdering his wife, in our account of the preceding murderer, Lewis 
Houssart; but we find the case of Davis even still more detestable, and the feelings of 
our readers on its perusal must render it unnecessary to do more than express our 
detestation of such monsters.


ROBERT HARPHAM 
Under the Pretence of making Buttons he made Coins, and was executed at 
Tyburn, 24th of May, 1725

	THIS offender lived in Westminster, where he carried on the business of a 
carpenter for a considerable time with some success; but at length had the misfortune 
to become a bankrupt, after which he appears to have turned his thoughts to a very 
dishonest way of acquiring money. Having engaged the assistance of one Fordham, he 
hired a house near St Paul's Churchyard, and pretending to be a button-maker he put 
up an iron press, with which he used to coin money, and Fordham, having aided him 
in the coinage, put off the counterfeit money thus made. From hence they removed to 
Rosemary Lane, and there carried on the same dangerous business for some time, till 
the neighbours, observing that great quantities of charcoal were brought in and the 
utmost precaution taken to keep the door shut, began to form very unfavourable 
suspicions; on which Harpham took a cellar in Paradise Row, near Hanover Square, to 
which the implements were removed. While in this situation, Harpham invited a 
gentleman to dine with him, and was imprudent enough to take him into his workshop 
and show him his tools. The gentleman wondering for what purpose they could be 
intended, Harpham said: "In this press I can make buttons, but I will show you 
something else that is a greater rarity." Having said this, he struck a piece of metal, 
which instantly bore the resemblance of half-a-guinea, except the milling on the edge; 
but another instrument being applied to it, the half-guinea was completed. Our coiners 
now removed to Jermyn Street, St. James's where Harpham took an empty cellar, and 
on the old pretence of button-making gave orders to a bricklayer to put up a grate. The 
bricklayer remarking what a quantity of coals the grate would consume; the other said 
it was so much the better, for it was calculated to dress victuals either by baking, 
stewing, roasting or boiling. Harpham kept the key of this cellar, permitting no one to 
enter but Fordham; and once in three weeks he had a quantity of charcoal and sea-coal 
put in through the window. The landlord of the place, suspecting some illegal 
proceeding, desired his neighbours to watch the parties; in consequence of which 
Harpham was soon discovered in the attempt to put off counterfeit money; on which 
he and his assistant were apprehended and committed to Newgate; and Fordham being 
admitted an evidence, the other was convicted, and received sentence of death. At the 
place of execution he exhorted the persons present to beware of covetousness and be 
content in the station allotted them by Providence.


JONATHAN WILD 
Director of a Corporation of Thieves, and a most famous Receiver. Executed 
at Tyburn, 24th of May, 1725

  
Jonathan Wild on his way to Execution

	OF all the thieves that ever infested London this man was the most notorious. 
That eminent vagabond, Barnfylde Moore Carew, was recognized as 'King of the 
Beggars:' — in like manner may the name and memory of Jonathan Wild be ever held 
in abhorrence as 'The Prince of Robbers.'
	The history of the arts, deceptions, cruelty, and perfidy of this man, have alone 
filled a volume; and, should he occupy more room in our epitome than may be 
deemed necessary, we have only to observe, that the whole catalogue of other crimes 
exposed in this Chronology, centred in one individual, would scarcely produce a 
parallel with this thief-taker, and most finished thief.
	Jonathan Wild was born at Wolverhampton, in Staffordshire, about the year 
1682. He was the eldest son of his parents, who, at a proper age, put him to a day-
school, which he continued to attend till he had gained a sufficient knowledge in 
reading, writing, and accounts, to qualify him for business. His father had intended to 
bring him up to his own trade; but changed that design, and, at about the age of 
fifteen, apprenticed him for seven years to a buckle-maker in Birmingham. Upon the 
expiration of this term be returned to Wolverhampton, married a young woman of 
good character, and gained a tolerable livelihood by working at his business.
	About two years after, in the course of which time his wife gave birth to a son, 
he formed the resolution of visiting London, deserted his wife and child, and set out 
for the metropolis, where he got into employment, and maintained himself by his 
trade: being, however, of an extravagant disposition, many months had not elapsed 
after his arrival before be was arrested for debt, and thrown into Wood Street 
Compter, where he remained upwards of four years. In a pamphlet which he 
published, and which we shall more particularly mention hereafter, be says that during 
his imprisonment 'it was impossible but he must, in some measure, be let into the 
secrets of the criminals there under confinement, and particularly Mr. Hitchin's 
management.'
	Whilst in the Compter, Wild assiduously cultivated the acquaintance of his 
fellow-captives, and attended to their accounts of the exploits in which they had been 
engaged with singular satisfaction. In this prison was a woman named Mary Milliner, 
who had long been considered as one of the most abandoned prostitutes and 
pickpockets in the town. After having escaped the punishment due to the variety of 
felonies of which she had been guilty, she was put under confinement for debt. An 
intimacy soon commenced between this woman and Wild, and they had no sooner 
obtained their freedom than they lived under the denomination of man and wife. By 
their iniquitous practices they quickly obtained a sum of money, which enabled them 
to open a little public house in Cock Alley, facing Cripplegate church.
	Milliner being personally acquainted with most of the depraved characters by 
whom London and its environs were infested, and perfectly conversant as to the 
manner of their proceedings, she was considered by Wild as a most useful companion; 
and indeed very materially contributed towards rendering him one of the most 
accomplished proficients in the arts of villainy. He industriously penetrated into the 
secrets of felons of every description, who resorted in great numbers to his house, in 
order to dispose of their booties; and they looked upon him with a kind of awe, arising 
from the consciousness that their lives were at all times in his power.
	Wild was at little trouble to dispose of the articles brought to him by thieves at 
something less than their real value, no law existing at this period for the punishment 
of the receivers of stolen goods; but the evil increased at length to so enormous a 
degree, that it was deemed expedient by the legislature to frame a law for its 
suppression. An act was passed, therefore, consigning such as should be convicted of 
receiving goods, knowing them to have been stolen, to transportation for the space of 
fourteen years.
	Wild's practices were considerably interrupted by the above-mentioned law; to 
elude the operation of which, however, he adopted the following plan — he called a 
meeting of all the thieves known to him, and observed that, if they carried their 
booties to such of the pawnbrokers as were known to be not much affected by 
scruples of conscience, they would scarcely receive on the property one-fourth of the 
real value; and that if they were offered to strangers, either for sale, or by way of 
deposit, it was a chance of ten to one but the parties offering were rendered amenable 
to the laws. The most industrious thieves, he said, were now scarcely able to obtain a 
livelihood, and must either submit to be half starved, or live in great and continual 
danger of Tyburn. He informed them that he had devised a plan for removing the 
inconveniences under which they laboured, recommended them to follow his advice, 
and to behave towards him with honour; and concluded by proposing that, when they 
made prize of any thing, they should deliver it to him, instead of carrying it to the 
pawnbroker, saying he would restore the goods to the owners, by which means 
greater sums might be raised, while the thieves would remain perfectly secure from 
detection.
	This proposal was received with general approbation, and it was resolved to 
carry it into immediate execution. All the stolen effects were to be given into the 
possession of Wild, who soon appointed convenient places wherein they were to be 
deposited, rightly judging that it would not be prudent to have them left at his own 
house.
	The infamous plan being thus concerted, it became the business of Wild to 
apply to persons who had been robbed, pretending to be greatly concerned at their 
misfortunes, saying that some suspected property had been stopped by a very honest 
man, a broker, with whom he was acquainted, and that, if their goods happened to be 
in the hands of his friend, restitution should be made. But he failed not to suggest that 
the broker ought to be rewarded for his trouble and disinterestedness; and to use every 
argument in his power towards exacting a promise that no disagreeable consequences 
should ensue to his friend, who had imprudently neglected to apprehend the supposed 
thieves.
	Happy in the prospect of regaining their property, without the trouble and 
expense necessarily attending prosecutions, people generally approved of the conduct 
of Wild, and sometimes rewarded him even with one half of the real value of the 
goods restored. It was not, however, uniformly so; and sundry pertinacious 
individuals, not satisfied with Wild's superficial statement, questioned him 
particularly as to the manner of their goods being discovered. On these occasions he 
pretended to feel hurt that his honour should be disputed, alleging that his motive was 
to afford all the service in his power to the injured party, whose goods he imagined 
might possibly be those stopped by his friend; but since his honest intentions had been 
received in so ungracious a manner, and himself interrogated respecting the robbers, 
he had nothing further to say on the subject, but must take his leave; adding, that his 
name was Jonathan Wild, and that he was every day to be found at his house in Cock 
Alley, Cripplegate. This affectation of resentment seldom failed to answer the 
purposes proposed by it; and a more favourable estimate of his principles and 
character thus formed, he had an opportunity of advancing his demands.
	WILD received in his own name no gratuity from the owners of stolen goods, 
but deducted his profit from the money which was to be paid the broker: thus did he 
amass considerable sums without danger of prosecution, his offences coming under 
the operation of no law then in existence. For several years indeed he preserved a 
tolerably fair character, so consummate was the art employed in the management of 
his schemes.
	Our hero's business greatly increasing, and his name becoming well known, he 
altered his mode of action. Instead of applying directly to parties who had been 
plundered, he opened an office, to which great numbers resorted, in hopes of 
recovering their effects. Re made a great parade in his business, and assumed a 
consequence which enabled him more effectually to impose upon the public. When 
persons came to his office, they were informed that they must each pay a crown in 
consideration of receiving his advice. This ceremony being dispatched, he entered in 
his book the name and address of the applicants, with all the particulars they could 
communicate respecting the robberies, and the rewards that would be given provided 
the goods were recovered: they were then desired to call again in a few days, when he 
hoped he should be able to give them some agreeable intelligence. Upon returning to 
know the success of his inquiries, he told them that he had received some information 
concerning their goods, but that the agent he had employed to trace them had apprised 
him that the robbers pretended they could raise more money by pawning the property 
than by restoring it for the promised reward; saying, however, that, if he could by any 
means procure an interview with the villains, he doubted not of being able to settle 
matters agreeably to the terms already stipulated; but, at the same time, artfully 
insinuating that the safest and most expeditious method would be to make some 
addition to the reward.
	Wild, at length, became eminent in his profession, which proved highly 
lucrative. When he had discovered the utmost sum that it was likely would be given 
for the recovery of any property, he requested its owner to apply at a particular time, 
and, meanwhile, caused the goods to be ready for delivery.
	Considerable advantages were derived from examining the person who had 
been robbed; as he thence became acquainted with particulars which the thieves might 
omit to communicate, and was enabled to detect them if they concealed any part of 
their booties. Being in possession of the secrets of every notorious thief, they were 
under the necessity of complying with whatever terms he thought proper to exact, 
being aware that, by opposing his inclination, they should involve themselves in the 
most imminent danger of being sacrificed to the injured laws of their country.
	Through the infamous practices of this man, articles which had been before 
considered as of little use but to the owners now became matters claiming particular 
attention from the thieves, by whom the metropolis and its environs were haunted. 
Pocket-books, books of accounts, watches, rings, trinkets, and a variety of articles of 
but small intrinsic worth, were at once esteemed very profitable plunder. Books of 
accounts, and other writings, being of great importance to the owners, produced very 
handsome rewards; and the same may be said of pocket-books, which generally 
contained curious memorandums, and sometimes banknotes and other articles on 
which money could be readily procured.
	Wild accumulated cash so fast, that he considered himself a man of 
consequence; and, to support his imaginary dignity, dressed in laced clothes and wore 
a sword, which martial instrument he first exercised on the person of his accomplice 
and reputed wife, Mary Milliner, who having on some occasion provoked him, e 
instantly struck at her with it and cut off one of her ears. This event was the cause of a 
separation; but, in acknowledgment of the great services she had rendered him, by 
introducing him to so advantageous a profession, he allowed her a weekly stipend till 
her decease.
	Before Wild had brought the plan of his office to perfection, he for some time 
acted as an assistant to Charles Hitchin, once city-marshal, a man as wicked as 
himself. These celebrated co-partners in villainy, under the pretext of controlling the 
enormities of the dissolute, paraded the streets from Temple-bar to the Minories, 
searching houses of ill fame, and apprehending disorderly and suspected persons; but 
those who complimented these public reformers with private douceurs were allowed 
to practise every species of wickedness with impunity. Hitchin and Wild, however, 
grew jealous of each other, and, an open rupture taking place, they parted, each 
pursuing the business of thief-taking on his own account.
	In the year 1715 Wild removed from his house in Cock Alley to a Mrs. 
Seagoe's, in the Old Bailey, where he pursued his business with the usual success, 
notwithstanding the efforts of Hitchin, his rival in iniquity, to suppress his 
proceedings.
	The reader's astonishment will increase when we state that these two 
abandoned miscreants had the daring effrontery to appeal to the public, and attacked 
each other with all possible scurrility in pamphlets and advertisements. Never, surely, 
was the press so debased as in disgorging time filth of their pens. Hitchin published 
what he called 'The Regulator; or a Discovery of Thieves and Thief-takers.' It is an 
ignorant and impudent insult to the reader, and replete with abuse of Wild, whom he 
brands, in his capacity of thief-taker, with being worse than the thief. Wild retorts 
with great bitterness; and his pamphlet containing much curious information, we shall 
incorporate a part of it, requesting the reader to bear in mind that it refers to a 
previous part or our hero's career.
	Hitchin having greatly debased the respectable post of city marshal, the lord 
mayor suspended him from that office. In order to repair his loss, he determined, as 
the most prudent step, to strive to bury his aversion, and confederate with Wild. To 
effect this, he wrote as follows:
	'I am very sensible that you are let into the knowledge of the secrets of the 
Compter, particularly with relation to the securing of pocket-books; but your 
experience is inferior to mine: I can put you in a far better method than you are 
acquainted with, and which may be done with safety; for, though I am suspended, I 
still retain the power of acting as constable, and, notwithstanding I cannot be heard 
before my lord mayor as formerly, I have interest among the aldermen upon any 
complaint.
	'But I must first tell you that you spoil the trade of thief-taking, in advancing 
greater rewards than are necessary. I give but half-a-crown a book, and, when the 
thieves and pickpockets see you and I confederate, they will submit to our terms, and 
likewise continue their thefts, for fear of coming to the gallows by our means. You 
shall take a turn, with me, as my servant or assistant, and we'll commence our rambles 
this night.'
	Wild, it appears, readily accepted the ex-marshal's proposals: towards dark 
they proceeded to Temple-bar, and called in at several brandy-shops and alehouses 
between that and Fleet Ditch; some of the masters of these houses complimented the 
marshal with punch, others with brandy, and some presented him with fine ale, 
offering their service to their worthy protector. Hitchin made them little answer; but 
gave them to understand all the service he expected from them was, to give 
information of pocket-books, or any goods stolen, as a pay-back: 'For you women of 
the town,' addressing himself to some females in one of the shops, 'make it a common 
practice to resign things of this nature to the bullies and rogues of your retinue; but 
this shall no longer be borne with. I'll give you my word both they and you shall be 
detected, unless you deliver all the pocket-books you meet with to me. What do you 
think I bought my place for, but to make the most of it? and you are to understand this 
is my man (pointing to our buckle-maker to assist me. And if you at any time, for the 
future, refuse to yield up the watches or books you take, either to me or my servant, 
you may be assured of being all sent to Bridewell, and not one of you shall be 
permitted to walk the streets longer. For, notwithstanding I am under suspension 
(chiefly for not suppressing the practices of such vermin as you), I have still a power 
of punishing, and you shall dearly pay for not observing deference to me.' Strutting 
along a little farther, he on a sudden seized two or three dexterous pickpockets, 
reprimanding them for not paying their respects, asking to what part of the town they 
were rambling, and whether they did not see him? They answered that they saw him 
at a distance, but he caught hold of them so hastily that they had no time to address 
him. 'We have been strolling' said they, 'over Moorfields, and from thence to the Blue 
Boar, in pursuit of you; but not finding you, as usual, were under some fears that you 
were indisposed.' The marshal replied, he should have given them a meeting there, but 
had been employed the whole day with his new man. 'You are to be very careful,' said 
he, 'not to oblige any person but myself, or servant, with pocket-books; if you 
presume to do otherwise you shall swing for it, and we are out in the city every night 
to observe your motions.' These instructions given, the pickpockets left, making their 
master a low congee and promising obedience. Such was the progress the first night 
with the buckle-maker, whom he told that his staff of authority terrified the ignorant 
to the extent of his wishes.
	Some nights afterwards, walking towards the back part of St. Paul's, the ex-
marshal thus addressed Jonathan: — 'I will now show you a brandy-shop that 
entertains no company but whores and thieves. This is a house for our purpose, and I 
am informed that a woman of the town who frequents it has lately robbed a gentleman 
of his watch and pocket-book: this advice I received from her companion, with whom 
I have a good understanding. We will go into this house, and, if we can find this 
woman, I will assume a sterner countenance (though at best I look like an infernal), by 
continued threats extort a confession, and by that means get possession of the watch 
and pocket-book; in order to which, do you slily accost her companion.' — Here he 
described her. — 'Call to her, and say that your master is in a damned ill humour, and 
swears if she does not instantly make a discovery where the watch and pocket-book 
may be found, at farthest by to-morrow, he will certainly send her to the Compter, and 
thence to the workhouse.'
	The means being thus concerted to obtain the valuable goods, both master and 
man entered the shop in pursuit of the game, and, according to expectation, found the 
person wanted, with several others; whereupon the marshal, showing an enraged 
countenance becoming the design, and Wild being obliged to follow his example, the 
company said that the master and man looked as sour as two devils. 'Devils!' said the 
marshal; 'I'll make some of you devils, if you do not immediately discover the watch 
and pocket-book I am employed to procure.' 'We do not know your meaning, Sir,' 
answered some. — 'Who do you discourse to?' said others; 'we know nothing of it.' 
The marshal replied in a softer tone, 'You are ungrateful to the last degree to deny me 
this small request, when I was never let info the secret of any thing to be taken from a 
gentleman but I communicated it to you, describing the person so exactly that you 
could not mistake your man; and there is so little got at this rate, that the devil may 
trade with you for me!'
	This speech being made, the marshal gave a nod to his man, who called one of 
the women to the door, and, telling the story above directed, the female answered, 
'Unconscionable devil! when he gets five or ten guineas, not to bestow above as many 
shillings upon us unfortunate wretches! but, however, rather than go to the Compter, 
I'll try what is to be done.'
	The woman, returning to Hitchin, asked him what he would give for the 
delivery of the watch, being seven or eight pounds in value, and the pocket-book, 
having in it various notes and goldsmiths' bills: to whom the marshal answered, a 
guinea; and told her it was much better to comply than to go to Newgate, which she 
must certainly expect upon her refusal. The woman replied that the watch was in 
pawn for forty shillings, and if he did not advance that sum she should be obliged to 
strip herself for its redemption; though, when her furbelowed scarf was laid aside, she 
had nothing underneath but furniture for a paper-mill. After abundance of words, he 
allowed her thirty shillings for the watch and book, which she accepted, and the watch 
was never returned to the owner!
	Some little time after this, a gentleman in liquor going into the Blue Boar, near 
Moorfields, with a woman of the town, immediately lost his watch. Tie applied to the 
ex-marshal, desiring his assistance; but the buckle-maker, being well acquainted with 
the walk between Cripplegate and Moorfields, had the fortune to find the woman. The 
master immediately seized her on notice given, and by vehement threatenings obliged 
her to a confession. She declared that she had stolen the watch, and carried it to a 
woman that kept a brandy-shop near, desiring her to assist in the sale of it. The 
mistress of the brandy-shop readily answered that she had it from an honest young 
woman who frequented her house, whose husband was gone to sea; whereupon she 
pawned the watch for its value, and ordered the sale.
	This story seeming reasonable, a watchmaker had purchased the watch, and 
gave the money agreed for it, which was fifty shillings. Thus the sale of the watch 
being discovered, the marshal, with his staff and assistants, immediately repaired to 
the watchmaker's house, and, seizing the watchmaker in the same manner as a person 
would do the greatest criminal, carried him to a public house, telling him that if he did 
not forthwith send for the watch he should be committed to Newgate.
	The watchmaker, not being any ways accustomed to unfair dealings, directly 
answered that he bought the watch, and the person he had it of would produce the 
woman that stole it if it were stolen, the woman being then present. The marshal 
replied he had no business with the persons that stole the property, but with him in 
whose possession it was found; and that, if he did not instantly send for the watch, and 
deliver it without insisting upon any money, but on the contrary return him thanks for 
his civility, which deserved five or ten pieces, he would without delay send him to 
Newgate.
	Hereupon the innocent artisan, being much surprised, sent for the watch, and 
surrendered it; and since that it has sufficiently appeared that the owner made a 
present to Hitchin of three guineas for his trouble, whilst the poor watchmaker 
underwent a dead loss of his fifty shillings. This story and the following afford a 
pretty good example of the honesty of this city-marshal:
	A biscuit-baker near Wapping having lost a pocketbook, wherein was, among 
other papers, an exchequer-bill for 100l. applied himself to the marshal's man, the 
buckle-maker, for the recovery thereof: the buckle-maker advised him to advertise it, 
and stop the payment of the bill, which he did accordingly; but having no account of 
his property, he came to Wild several times about it; and, at length, told him that he 
had received a visit from a tall man, with a long peruke and sword, calling himself the 
city-marshal, who asked him if he had lost his pocket-book. The biscuit-baker 
answered yes; and desiring to know his reasons for putting such a question, or 
whether he could give him any intelligence; he replied, no, he could not give him any 
intelligence of it as yet, but wished to be informed whether he had employed any 
person to search after it. To which the biscuit-baker answered, he had employed one 
Wild. Hereupon the marshal told him he was under a mistake; that he should have 
applied to him, who was the only person in England that could serve him, being well 
assured it was entirely out of the power of Wild, or any of those fellows, to know 
where the pocket-book was (this, says the pamphlet, was very certain, he having it at 
that time in his custody); and begged to know the reward that would be given. The 
biscuit-baker replied he would give 10L. The marshal said that a greater reward 
should be offered, for that exchequer-bills and those things were ready money, and 
could immediately be sold; and that, if he had employed him in the beginning, and 
offered 40L. or 50L. he would have served him.
	The biscuit-baker having acquainted Wild with this story, the latter gave it as 
his opinion that the pocketbook was in the marshal's possession, and that it would be 
to no purpose to continue advertising it, he being well assured that the marshal would 
not have taken the pains to find out the biscuit-baker, unless he knew how to get at it.
	Upon the whole, therefore, he advised the owner rather to advance his bidding, 
considering what hands the note was in, especially as the marshal had often told his 
servant how easily he could dispose of banknotes and exchequer-bills at gaming-
houses, which he very much frequented.
	Pursuant to this advice, the losing party went a second time to the marshal, and 
bid 401. for his pocket-book and bill. ' Zounds, sir,' said the marshal, 'you are too late! 
' which was all the satisfaction he gave him. Thus was the poor biscuit-baker tricked 
out of his exchequer-bill, which was paid to another person, though it could never be 
traced back; but it happened, a short time after, that some of the young fry of 
pickpockets under the tuition of the marshal fell out in sharing the money given them 
for this very pocketbook; whereupon one of them came to Wild, and discovered the 
whole matter, viz, that he had sold the pocket-book, with the 100L. exchequer-note in 
it, and other bills, to the city-marshal, at a tavern in Aldersgate Street, for four or five 
guineas.
	A person standing in the pillory, near Charing Cross, a gentleman in the crowd 
was deprived of a pocketbook, which had in it bills and lottery-tickets to the value of 
several hundred pounds; and a handsome reward (30L.) was at first offered for it in a 
public advertisement. The marshal, having a suspicion that a famous pickpocket, 
known by his lame hand, had taken the book, he applied to him; and, to enforce a 
confession and delivery, told him, with a great deal of assurance, that he must be the 
person, such a man, with a lame hand, having been described by the gentleman to 
have been near hint, and whom he was certain had stolen his book. 'In short,' says he, 
'you had the book, and you must bring it to me, and you shall share the reward; but, if 
you refuse to comply with such advantageous terms, you must never expect to come 
within the city gates; for, if you do, Bridewell, at least, if not Newgate, shall be your 
residence.'
	After several meetings, the marshal's old friend could not deny that he had the 
pocket-book: but he said to the marshal, I did not expect this rigorous treatment from 
you, after the services I have done you, in concealing you several times, and by that 
means keeping you out of a gaol. It is not the way to expect any future service, when 
all my former good offices are forgotten.' Notwithstanding these reasons, Hitchin still 
insisted upon what he had at first proposed; and at length the pickpocket, considering 
that he could not repair to the Exchange, or elsewhere, to follow his pilfering 
employment, without the marshal's consent, and fearing to be made a mark of his 
revenge, condescended to part with the pocket-book upon terms reasonable between 
buyer and seller. Whereupon says the marshal, 'I lost all my money last night at 
gaming, except a gold watch in my pocket, which I believe there will be no inquiry 
after, it coming to hand by an intrigue with a woman of the town, whom the 
gentleman will be ashamed to prosecute for fear of exposing himself. I'll exchange 
goods for goods with you.' So the pickpocket, rather than he would risk the 
consequence of disobliging his master, concluded the bargain.
	One night, not far from St. Paul's, the marshal and his man met with a 
detachment of pickpocket boys, who instantly, at the sight of their master, took to 
their heels and ran away. The buckle-maker asked the meaning of their surprise. To 
which the marshal answered, 'I know their meaning, a pack of rogues! they were to 
have met me in the fields, this morning, with a book I am informed they have taken 
from a gentleman and they are afraid of being secured for their disobedience. There is 
Jack Jones among them. — We'll catch the whore's bird.' Jack Jones, running behind a 
coach to make his escape, was taken by the marshal and his man. The master carried 
him to a tavern, and threatened him severely, telling him he believed they were turned 
housebreakers, and that they were concerned in a burglary lately committed by four 
young criminals. This happened to be the fact, and the boy fearing the marshal had 
been informed of it, he, for his own security, confessed, and the marshal promised to 
save his life on his becoming evidence: whereupon the marshal committed the boy to 
the Compter till the next morning, when he carried him before a justice of the peace, 
who took his information, and issued a warrant for the apprehension of his 
companions.
	Notice being given where the criminals were to be found, viz, at a house in 
Beech Lane, Hitchin and Wild went privately in the night thither, and, listening at the 
door, they overheard the boys, with several others, in a mixed company. Entering the 
house, they met ten or twelve persons, who were in a great rage, inquiring what 
business the marshal had there, and saluting him with a few oaths, which occasioned 
the marshal to make a prudent retreat, pulling the door after him, and leaving his little 
man to the mercy of the savage company.
	In a short time the marshal returned with eight or ten watchmen and a 
constable; and, at the door, out of his dastardly disposition, though his pretence was a 
ceremonious respect, obliged the constable to go in first; but the constable and 
marshal were both so long with their compliments that the man thought neither of 
them would enter in: at last the constable appearing, with his long staff extended 
before him, the marshal manfully followed, crying out, 'Where are the rebel villains? 
Why don't ye secure them?' Wild answered that they were under the table; upon which 
the constable pulled out the juvenile offenders, neither of whom were above twelve 
years of age. The two boys now taken were committed to Newgate; but the fact 
having been perpetrated in the county of Surrey, they were afterwards removed to the 
Marshalsea prison. The assizes coining en at Kingston, and Jones giving his evidence 
against his companions before the grand jury, a true bill was found, and the marshal 
endorsed his name on the back of it, to have the honour of being an evidence against 
these monstrous housebreakers. On the trial, the nature of the fact was declared; but 
the parents of the offenders appeared, and satisfied the Court that the marshal was the 
occasion of the ruin of these boys, by taking them into the fields, and encouraging 
them in the stealing of pocket-books; and told him, on his affirming they were thieves, 
that he had made them such. The judge, observing the marshal's views were more to 
get the reward than to do justice, summed up the charge to the jury in favour of the 
boys, who were thereupon acquitted, and the marshal reprimanded. He was so enraged 
at this, and so angry with himself for not accusing them of other crimes, that he 
immediately returned to London, leaving his man to discharge the whole reckoning at 
Kingston.
	A gentleman, who had lost his watch when in company with a woman of the 
town, applied to a person belonging to the Compter, who recommended him to the 
buckle-maker, to procure the same; and the gentleman applying accordingly to him, 
and giving him a description of the woman, the buckle-maker, a few days after, 
traversing Fleet Street with his master in an evening, happened to meet with the 
female (as he apprehended by the description of the gentleman) who had stolen the 
watch, and, coming nearer, was satisfied therein.
	He told his master that she was the very person described: to which the master 
answered, with an air of pleasure, 'I am glad to find we have a prospect of something 
to-night to defray our expenses,' and immediately, with the assistance of Wild, seized 
the female and carried her to a public house, where upon examination, she confessed 
it was in her power to serve the marshal in it; telling him that if he would please to go 
with her home, or send his man, the watch would be returned, with a suitable reward 
for his trouble. The man asked his master his opinion, whether he thought he might 
pursue the woman with safety? To which the other replied, Yes, for that he knew her, 
at the same time giving hints of his following at a reasonable distance, for his security, 
which he did with a great deal of precaution, as will appear; for, proceeding with the 
female, she informed him that her husband, who had the watch about him, was at a 
tavern near Whitefriars, and, if he would condescend to go thither, he might he 
furnished with it without giving himself any farther trouble, together with the reward 
he deserved, — To which Wild consenting, they came to the tavern, where she made 
inquiry for the company she had been with but a short space before; and, being 
informed they were still in the house, she sent in word by the drawer that the 
gentlewoman who had been with them that evening desired the favour to speak with 
them. The drawer going in, and delivering the message, immediately three or four 
men came from the room to the female: she gave them to understand that the 
marshal's man had accused her of stealing a watch, telling them she supposed it must 
be some other woman who had assumed her name, and desired their protection: upon 
this the whole company sallied out, and attacked the marshal's man in a very violent 
manner, to make a rescue of the female, upbraiding him for degrading a gentlewoman 
of her reputation. The marshal having followed at a little distance, and observed the ill 
success of his man, fearing the like discipline, made off, hugging himself that he had 
escaped the severe treatment he had equally deserved. Jonathan in the struggle 
showed his resentment chiefly against the female; who, after a long contest, was thrust 
out at the back door; and immediately the watch being called, he and the rest of the 
party were seized.
	As they were going to the Compter, the marshal overtook them near Bow 
church, and, coming up to Wild in great haste, asked him the occasion of his long 
absence: the man said, that he had been at a tavern with the woman, where he thought 
he saw him: the master answered, that indeed he was there; but seeing the confusion 
so great, he went off to call the watch and constables. The marshal used his interest to 
get his servant off, but to no purpose, he being carried to the Compter with the rest of 
the company, in order to muke an agreement there.
	The next morning the woman sent to her companions in the Compter, letting 
them know that, if they could be released, the watch should he returned without any 
consideration, which was accordingly done, and a small present made to the marshal's 
man for smart-money. They were now all discharged, paying their fees.
	The watch being thus ready to be produced to the owner, the marshal insisted 
upon the greatest part of the reward, as being the highest person in authority: the man 
declared this unreasonable, he himself having received the largest share of the 
bastinado. 'But, however,' says the marshal, 'I have now an opportunity of playing my 
old game; I'll oblige the gentleman to give me ten guineas to save his reputation, 
which is so nearly concerned with a common prostitute.' But the gentleman knew too 
much of his character to be thus imposed upon, and would give him no more than 
what he promised, which was three guineas. Hitchin at first refused; but his man (who 
had the most right to make a new contract) advising him to act cautiously, he at last 
agreed to accept the reward first offered, giving Jonathan only one guinea for his 
services and the cure of his wounds. The above is a farther instance of the marshal's 
cowardice and inhumanity.
	The marshal, going one night up Ludgate Hill, observed a well-dressed woman 
walking before, whom he told Wild was a lewd woman, for that he saw her talking 
with a man. This was no sooner spoke but he seized her, and asked who she was. She 
made answer that she was a bailiff's wife. ' You are more likely to be a whore,' said 
the marshal, and as such you shall go to the Compter.'
	Taking the woman through St. Paul's Church-yard, she desired liberty to send 
for some friends; but he would not comply with her request. He forced her into the 
Nag's Head tavern in Cheapside, where he presently ordered a hot supper and plenty 
of wine to be brought in; commanding the female to keep at a distance from him, and 
telling her that he did not permit such vermin to sit in his company, though he 
intended to make her pay the reckoning.
	When the supper was brought to the table, he fell to it lustily, and would not 
allow the woman to eat any part of the supper with him, or to come near the fire, 
though it was extreme cold weather. When he had supped, he stared round, and, 
applying himself to her, told her that if he had been an informer, or such a fellow, she 
would have called for eatables and wine herself, and not have given him the trouble of 
direction, or else would have slipped a piece into his hand; adding, 'You may do what 
you please: but I can assure you it is in my power, if I see a woman in the bands of 
informers, to discharge her, and commit them. You are not so ignorant but you must 
guess my meaning.' She replied, that she had money enough to pay for the supper, and 
about three half-crowns more. This desirable answer being given, he ordered his 
attendant to withdraw, while he compounded the matter with her.
	When Wild returned, the gentlewoman was civilly asked to sit by the fire, and 
eat the remainder of the supper, and in all respects treated very kindly, only with a 
pretended reprimand to give him better language whenever he should speak to her for 
the future; and, after another bottle drank at her expense, she was discharged. This is 
an excellent method to get a good supper gratis, and to fill an empty pocket.
	The marshal, previous to his suspension, had daily meetings with the 
pickpocket boys in Moorfields, and treated them there plentifully with cakes and ale; 
offering them sufficient encouragement to continue their thefts: and at a certain time it 
happened that one of the boys, more cunning than his companions, having stolen an 
alderman's pocket-book, and finding, on opening it, several bank bills, he gave the 
marshal to understand that it was worth a great deal beyond the usual price; and, the 
notes being of considerable value, insisted upon five pieces. The marshal told the boy 
that five pieces were enough to break him at once; that if he gave him two guineas he 
would be sufficiently paid; but assured him that, if he had the good luck to obtain a 
handsome reward, he would then make it up five pieces. Upon this present 
encouragement and future expectation the boy delivered up the pocketbook, and a few 
days afterwards, being informed that a very large reward had been given for the notes, 
he applied to the marshal for the remaining three guineas, according to promise; but 
all the satisfaction he got was, that he should be sent to the house of correction if he 
continued to demand it; the marshal telling him that such rascals as he were ignorant 
how to dispose of their money.
	This conniving at the intrigues of the pickpockets, taking the stolen pocket-
books, and sending threatening letters to the persons that lost them, under pretence 
that they had been in company with lewd women; extorting money also from persons 
in various other ways; were the causes of the marshal's being suspended; and this 
most detestable villain having subsequently been fined twenty pounds, and pilloried, 
for a crime too loathsome to be named in these pages, left Wild at length alone to 
execute his plans of depredation on the public.
	We shall now, quitting Mr. Wild's recriminating pamphlet, proceed in our 
regular account of the hero of this narrative. — When the vagabonds with whom he 
was in league faithfully related to him the particulars of the robberies they had 
committed, and intrusted to him the disposal of their booties, he assured them that 
they might safely rely on him for protection against the vengeance of the law; and 
indeed it must be acknowledged that in cases of this nature he would persevere in his 
utmost endeavours to surmount very great difficulties rather than wilfully falsify his 
word.
	Wild's artful behaviour, and the punctuality with which he discharged his 
engagements, obtained him a great share of confidence among thieves of every 
denomination; insomuch, that if he caused it to be intimated to them that he was 
desirous of seeing them, and that they should not be molested, they would attend him 
with the utmost willingness, without entertaining the most distant apprehension of 
danger, although conscious that he had informations against them, and that their lives 
were absolutely in his power; but if they presumed to reject his proposals, or proved 
otherwise refractory, he would address them to the following effect: 'I have given you 
my word that you should come and go in safety, and so you shall; but take care of 
yourself, for, if ever you see me again, you see an enemy.'
	The great influence that Wild obtained over the thieves will not be thought a 
very extraordinary matter, if it is considered that, when he promised to use his 
endeavours for rescuing them from impending fate, he was always desirous, and 
generally able, to succeed. Such as complied with his measures he would never 
interrupt; but on the contrary, afford them every encouragement for prosecuting their 
iniquitous practices; and, if apprehended by any other person, he seldom failed of 
procuring their discharge. His most usual method (in desperate cases, and when 
matters could not be managed with more ease and expedition) was to procure them to 
be admitted evidences, under pretext that it was in their power to make discoveries of 
high importance to the public. When they were in prison he frequently attended them, 
and communicated to them from his own memorandums such particulars as he judged 
it would be prudent for them to relate to the Court. When his accomplices were 
apprehended, and he was not able to prevent their being brought to trial, he contrived 
stratagems (in which his invention was amazingly fertile) for keeping the principal 
witnesses out of Court; so that the delinquents were generally dismissed in defect of 
evidence.
	Jonathan was ever a most implacable enemy to those who were hardy enough 
to reject his terms, and dispose of their stolen effects for their own separate advantage. 
He was industrious to an extreme in his efforts to surrender them into the hands of 
justice; and, being acquainted with all their usual places of resort, it was scarcely 
possible for them to escape his vigilance.
	By his subjecting such as incurred his displeasure to the punishment of the 
law, he obtained the rewards offered for pursuing them to conviction; greatly 
extended his ascendancy over the other thieves, who considered him with a kind of 
awe; and, at the same time, established his character as being a man of great public 
utility.
	It was the practice of Wild to give instructions to the thieves whom he 
employed as to the manner in which they should conduct themselves; and, if they 
followed his directions, it was seldom that they failed of success. But if they neglected 
a strict observance of his rules, or were, through inadvertency or ignorance, guilty of 
any kind of mismanagement or error in the prosecution of the schemes he had 
suggested, it was to be understood almost as an absolute certainty that he would 
procure them to be convicted at the next sessions, deeming them to be unqualified for 
the profession of roguery.
	He was frequently asked how it was possible that he could carry on the 
business of restoring stolen effects, and yet not be in league with the robbers; and his 
replies were always to this purpose — 'My acquaintance among thieves is very 
extensive, and, when I receive information of a robbery, I make inquiry after the 
suspected parties, and leave word at proper places that, if the goods are left where I 
appoint, the reward shall be paid, and no questions asked. Surely no imputation of 
guilt can fall upon me; for I hold no interviews with the robbers, nor are the goods 
given into my possession.'
	We will now give a relation of the most remarkable exploits of the hero of 
these pages; and our detail must necessarily include many particulars relating to other 
notorious characters of the same period.
	A lady of fortune being on a visit in Piccadilly, her servants, leaving her sedan 
at the door, went to refresh themselves at a neighbouring public house. Upon their 
return the vehicle was not to be found; in consequence of which the men immediately 
went to Wild, and having informed him of their loss, and complimented him with the 
usual fee, they were desired to call upon him again in a few days. Upon their second 
applications Wild extorted from them a considerable reward, and then directed them 
to attend the chapel in Lincoln's Inn Fields on the following morning, during the time 
of prayers. The men went according to the appointment, and under the piazzas of the 
chapel perceived the chair, which upon examination they found to contain the velvet 
seat, curtains, and other furniture, and that it had received no kind of damage.
	A young gentleman, named Knap, accompanied his mother to Sadler's Wells, 
on Saturday, March 31, 1716. On their return they were attacked, about ten at night, 
near the wall of Gray's Inn Gardens, by five villains. The young gentleman was 
knocked down, and his mother, being exceedingly alarmed, called for assistance; 
upon which a pistol was discharged at her, and she instantly fell down dead. A 
considerable reward was offered by proclamation in the Gazette for the discovery of 
the perpetrator of this horrid crime; and Wild was remarkably assiduous in his 
endeavours to apprehend the offenders. From a description given of some of the 
villains, Wild immediately judged the gang to be composed of William White, 
Thomas Thurland, John Chapman alias Edward Darvel, Timothy Dun, and Isaac Rag.
	On the evening of Sunday, April 8, Wild received intelligence that some of the 
above-named men were drinking with their prostitutes at a house kept by John 
Weatherly, in Newtoner's Lane. He went to Weatherly's, accompanied by his man 
Abraham, and seized White, whom he brought away about midnight, in a hackney-
coach, and lodged him in the round-house.
	White being secured, information was given to Wild that a man named James 
Aires was then at the Bell Inn, Smithfield, in company with a woman of the town. 
Having an information against Aires, Wild, accompanied by his assistants, repaired to 
the inn, under the gateway of which they met Thurland, whose person had been 
mistaken for that of Aires. Thurland was provided with two brace of pistols; but, 
being suddenly seized, he was deprived of all opportunity of making use of those 
weapons, and taken into custody.
	They went on the following night to a house in White Horse Alley, Drury 
Lane, where they apprehended Chapman, alias Darvel. Soon after the murder of Mrs. 
Knap, Chapman and others stopped the coach of Thomas Middlethwaite, Esq., but 
that gentleman escaped being robbed by discharging a blunderbuss, and wounding 
Chapman in the arm, on which the villains retired.
	In a short time after, Wild apprehended Isaac Rag at a house which he 
frequented in St. Giles's, in consequence of an information charging him with a 
burglary. Being taken before a magistrate, in the course of his examination Hag 
impeached twenty-two accomplices, charging them with being housebreakers, 
footpads, and receivers of stolen effects; and, in consequence thereof, was admitted an 
evidence for the crown. This man had been convicted of a misdemeanour in January, 
1714-15, and sentenced to stand three times in the pillory. He had concealed himself 
in the dust-hole belonging to the house of Thomas Powell, where being discovered, he 
was searched, and a pistol, some matches, and a number of pick-lock keys, were 
found in his possession. His intention was evidently to commit a burglary; but, as he 
did not enter the house, he was indicted for a misdemeanour in entering the yard with 
intent to steal. He was indicted on October, 1715, for a burglary, in the house of 
Elizabeth Stanwell, on the 24th of August; but he was acquitted of this charge.
	White, Thurland, and Chapman, were arraigned on the 18th of May, 1716, at 
the sessions-house in the Old Bailey, on an indictment for assaulting John Knap, 
Gent, putting him in fear, and taking from him a hat and wig, on the 3ist of March, 
1716. They were also indicted for the murder of Mary Knap, widow: White by 
discharging a pistol loaded with powder and bullets, and thereby giving her a wound, 
of which she immediately died, March 31st 1716. They were a second time indicted 
for assaulting and robbing John Gough. White was a fourth time indicted with James 
Russel for a burglary in the house of George Barklay. And Chapman was a fourth 
time indicted for a burglary in the house of Henry Cross. These three offenders were 
executed at Tyhurn on the 8th of June, 1716.
	Wild was indefatigable in his endeavours to apprehend Timothy Dun, who had 
hitherto escaped the hands of justice by removing to a new lodging, where he 
concealed himself in the most cautious manner. Wild however, did not despair of 
discovering this offender, whom he supposed must either perish through want of the 
necessaries of life, or obtain the means of subsistence by returning to his felonious 
practices; and so confident was he of success, that he made a wager of ten guineas that 
he would have him in custody before the expiration of an appointed time.
	Dun's confinement, at length, became exceedingly irksome to him; and he sent 
his wife to make inquiries respecting him of Wild, in order to discover whether he 
was still in danger of being apprehended. Upon her return Wild ordered one of his 
people to follow her home. She took water at Blackfriars, and landed at the Falcon; 
but suspecting the man was employed to trace her, she again took water, and crossed 
to Whitefriars: observing that she was still followed, she ordered the waterman to 
proceed to Lambeth, and having landed there, it being nearly dark, imagined she had 
escaped the observation of Wild's man, and therefore walked immediately home. The 
man traced her to Maid Lane, near the Bankside, Southwark, and perceiving her enter 
a house, he marked the wall with chalk, and then returned to his employer, with an 
account of the discovery he had made.
	Wild, accompanied by a fellow named Abraham, a Jew, who acted the part 
himself had formerly done to the worthless marshal, one Riddlesden, and another 
man, went on the following morning to the house where the woman had been seen to 
enter. Dun, hearing a noise, and thence suspecting that he was discovered, got through 
a back-window on the second floor upon the roof of the pantry, the bottom of which 
was about eight feet from the ground. Abraham discharged a pistol, and wounded Dun 
in the arm; in consequence of which he fell from the pantry into the yard; after his fall 
Riddlesden fired also, and wounded him in the face with small-shot. Bun was secured 
and carried to Newgate, and being tried at the ensuing sessions, was soon after 
executed at Tyburn.
	Riddlesden was bred to the law, but he entirely neglected that business, and 
abandoned himself to every species of wickedness. His irregular course of life having 
greatly embarrassed his circumstances, he broke into the chapel of Whitehall, and 
stole the communion-plate. He was convicted of this offence, and received sentence 
of death; but, through the exertion of powerful interest, a pardon was obtained, on 
condition of transporting himself for the term of seven years. He went to America, but 
soon returned to England, and had the address to ingratiate himself into the favour of 
a young lady, daughter to an opulent merchant at Newcastle-upon-Tyne. Before he 
could get his wife's fortune, which was considerable, into his hands, he was 
discovered and committed to Newgate. She followed him, and was brought to bed in 
the prison. Her friends, however, being apprised of her unhappy situation, caused her 
to return home. He contracted an intimacy with the widow of Richard Revel, one of 
the turnkeys of Newgate; and, being permitted to transport himself again, that woman 
went with him to Philadelphia, under the character of his wife. In consequence, 
however, of a disagreement between them, Mrs. Revel returned, and took a public 
house in Golden Lane; but what became of Riddlesden does not appear.
	One night, during the connexion of Wild with Hitchin the city marshal, being 
abroad in their walks, not far from the Temple, they discovered a clergyman standing 
against the wall, in an alley, to which he had retired, as persons frequently do, on 
account of modesty and decency. Immediately a woman of the town, lying in wait for 
prey, brushing by, the clergyman exclaimed aloud, 'What does the woman want?' The 
marshal instantly rushed in upon them, and seized the clergyman, bidding his man 
secure the woman. The clergyman resisted, protesting his innocence which his 
language to the woman confirmed; but, finding it to no purpose, he at last desired that 
he might be permitted to go into an ironmonger's house near. This the marshal 
refused, and dragged the clergyman to the end of Salisbury Court, in Fleet Street, 
where he raised a mob about him; and two or three gentlemen, who knew the parson, 
happening to come by, asked the mob what they were doing with him, telling them be 
was chaplain to a noble lord. The rough gentry answered, 'Damn but, we believe he's 
chaplain to the devil, for we caught him with a whore.'

  
Jonathan Wild, Hitchin and a woman of the town entrapping a clergyman 

	Hereupon the gentlemen desired the marshal to go to a tavern, that they might 
talk with him without noise and tumult, which he consented to. When they came into 
the tavern, the clergyman asked the marshal by what authority he thus abused him. 
The marshal replied he was a city officer (pulling out his staff), and would have him 
to the Compter, unless he gave very good security for his appearance next morning, 
when he would swear that he caught him with a whore.
	The clergyman seeing him so bent upon perjury, which would very much 
expose him, sent for other persons to vindicate his reputation, who, putting a purse of 
gold into the marshal's hand (which they found was the only way to deal with such a 
monster in iniquity), the clergyman was permitted to depart.
	A thief of most infamous character, named Arnold Powel, being confined in 
Newgate, on a charge of having robbed a house in the neighbourhood of Golden 
Square of property to a great amount, was visited by Jonathan, who informed him 
that, in consideration of a sum of money, he would save his life; adding that, if the 
proposal was rejected, he should inevitably die at Tyburn for the offence on account 
of which he was then imprisoned. The prisoner, however, not believing that it was in 
Wild's power to do him any injury, bade him defiance. Powel was brought to trial; 
but, through a defect of evidence, he was acquitted. Having gained intelligence that 
Powel had committed a burglary in the house of Mr. Eastlick, near Fleet Ditch, Wild 
caused that gentleman to prosecute the robber. Upon receiving information that a bill 
was found for the burglary, Powel sent for Wild, and a compromise was effected 
according to the terms which Wild himself had proposed, in consequence of which 
Powel was assured that his life should be preserved. Upon the approach of the 
sessions, Wild informed the prosecutor that the first and second days would be 
employed in other trials, and, as he was willing Mr. Eastlick should avoid attending 
with his witnesses longer than was necessary, he would give timely notice when 
Powel would be arraigned. But he contrived to have the prisoner put to the bar; and, 
no persons appearing to prosecute he was ordered to be taken away; but after some 
time he was again set to the bar, then ordered away, and afterwards put up a third 
time, proclamation being made each time for the prosecutor to appear. At length the 
jury were charged with the prisoners and, as no accusation was adduced against him, 
he was necessarily dismissed and the Court ordered Mr. Eastlick's recognisances to be 
estreated.
	Powel was ordered to remain in custody till the next sessions, there being 
another indictment against him; and Mr. Eastlick represented the behaviour of Wild to 
the Court, who justly reprimanded him with great severity.
	Powel put himself into a salivation, in order to avoid being brought to trial the 
next sessions; but, notwithstanding this stratagem, he was arraigned and convicted, 
and executed on the 20th of March, 1716-7.
	At this time Wild had quitted his apartments at Mrs. Seagoe's, and hired a 
house adjoining to the Coopers' Arms, on the opposite side of the Old Bailey. The 
unexampled villainies of this man were now become an object of so much 
consequence, as to excite the particular attention of the legislature. In the year 1718 an 
act was passed, deeming every person guilty of a capital offence who should accept a 
reward in consequence of restoring stolen effects without prosecuting the thief. It was 
the general opinion that this law would effectually suppress the iniquitous practices of 
Wild; but, after some interruption to his proceedings, he devised means for evading it, 
which were for several years attended with success.
	He now declined the custom of receiving money from the persons who applied 
to him; but, upon the second or third time of calling, informed them that all he had 
been able to learn respecting their business was, that, if a sum of money was left at an 
appointed place, their property would be restored the same day.
	Sometimes, as the person robbed was returning from Wild's house, he was 
accosted in the street by a man who delivered the stolen effects, at the same time 
producing a note, expressing the sum that was to be paid for them.
	In cases wherein he supposed danger was to be apprehended, he advised 
people to advertise that whoever would bring the stolen goods to Jonathan Wild 
should be rewarded, and no questions asked.
	In the two first instances it could not be proved that he either saw the thief, 
received the goods, or accepted of a reward; and in the latter case he acted agreeably 
to the directions of the injured party, and there appeared no reason to criminate him as 
being in confederacy with the felons.
	When he was asked what would satisfy him for his trouble, he told the persons 
who had recovered their property that what he had done was without any interested 
view, and merely from a principle of doing good; that therefore he made no claim; 
but, if he accepted a present, he should not consider it as being his due, but as an 
instance of generosity, which he should acknowledge accordingly.
	Our adventurer's business increased exceedingly, and he opened an office in 
Newtoner's Lane, to the management of which he appointed his man Abraham. This 
Israelite proved a remarkably industrious and faithful servant to Jonathan, who 
intrusted him with matters of the greatest importance.
	By too strict an application to business Wild much impaired his health, so that 
he judged it prudent to retire into the country for a short time. he hired a lodging at 
Dulwich, leaving both offices under the direction of Abraham.
	A lady had her pocket picked of bank-notes to the amount of seven thousand 
pounds. She related the particulars of her robbery to Abraham, who in a few days 
apprehended three pickpockets, and conducted them to Jonathan's lodgings at 
Dulwich. Upon their delivering up all the notes, Wild dismissed them. When the lady 
applied to Abraham, he restored her property, and she generously made him a present 
of four hundred pounds, which he delivered to his employer. These three pickpockets 
were afterwards apprehended for some other offences, and transported. One of them 
carefully concealed a bank-note for a thousand pounds in the lining of his coat. On his 
arrival at Maryland, he procured cash for the note, and, having purchased his freedom, 
went to New York, where he assumed the character of a gentleman.
	Wild's business would not permit him to remain long at Dulwicb; and being 
under great inconvenience from the want of Abraham's immediate assistance, he did 
not keep open his office in Newtoner's Lane for more than three months.
	About a week after the return of Jonathan from Dulwich, a mercer in Lombard 
Street ordered a porter to carry to a particular inn a box containing goods to the 
amount of two hundred pounds. In his way the porter was observed by three thieves, 
one of whom, being more genteelly dressed than his companions, accosted the man in 
the following manner: 'If you are willing to earn sixpence, my friend, step to the 
tavern at the end of the street, and ask for the roquelaure I left at the bar; but, lest the 
waiter should scruple giving it to you, take my gold watch as a token. Pitch your 
burden upon this bulk, and I will take care of it till you return; but be sure you make 
haste.' The man went to the tavern, and, having delivered his message, was informed 
that the thing he inquired for had not been left there; upon which the porter said, 
'Since you scruple to trust me, look at this gold watch, which the gentleman gave me 
to produce as a token.' What was called a gold watch, being examined, proved to be 
only pewter lacquered. In consequence of this discovery, the porter hastened back to 
where he had left the box; but neither that nor the sharpers were to be found.
	The porter was, with reason, apprehensive that he should incur his master's 
displeasure if be related what had happened; and, in order to excuse his folly, he 
determined upon the following stratagem — he rolled himself in the mud, and then 
went home, saying he had been knocked down, and robbed of the goods. The 
proprietor of the goods applied to Wild, and related to him the story he had been told 
by his servant. Wild told him he had been deceived as to the manner in which the 
trunk was lost, and that he should be convinced of it if he would send for the porter. A 
messenger was accordingly dispatched for him, and, upon his arrival, Abraham 
conducted him into a room separated from the office only by a slight partition. 'Your 
master,' said Abraham, 'has just been here concerning the box you lost; and he desired 
that you might be sent for, in order to communicate the particulars of the robbery. — 
What kind of people were the thieves, and in what manner did they take the box 
away? ' In reply the man said, 'Why, two or three fellows knocked me down, and then 
carried off the box.' Hereupon Abraham told him, that, ' if they knocked him down, 
there was but little chance of the property being recovered, since that offence rendered 
them liable to be hanged. 'But,' continued he, 'Let me prevail on you to speak the 
truth; for, if you persist in a refusal, be assured we shall discover it by some other 
means. Pray, do you recollect nothing about a token? Were you not to fetch a 
roquelaure from a tavern? and did you not produce a gold watch as a token to induce 
the waiter to deliver it?' — Astonished at Abraham's words, the porter declared 'he 
believed he was a witch,' and immediately acknowledged in what manner he had lost 
the box.
	One of the villains concerned in the above transaction lived in the house 
formerly inhabited by Wild, in Cock Alley, near Cripplegate. To this place Jonathan 
and Abraham repaired, and when they were at the door, they overheard a dispute 
between the man and his wife, during which the former declared that he would set out 
for Holland the next day. Upon this they forced open the door; and Wild, saying he 
was under the necessity of preventing his intended voyage, took him into custody, and 
conducted him to the Compter. 0mm the following day, the goods being returned to 
the owner, Wild received a handsome reward; and he contrived to procure the 
discharge of the thief.
	On the 23d or 24th of January, 1718-19, Margaret Dodwell and Alice Wright 
went to Wild's house, and desired to have a private interview with him. Observing one 
of these women to be with child, he imagined she might want a father to her expected 
issue; for it was a part of his business to procure persons to stand in the place of the 
real fathers of children born in consequence of illicit commerce. Being shown into 
another room, Dodwell spoke in the following manner:— 'I do not come, Mr. Wild, to 
inform you that I have met with any loss, but that I wish to find something. If you will 
follow my advice, you may acquire a thousand pounds, or perhaps many thousands.' 
Jonathan here expressed the utmost willingness to engage in an enterprise so highly 
lucrative, and the woman proceeded thus: 'My plan is this: you must procure two or 
three stout resolute fellows who will undertake to rob a house in Wormwood Street, 
near Bishopsgate. This house is kept by a cane chair maker, named John Cooke, who 
has a lodger, an ancient maiden lady, immensely rich; and she keeps her money in a 
box in her apartment; she is now gone into the country to fetch more. One of the men 
must find an opportunity of getting into the shop in the evening, and conceal himself 
in a sawpit there: he may let his companions in when the family are retired to rest. But 
it will be particularly necessary to secure two stout apprentices, and a boy, who lie in 
the garret. I wish, however, that no murder may be committed.' Upon this Wright said, 
'Phoo! phoo! when people engage in matters of this sort, they must manage as well as 
they can, and so as to provide for their own safety.' Dodwell now resumed her 
discourse to Jonathan. 'The boys having been secured, no kind of difficulty will attend 
getting possession of the old lady's money, she being from home, and her room under 
that where the boys sleep. In the room facing that of the old lady, Cooke and his wife 
lie: he is a man of remarkable courage; great caution, therefore, must be observed 
respecting him; and indeed I think it would be as well to knock him on the head; for 
then his drawers may be rifled, and he is never without money. A woman and a child 
lie under the room belonging to tho old lady, but I hope no violence will be offered to 
them.'
	Having heard the above proposal, Wild took the women into custody, and 
lodged them in Newgate. It is not to be supposed that his conduct in this affair 
proceeded from a principle of virtue or justice, but that he declined engaging in the 
iniquitous scheme from an apprehension that their design was to draw him into a 
snare.
	Dodwell had lived five months in Mr. Cooke's house, and, though she paid no 
rent, he was too generous to turn her out, or in any manner to oppress her. Wild 
prosecuted Dodwell and Wright for a misdemeanour, and, being found guilty, they 
were sentenced each to six months' imprisonment.
	Wild had inserted in his book a gold watch, a quantity of fine lace, and other 
property of considerable value, which one John Butler had stolen from a house at 
Newington Green; but Butler, instead of coming to account as usual, had declined his 
felonious practices, and lived on the produce of his booty. Wild, highly enraged at 
being excluded his share, determined to pursue every possible means for subjecting 
him to the power of justice.
	Being informed that he lodged at a public house in Bishopsgate Street, Wild 
went to the house early one morning, when Butler, hearing him ascending the stairs, 
jumped out of the window of his room, and, climbing over the wall of the yard, got 
into the street. Wild broke open the door of the room; but was exceedingly 
disappointed and mortified to find that the man of whom he was in pursuit had 
escaped. In the mean time Butler ran into a house, the door of which stood open, and, 
descending to the kitchen, where some women were washing, told them he was 
pursued by a bailiff, and they advised him to conceal himself in the coal-hole.
	Jonathan, coming out of the ale-house, and seeing a shop on the opposite side 
of the way open, he inquired of the master, who was a dyer, whether a man had not 
taken refuge in his house. The dyer answered in the negative, saying he had not left 
his shop more than a minute since it had been opened. Wild requested to search the 
house, and the dyer readily complied. Wild asked the women if they knew whether a 
man had taken shelter in the house, which they denied; but, informing them that the 
man he sought was a thief, they said he would find him in the coal-hole.
	Having procured a candle, Wild and his attendants searched the place without 
effect, and they examined every part of the house with no better success. He observed 
that the villain must have escaped into the street; on which the dyer said that could not 
be the case; that if he had entered, he must still be in the house, for he had not quitted 
the shop, and it was impossible that a man could pass to the street without his 
knowledge; advising Wild to search the cellar again. They now all went into the 
cellar, and, after some time spent in searching, the dyer turned up a large vessel, used 
in his business, and Butler appeared. Wild asked him in what manner he had disposed 
of the goods he stole from Newington Green, upbraided him as being guilty of 
ingratitude, and declared that he should certainly be hanged.

  
Butler discovered under a tub by Jonathan Wild

	Butler, however, knowing the means by which an accommodation might be 
effected, directed our hero to go to his lodging, and look behind the head of the bed, 
where he would find what would recompense him for his time and trouble. Wild went 
to the place, and found what perfectly satisfied him; but, as Butler had been 
apprehended in a public manner, the other was under the necessity of taking him 
before a magistrate, who committed him for trial. He was tried the ensuing sessions at 
the Old Bailey; but, by the artful management of Wild, instead of being condemned to 
die, he was only sentenced to transportation.
	Being at an inn in Smithfield, Wild observed a large trunk in the yard, and, 
imagining that it contained property of value, he hastened home, and instructed one of 
the thieves he employed to carry it off. The man he used in this matter was named 
Jeremiah Rann, and he was reckoned one of the most dexterous thieves in London. 
Having dressed himself so as exactly to resemble a porter, he carried away the trunk 
without being observed.
	Mr. Jarvis, a whipmaker by trade, and the proprietor of the trunk, had no 
sooner discovered his loss than he applied to Wild, who returned him the goods, in 
consideration of receiving ten guineas. Some time after, a disagreement taking place 
between Jonathan and Rann, the former apprehended the latter, who was tried and 
condemned to die. The day preceding that on which Rann was executed he sent for 
Mr. Jarvis, and related to him all the particulars of the trunk. Wild was threatened 
with a prosecution by Mr. Jarvis; but all apprehensions arising hence were soon 
dissipated by the decease of that gentleman.
	Wild, being much embarrassed in endeavouring to find out some method by 
which he might safely dispose of the property that was not claimed by the respective 
proprietors, revolved in his mind a variety of schemes; but at length he adopted that 
which follows: he purchased a sloop, in order to transport the goods to Holland and 
Flanders, and gave the command of the vessel to a notorious thief, named Roger 
Johnson.
	Ostend was the port where this vessel principally traded but, when the goods 
were not disposed of there, Johnson navigated her to Bruges, Ghent, Brussels, and 
other places. He brought home lace, wine, brandy, etc., and these commodities were 
landed in the night, without making any increase to the business of the revenue 
officers. This trade was continued about two years, when, five pieces of lace being 
lost, Johnson deducted the value of them from the mate's pay. Violently irritated by 
this conduct, the mate lodged an information against Johnson for running a great 
quantity of various kinds of goods.
	In consequence of this the vessel was exchequered, Johnson cast in damages to 
the amount of 700L. and the commercial proceedings were entirely ruined.
	A disagreement had for some time subsisted between Johnson and Thomas 
Edwards, who kept a house of resort for thieves in Long Lane, concerning the division 
of some booty. Meeting one day in the Strand, they charged each other with felony, 
and were both taken into custody. Wild bailed Johnson, and Edwards was not 
prosecuted. The latter had no sooner recovered his liberty than he gave information 
against Wild, whose private warehouses being searched, a great quantity of stolen 
goods were there found. Wild now arrested Edwards in the name of Johnson, to whom 
he pretended the goods belonged, and he was taken to the Marshalsea, but the next 
day procured bail. Edwards determined to wreak his revenge upon Johnson, and for 
some time industriously sought him in vain; but, meeting him accidentally in 
Whitechapel Road, he gave him into the custody of a peace-officer, who conducted 
him to an adjacent alehouse. Johnson sent for Wild, who immediately attended, 
accompanied by his man, Quilt Arnold. Wild promoted a riot, during which Johnson 
availed himself of an opportunity of effecting an escape.
	Information being made against Wild for the rescue of Johnson, he judged it 
prudent to abscond, and he remained concealed for three weeks; at the end of which 
time, supposing all danger to be over, he returned to his house. Being apprised of this, 
Mr. Jones, high-constable of Holborn division, went to Jonathan's house in the Old 
Bailey, on the 15th of February, 1725, apprehended him and Quilt Arnold, and took 
them before Sir John Fryer, who committed them to Newgate on a charge of having 
assisted in the escape of Johnson.
	On Wednesday, the 24th of the same month, Wild moved to be either admitted 
to bail or discharged, or brought to trial that sessions. On the following Friday a 
warrant of detainer was produced against him in Court, and to it was affixed the 
following articles of information:
	I. That for many years he had been a confederate with great numbers of 
highwaymen, pickpockets, housebreakers, shop-lifters, and other thieves.
	II. That he had formed a kind of corporation of thieves, of which he was the 
head or director; and that notwithstanding his pretended services, in detecting and 
prosecuting offenders, he procured such only to be hanged as concealed their booty, 
or refused to share it with him.
	M. That he had divided the town and country into so many districts, and 
appointed distinct gangs for each, who regularly accounted with him for their 
robberies. That he had also a particular set to steal at churches in time of divine 
service: and likewise other moving detachments to attend at Court on birthdays, balls, 
&c, and at both houses of parliament, circuits, and country fairs.
	IV. That the persons employed by him were for the most part felon convicts, 
who had returned from transportation before the time for which they were transported 
was expired; and that he made choice of them to be his agents, because they could not 
be legal evidences against him, and because he had it in his power to take from them 
what part of the stolen goods he thought fit, and otherwise use them ill, or hang them, 
as he pleased.
	V. That he had from time to time supplied such convicted felons with money 
and clothes, and lodged them in his own house, the better to conceal them: 
particularly some against whom there are now informations for counterfeiting and 
diminishing broad pieces and guineas.
	VI. That he had not only been a receiver of stolen goods, as well as of writings 
of all kinds, for near fifteen years past, but had frequently been a confederate, and 
robbed along with the above-mentioned convicted felons.
	VII. That in order to carry on these vile practices, and to gain some credit with 
the ignorant multitude, he usually carried a short silver staff, as a badge of authority 
from the government, which he used to produce when he himself was concerned in 
robbing.
	VIII. That he had, under his care and direction, several warehouses for 
receiving and concealing stolen goods; and also a ship for carrying off jewels, 
watches, and other valuable goods, to Holland, where he had a superannuated thief for 
his factor.
	IX. That he kept in pay several artists to make alterations, and transform 
watches, seals, snuff-boxes, rings, and other valuable things, that they might not be 
known, several of which he used to present to such persons as he thought might be of 
service to him.
	X. That he seldom or never helped the owners to the notes and papers they had 
lost unless he found them able exactly to specify and describe them, and then often 
insisted on more than half the value.
	XI. And, lastly, it appears that he has often sold human blood, by procuring 
false evidence to swear persons into facts they were not guilty of; sometimes to 
prevent them from being evidences against himself, and at other times for the sake of 
the great reward given by the government.
	The information of Mr. Jones was also read in Court, setting forth that two 
persons would be produced to accuse the prisoner of capital offences. The men 
alluded to in the above affidavit were John Follard and Thomas Butler, who had been 
convicted; but, it being deemed expedient to grant them a pardon on condition of their 
appearing in support of a prosecution against Wild, they pleaded to the same, and 
were remanded to Newgate till the next sessions.
	Saturday, the 12th of April, Wild, by counsel, moved that his trial might be 
postponed till the ensuing sessions; and an affidavit made by the prisoner was read in 
Court, purporting that till the preceding evening he was entirely ignorant of a bill 
having been found against him that he knew not what offence he was charged with, 
and was unable to procure two material witnesses, one of them living near Brentford, 
and the other in Somersetshire. This was opposed by the counsel for the crown, who 
urged that it would be improper to defer the trial on so frivolous a pretext as that made 
by the prisoner; that the affidavit expressed an ignorance of what offence he was 
charged w1th, and yet declared that two nameless persons were material witnesses.
	The prisoner informed the Court that his witnesses were Hays, at the Pack 
Horse, on Turnham Green, and Wilson, a clothier, at Frome; adding that he had heard 
it slightly intimated that he was indicted for a felony upon a person named Stretham. 
Wild's counsel moved that the names of Hays and Wilson might be inserted in the 
affidavit, and that it should be again sworn to by the prisoner. The counsel for the 
prosecution observed that justice would not be denied the prisoner, though it could not 
be reasonably expected that he would be allowed any extraordinary favours or 
indulgences. Follard and Butler were, at length, bound each in the penalty of 500L. to 
appear at the ensuing sessions, when it was agreed that Wild's fate should be 
determined.
	Saturday, May 15, 1725, Jonathan Wild was indicted for privately stealing in 
the house of Catherine Stretham, in the parish of St. Andrew, Holborn, fifty yards of 
lace, the property of the said Catherine, on the 22nd of January, 1724-5. He was a 
second time indicted for feloniously receiving from the said Catherine, on the 10th of 
March, ten guineas, on account, and under pretence, of restoring the said lace, without 
apprehending and prosecuting the felon who stole the property.
	Previous to his trial Wild distributed among the jurymen, and other persons 
who were walking on the leads before the Court, a great number of printed papers, 
under the title of 'A List of Persons discovered, apprehended, and convicted of several 
Robberies on the Highway; and also for Burglary and Housebreaking; and also for 
returning from Transportation: by Jonathan Wild.' This list contained the names of 
thirty-five for robbing on the highway, twenty-two for housebreaking, and ten for 
returning from transportation. To the list was annexed the following Nota Bene:—
	'Several others have been also convicted for the like crimes, but, remembering 
not the persons' names who had been robbed, I omit the criminals' names.
	'Please to observe that several others have been also convicted for shop-lifting, 
picking of pockets, &c., by the female sex, which are capital crimes, and which are 
too tedious to be inserted here, and the prosecutors not willing of being exposed.
	'In regard, therefore, of the numbers above convicted, some, that have yet 
escaped justice, are endeavouring to take away the life of the said 
	'JONATHAN WILD.'
	The prisoner, being put to the bar, requested that the witnesses might be 
examined apart, which was complied with. Henry Kelly deposed that by the prisoner's 
direction he went, in company with Margaret Murphy, to the prosecutor's shop, under 
pretence of buying some lace; that he stole a tin box, and gave it to Murphy in order to 
deliver to Wild, who waited in the street for the purpose of receiving their booty, and 
rescuing them if they should be taken into custody; that they returned together to 
Wild's house, where the box, being opened, was found to contain eleven pieces of 
lace; that Wild said he could afford to give no more than five guineas, as he should 
not be able to get more than ten guineas for returning the goods to the owner; that he 
received, as his share, three guineas and a crown, and that Murphy had what remained 
of the five guineas.
	Margaret Murphy was next sworn, and her evidence corresponded in every 
particular with that of the former witness.
	Catherine Stretham, the elder, deposed that, between three and four in the 
afternoon of the 22d of January, a man and woman came to her house, pretending that 
they wanted to purchase some lace; that she showed them two or three parcels, to the 
quality and price of which they objected; and that in about three minutes after they 
had left the shop she missed a tin box, containing a quantity of lace, the value of 
which she estimated at 50L.
	The prisoner's counsel observed that it was their opinion he could not be 
legally convicted, because the indictment positively expressed that he stole the lace in 
the house, whereas it had been proved in evidence that he was at a considerable 
distance when the fact was committed. They allowed that he might be liable to 
conviction as an accessory before the fact, or guilty of receiving the property, 
knowing it to be stolen; but conceived that he could not be deemed guilty of a capital 
felony unless the indictment declared (as the act directs) that he did assist, command, 
or hire.
	Lord Raymond presided when Wild was tried, and, in summing up the 
evidence, his lordship observed that the guilt of the prisoner was a point beyond all 
dispute; but that, as a similar case was not to he found in the law-books, it became his 
duty to act with great caution; he was not perfectly satisfied that the construction 
urged by the counsel for the crown could be put upon the indictment; and, as the life 
of a fellow-creature was at stake, recommended the prisoner to the mercy of the jury, 
who brought in their verdict Not Guilty.
	Wild was indicted a second time for an offence committed during his 
confinement in Newgate. The indictment being opened by the counsel for the crown, 
the following clause in an act passed in the 4th year of Geo. I. was ordered to be read:
	'And whereas there are divers persons who have secret acquaintance with 
felons, and who make it their business to help persons to their stolen goods, and by 
that means gain money from them, which is divided between them and the felons, 
whereby they greatly encourage such offenders: — Be it enacted, by the authority 
aforesaid, that whenever any person taketh money or reward, directly or indirectly, 
under pretence, or upon account, of helping any person or persons to any stolen goods 
or chattels, every such person so taking money or reward as aforesaid (unless such 
person do apprehend or cause to be apprehended, such felon who stole time same, and 
give evidence against him) shall be guilty of felony, according to the nature of the 
felony committed in stealing such goods, and in such and the same manner as if such 
offender had stolen such goods and chattels in the manner, and with such 
circumstances, as the same were stolen.'
	Catherine Stretham deposed to the following effect: A box of lace being stolen 
out of my shop on the 22d of January, I went in the evening of the same day to the 
prisoner's house, in order to employ him in recovering my goods; but, not finding him 
at home, I advertised them, offering a reward of fifteen guineas, and saying no 
questions should be asked. The advertisement proved ineffectual. I therefore went 
again to the prisoner's house, and by his desire gave the best description that I was 
able of the persons I suspected to be the robbers; and, promising to make inquiry after 
my property, he desired me to call again in two or three days. I attended him a second 
time, when he informed me that he had learnt something concerning my goods, and 
expected more particular information in a short time. During this conversation we 
were joined by a man who said he had reason to suspect that one Kelly, who had been 
tried for circulating plated shillings, was concerned in stealing the lace. I went to the 
prisoner again on the day he was apprehended, and informed him that, though I had 
advertised a reward of no more than fifteen, I would give twenty or twenty-five 
guineas, rather than not recover my property; upon which he desired me not to be in 
too great a hurry, and said the people who had the lace were gone out of town, but that 
he would contrive to foment a disagreement between them, by which means he should 
be enabled to recover the goods on more easy terms. He sent me word, on the 10th of 
March, that if I would attend him in Newgate, and bring ten guineas with me, the 
goods should be returned. I went to the prisoner, who desired a person to call a porter, 
and then gave me a letter, saying it was the direction he had received where to apply 
for the lace. I told him I could not read, and gave the letter to the man he had sent for, 
who appeared to be a ticket-porter. The prisoner then told me I must give the porter 
ten guineas, that he might pay the people who had my goods, otherwise they would 
not return them. I gave the money, and the man went out of the prison; but in a short 
time he returned with a box sealed up, though it was not the box I lost. I opened it, 
and found all my lace, excepting one piece. I asked the prisoner what satisfaction be 
expected; and he answered, Not a farthing; I have no interested views in matters of 
this kind, but act from a principle of serving people under misfortune. I hope I shall 
soon he able to recover the other piece of lace, and to return you the ten guineas, and 
perhaps cause the thief to be apprehended. For the service I can render you I shall 
only expect your prayers. I have many enemies, and know not what will be the 
consequence of this imprisonment.'
	The prisoner's counsel argued that as Murphy had deposed that Wild, Kelly, 
and herself, were concerned in the felony, the former could by no means be 
considered as coming within the description of the act on which the indictment was 
founded, for the act in question was not meant to operate against the actual 
perpetrators of felony, but to subject such persons to punishment as held a 
correspondence with felons.
	The counsel for the crown observed that, from the evidence adduced, no doubt 
could remain of the prisoner's coming under the meaning of the act, since it had been 
proved that he had engaged in combinations with felons, and had not discovered them.
	The judge recapitulated the arguments enforced on each side, and was of 
opinion that the case of the prisoner was clearly within the meaning of the act for it 
was plain that he had maintained a secret correspondence with felons, and received 
money for restoring stolen goods to the owners, which money was divided between 
him and the felons, whom he did not prosecute. The jury pronounced him guilty, and 
he was executed at Tyburn on Monday, the 24th of May, 1725, along with Robert 
Harpham.
	Wild, when he was under sentence of death, frequently declared that he 
thought the service he had rendered the public in returning the stolen goods to the 
owners, and apprehending felons, was so great as justly to entitle him to the royal 
mercy. He said that, had he considered his ease as being desperate, he should have 
taken timely measures for inducing some powerful friend at Wolverhampton to 
intercede in his favour; and that he thought it not unreasonable to entertain hopes of 
obtaining a pardon through the interest of some of the dukes, earls, and other persons 
of high distinction, who had recovered their property through his means. It was 
observed to him that he had trained up a great number of thieves, and must he 
conscious that he had not enforced the execution of the law from any principle of 
virtue, but had sacrificed the lives of a great number of his accomplices, in order to 
provide for his own safety, and to gratify his desire of revenge against such as had 
incurred his displeasure.
	He was observed to be in an unsettled state of mind, and, being asked whether 
he knew the cause thereof, he said he attributed his disorder to the many wounds he 
had received in apprehending felons, and particularly mentioned two fractures of his 
skull, and his throat being cut by Blueskin.
	He declined attending divine service in the chapel, excusing himself on 
account of his infirmities, and saying that there were many people highly exasperated 
against him, and therefore he could not expect but that his devotions would he 
interrupted by their insulting behaviour. He said he had fasted four days, which had 
greatly increased his weakness. He asked the Ordinary the meaning of the words 
'Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree;' and what was the state of the soul 
immediately after its departure from the body. He was advised to direct his attention 
to matters of more importance, and sincerely to repent of the crimes he had 
committed.
	By his desire the Ordinary administered the sacrament to him, and during the 
ceremony he appeared to be somewhat attentive and devout. The evening preceding 
the day on which he suffered he inquired of the ordinary whether self-murder could be 
deemed a crime, since many of the Greeks and Romans, who had put a period to their 
own lives, were so honourably mentioned by historians. He was informed that the 
most wise and learned heathens accounted those guilty of the greatest cowardice who 
had not fortitude sufficient to maintain themselves in the station to which they had 
been appointed by the providence of Heaven; and that the Christian doctrines 
condemned the practice of suicide in the most express terms.
	He pretended to be convinced that self-murder was a most impious crime; but 
about two in the morning he endeavoured to put an end to his life by drinking 
laudanum: however, on account of the largeness of the dose, and his having fasted for 
a considerable time, no other effect was produced than drowsiness, or a kind of 
stupefaction. The situation of Wild being observed by two of his fellow-prisoners, 
they advised him to rouse his spirits, that he might be able to attend to the devotional 
exercises, and, taking him by the arms, they obliged him to walk, which he could not 
have done alone, being much afflicted with the gout. The exercise revived him a little, 
but he presently became exceedingly pale, then grew very faint; a profuse sweating 
ensued, and soon afterwards his stomach discharged the greatest part of the laudanum. 
Though he was somewhat recovered, he was nearly in a state of insensibility; and in 
this situation he was put into the cart and conveyed to Tyburn.
	On his way to the place of execution the populace treated this offender with 
remarkable severity, incessantly pelting him with stones, dirt, &c. and execrating him 
as the most consummate villain that had ever disgraced human nature.
	Upon his arrival at Tyburn he appeared to be much recovered from the effects 
of the laudanum; and the executioner informed him that a reasonable time would be 
allowed him for preparing himself for the important change that he must soon 
experience. Tie continued sitting some time in the cart; but the populace were at 
length so enraged at the indulgence shown him, that they outrageously called to the 
executioner to perform the duties of his office, violently threatening him with instant 
death if he presumed any longer to delay. He judged it prudent to comply with their 
demands, and when he began to prepare for the execution the popular clamour ceased.
	About two o'clock on the following morning the remains of Wild were interred 
in St. Pancras Churchyard; but a few nights afterwards the body was taken up (for the 
use of the surgeons, as it was supposed). At midnight a hearse and six was waiting at 
the end of Fig Lane, where the coffin was found the next day.
	Wild had by the woman he married at Wolverhampton a son about nineteen 
years old, who came to London a short time before the execution of his father. He was 
a youth of so violent and ungovernable a disposition, that it was judged prudent to 
confine him while his father was conveyed to Tyburn, lest he should create a tumult, 
and prove the cause of mischief among the populace. Soon after the death of his father 
he accepted a sum of money to become a servant in one of our plantations.
	Besides the woman to whom he was married at Wolverhampton, five others 
lived with him under the pretended sanction of matrimony: the first was Mary 
Milliner; the second Judith Nun, by whom he had a daughter; the third Sarah Grigson, 
alias Perrin; the fourth Elizabeth Man, who cohabited with him above five years; the 
fifth, whose real name is uncertain, married some time after the death of Wild.
	History can scarcely furnish an instance of such complicated villainy as was 
shown in the character of Jonathan Wild, who possessed abilities which, had they 
been properly cultivated, and directed into a right course, would have rendered him a 
respectable and useful member of society; but it is to be lamented that the profligate 
turn of mind which distinguished both in the early part of his life disposed him to 
adopt the maxims of the abandoned people with whom he became acquainted.
	During his apprenticeship Wild was observed to be fond of reading; but, as his 
finances would not admit of his buying books, his studies were confined to such as 
casually fell in his way; and they unfortunately happened to contain those abominable 
doctrines to which thousands have owed the ruin of both their bodies and souls. In 
short, at an early period of life he imbibed the principles of deism and atheism; and 
the sentiments he thus early contracted he strictly adhered to nearly till the period of 
his dissolution.
	Voluminous writings were formerly beyond the purchase of persons in the 
inferior classes of life; but the great encouragement that has of late years been given 
to the publication of weekly numbers has so liberally diffused the streams of 
knowledge, that but few even of the lower ranks of society can be sensible of any 
impediment to the gratification of the desire of literary acquirements.
	Wild trained up and instructed his dependants in the practice of roguery; and, 
when they became the objects of his displeasure, he laboured with unremitting 
assiduity to procure their deaths. Thus his temporal and private interest sought 
gratification at the expense of every religious and moral obligation. We must conceive 
it to be impossible for a man acknowledging the existence of an Almighty Being to 
expect his favour, while devising the means of corrupting his fellow-creatures, and 
cutting them off even in the blossom of their sins: but the atheist, having nothing after 
this world either to hope or fear, is only careful to secure himself from detection; and 
the success of one iniquitous scheme naturally induces him to engage in others, and 
the latter actions are generally attended with circumstances of more aggravated guilt 
than the former.
	There is a principle implanted in our nature, which will exert itself when we 
are approaching to a state of dissolution, and impress our minds with a full confidence 
in the existence of an eternal God, who will reward or punish us according to our 
deserts or demerits. Thus it happened to the miserable subject of these pages, who, 
when he had relinquished the hope of surviving the sentence of the law, anxiously 
inquired into the meaning of several texts of scripture, and concerning the 
intermediate state of the soul.
	The horrors of his guilt rushed upon his conscience with such force that 
reflection became intolerable; and, instead of repenting of his enormous crimes, he 
employed the last of his moments that were enlightened by reason (the distinguished 
characteristic of humanity) in meditating the means of self-destruction.



EDWARD BURNWORTH, WILLIAM BLEWITT, 
EMANUEL DICKENSON, THOMAS BERRY, JOHN 
LEGEE, JOHN HIGGS, and —— MARJORAM 
Another gang of murderers and daring robbers.

	NOTWITHSTANDING Jonathan Wild, in the early career of his villainy, had 
been active in bringing a number of thieves to condign punishment, yet London and 
its environs were never more infested with common depredators, than about this time.
	Burnworth and his gang seem to have risen to notoriety on the downfall of 
Wild; for about the time of his apprehension, they were committing the most daring 
robberies; but they, however, did not survive him quite a single year. The captain of 
this gang was born in Moorfields, London. His father was a painter, and placed his 
son Edward apprentice to a buckle-maker in Grub-street; in which situation he did not 
remain long, having given himself up to the company of loose and disorderly young 
men. His initiation into vicious habits took place, at an infamous place of low 
diversion, called the Ring, near his father's place of residence, and where it appears he 
excelled in the vulgar art of cudgel-playing. He soon commenced pick-pocket, and 
through the gradations in villainy, which we have already described, became a general 
thief. As a pick-pocket, he frequented every public place in and near the city. He used 
to steal snuff-boxes, watches, handkerchiefs, pocket-books, &c. At length he was 
apprehended, and lodged in New Prison, from which he found means to escape, and 
renewed his former occupation, but with more circumspection, usually lounging about 
the fields near London during the day time, and returning to town at night in search of 
prey. He was a remarkably daring villain, and constantly carried pistols about hint, to 
aid him to make a readier escape in case of detection. Going into a public house in the 
Old Bailey, the landlord told him that Quilt Arnold, one of Jonathan Wild's men, who 
had been seeking him some days, was then in the house. Hereupon Burnworth went 
backwards to a room where Arnold was sitting alone; and presenting a pistol, 
upbraided him for endeavouring to injure his old acquaintance, Arnold having been a 
brother thief. Burnworth then called for a glass of brandy, and putting some 
gunpowder in it, compelled the other to drink it on his knees, and swear that he would 
never seek for him in future. He was once whipped at the cart's tail for a theft.
	William Blewitt, another of this gang, was the son of poor parents near 
Cripplegate, who apprenticed him to a glover; but before he had served above three 
years of his time, he associated with ill company, and became a pickpocket and 
house-breaker. Having been apprehended and lodged in Newgate, he was tried for an 
offence, of which he was convicted, and sentenced to be transported for seven years; 
in consequence of which he was put on board a ship in the river, in company, with 
several other felons. Some of these had procured saws and files to be concealed in 
cakes of gingerbread, and by means of these instruments they hoped to effect their 
escape before the ship sailed to any distance. Blewitt having discovered their 
intention, disclosed it to the captain of the vessel, who seized the implements, and 
gave Blewitt his liberty, as a reward-for the information. [Note: This was assuming a 
power which was never given to any captain of any vessel]. But he was no sooner at 
large, than he returned to his old practices, in consequence of which he was 
apprehended, and committed to Newgate. At the following sessions he was indicted 
for returning from transportation, and being convicted, received sentence of death; but 
he pleaded the service he had done by preventing the escape of the prisoners in the 
river: on which he was reprieved till the return of the vessel from America; when his 
allegations being found to be true, he was pardoned, on the condition of transporting 
himself. This however he neglected to do; but got into the company of Burnworth, 
Berry, Legee, and Higgs, the three last having been thieves from their infancy.
	At this time there was a gin-shop kept in the Mint, Southwark, by a man 
named Ball, whose character was similar to that of Jonathan Wild. Ball, who had been 
himself a thief, threatened that he would cause Burnworth to be taken into custody. 
The latter, hearing of this circumstance, resolved on the murder of Ball and engaged 
his accomplices in the execution of the plan. Previous to this, while they were 
drinking at Islington, Burnworth proposed to break open and rob the house of a 
magistrate in Clerkenwell, who had distinguished himself by his diligence in causing 
thieves to be apprehended; and this robbery was proposed more from motives of 
revenge than of gain. They soon executed their design, and robbed the house of what 
they thought a large quantity of plate, which they carried to Copenhagen-house, at that 
time a public-house of ill fame; but, on examining the supposed treasure, they 
discovered that it was only brass covered with silver, on which they threw it into the 
New River.
	The following day, while they were carousing, one of their associates came 
and informed them that some peace officers were waiting for them in Chick-lane, a 
place they greatly frequented. Thus informed, they kept in a body, and concealed their 
pistols and cutlasses under their clothes. On the approach of evening they ventured 
towards London, and having got as far as Turnmill-street, the keeper of Clerkenwell 
Bridewell happening to see them, called to Burnworth, and said he wanted to speak 
with him. Burnworth hesitated; but the other assuring him that he intended no injury, 
and the thief being confident that his associates would not desert him, swore he did 
not regard the keeper, whom he advanced to meet with the pistol in his hand, the other 
rogues waiting on the opposite side of the street, armed with cutlasses and pistols. 
This singular spectacle attracting the attention of the populace, a considerable crowd 
soon gathered round them, on which Burnworth joined his companions, who kept 
together, and facing the people retired in a body, presenting their pistols, and swearing 
that they would fire on any one who should offer to molest them. Thus they retreated 
as far as Battle-bridge, and then making a circle round the fields, entered London by a 
different avenue, and going to Blackfriars, took a boat and crossed the Thames. 
Having landed at the Bankside, Southwark, they went to a place called the Music-
house, which was at that time much frequented by people of dissolute characters. Here 
they continued drinking some time, and then went into St. George's-fields, where 
Burnworth re-proposed the murder of Ball, on account of the threat that he had issued. 
All the company readily agreed, except Higgs, who said he would have no concern in 
murder; however, the others forced him with them. It was dark when they arrived at 
Ball's house, and Higgs waited at the door, while the rest went in. Ball's wife told 
them he was at an alehouse in the neighbourhood, but she would go and call him, 
which she accordingly did; he no sooner got to the door of his own house, than 
Burnworth seized him and dragged him in, reproaching him with treachery, in 
intending to betray his old acquaintance. As these desperadoes were armed with 
pistols, Ball trembled with just apprehension for his life, and dropping on his knees, 
earnestly entreated that they would not murder him; but Burnworth, swearing that he 
should never obtain the reward for betraying him, shot him dead on the spot, while 
thus begging for his life. The murder was no sooner perpetrated, than they all sallied 
forth into the street; when Blewitt, supposing that the report of the pistol might alarm 
the neighbours, fired another into the air, saying, "We are now safe in town, and there 
is no fear of rogues;" thereby intimating that they had come out of the country, 
whither they had taken pistols for their protection. Higgs had left his companions as 
soon as the murder was committed; but on their way to the Falcon Stairs, where they 
intended to take a boat, they met with him again, when Burnworth proposed to murder 
him, as they had done Ball; but Marjoram, an old acquaintance, whom they had just 
met, interceded for his life, which was granted, on condition that, for the future, he 
should behave with greater courage. They now crossed the Thames, and went to the 
Boar's-head tavern, in Smithfield, where, not being known, they were under no 
apprehension of detection. Here they remained till ten at night, and then parted in 
different gangs, to commit separate robberies.
	Some days after this, Dickenson, Berry, and Blewitt, having obtained a large 
booty, went to Harwich, and sailed in the packet-boat to Holland. In the mean time, 
Higgs went to Portsmouth, and entered on board the Monmouth man of war; but his 
brother happening to meet the mate of a ship in London, gave him a letter to deliver to 
him. The mate going accidentally into a public-house in Smithfield, heard the name of 
Higgs mentioned by some people who were talking of the murder, among whom was 
a watchman, whom the mate told that he had a letter to carry to one Higgs. On this the 
watchman went to the under secretary of state, and mentioned what he had heard and 
suspected. Hereupon the watchman, and two of the king's messengers, being 
dispatched to Portsmouth, Higgs was taken into custody, brought to London, and 
committed to Newgate. Still Burnworth, and the rest of his associates, continued to 
defy the laws, in the most open manner. Having stopped the Earl of Harborough's 
chair, during broad daylight, in Piccadilly, one of the chairmen pulled out a pole of 
the chair, and knocked down one of the villains, while the Earl came out, drew his 
sword, and put the rest to flight: but not before they had raised their wounded 
companion, whom they took off with them.
	The number of daring robberies which were now daily committed were so 
alarming, that the king issued a proclamation for apprehending the offenders, and a 
pardon was offered to any one who would impeach his accomplices, except 
Burnworth, who was justly considered as the principal of the gang. Marjoram 
happened to be drinking at a public house in Whitecross-street one night, when a 
gentleman went in and read the royal proclamation. The company present knew 
nothing of Marjoram; but he apprehending that some of his accomplices would 
become an evidence, if he did not, applied to a constable in Smithfield, and desired 
him to take him before the Lord Mayor. By this time the evening was far advanced, 
on which Marjoram was lodged in the Compter for that night, and being taken to 
Guildhall the next day, he discovered all the circumstances that he knew; and 
informing the Lord Mayor that Legge lodged in Whitecross-street, he was almost 
immediately apprehended, and committed to Newgate the same day. The 
circumstance of Marjoram having turned evidence being now the public topic, John 
Barton, a fellow who had been sometime connected with Burnworth and, his gang, 
provided a loaded pistol, and placing himself near Goldsmith's-hall, took an 
opportunity, when the officers were conducting Marjoram before the Lord Mayor, to 
fire at him; but Marjoram observing him advancing, stooped down, so that the ball 
grazed his back only. The suddenness of this action, and the surprise it occasioned; 
gave Barton an opportunity of effecting his escape. About this time one Wilson, who 
had likewise belonged to the gang, quitted London, but being apprehended about two 
years afterwards, he was hanged at Kingston in Surrey.
	In the mean time, Burnworth continued at large, committing depredations on 
the public, and appearing openly in the streets, notwithstanding the proclamation 
issued to apprehend him. He broke open the house of a distiller in Clare-market, and 
carried off a great number of banknotes; in consequence of which another 
proclamation was issued, and three hundred pounds were offered for taking him into 
custody; notwithstanding he still appeared at large, and gave the following among 
other proofs of his audacity. Sitting down at the door of a public-house, in Holborn, 
where he was well known, he called for a pint of beer and drank it, holding a pistol in 
his hand, by way of protection; he then paid for his beer, and went off with the 
greatest apparent unconcern. At this time he kept company with two infamous 
women, one of whom was the wife of a man named Leonard; who, having belonged 
to the gang, thought to recommend himself to mercy, by the apprehension of 
Burnworth. Having told his wife what he intended, she informed same magistrates of 
the proposed plan, and they sent six men to assist in carrying it into execution. Shrove 
Tuesday being the day appointed, the men waited at a public-house till they should 
receive a hint to proceed.. About six in the evening Burnworth went to the lodgings of 
the women, to which there was a back door that opened into a yard. It was proposed to 
have pancakes for supper, and while one of the women was frying them, the other 
went to the public house for some beer, and on her return pretended to bolt the door, 
but designedly missed the staple; at that moment six men rushed in, and seized 
Burnworth before he had time to make any resistance, though he had a pistol in the 
pocket of his great coat. Being carried before three magistrates he was committed to 
Newgate; but his accomplices were so infamously daring as to attempt the murder of 
the woman who had occasioned his apprehension; a pistol was fired at her as she was 
entering the door of her own house, which being communicated to the magistrates, 
constables were appointed to watch nightly for her protection, till the desperadoes 
gave over their attempts.
	Burnworth, while in Newgate, projected the following scheme of escape: 
having been furnished with an iron crow, he engaged some of the prisoners, who 
assisted him in pulling stones out of the wall, while others sung psalms, that the 
keepers might not hear what they wore doing. On the day following this transaction, 
which was carried on during the night, five condemned criminals were to be executed; 
but when the gaolers came to take them out, there was such an immense quantity of 
stones and rubbish to remove, that it was two o'clock in the afternoon before the 
criminals could be got out of their cells. This scheme of Burnworth occasioned his 
closer confinement. He was removed into a room known by the name of the bilboes, 
and loaded with a pair of the heaviest irons in the prison: but he intended to have 
made his escape even from this place; and being furnished with files and saws from 
some of his acquaintance, he worked his way through a wall into a room in which 
were some women prisoners, one of whom .acquainting the keeper with what had 
happened, Burnworth was chained to the floor of the condemned hold. Application 
was made to the secretary of state, to take measures for the apprehension of Berry, 
Dickenson, and Blewitt, who had gone over to Holland; and here upon instructions 
were sent to the English Ambassador at the Hague, empowering him to request of the 
States General, that the offenders might be delivered up to justice, if found any where 
within their jurisdiction. The ambassador, on receiving the necessary instructions, 
made the application, and orders were issued accordingly; in consequence of which 
Blewitt was apprehended in Rotterdam, but Dickenson and Berry had taken refuge on 
board a ship at the Brill. Blewitt was lodged in the state-house prison, and then the 
officers who took him went immediately on board the ship, and seized his two 
accomplices, whom they brought to the same place of confinement. They were 
chained to the floor till the English ambassador requested permission to send them 
home, which being readily obtained, they were guarded to the packet-boat by a party 
of soldiers, and were chained together as soon as they were put on board. When they 
reached the Nore, they were met by two of the king's messengers, who conducted 
them up the river. On the arrival of the vessel, they were put into a boat opposite the 
Tower, which was guarded by three other boats, in each of which was a corporal and 
several soldiers. In this manner they were conducted to Westminster, where they were 
examined by two magistrates, who committed them to Newgate, to which they were 
escorted by a party of the foot-guards. On sight of Burnworth, they seemed to pity his 
situation, while he in a hardened manner, expressed his happiness at their safe arrival 
from Holland. On the approach of the ensuing assizes for the county of Surrey, they 
were handcuffed, put into a waggon, and in this manner a party of dragoons 
conducted them to Kingston. Their insolence on leaving Newgate was unparalleled — 
they told the spectators that it would become them to treat gentlemen of their 
profession with respect, especially as they were going a journey; and likewise said to 
the dragoons, that they expected to be protected from injury on the road; and during 
their journey they behaved with great indifference, throwing money among the 
populace, and diverting themselves by seeing them scramble for it. A boy having 
picked up a halfpenny, one of a handful which Blewitt had thrown among the people, 
told him that he would keep that halfpenny, and have his name engraved on it, as sure 
as he would be hanged at Kingston, on which Blewitt gave him a shilling to pay the 
expense of engraving, and enjoined him to keep his promise, which it is affirmed, the 
boy actually did.
	On their arrival at Kingston, they were put in the prison called the Stockhouse, 
where they were chained to the floor; and on the following day, bills of indictment 
were found against them, they were brought up for trial before Lord Chief Justice 
Raymond, and Judge Denton, but, some articles having been taken from Burnworth 
when he was apprehended, he refused to plead, unless they were restored to him. The 
judges made use of every argument to prevail on him to plead, but in vain; in 
consequence of which sentence was passed that he should be pressed to death. 
Hereupon he was taken back to the Stockhouse, where he bore the weight of one 
hundred, three quarters, and two pounds, on his breast. The high-sheriff who attended 
him on this occasion, used every argument to prevail on him to plead, to which he 
consented, after bearing the weight an hour and three minutes, during great part of 
which time he endeavoured to kill himself, by striking his head against the floor. 
Being brought into court, he was tried, and convicted with his companions, They were 
no sooner convicted, than orders were given for their being chained to the floor; but in 
this deplorable situation they diverted themselves, by recounting some particulars of 
their robberies, to such persons whose curiosity induced them to visit the gaol. Some 
people wished, they would leave an account of their robberies, but Burnworth said the 
particulars could not be contained in an hundred sheets of paper. On passing sentence 
the learned judge most earnestly entreated them to prepare for another world, as their 
time in the present must necessarily be short. They begged that their friends might 
visit them; and this being complied with, files and saws were conveyed to them, to 
assist them in their escape. Their plan was to have mixed opium in wine, to have 
made the keepers sleep; and if this had taken place, they then proposed to have set fire 
to some piles of wood near the prison, and in other parts of the town, and to get a 
considerable distance during the conflagration; but the keepers having listened to their 
discourse, they were more strictly guarded than before, and their whole scheme 
rendered abortive. A short time before their execution Burnworth told one of the 
keepers, that, "If he did not see him buried in a decent manner, he would meet him 
after death in a dark entry, and pull off his nose."
	When the day of execution arrived, the prisoners were put into a cart, and a 
company of foot soldiers escorted them to the fatal tree. On their way Blewitt saw a 
gentleman named Warwick, and having obtained permission to speak to him, most 
earnestly entreated his pardon for having attempted to shoot him, in consequence of 
an information which Mr. Warwick had given against him. Dickenson and Blewitt 
appeared more penitent than any of the rest. They wept bitterly at the place of 
execution, and said, they hoped their untimely fate would teach young men to avoid 
such courses as had brought them to their fatal end. They suffered April 12, 1726. 
After execution, their bodies were brought to the new gaol in Southwark, to be fitted 
with chains. The bodies of Burnworth and Blewitt, were suspended on a gibbet in St. 
George's Fields, near where the murder was perpetrated. Legee and Higgs were 
hanged on Putney Common, and Berry and Dickenson on Kennington Common; but 
representation being made to the people in power, that Dickenson's father, when a 
lieutenant in the army, had died fighting for his country in Flanders, permission was 
given to his friends to take down and bury the body, after he had hung one day. 
Marjoram, the evidence, obtained his liberty, of course, when his accomplices were 
convicted: but in a few days afterwards he cut the string of a butcher's apron, and ran 
away with his steel. Being pursued, he was apprehended, committed, and being 
indicted for privately stealing, was convicted, and received sentence of death; but in 
consideration of his having been the means of bringing the above-mentioned atrocious 
offenders to justice, the sentence of death was changed to that of transportation.


CATHERINE HAYES 
Who with Others foully murdered her Husband, and was burned alive on 9th 
of May, 1726

  
Hayes, Wood and Billings murdering Mr. Hayes

	CATHERINE HAYES was the daughter of a poor man named Hall, who lived 
at Birmingham, and having remained with her parents until she was fifteen years of 
age, a dispute then arose, in consequence of which she set off for London. On her way 
she met with some officers, who, remarking that her person was engaging, persuaded 
her to accompany them to their quarters at Great Ombersley, in Worcestershire. 
Having remained with them some time, she strolled on into Warwickshire, and was 
there hired into the house of Mr Hayes, a respectable farmer. An intimacy soon sprang 
up between her and the son of her master, which ended in a private marriage taking 
place at Worcester; and an attempt on the part of the officers to entrap young Hayes 
into enlisting rendered it necessary to disclose the whole affair to the father. He felt 
that it would be useless now to oppose his son, in consequence of what had taken 
place, and he set him up in business as a carpenter. Mrs Hayes, however, was of a 
restless disposition, and persuaded him to enlist, which he did; and his regiment being 
ordered to the Isle of Wight his wife followed him. His father bought him off, at an 
expense of sixty pounds, and now gave him property to the value of about twenty-six 
pounds per annum; but after the marriage had been solemnised about six years Mrs 
Hayes prevailed on her husband to come to London. On their arrival in the metropolis 
Mr Hayes took a house, part of which he let in lodgings, and opened a shop in the 
chandlery and coal trade, in which he was as successful as he could have wished; but 
exclusive of his profit by shop-keeping he acquired a great deal of money by lending 
small sums on pledges, for at this time the trade of pawnbroking was followed by 
anyone at pleasure, and was subjected to no regulation.
	Mr Hayes soon found that the disposition of his wife was not of such a nature 
as to promise him much peace. The chief pleasure of her life consisted in creating and 
encouraging quarrels among her neighbours. Sometimes she would speak of her 
husband to his acquaintances in terms of great tenderness and respect, and at other 
times she would represent him to her female associates as a compound of everything 
that was contemptible in human nature. On a particular occasion she told a woman 
that she should think it no more sin to murder him than to kill a dog. At length her 
husband thought it prudent to remove to Tottenham Court Road, where he carried on 
his former business, but he then again removed to Tyburn Road (now Oxford Street). 
He soon amassed what he considered a sufficient sum to enable him to retire from 
business, and he accordingly took lodgings near the same spot. A supposed son of 
Mrs Hayes, by her former connection, who went by the name of Billings, lived in the 
same house, and he and Mrs Hayes were in the habit of feasting themselves at the 
expense of the husband of the latter.
	During his temporary absence from town her proceedings were so extravagant 
that the neighbours deemed it right to make her husband aware of the fact; and on his 
return he remonstrated with her on the subject, when a quarrel took place, which 
ended in a fight. It is supposed that at this time the design of murdering Mr Hayes was 
formed by his wife, and it was not long before she obtained a seconder in her horrid 
project in the person of her reputed son. At this time a person named Thomas Wood 
came to town from Worcestershire, and seeking out Hayes persuaded him to give him 
a lodging, as he was afraid of being impressed. After he had been in town only a few 
days Mrs Hayes informed him of the plot which existed, and endeavoured to persuade 
him to join her and her son. He was at first shocked at the notion of murdering his 
friend and benefactor, and rejected the proposals; but at length Mrs Hayes, alleging 
that her husband was an atheist, and had already been guilty of murdering two of his 
own children, one of whom he had buried under an apple-tree, and the other under a 
pear-tree, and besides urging that fifteen hundred pounds, which would fall to her at 
his death, should be placed at the disposal of her accomplices, he consented.
	Shortly after this Wood went out of town for a few days, but on his return he 
found Mrs Hayes and her son and husband drinking together, and apparently in good 
humour. He joined them at the desire of Hayes, and the latter boasting that he was not 
drunk, although they had had a guinea's worth of liquor among them, Billings 
proposed that he should try whether he could drink half-a-dozen bottles of mountain 
wine without getting tipsy, and promised that if he did so he would pay for the wine. 
The proposal was agreed to, and the three murderers went off to procure the liquor. 
On their way it was agreed among them that this was the proper opportunity to carry 
their design into execution, and having procured the wine, for which Mrs Hayes paid 
half-a-guinea, Mr Hayes began to drink it, while his intended assassins regaled 
themselves with beer. When he had taken a considerable quantity of the wine he 
danced about the room like a man distracted, and at length finished the whole 
quantity; but not being yet in a state of absolute stupefaction, his wife sent for another 
bottle, which he also drank, and then fell senseless on the floor. Having lain some 
time in this condition, he got, with much difficulty, into another room, and threw 
himself on a bed.
	When he was asleep his wife told her associates that this was the time to 
execute their plan, as there was no fear of any resistance on his part, and accordingly 
Billings went into the room with a hatchet, with which he struck Hayes so violently 
that he fractured his skull. At this time Hayes's feet hung off the bed, and the torture 
arising from the blow made him stamp repeatedly on the floor, which being heard by 
Wood, he also went into the room, and taking the hatchet out of Billings's hand gave 
the poor man two more blows, which effectually dispatched him. A woman named 
Springate, who lodged in the room over that where the murder was committed, 
hearing the noise occasioned by Hayes's stamping, imagined that the parties might 
have quarrelled in consequence of their intoxication; and going downstairs she told 
Mrs Hayes that the noise had awakened her husband, her child and herself. Catherine, 
however, had a ready answer to this: she said some company had visited them, and. 
had grown merry, but they were on the point of taking their leave; and Mrs Springate 
returned to her room well satisfied.
	The murderers now consulted on the best manner of disposing of the body so 
as most effectually to prevent detection. Mrs Hayes proposed to cut off the head, 
because if the body were found whole it would be more likely to be known, and on 
the villains agreeing to this proposition she fetched a pail, lighted a candle, and all of 
them went into the room. The men then drew the body partly off the bed, and Billings 
supported the head while Wood, with his pocket- knife, cut it off, and the infamous 
woman held the pail to receive it, being as careful as possible that the floor might not 
be stained with the blood. This being done, they emptied the blood out of the pail into 
a sink by the window, and poured several pails of water after it. When the head was 
cut off, the woman recommended boiling it till the flesh should part from the bones; 
but the other parties thought this operation would take up too much time, and 
therefore advised throwing it into the Thames, in expectation that it would be carried 
off by the tide, and would sink. This agreed to, the head was put into the pail, and 
Billings took it under his greatcoat, being accompanied by Wood; but making a noise 
in going downstairs, Mrs Springate called, and asked what was the matter. To this Mrs 
Hayes answered that her husband was going a journey; and with incredible 
dissimulation affected to take leave of him, pretending great concern that he was 
under a necessity of going at so late an hour, and Wood and Billings passed out of the 
house unnoticed. They first went to Whitehall, where they intended to throw in the 
head; but the gates being shut they went to a wharf near the Horse Ferry, Westminster. 
Billings putting down the pail, Wood threw the head into the dock, expecting it would 
be carried away by the stream; but at this time the tide was ebbing, and a lighter-man, 
who was then in his vessel, heard something fall into the dock, but it was too dark for 
him to distinguish any object. The head being thus disposed of, the murderers returned 
home, and were admitted by Mrs Hayes without the knowledge of the other lodgers. 
The body next became the object of their attention, and Mrs Hayes proposed that it 
should be packed up in a box and buried. The plan was determined upon immediately, 
and a box purchased, but being found too small, the body was dismembered so as to 
admit of its being enclosed in it, and was left until night should favour its being 
carried off. The inconvenience of carrying a box was, however, immediately 
discovered, and the pieces of the mangled body were therefore taken out and, being 
wrapped up in a blanket, were carried by Billings and Wood to a field in Marylebone, 
and there thrown into a pond.
	In the meantime the head had been discovered, and the circumstance of a 
murder having been committed being undoubted, every means was taken to secure the 
discovery of its perpetrators. The magistrates, with this view, directed that the head 
should be washed clean, and the hair combed; after which it was put on a pole in the 
churchyard of St Margaret's, Westminster, that an opportunity might be afforded of its 
being viewed by the public.

  
The head of Mr. Hayes displayed in the churchyard of St Margaret's

	[Note: It was formerly customary to oblige persons suspected of murder to 
touch the murdered body for the discovery of their guilt or innocence. This way of 
finding murderers was practised in Denmark by King Christianus II., and permitted 
over all his kingdom; the occasion whereof was this. Certain gentlemen being on an 
evening together in a stove, or tavern, fell out among themselves, and from words 
came to blows (the candles being out), insomuch that one of them was stabbed with a 
poniard. Now the murderer was unknown by reason of the number, although the 
person stabbed accused a pursuivant of the king's, who was one of the company. The 
king, to find out the homicide, caused them all to come together in the stove, and, 
standing round the corpse, he commanded that they should, one after another, lay their 
right hand on the slain gentleman's naked breast, swearing that they had not killed 
him. The gentlemen did so, and no sign appeared against them: the pursuivant only 
remained, who, condemned before in his own conscience, went first of all and kissed 
the dead man's feet; but as soon as he bad laid his hand upon his breast the blood 
gushed forth in abundance, out of both his wound and his nostrils; so that, urged by 
this evident accusation, he confessed the murder, and was, by the king's own sentence, 
immediately beheaded. Such was the origin of this practice, which was so common in 
many of the countries in Europe for finding out unknown murderers. ]
	Thousands went to witness this extraordinary spectacle; and there were not 
wanting those among the crowd who expressed their belief among themselves that the 
head belonged to Hayes. Their suspicions were mentioned by some of them to 
Billings, but he ridiculed the notion, and declared that Hayes was well, and was only 
gone out of town for a few days, When the head had been exhibited for four days it 
was deemed expedient that measures should be taken to preserve it; and Mr 
Westbrook, a chemist, in consequence received directions to put it into spirits. Mrs 
Hayes soon afterwards changed her lodgings, and took the woman Springate with her, 
paying the rent which she owed, Wood and Billings also accompanying her; and her 
chief occupation now was that of collecting the debts due to her husband, by means of 
which she continued to supply her diabolical assistants with money and clothes. 
Amongst the incredible numbers of people who resorted to see the head was a poor 
woman from Kingsland, whose husband had been absent from the very time that the 
murder was perpetrated. After a minute survey of the head she believed it to be that of 
her husband, though she could not be absolutely positive; but her suspicions were so 
strong, that strict search was made after the body, on a presumption that the clothes 
might help her to ascertain it.
	Meanwhile, Mr Hayes not being visible for a considerable time, his friends 
could not help making inquiry after him; and a Mr Ashby in particular, who had been 
on the most friendly terms with him, called on Mrs Hayes and demanded what had 
become of her husband. Catherine pretended to account for his absence by 
communicating the following intelligence, as a matter that must be kept profoundly 
secret. "Some time ago," said she, "he happened to have a dispute with a man, and 
from words they came to blows, so that Mr Hayes killed him. The wife of the 
deceased made up the affair, on Mr Hayes's promising to pay her a certain annual 
allowance; but he not being able to make it good, she threatened to inform against 
him, on which he has absconded." This story was, however, by no means satisfactory 
to Mr Ashby, who asked her if the head that had been exposed on the pole was that of 
the man who had been killed by her husband. She readily answered in the negative, 
adding that the party had been buried entire, and that the widow had her husband's 
bond for the payment of fifteen pounds a year. Ashby inquired to what part of the 
world Mr Hayes had gone, and she said to Portugal, in company with some 
gentlemen; but she had yet received no letter from him. The whole of this detail 
seeming highly improbable to Mr Ashby, he went to Mr Longmore, a gentleman 
nearly related to Hayes; and it was agreed between them that Mr Longmore should 
call on Catherine and have some conversation with her upon the same subject. Her 
story to this gentleman differed in its details from that which she had related to Mr 
Ashby; and Mr Eaton, also a friend of Mr Hayes, being consulted, they determined 
first to examine the head, and then, if their suspicions were confirmed, to 
communicate their belief to the magistrates. Having accordingly minutely examined 
the head, and come to the conclusion that it must be that of their friend Hayes, they 
proceeded to Mr Lambert, a magistrate, who immediately issued warrants for the 
apprehension of Mrs Hayes and Mrs Springate, as well as of Wood and Billings, and 
proceeded to execute them personally. Going accordingly to the house in which they 
all lived, they informed the landlord of their business, and went immediately to the 
door of Mrs Hayes's room. On the magistrate's rapping, the woman asked, "Who is 
there?" and he commanded her to open the door directly, or it should be broken open. 
To this she replied that she would open it as soon as she had put on her clothes; and 
she did so in little more than a minute; when the justice ordered the parties present to 
take her into custody. At this time Billings was sitting on the side of the bed, bare-
legged. Some of the parties remaining below to secure the prisoners, Mr Longmore 
went upstairs with the justice and took Mrs Springate into custody; and they were all 
conducted together to the house of Mr Lambert. This magistrate having examined the 
prisoners separately for a considerable time, and all of them positively persisting in 
their ignorance of anything respecting the murder, they were severally committed for 
re-examination on the following day, before Mr Lambert and other magistrates. Mrs 
Springate was sent to the Gatehouse, Billings to New Prison, and Mrs Hayes to 
Tothill Fields Bridewell.
	When the peace officers, attended by Longmore, went the next day to fetch up 
Catherine to her examination, she earnestly desired to see the head; and it being 
thought prudent to grant her request, she was carried to the surgeon's; and no sooner 
was the head shown to her than she exclaimed: "Oh, it is my dear husband's head! It is 
my dear husband's head!" She now took the glass in her arms and shed many tears 
while she embraced it. Mr Westbrook told her that he would take the head out of the 
glass that she might have a more perfect view of it and be certain that it was the same; 
and the surgeon doing as he had said, she seemed to be greatly affected; and having 
kissed it several times, she begged to be indulged with a lock of the hair; and on Mr 
Westbrook expressing his apprehension that she had had too much of his blood 
already, she fell into a fit. On her recovery she was conducted to Mr Lambert's, to 
take her examination with the other parties.
	It is somewhat remarkable that it was on the morning of this day that the body 
was discovered. As a gentleman and his servant were crossing the fields at 
Marylebone they observed something lying in a ditch, and on going nearer to it they 
perceived that it was some parts of a human body. Assistance being procured, the 
whole of the body was found except the head; and information of the circumstance 
was conveyed to Mr Lambert at the very moment at which he was examining the 
prisoners. The suspicions which already existed were strengthened by this 
circumstance, and Mrs Hayes was committed to Newgate for trial; the committal of 
Billings and Mrs Springate, however, being deferred until the apprehension of Wood.
	The latter soon after coming into town, and riding up to Mrs Hayes's lodgings, 
was directed to go to the house of Mr Longmore, where he was told he would find 
Mrs Hayes; but the brother of Longmore, standing at the door, immediately seized 
him, and caused him to be carried before Mr Lambert. He underwent an examination; 
but refusing to make any confession, he was sent to Tothill Fields Bridewell. On his 
arrival at the prison he was informed that the body had been found; and, not doubting 
but that the whole affair would come to light, he begged that he might be carried back 
to the justice's house. This being made known to Mr Lambert, the prisoner was 
brought up, and he then acknowledged the particulars of the murder, and signed his 
confession. This wretched man owned that since the perpetration of the crime he had 
been terrified at the sight of everyone he met, that he had not experienced a moment's 
peace, and that his mind had been distracted with the most violent agitation.
	His commitment to Newgate was immediately made out, and he was 
conducted to that prison under the escort of eight soldiers with fixed bayonets, whose 
whole efforts were necessary to protect him from the violence of the mob. A Mr 
Mercer visiting Mrs Hayes in prison, she begged him to go to Billings and urge him to 
confess the whole truth, as no advantage, she said, could be expected to arise from a 
denial of that which was too clearly proved to admit of denial; and he being carried 
before justice Lambert again gave an account precisely concurring with that of Wood. 
Mrs Springate, whose innocence was now distinctly proved, was set at liberty.
	At the trial Wood and Billings confessed themselves guilty of the crime 
alleged against them, but Mrs Hayes, flattering herself that as she had said nothing she 
had a chance of escape, put herself upon her trial; but the jury found her guilty. The 
prisoners being afterwards brought to the bar to receive sentence, Mrs Hayes entreated 
that she might not be burned, according to the then law of petty treason, alleging that 
she was not guilty, as she did not strike the fatal blow; but she was informed by the 
Court that the sentence awarded by the law could not be dispensed with.
	After conviction the behaviour of Wood was uncommonly penitent and 
devout; but while in the condemned hold he was seized with a violent fever, and being 
attended by a clergyman, to assist him in his devotions, he said he was ready to suffer 
death, under every mark of ignominy, as some atonement for the atrocious crime he 
had committed. But he died in prison, and thus defeated the final execution of the law. 
Billings behaved with apparent sincerity, acknowledging the justice of his sentence, 
and saying that no punishment could be commensurate with the crime of which he 
had been guilty. He was executed in the usual manner, and hung in chains not far 
from the pond in which Mr Hayes's body was found, in Marylebone Fields. The 
behaviour of Mrs Hayes was somewhat similar to her former conduct. Having an 
intention to destroy herself, she procured a phial of strong poison, which was casually 
tasted by a woman who was confined with her, and her design thereby discovered and 
frustrated. On the day of her death she received the Sacrament, and was drawn on a 
sledge to the place of execution. When the wretched woman had finished her 
devotions, in pursuance of her sentence an iron chain was put round her body, with 
which she was fixed to a stake near the gallows. On these occasions, when women 
were burned for petty treason, it was customary to strangle them, by means of a rope 
passed round the neck and pulled by the executioner, so that they were dead before 
the flames reached the body. But this woman was literally burned alive; for the 
executioner letting go the rope sooner than usual, in consequence of the flames 
reaching his hands, the fire burned fiercely round her, and the spectators beheld her 
pushing away the faggots, while she rent the air with her cries and lamentations. Other 
faggots were instantly thrown on her; but she survived amidst the flames for a 
considerable time, and her body was not perfectly reduced to ashes until three hours 
later. These malefactors suffered at Tyburn, 9th of May, 1726.
	[Note: Until the thirtieth year of the reign of King George III. this punishment 
was inflicted on women convicted of murdering their husbands, which crime was 
denominated petit treason, It has frequently, from some accident happening in 
strangling the malefactor, produced the horrid effects above related. In the reign of 
Mary (the cruel) this death was commonly practised upon the objects of her 
vengeance; and many bishops, rather than deny their religious opinions, were burned 
even without previous strangulation. It was high time this part of the sentence, a type 
of barbarism, should be dispensed with. The punishment now inflicted for this most 
unnatural and abhorred crime is hanging.]


RICHARD SAVAGE, ESQ. (THE CELEBRATED POET, 
SON OF THE EARL OF RIVERS AND THE UNNATURAL 
COUNTESS OF MACCLESFIELD), JAMES GREGORY, 
ESQ., AND WILLIAM MERCHANT, ESQ. 
Murderers who escaped Death

	RICHARD SAVAGE — a name the mention of which cannot fail to excite in 
every feeling mind the deepest emotions of pity, and whose almost unparalleled 
persecution, by an abandoned mother, tends to efface all recollection even of his many 
frailties — was born in 1698, having been the son of Anne, Countess of Macclesfield, 
by Captain Savage, afterwards Earl of Rivers. He might have been considered the 
lawful issue of Lord Macclesfield; but his mother, in order to procure a separation 
from her husband, made a public confession of adultery in this instance. As soon as 
her spurious offspring was brought to light, the countess treated him with every kind 
of unnatural cruelty. She committed him to the care of a poor woman to educate as her 
own, and prevented the Earl of Rivers from making him a be quest of L.6000 by 
declaring he was already dead. She endeavoured to send him secretly to the American 
plantations; and at last, to bury him in obscurity and indigence for ever, placed him as 
an apprentice to a shoemaker in Holborn. About this period his nurse died; and, in 
searching her effects, Savage found some letters which unravelled the mystery of his 
origin. He therefore left his low occupation, and tried every method, but without avail, 
to awaken the tenderness and attract the regard of his mother. Being thus thrown upon 
the world without the aid of any fostering hand, he availed himself of the portion of 
learning he had acquired at the grammar school of St. Albans, and commenced author.
	Savage's early productions do not seem to have afforded him either fame or 
profit; but in 1723 he produced a tragedy, in which himself performed a principal 
character, entitled "Sir Thomas Overbury"; during his employment upon which he is 
said to have been without a lodging, and often without food; possessing no other 
conveniences for study than the fields or the street; and, when he had composed a 
speech, stepping into a shop, and begging the use of pen, ink, and paper. The profits 
of this play appear to have amounted to L.200; and the world was beginning to regard 
this victim of maternal heartlessness with a more favourable eye, when the accident 
occurred which put not only his reputation but his life itself into jeopardy, and brought 
the name of Richard Savage within the gloomy boundaries of our criminal 
chronology.
	We have before adverted to the frailties of the subject of this memoir. He was 
proud, vain, and dissipated; and the narrative we are about to give will show that he 
was destitute of that command over his passions which should be indicated in the 
conduct of every wise and virtuous man. But let the humane reader pause before he 
passes too severe a judgment upon poor Savage; and suffer the remembrance of his 
forlorn condition and unheard-of wrongs to cover, at least to a certain extent, "a 
multitude of sins."
	In the month of December, 1727, this gentleman, together with James Gregory 
and William Merchant, was indicted at the Old Bailey, for the murder of James 
Sinclair: — Savage by giving him a mortal wound with a drawn sword in the lower 
part of the belly; and Gregory and Merchant by aiding and abetting in the commission 
of the said murder.
	It appeared in evidence that these three gentlemen had accidentally come, at a 
late hour, much disguised in liquor, to Robinson's coffee-house at Charing Cross, and 
went into a room where Mr. Sinclair and other company were drinking. Merchant, 
entering first, kicked down the table; and Savage and Gregory drawing their swords, 
they were earnestly desired to put them up, but refused to do so.
	A scuffle ensued, in which Mr. Sinclair received a mortal wound, and was 
heard to say "I am a dead man": soon after which the candles were extinguished.
	Another witness deposed that, as he and some other company were on the 
point of leaving the house, the prisoners came in, when Merchant kicked down the 
table, and Gregory, going up to the deceased, said, "Damn ye, you rascal, deliver your 
sword"; on which weapons were drawn, and the deceased wounded, as above 
mentioned: that the deceased had his sword drawn when the word was given by 
Savage; but that he held it with the point down towards the ground; but neither this 
deponent nor the former observed that Merchant had any sword.
	There were several other witnesses to prove the fact; but it may be now proper 
to mention how it happened that the parties accused came to the house where it 
occurred. Mr. Savage had at the time a lodging at Richmond, and another at London; 
and having come to town to pay off the latter, and casually meeting with Gregory and 
Merchant, with whom he had been acquainted for some time past, they went to a 
coffee-house, where they drank till late in the evening. Savage would have engaged a 
bed at this place; but there not being accommodations for him, he and his friends went 
into the street, proposing to spend the night as they could, and in the morning to walk 
to Richmond. Strolling about, they saw a light in Robinson's coffee-house, into which 
they entered, and the fatal consequence ensued which we have already recited.
	The perpetrators of this rash action having left the house, some soldiers were 
sent for, by whom they were taken into custody, and lodged in the round-house; and 
in the morning were carried before a magistrate, who committed them to the Gate-
house; but Mr. Sinclair dying on the following day, they were sent to Newgate.
	The deceased had been attended by a clergyman, who declared that he said he 
was stabbed before he had time to draw his sword; and his testimony was confirmed 
by that of other witnesses.
	When the evidence was summed up, the Court observed to the jury, that, "As 
the deceased and his companions were in possession of the room, if the prisoners were 
the aggressors, by coming into that room, kicking down the table, and immediately 
thereupon drawing their swords, without provocation, &c. it was murder, not only in 
him who gave the wound, but in those who aided and abetted him."
	After a trial of eight hours, the jury found Savage and Gregory guilty of 
murder, and Merchant guilty of manslaughter: in consequence of which the latter was 
burnt in the hand and discharged.
	On the 11th of December, 1727, Richard Savage and James Gregory were 
brought to the bar, with other capital convicts, to receive sentence of death; and being 
asked, in the customary manner, what they had to say why judgment should not be 
duly passed, Savage spoke as follows:
	"It is now, my lords, too late to offer anything by way of defence or 
vindication; not can we expect aught from your lordships in this Court but the 
sentence which the law requires you, as judge, to pronounce against men in our 
calamitous condition. — But we are also persuaded that as mere men, and out of this 
seat of rigorous justice, you are susceptible of the tender passions, and too humane not 
to commiserate the unhappy situation of those whom the law sometimes perhaps 
exacts from you to pronounce sentence upon.
	"No doubt you distinguish between offences which arise out of premeditation 
and a disposition habitual to vice or immorality, and transgressions which are the 
unhappy and unforeseen effects of a casual absence of reason and sudden impulse of 
passion; we, therefore, hope you will contribute all you can to an extension of that 
mercy which the gentle men of the jury have been pleased to show Mr. Merchant, 
who (allowing facts as sworn against us by the evidence) has led us into this calamity. 
"I hope this will not be construed as if we meant to reflect upon that gentleman, or 
remove anything from us upon him, or that we repine the more at our fate because he 
has no participation of it: no, my lord! for my part, I declare nothing could more 
soften my grief than to be without any companion in so great a misfortune."
	It will scarcely be believed that, at this critical juncture, the inhuman countess 
exerted all her influence to prejudice the queen against her unhappy child, and to 
render unavailing every intercession that might be made to procure for him the royal 
mercy: at length, however, the Countess of Hertford having laid an account of the 
extraordinary story and sufferings of poor Savage before her majesty, a pardon was 
obtained for him and his companion, and they were accordingly set at liberty on the 
5th of March, 1728.
	Our author had now recovered his liberty, but was destitute of all means of 
subsistence; and his latter days appear to have been spent, for the most part, in abject 
poverty. His distresses do not, however, seem to have overcome him. In his lowest 
sphere his pride sustained his spirits, and set him on a level with those of the highest 
rank. After enduring numberless privations, and disgusting almost all his friends by 
the heedlessness (and we are afraid we must add the ingratitude) of his disposition, 
Savage expired at Bristol, where he had been imprisoned for debt, August, 1743, in 
his 46th year, and was buried in the churchyard of St. Peter, at the expense of the 
gaoler.


MARGARET DIXON 
Who was married a Few Days after she was hanged for Murder in 1728

	THIS remarkable woman was the daughter of poor parents, who lived at 
Musselburgh, about five miles from Edinburgh, and who brought up their child in the 
practice of religious duties, having instructed her in such household business as was 
likely to suit her future situation in life. The village of Musselburgh was then almost 
entirely inhabited by gardeners, fishermen and persons employed in making salt. The 
husbands having prepared the several articles for sale, the wives carried them to 
Edinburgh, and procured a subsistence by crying them through the streets of that city.
	When Margaret Dixon had attained years of maturity she was married to a 
fisherman, by whom she had several children. But there being a want of seamen, her 
husband was impressed into the naval service; and during his absence from Scotland 
his wife had an illicit connection with a man at Musselburgh, in consequence of which 
she became pregnant. At this time it was the law in Scotland that a woman known to 
have been unchaste should sit in a distinguished place in the church on three Sundays, 
to be publicly rebuked by the minister; and many poor infants have been destroyed 
because the mother dreaded this public exposure, particularly as many Scottish ladies 
went to church to be witnesses of the frailty of a sister who were never seen there on 
any other occasion.
	The neighbours of Mrs Dixon averred that she was with child; but this she 
constantly denied. At length, however, she was delivered of a child; but it is uncertain 
whether it was born alive or not. Be this as it may, she was taken into custody, and 
lodged in the jail of Edinburgh. When her trial for child-murder came on several 
witnesses deposed that she had been frequently pregnant; others proved that there 
were signs of her having been delivered, and that a new-born infant had been found 
near the place of her residence. A surgeon deposed that, putting the lungs of the infant 
in water, they were found to swim, which was deemed a proof that the child had been 
born alive. For it was a received opinion that, if no air be ever drawn into the lungs, 
they will not swim; but this circumstance is a matter of doubt even among the 
gentlemen of the faculty. The jury, giving credit to the evidence against her, brought 
in a verdict of guilty; in consequence of which she was doomed to die.
	After her condemnation she behaved in the most penitent manner, confessed 
that she had been guilty of many sins, and even owned that she had departed from the 
line of duty to her husband; but she constantly and steadily denied that she had 
murdered her child, or even formed an idea of so horrid a crime. She owned that the 
far of being exposed to the ridicule of her neighbours in the church has tempted her to 
deny that she was pregnant; and she said that, being suddenly seized with the pangs of 
childbirth, she was unable o procure the assistance of her neighbours; and that a state 
of insensibility ensued, so it was impossible she should know what became of her 
infant.
	At the place of execution her behaviour was consistent with her former 
declaration. She avowed her total innocence of the crime of which she was convicted, 
but confessed the sincerest sorrow for all her other sins. After execution her body was 
cut down and delivered to her friends, who put it into a coffin and sent it in a cart to 
be buried at her native place; but, the weather being sultry, the persons who had the 
body in their care stopped to drink at a village called Pepper Mill, about two miles 
from Edinburgh. While they were refreshing themselves one of them perceived the lid 
of the coffin move, and, uncovering it, the woman immediately sat up, and most of the 
spectators ran off, with every sign of trepidation. It happened that a person who was 
then drinking in the public-house had recollection enough to bleed her, and in about 
an hour she was put to bed; and by the following morning she was so far recovered as 
to be able to walk to her own house.
	By the Scottish law, which is in part founded on that of the Romans, a person 
against whom the judgment of the Court has been executed can suffer no more in 
future, but is thenceforward totally exculpated; and it is likewise held that a marriage 
is dissolved by the execution of the convicted party — which indeed is consistent with 
the ideas that common sense would form on such an occasion.
	Mrs Dixon, then, being convicted and executed as above mentioned, the 
King's advocate could prosecute her no further; but he filed a bill in the High Court of 
Justiciary against the sheriff for omitting to fulfil the law. The husband of this revived 
convict married her publicly a few days after she was hanged; and she constantly 
denied that she had been guilty of the alleged crime. She was living as late as the year 
1753. This singular transaction took place in the year 1728.


EDWARD BELLAMY 
A Daring Shop-Robber, who was executed at Tyburn On 27th of March, 
1728

	THIS malefactor was a native of London, and served his time to a tailor; but 
his apprenticeship was no sooner expired than he associated with some women of ill-
fame, and became a thief in order to support their extravagance. His commencement 
in the art of theft was with a number of young pickpockets, and he soon became an 
adept in the profession. From this business they advanced a step further. They used to 
go, three or four in company, to the shops of silversmiths in the evening, and while 
one of them cheapened some article of small value, his companions used to secrete 
something of greater. It was likewise a practice with them to walk the streets at night, 
and, forcing up the windows of shops with a chisel, run off with any property that lay 
within their reach.
	Having followed this infamous business about three years, he forged (an 
offence not then capital) a note, by which he defrauded a linen-draper of money to a 
considerable amount. Being taken into custody for this forgery he was lodged in 
Newgate, but discharged without being brought to trial, his friends having found 
means to accommodate the matter with the injured party.
	A short time after he left Newgate he made connections with Jonathan Wild, 
who used frequently to borrow money from Mr Wildgoose, who kept an inn in 
Smithfield; and Bellamy, wishing to become acquainted with a man whom he thought 
he could make subservient to his interest, applied to Jonathan to recommend him to 
Wildgoose, but this the famous thief-taker absolutely refused.
	Having often gone with messages and notes from Jonathan to Wildgoose, and 
being well acquainted with the hand- writing of the former, he forged a draft on the 
latter for ten guineas, which Wildgoose paid without hesitation; and as soon as 
Bellamy had got the money he omitted to pay his usual visits at Wild's office.
	A few days after this transaction Wild went to his acquaintance to borrow 
some money, when Wildgoose told him he had paid his draft for the above-mentioned 
sum, and producing the note, Jonathan could not be certain that it was not his own 
handwriting otherwise than by recollecting that he had never given such a draft. 
Wildgoose was unacquainted with Bellamy's name; but by the description of his 
person Jonathan soon found who had committed the forgery, on which he ordered his 
myrmidons to be careful to apprehend the offender. Bellamy was soon found in a 
lodging in Whitefriars, and Jonathan's men sent word to their master that they had him 
in custody, and begged he would give orders how they should dispose of him. In the 
interim Bellamy, who expected no mercy from the old thief-taker, seized the 
advantage of the casual absence of his attendants from the room, fixed a rope to the 
bar of the window, and let himself into the street, though the room was three storeys 
high.
	He now entertained thoughts of accommodating the affair with Wild, 
imagining he should be treated with the utmost severity if he should be 
reapprehended; but before he had proceeded in this negotiation Wild's men seized him 
at a gin-shop in Chancery Lane, and sent to their master for instructions how to act. 
To this message Jonathan returned an answer that they might give him his liberty on 
condition that he should come to the office and adjust the business with himself.
	Thereupon Bellamy was discharged: but, knowing how dangerous it would be 
to affront Wild, he went the following morning to a public-house in the Old Bailey, 
where he sent for Jonathan to breakfast with him; and, the latter sending for 
Wildgoose, Bellamy gave him a note for the money received, and no further steps 
were taken in the affair.
	As soon as this business was adjusted, Bellamy renewed his former plan of 
making depredations on the public, and committed an immense number of robberies 
in the City of London. He and one of his gang having broken the sash of a 
silversmith's shop in Russel-court, Drury-lane, a person who lay under the counter 
fired a blunderbuss at them, which obliged them to decamp without their booty. This 
attempt failing, they went to the house of another silversmith, which they broke open, 
and finding the servant-maid sitting up for her master, they terrified her into silence, 
and carried off effects to a large amount.
	Not long after this robbery, they broke open the shop of a grocer near 
Shoreditch, in the expectatton at finding cash to a great amount; but the proprietor 
having previously secured it, they got only about ten pounds of tea, and the loose 
money in the tin.
	Their next attempt was at the house of a hosier in Widegate alley, from whose 
shop they carried off some goods of value, which they sold to the Jews on the 
following day.
	From the shop of a silversmith in Bride-lane, they carried off plate to the 
amount of fifty pounds; and from the house of a haberdasher in Bishopsgate-street, a 
load of various articles, the whole of which they disposed of to the Jews.
	On another occasion, they broke open a tea shop near Gray's-Inn-lane; having 
removed the shutters, by cutting away part of them with chisels, they were going to 
lift up the sash, when a person from within hearing them, cried out thieves! on which 
they ran off without their booty.
	Having broke into a tea-warehouse near Aldgate, they had packed up a 
valuable parcel of goods, when the maid servant came down stairs, undressed, and 
without a candle. Having gone into the yard, she returned, without knowing that they 
were in the house; but when she came into the shop, Bellamy seized her, and obliged 
her to lay on the floor, while they went off with their booty; and the same night they 
broke open the shop of a mercer in Bishopsgate-street, whence they carried off goods 
to a large amount.
	Their next robbery was at the house of a grocer in Thames street. The 
watchman passing by as they were packing up their booty, Bellamy seized him and 
obliged him to put out his candle, to prevent any alarm being given. Having kept him 
till they were ready to go off with their plunder, they took him to the side of the 
Thames, and threatened to throw him in, if he would not throw in his lanthorn and 
staff. It need not be said that the poor man was obliged to comply with their 
injunctions.
	Soon after this they stole a large sum of money, and a quantity of goods, from 
the house of a grocer which they broke open in Aldersgate-street. A neighbour saw 
this robbery from his window, but was too much frightened to take any measures for 
the detection of the villains.
	Their next exploit was at an old clothes-shop, kept by a woman in Shadwell, 
whence they carried off every valuable article; and after this they robbed the shop of a 
hosier in Coleman-street, and took away goods to the amount of seventy pounds, 
which the thieves divided into shares, and sold them to their old acquaintance the 
Jews.
	They were disappointed in their next attempt, which was to break open the 
house of a linen-draper in Westminster: for some people coming up before they had 
completed their operations, they were obliged to decamp with precipitation.
	On the evening after this transaction, observing the door of a shop shut in St. 
Clement's churchyard, they made it fast with a cord on the outside, and throwing up 
the sash, stole a very large number of silk handkerchiefs, while the woman in the shop 
made many fruitless attempts to open the door; and they stole a variety of plate, 
wearing apparel, and other effects, the same nigh; from two houses in Holborn.
	While they were thus rendering themselves the mere pests of society they 
became intimate with an old woman who had opened an office near Leicester Fields 
for the reception of stolen goods, something on the plan of that of Jonathan Wild. To 
this woman Bellamy and his companions used to sell much of their ill-gotten effects; 
but she having, on one occasion, given a smaller price than they expected, Bellamy 
determined on a plan of revenge; in pursuance of which he went to her office with a 
small quantity of stolen plate, and while she was gone with it to a silversmith he 
carried off her cash, to a large amount. At length he robbed a shop in Monmouth 
Street. But by this time he had rendered himself so conspicuous for his daring 
villainies that a reward of one hundred pounds was offered for apprehending him; in 
consequence of which he was taken, near the Seven Dials, on the following day, and 
committed to Newgate.
	For this last fact he was tried, convicted, and received sentence. Form this time 
until the arrival of the warrant for his execution, he affected a cheerfulness of 
behaviour, and said, that he would be hanged in his shroud. But the certainty that he 
should suffer, and the sight of his coffin, excited more serious ideas in his mind; and 
he received the sacrament before his death, with evident marks of repentance for the 
many crimes of which he had been guilty. He was executed at Tyburn; and just before 
he was turned off made a speech to the surrounding multitude, in which he confessed 
his numerous offences, and acknowledged the justice of his sentence.


JOHN EVERETT 
Highwayman, Turnkey and Ale-House Keeper. Executed at Tyburn, 20th of 
February, 1729

  
John Everett and Richard Bird robbing a Coach

	JOHN EVERETT was a native of Hitchin, in Hertfordshire, and had been well 
educated, his father possessing three hundred pounds per annum. He was apprenticed 
to a salesman, but running away from his master he entered into the army and served 
in Flanders, where he behaved so well that he was promoted to the rank of sergeant. 
On the return of his regiment to England he purchased his discharge, and repairing to 
London bought the place of an officer in Whitechapel Court, in which he continued 
about seven years; but having given liberty to some persons whom he had arrested, 
one Charlesworth, a solicitor of that court, caused him to be discharged, and then sued 
him for the amount of the debts of the parties whom his inconsiderate good nature had 
liberated. To evade imprisonment Everett enlisted in Lord Albemarle's company of 
Foot Guards. Soon after his re-engaging in the army he fell into company with 
Richard Bird, with whom he had been formerly acquainted.
	This Bird hinted that great advantages might be acquired in a particular way if 
Everett could be trusted, and the latter, anxious to know what the plan was, learned 
that it was to go on the road; on which an agreement was immediately concluded. 
Thereupon they set out on their expedition, and robbed several stages in the counties 
adjacent to London, from which they obtained considerable booty, in jewels, money 
and valuable effects. Thus successful in their first exploits they went to Hounslow 
Heath, where they stopped two military officers who were attended by servants armed 
with blunderbusses; but they obliged them to submit, and robbed them of their money 
and watches. The watches were afterwards left, according to agreement, at a coffee-
house near Charing Cross, and the thieves received twenty guineas for restoring them. 
Soon after they stopped a gentleman in an open chaise near Epsom. The gentleman 
drew his sword and made several passes at them, yet they robbed him of his watch, 
two guineas, his sword and some writings; but they returned the writings at the earnest 
request of the injured party. They also made a practice of robbing the butchers and 
higglers in Epping Forest, on their way to London. One of these robberies was 
singular. Meeting with an old woman, a higgler, they searched the lining of a high-
crowned hat, which she said had been her mother's, in which they found about three 
pounds, but returned her hat. Soon after this they stopped a coach on Hounslow Heath 
in which were two Quakers, who, calling them sons of violence, jumped out of the 
coach to oppose them; but their fellow-travellers making no resistance, and begging 
them to submit, all the parties were robbed of their money. Everett, remarking that 
one of the Quakers wore a remarkably good wig, snatched it from his head and gave 
him in return an old black tie, which he had purchased for half-a-crown from a 
Chelsea pensioner. This sudden metamorphosis caused great mirth among the other 
company in the coach. About ten days after this he and his companion walked to 
Hillingdon Common, where, seeing two gentlemen on horseback, Everett stopped the 
foremost, and Bird the other, and robbed them of upwards of three guineas and their 
gold watches; they then cut the girths of their saddles and secured the bridles, to 
prevent pursuit. They now hastened to Brentford, where, understanding that they were 
followed, they got into the ferry to cross the Thames; and when they were three parts 
over, so that the river was fordable, they gave the ferrymen ten shillings and obliged 
them to throw their oars into the river. They then jumped overboard and got on shore, 
while the spectators thought it was a drunken frolic, and the robbers got safe to 
London.
	Some time after this, Everett was convicted of an attempt to commit a robbery 
on the highway, for which he was sentenced to three years' imprisonment in New 
Prison, Clerkenwell. After some time he was employed to act here as turnkey, and, his 
conduct meeting with approbation, he remained in that station after the term of his 
imprisonment was expired; but the keeper dying, he took a public-house in Turnmill 
Street. He had not been long in this station when the new keeper who had been 
appointed frequently called on him and made him advantageous offers, on the 
condition of his reassuming the office of turnkey. This he did. But when Everett had 
perfectly instructed him in the management of the prison he dismissed him, without 
assigning any reason for such ungenerous conduct. Everett being now greatly in debt, 
and consequently obliged to remove within the rules of the Fleet Prison, took a public-
house in the Old Bailey. After which he took the Cock ale-house, in the same street, 
which he kept three years with reputation, when the Warden of the Fleet persuaded 
him to keep the tap-house of the said prison. While in this station he was charged with 
being concerned with the keeper in some malpractices, for which the House of 
Commons ordered him to be confined in Newgate; but he obtained his liberty at the 
end of the sessions, as no bill had been found against him. During his confinement his 
brewer seized his stock of beer, to the amount of above three hundred pounds, which 
reduced him to circumstances of great distress. He even now resolved on a life of 
industry if he could get employment, but his character was such that no person would 
engage him.
	Thus perplexed, he once more equipped himself for the highway, with a view, 
as he solemnly declared after sentence of death, to raise only fifty pounds, as his 
brewer would have given him credit if he could have possessed himself of that sum. 
Having stopped a coach on the Hampstead road, in which were a lady, her daughter, 
and a child about five years old, the child was so terrified at his presenting a pistol, 
that he withdrew it at the request of the lady, who gave him a guinea and some silver; 
and though he observed she had a watch and some gold rings, &c, he did not demand 
them. Some company riding up, he was followed to the end of Leather Lane, where he 
evaded the pursuit by turning into Hatton Garden, and going into the Globe tavern. 
Here he called for wine, and, while he was drinking, he saw his pursuers pass; on 
which he paid his reckoning, and slipped into a public house in Holborn, where he 
again saw them pass. Thinking himself safe, he remained here a considerable time. 
When he thought the pursuit was over, he called a coach at the end of Brook Street, 
and, driving to Honey Lane Market, purchased a duck for his supper, and a turkey for 
his Christmas dinner: he then went to his lodging in Newgate Market. On the 
following day one Whitaker (called "the boxing drover"), circulated a report that 
Everett had committed a highway robbery; on which the latter loaded a brace of 
pistols, and vowed he would be revenged. He went to Islington in search of Whitaker, 
and visited several public houses which he used to frequent but, not meeting with him, 
the crime of murder was happily prevented. A woman in the neighbourhood of 
Newgate Market having buried her husband, who had left her enough to support 
herself and children with decency, Everett repeatedly visited the widow, was received 
with too great marks of esteem, and assisted her in the dissipation of that money 
which should have provided for her family. The widow's son, jealous of this 
connexion, remonstrated with his mother on the impropriety of her conduct, and told 
her it would end in her ruin. This made Everett and her more cautious in their 
meetings; but the son watched them with the utmost degree of vigilance and 
circumspection. Having one evening observed them go to the tavern, he provided 
himself with a large and sharp knife, and, entering the room where they were sitting, 
swore he would stab Everett to the heart; but the latter, by superiority of strength, 
disarmed him. The young fellow was at length persuaded to sit down, when Everett 
assured him that he entertained the utmost respect both for himself and his mother; 
but the youth answered he was a liar, and the mutual destruction both of mother and 
children must follow their unlawful connexion. As the lad grew warm, Everett 
affected great coolness and good humour, and considered how he might most readily 
get rid of so unwelcome a guest, as he was unwilling so soon to part with the widow. 
At length he determined to make the young fellow drunk, and plied him with such a 
quantity of liquor that he fell fast asleep, in which condition he was left, while the 
other parties adjourned to a distant tavern, where they remained till morning, when 
Everett borrowed seven guineas of the widow, under pretence of paying her in a 
week. Not long after this Everett was married to this very widow at Stepney church, 
by which he came into possession of money and plate to a considerable amount, and 
might have lived happily with her if he would have taken her advice; but the 
extravagance of his disposition led to his ruin.
	When he was in very low circumstances he casually met his old accomplice, 
Bird, and joined with him in the commission of a robbery in Essex. They were both 
taken, and lodged in Chelmsford gaol; but Everett having turned evidence, the other 
was convicted and executed. As soon as he obtained his liberty he committed several 
robberies in the neighbour hood of London, the last of which was on a lady named 
Ellis, whom he stopped near Islington; but, being taken into custody on the following 
day, he was tried, and capitally convicted. He had been married to three wives, who 
all visited him after sentence of death. He was likewise visited by the son of the 
widow; but, recollecting what had formerly passed between them, Everett would have 
stabbed him with a penknife, but was prevented by one of his wives; for which 
interposition he afterwards expressed the greatest happiness. What gave him the most 
uneasiness was the crime of perjury, of which he had been guilty, with a view to take 
away the life of an innocent man. One Pickett, a cooper, having affronted him, he 
swore a robbery against him; but, the jury not being satisfied with the evidence, the 
man was fortunately acquitted. Mr. Nicholson, the then minister of St. Sepulchre's 
church, attended the prisoner while under sentence of death, and kindly exerted 
himself to convince him of the atrocious nature of his offences; but the number of 
people who visited him from motives of curiosity took off his attention from his more 
important duties. However, he was at times serious, and would then advise his 
brethren in affliction to prepare for that death which now appeared unavoidable.
	The gaol distemper having seized him while in Newgate, a report was 
propagated that he had taken poison, but this was totally false. At the place of 
execution, at Tyburn, February 20, 1729, he behaved in such a manner as induced the 
spectators to think that his penitence for his past crimes was unaffected.


MAJOR JOHN ONEBY 
Who murdered a Man in a Duel and cheated the Gallows, 1729

	MAJOR ONEBY was the son of an eminent attorney at Burnwell, in 
Leicestershire. His father intended him for his own honourable profession, and 
procured him a marriage with the niece of the celebrated Sir Nathan Wright, who was 
appointed Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England.
	Sir Nathan appointed him to be his train-bearer — no invaluable place, but 
greatly inferior to what the young gentleman's ambition had taught him to aspire to. 
However he kept his place some time, in expectation of preferment; but failing in his 
views of promotion in this line he bought a commission in the army. He served under 
the Duke of Marlborough in several campaigns in Flanders, and was promoted in the 
army as the reward of his military merit. While in winter quarters at Bruges, at the 
close of one of these campaigns, he had a quarrel with another officer, which 
occasioned a duel, and Oneby, having killed the other, was brought to his trial before 
a court martial, which acquitted him of the murder. The regiment being soon 
afterwards ordered to Jamaica, Mr Oneby went with it, and during his residence at 
Port Royal fought another duel with a brother officer, whom he wounded in so 
dangerous a manner that he expired after an illness of several months; but as he did 
not instantly die, no further notice was taken of the affair.
	The rank of Major in a regiment of dragoons had been conferred on Mr Oneby 
in consequence of his services; but on the Peace of Utrecht he returned to England, 
and was reduced to half-pay. Repairing to London he frequented the gaming-houses, 
and became so complete a gambler that he commonly carried cards and dice in his 
pockets. Having fallen into company with some gentlemen at a coffee-house in 
Covent Garden, they all adjourned to the Castle Tavern, in Drury Lane, where they 
went to cards. Mr Hawkins, who was of the company, having declined playing, Mr 
Rich asked if anyone would bet him three half-crowns. The bet was apparently 
accepted by William Gower, Esq., who, in ridicule, laid down three halfpence. On this 
Major Oneby abused Gower and threw a bottle at him; and, in return, Gower threw a 
glass at the other. Swords were immediately drawn on both sides, but Mr Rich 
interposing, the parties were apparently reconciled, and sat down to their former 
diversion. Gower seemed inclined to compromise the difference, saying that he was 
willing to adjust the affair though the Major had been the aggressor. In answer to this 
Oneby said he "would have his blood," and said to Mr Hawkins that the mischief had 
been occasioned by him. Hawkins replied he was ready to answer, if he had anything 
to say; to which Oneby said: "I have another chap first." Mr Hawkins left the 
company about three o'clock in the morning; soon after which Mr Oneby rose and 
said to Gower: "Hark ye, young gentleman, a word with you"; on which they retired 
to another room and shut the door. A clashing of swords being heard by the company, 
the waiter broke open the door, and on their entrance they found Oneby holding 
Gower with his left hand, having his sword in the right, and Mr Gower's sword lying 
on the floor. A surgeon of eminence having examined Mr Gower's wounds, it was 
found that the sword of his antagonist had passed through his intestines, of which 
wound he died the following day; on which Mr Oneby was apprehended and lodged 
in Newgate.
	The circumstances above mentioned were stated on his trial; but some doubts 
arising in the minds of the jury, they brought in a special verdict, referable to the 
opinion of the twelve judges. Mr Oneby having remained in Newgate two years, and 
the judges not having met to give their opinion, he became impatient of longer 
confinement, and therefore moved the Court of King's Bench that counsel might be 
heard on his case. Thereupon the prisoner was carried into court, by virtue of a writ of 
habeas corpus; and the record of the special verdict being read, the Reverend Bench, 
with great humanity, assigned him two counsel, a solicitor and a clerk in court.
	Lord Chief Justice Raymond and three other judges presided a few days 
afterwards, when the Major was again brought up, his counsel, as well as those for the 
Crown, being heard; after which the Lord Chief Justice declared that he would take an 
opportunity of having the opinion of the other judges, and then the prisoner should be 
informed of the event. The Major, on his return to Newgate, gave a handsome dinner, 
at the Crown and Anchor tavern, in the Strand, to the persons who had the custody of 
him; and, seeming to be in high spirits on account of the ingenious arguments used by 
his counsel, entertained little doubt of being discharged.
	After a considerable time the judges assembled at Serjeant's Inn Hall to bring 
the matter to a final decision. Counsel were heard on both sides, and the pleadings 
lasted a whole day, during which the Major was carousing with his friends in 
Newgate, and boasting of the certainty of his escape, as he had only acted in 
conformity with the character of a man of honour.
	The judges broke up about ten o'clock at night without declaring their opinion.
	Not many days after this the keeper of Newgate told the Major he must 
double-iron him, to prevent his making his escape, and that he must be removed to a 
safer place, unless he would pay for a man to attend him in his room. Oneby was 
shocked at this news and asked the keeper's authority for such a proceeding, but he 
could obtain no satisfactory answer.
	The man appointed to attend the Major in his room was one John Hooper (who 
was afterwards executioner), a fellow of remarkable drollery, but of such a forbidding 
countenance that when Oneby first saw him he exclaimed: "What the devil do you 
bring this fellow here for? Whenever I look at him I shall think of being hanged." 
Hooper, however, by a knack of telling stories, soon made himself a very agreeable 
companion to the Major.
	At length the judges assembled again at Serjeant's Inn Hall, and having 
declared their opinions to each other, the Counsel for the Prosecution demanded that 
their Lordships would proceed to judgment. Thereupon the sense of the Bench was 
delivered to Mr Oneby by Lord Raymond, who said that it was the unanimous opinion 
of the judges that he had been guilty of murder, and that his declaring he would "have 
the blood" of Gower had great weight in his disfavour. A few days after this judgment 
of death was passed against him, and he was ordered to be executed. On the Saturday 
preceding the day that he was ordered for execution an undertaker went to Newgate 
and delivered him a letter, of which the following is a copy, saying that he would wait 
below for an answer:
HONOURED SIR, — This is to inform you that I follow the business of an 
undertaker in Drury Lane, where I have lived many years and am well known to 
several of your friends. As you are to die on Monday, and have not, as I suppose, 
spoken to anybody else about your funeral, if your honour shall think fit to give me 
orders, I will perform it as cheap, and in as decent a manner, as any man alive. Your 
honour's unknown humble servant, G. H.
	The Major had no sooner read this letter than he flew into a violent passion, 
which being made known to the undertaker he thought proper to decamp, without 
waiting for his orders. When Hooper came at night to attend Mr Oneby he told him of 
the letter he had received from the undertaker, and in terms very improper for his 
melancholy situation expressed his resentment for the supposed affront. Every hope of 
pardon being vanished, this unhappy man had recourse to a dreadful method of 
evading the ignominy of the gallows. On the night of the Saturday last mentioned he 
went to bed at ten o'clock, and having slept till four o'clock on Sunday morning he 
asked for a glass of brandy-and-water, and pen, ink and paper, and sitting up in bed 
wrote the following note: —
COUSIN TURVILL, — Give Mr Akerman, the turnkey below-stairs, half-a-guinea, 
and Jack, who waits in my room, five shillings. The poor devils have had a great deal 
of trouble with me since I have been here.
	Having delivered this note to his attendant, he begged to be left to his repose, 
that he might be fit for the reception of some friends who were to call on him. He was 
accordingly left, and on a gentleman coming into his apartment about seven o'clock, 
and the Major's footman with him, he called out to the latter, "Who is that, Philip?" 
which were the last words he was heard to speak. The gentleman, approaching the 
bedside, found he had cut a deep wound in his wrist with a penknife and was drenched 
in blood. A surgeon was instantly sent for, but he was dead before his arrival.


JAMES CLUFF 
Murderer, executed at Tyburn, July 25, 1729, on an appeal, after being 
acquitted.

	This unhappy young man was born in Clare-market, and lived as a waiter at 
several public-houses, in all of which he maintained an extraordinary character for 
diligence, obligingness, and integrity.
	Mr. Payne, master of the. Green Lattice, in Holborn, hired Cluff as a servant, 
and during his residence there, he fell in love with Mary Green, his fellow-servant; 
but she being courted by another man, constantly rejected his addresses, which 
frequently agitated his mind in the most violent degree.
	Green's other lover coming to see her, sat in the same box with her, and was 
received by her in an affectionate manner; but this did not seem to be much regarded 
by Cluff, who was then engaged in attending the customers: but when the lover was 
gone, Mr. Payne, perceiving that something had discomposed Cluff's mind, asked him 
the reason of it; but could not prevail on him to tell the cause.
	While Mr. Payne and his wife were at dinner in the parlour, and the girl was 
eating her dinner in one of the boxes, Mrs. Payne heard a noise, as if two persons 
were struggling, and going into the tap-room, Cluff said, "Come hither, madam." On 
this she advanced, and saw the prisoner holding the deceased by the shoulders, who 
was sitting on the floor, and speechless, while the blood streamed from her in large 
quantities.
	Mrs. Payne called out, "What have you been doing, James?" He said, 
"Nothing." He was asked if he had seen her hurt herself? He said, No; but that he had 
seen her bring a knife from the cellar where she had been to draw some beer for her 
dinner. Mr. Payne now entered the tap-room, and then went into then cellar to 
discover if there was any blood there; but finding none, he accused Cluff on suspicion 
of having committed the murder; and instantly sent for a surgeon. When the surgeon 
arrived, he found that a knife had been stabbed into the upper part of the thigh, and 
entered the body of the girl, in such a planner that she could not survive the stroke 
more than a minute.
	A bloody knife was found in the room, and Cluff was committed to Newgate 
for the murder. On his trial, the surgeon deposed that the knife fitted the wound that 
had been made, and that he believed the woman had not killed herself: but the jury 
acquitted the prisoner, from what they deemed insufficiency of evidence:
	A discharge of the accused party would now have followed of course; but 
William Green, the brother and heir of the deceased, immediately lodged an appeal in 
consequence of which Cluff was brought to trial at the next sessions but one, when his 
case was argued with the utmost ingenuity by the counsel for and against him, but this 
second jury found him guilty, and he was sentenced to die.
	After conviction, his behaviour was the most devout and resigned that could 
be imagined; he exercised himself in every act of devotion, but solemnly declared his 
perfect innocence with respect to the murder. He was visited by his friends, who 
earnestly entreated him to make a sincere confession; especially as in his case it was 
not in the power of the king himself to grant him a pardon. In answer hereto, he freely 
confessed all his other crimes; but, saying he would not rush into eternity with a lie in 
his month, again steadily denied the perpetration of the crime of which he had been 
convicted. The clergyman who attended him urged him to the confession of his guilt, 
and even refused to administer the sacrament to him on the morning of his execution, 
on any other terms than those of acknowledging his crime, but nothing could shake 
his resolution; he still steadily persisted in his innocence.
	On his way to the place of execution, he desired to stop at the door of his late 
master, which being granted, he called for a pint of wine, and having drank a glass of 
it, he addressed Mr. Payne in the following terms:
	"Sir, you are not insensible that I am going to suffer an ignominious death, for 
a crime of which I declare I am not guilty, as I am to appear before my great Judge in 
a few moments to answer for all my past sins. I hope you and my good mistress will 
pray for my poor soul. God bless you, and all your family."
	At the place of execution he behaved in the most composed, devout, and 
resigned manner; and seemed to possess in the consciousness of innocence. There was 
a great concourse of spectators to witness his fatal end; to whom he spoke in the 
following manner: "Good people, I am going to die for a fact I never committed, I 
wish all mankind well; and as I have prayed for my prosecutors, I hope my sins will 
be forgiven through the merits of my ever blessed redeemer. I beg you to pray for my 
departing soul; and as to the fact now die for, I wish I was as free from, all other sins."
	He was hanged at Tyburn on the, 25th of July, 1729, exhibiting no signs of 
fear to his last moment.
	The case of this man is very extraordinary. The evidence against him was at 
best but circumstantial; and this not supported with such strong corroborative proofs 
as have occasioned conviction in many other instances. No person was witness to his 
commission of the murder; nor was there any absolute proof that he did commit it; 
and from the steady perseverance with which he denied it, under the most awful 
circumstances, and at the very concluding scene of his life, charity would. tempt one 
to believe that he was innocent. Ought not this case to afford a lesson of caution to 
juries how they convict on circumstantial evidence? Is it not better that the guilty 
should escape, than the innocent be punished? All the decrees of mortals are liable to 
error; but the time will come when all mists shall be cleared from our sight; and we 
shall witness to the wisdom of those laws of Providence, which are now inscrutable to 
mortal eyes. Then shall we see that what appeared inexplicable to us was divinely 
right; and learn to admire that wisdom which, at present, so much exceeds our finite 
comprehension. In the mean time, we ought to adore that goodness we cannot 
comprehend, and rest satisfied with those dispensations, which are eternally and 
immutably just.


JOHN GOW 
Captain of a notorious Gang of Pirates. Executed at Execution Dock, 11th 
of August, 1729 for Piracy

  
Execution of a Pirate at Execution Dock

	JOHN GOW was a native of one of the Orkney Islands, in the north of 
Scotland, and was instructed in maritime affairs, in which he became so expert that he 
was appointed second mate of a ship, in which he sailed on a voyage to Santa Cruz.
	When the vessel was ready to weigh anchor the merchants who had shipped 
goods on board her came to pay a parting visit to the captain, and to give him their 
final instructions.
	On this occasion the captain, agreeable to custom, entertained his company 
under an awning on the quarter-deck; and while they were regaling, some of the 
sailors preferred a complaint of ill-treatment they pretended to have received, 
particularly with regard to short allowance. The captain was irritated at so undeserved 
a charge, which seemed calculated to prejudice him in the opinion of his employers; 
but, conscious of the uprightness of his intentions, he did not reply in anger, but only 
said that there was a steward on board who had the care of the provisions, and that all 
reasonable complaints should be redressed; on which the seamen retired, with 
apparent satisfaction.
	The wind being fair, the captain directed his men to weigh anchor as soon as 
the merchants had quitted the vessel. It was observed that Paterson, one of the 
complainants, was very dilatory in executing his orders; on which the captain 
demanded to know why he did not exert himself to unfurl the sails; to which he made 
no direct answer, but was heard to mutter: "As we eat, so shall we work." The captain 
heard this, but took no notice of it, as he was unwilling to proceed to extremities.
	The ship had no sooner sailed than the captain considered his situation as 
dangerous, on reflecting that his conduct had been complained of and his orders 
disobeyed. Thereupon he consulted the mate, and they agreed to deposit a number of 
small-arms in the cabin, in order to defend themselves in case of an attack. This 
precaution might have been extremely salutary, but that they had spoken so loud as to 
be overheard by two of the conspirators who were on the quarter-deck.
	The captain likewise directed the mate to order Gow, who was second mate 
and gunner, to clean the arms — a circumstance that plainly insinuated to the latter 
that the conspiracy was at least suspected.
	Those who had overheard the conversation between the captain and mate 
communicated the substance of it to Gow and the other conspirators, who thereupon 
resolved on immediate action. Gow, who had previously intended to turn pirate, 
thought the present an admirable opportunity, as there were several chests of money 
on board the ship: wherefore he proposed to his companions that they should 
immediately embark in the enterprise; and they determined to murder the captain and 
seize the ship.
	Half of the ship's company were regularly called to prayers in the great cabin 
at eight o'clock in the evening, while the other half were doing duty on deck; and, 
after service, those who had been in the cabin went to rest in their hammocks. The 
contrivance was to execute the plot at this juncture. Only two of the conspirators 
remained on duty, the rest being among those who retired to their hammocks. 
Between nine and ten at night a kind of watchword was given, which was, "Who fires 
first?" On this some of the conspirators left their hammocks, and going to the cabins 
of the surgeon, chief mate and supercargo, they cut their throats while they were 
asleep.
	The surgeon finding himself violently wounded quitted his bed, and soon 
afterwards dropped on the floor and expired. The mate and supercargo held their 
hands on their throats, and going on the quarter-deck solicited a momentary respite, to 
recommend their souls to Heaven; but even this favour was denied, for the villains, 
who found their knives had failed to destroy them, dispatched them with pistols.
	The captain, hearing a noise, demanded the occasion of it. The boatswain 
replied that he did not know, but he was apprehensive that some of the men had either 
fallen or been thrown overboard. The captain hereupon went to look over the ship's 
side, on which two of the murderers followed, and tried to throw him into the sea; but 
he disengaged himself and turned about to take a view of them, when one of them cut 
his throat, but not so as to kill him, for he now solicited mercy; but instead of granting 
it the other stabbed him in the back with a dagger, and would have repeated his blow 
but that he had struck with such force that he could not draw back the weapon. At this 
instant Gow, who had been assisting in the murders between the decks, came on the 
quarter-deck and fired a brace of balls into the captain's body, which put a period to 
his life.
	The execrable villains concerned in this tragical affair having thrown all the 
dead bodies overboard, Gow was unanimously appointed to the command of the ship. 
Those of the sailors who had not been engaged in the conspiracy secreted themselves, 
some in the shrouds, some under the stores, in dreadful apprehension of sharing the 
fate of the captain and their murdered companions.
	Gow now assembled his associates on the quarter-deck, and appointed them 
their different stations on board; and it was agreed to commence as pirates. The new 
captain now directed that the men who had concealed themselves should be informed 
that no danger would happen to them if they did not interfere to oppose the new 
government of the ship, but keep such stations as were assigned to them. The men, 
whose terrors had taught them to expect immediate death, were glad to comply with 
these terms; but the pirates, to enforce obedience to their orders, appointed two men to 
attend with drawn cutlasses, to terrify the others into submission. Gow and his 
companions now divided the most valuable effects in the cabin; and then, ordering 
liquor to be brought on the quarter-deck, they consumed the night in drinking, while 
those unconnected in the conspiracy had the care of working the ship.
	The ship's crew originally consisted of twenty-four men, of whom four had 
been murdered and eight were conspirators, and before morning four of the other men 
had approved of the proceedings of the pirates; so that there were only eight 
remaining in opposition to the newly usurped authority.
	On the following day the new captain summoned these eight men to attend 
him, and, telling them he was determined to go on a cruising voyage, said that they 
should be well treated if they were disposed to act in concert with the rest of the crew. 
He said that every man should fare in the same manner, and that good order and 
discipline were all that would be required. He further said that the captain's 
inhumanity had produced the consequences which had happened; that those who had 
not been concerned in the conspiracy had no reason to fear any ill consequences from 
it; that they had only to discharge their duty as seamen, and every man should be 
rewarded according to his merit.
	To this address these unfortunate honest men made no kind of reply, and Gow 
interpreted their silence into an assent of measures which it was not in their power to 
oppose. After this declaration of the will of the new captain they were permitted to 
range the ship at their pleasure; but as some of them appeared to act very reluctantly a 
strict eye was kept on their conduct, for, as guilt is ever suspicious, the pirates were 
greatly apprehensive of being brought to justice by means of some these men.
	A man named Williams now acted as lieutenant of the vessel; and being 
distinguished by the ferocity of his nature he had an opportunity of exerting his 
cruelty by beating the unhappy men — a privilege that he did not fail to exert with a 
degree of severity that must render his memory detestable.
	The ship thus seized had been called the George galley, but the pirates gave 
her the name of the Revenge; and, having mounted several guns, they steered towards 
Spain and Portugal, in expectation of making a capture of wine, of which article they 
were greatly deficient. They soon made prize of an English vessel laden with fish, 
bound from Newfoundland to Cadiz; but having no use for the cargo, they took out 
the captain and four men, who navigated the ship, which they sunk.
	One of the seamen whom they took out of the captured vessel was named 
James Belvin, a man admirably calculated for their purpose, as he was by nature cruel, 
and by practice hardened in that cruelty. He said to Gow that he was willing to enter 
into all his schemes, for he had been accustomed to the practice of acts of barbarity. 
This man was thought a valuable acquisition to the crew, as several of the others 
appeared to act from motives of fear rather than of inclination.
	The next vessel taken by the pirates was a Scotch ship, bound for Italy, with 
pickled herrings. But this cargo, like the former, being of no use to them, they sunk 
the vessel, having first taken out the men, arms, ammunition, and stores.
	After cruising eight or ten days, they saw a vessel about the size of their own, 
to which they gave chase. She hoisted French colours, and crowded all her sail in 
order to get clear of them; and, after a chase of three days and nights, they lost the 
French vessel in a fog.
	Being distressed for water, they now steered towards the Madeira islands, of 
which they came in sight in two days; but not thinking it prudent to enter the harbour, 
they steered off and on for several days, in expectation of making prize of some 
Portuguese or Spanish vessel; but their expectations were frustrated.
	Their distress increasing, they stood in for the harbour, and brought the ship to 
an anchor, but at a considerable distance from the shore. This being done, they sent 
seven men, well armed, in a boat, with instructions to board a ship, cut her cables, and 
bring her off; but if they failed in this, they were to attempt to make prize of wine and 
water, conveying it in the boats to the ships. But both these schemes were frustrated 
since it was easily known, from the distance they lay at, that they were pirates.
	When they had cruised off for some days, they found themselves in such 
distress, that it became absolutely necessary to seek immediate relief; on which they 
sailed to Port Santa, a Portuguese settlement, at the distance of about ten leagues.
	On their arrival off this place, they sent their boat on shore, with a present of 
salmon and herrings for the governor, and the name of a port to which they pretended 
to be bound. The persons sent on shore were civilly treated by the governor, who 
accompanied some of his friends on board the ship. Gow and his associates received 
the governor very politely, and entertained him and his company in the most 
hospitable manner; but the boat belonging to the pirates not coming on board with 
some provisions they had expected, and the governor and his attendants preparing to 
depart, Gow and his people threatened to take away their lives, unless they instantly 
furnished them with what they required.
	The surprise of the Portuguese governor and his friends, on this occasion, is 
not to be expressed. They dreaded instant death; and, with every sign of extreme fear, 
solicited that their lives might be spared. Gow being peremptory in his demands, the 
governor sent a boat repeatedly on shore, till the pirates were furnished with such 
articles as they wanted.
	This business being ended, the Portuguese were permitted to depart; and the 
pirates determined to steer towards the coast of Spain, where they soon arrived. After 
cruising a few days off Cape St. Vincent, they fell in with an English vessel, bound 
from the coast of Guinea to America, with slaves; but had been obliged to put into the 
port of Lisbon. However, it would have been of no use for them to have made capture 
of such a vessel; yet they did take it, and putting on board the captain and men they 
had heretofore taken, and taking out all the provisions, and some of the sails, they left 
the ship to proceed on her voyage.
	Falling in with a French ship, laden with wine, oil, and fruit, they took out the 
lading, and gave the vessel to the Scotch captain, in return for the ship which they had 
sunk. The Scotchman was likewise presented with some valuable articles, and 
permitted to take his men to sail with him; all of whom did so, except one, who 
continued with the pirates through choice.
	The day previous to this affair they observed a French ship bearing down 
towards them, on which Gow ordered his people to lay to; but observing that the 
vessel mounted two and thirty guns, and seemed proportionately full of men, he 
assembled his people, and observed to them that it would be madness in them to think 
of engaging so superior a force.
	The crew in general were of Gow's opinion; but Williams, the lieutenant, said 
that Gow was a coward, and unworthy to command the vessel. The fact is, that Gow 
possessed somewhat of calm courage, while Williams's impetuosity was of the most 
brutal kind. The latter, after behaving in the most abusive manner, demanded that the 
former should give orders for fighting the vessel; but Gow refusing to comply, the 
other presented his pistol to shoot him, but it only flashed in the pan.
	This being observed by two of the pirates, named Winter and Patterson, they 
both fired at Williams, when one of them wounded him in the arm and the other in the 
belly. He dropped as soon as the pieces were discharged, and the other seamen, 
thinking he was dead, were about to throw him overboard when he suddenly sprang 
on to his feet, jumped into the hold, and swore he would set fire to the powder-room; 
and as his pistol was yet loaded there was every reason to think he would actually 
have done so if he had not been instantly seized and his hands chained behind him, in 
which condition he was put among French prisoners taken from ships they had 
pirated, who were terrified at the sight of him; for the savage ferocity and barbarity of 
his nature is not to be described, it being a common practice with him to beat the 
prisoners in the severest manner for his diversion (as he called it), and then threaten to 
murder them.
	No engagement happened with the French ship, which held on her way; and 
two days afterwards the pirates took a ship belonging to Bristol, which was laden with 
salt fish and bound from Newfoundland to Oporto. Having taken out the provisions, 
and many of the stores, they compelled two of the crew to sail with them, and then put 
the French prisoners on board the newly captured vessel, which was just on the point 
of sailing when they began to reflect in what manner that execrable villain, Williams, 
should be disposed of.
	At length it was determined to put him on board the Bristol ship, the 
commander of which was desired to turn him over to the first English man-of-war he 
should meet with, that he should experience the justice due to his crimes, and in the 
meantime to keep him in the strictest confinement.
	The cruelty of Williams's disposition has been already mentioned, and the 
following is the most striking instance of it. Among the arguments used by Gow 
against engaging the French ship, one was that they had already more prisoners than 
they had proper accommodation for, on which Williams proposed, that those in their 
possession might be brought up singly, their throats cut, and their bodies thrown 
overboard; but Gow said there had been too much blood spilt already; for this was too 
horrid a proposal for even pirates to consent to; and few men, however wicked, who 
have committed murder, are so completely hardened as not to feel at times some 
remorse for it.
	The fact is, Williams would have been hanged at the yard-arm if an 
opportunity had not offered of putting him on board the Bristol ship. When he learned 
their intention respecting him he earnestly besought a reconciliation; but this being 
refused him, and he being brought on deck in irons, he begged to be thrown 
overboard, as he was certain of an ignominious death on his arrival in England; but 
even this poor favour was denied him, and his companions only wished him "a good 
voyage to the gallows." When the captain of the Bristol ship reached the port of 
Lisbon he delivered his prisoner on boar an English man-of-war, which conveyed him 
to England, where he had afterwards the fate of being hanged with his companions, as 
we shall see in the sequel.
	As soon as the Bristol ship had left them, Gow and his crew began to reflect 
on their situation. They were apprehensive, that as soon as intelligence of their 
proceedings reached Portugal, some ships would be sent in pursuit of them Hereupon 
they called a kind of council, in which every on gave his opinion, as dictated by his 
hopes of profit, or by his fears.
	Some of them advised going to the coast of Guinea, others to North America, 
and others again to the West Indies; but Gow proposed to sail to the Isles of Orkney, 
on the north of Scotland, where he said they might dispose of theft effects and retire, 
and live on the produce. To induce his people to comply with this proposal, Gow 
represented that they wert much in want of water, and provisions of every kind; that 
their danger would be great, if they continued longer on the high seas; and, above all, 
that it was highly necessary for them to repair their ship, which they could not do with 
any degree of safety in a southern port.
	He likewise said, that if any ships should be dispatched it quest of them, they 
would not think of searching for then in a northern latitude, so that their voyage that 
way would be safe; and, if they would follow his directions, much booty might be 
obtained by plundering the houses of the gentlemen residing near the sea-coast. The 
danger of alarming the country was objected to these proposals; but Gow said, that 
they should be able to dispatch all their business, and sail again, before such an event 
could happen.
	Apparently convinced by this reasoning, they steered northward, and entering 
a bay of one of the Orkney islands, Gow assembled his crew, and instructed them 
what tale they should tell to the country people, to prevent suspicion: and it is 
probable that they might, for the present, have escaped detection, if his instructions 
had been literally attended to.
	These instructions were, to say they were bound from Cadiz to Stockholm, but 
contrary winds driving them past the Sound till it was filled with ice, they were under 
the necessity of putting in to clean their ship; and that they would pay ready money 
for such articles as they stood in need of.
	It happened that a smuggling-vessel lay at this time in the bay: it belonged to 
the Isle of Man; and, being laden with brandy and wine from France, had come north-
about, to steer clear of the custom-house cutters. In their present situation, Gow 
thought it prudent to exchange goods with the commander of the vessel; though, in 
any other, he would hardly have been so ceremonious. A Swedish vessel entering the 
bay two days afterwards, Gow likewise exchanged some goods with the captain.
	Now it was that the fate of the pirates seemed to be approaching; for such of 
the men as had been forced into the service began to think how they should effect 
their escape, and secure themselves by becoming evidence against their dissolute 
companions.
	When the boat went ashore one evening, a young fellow who had been 
compelled to take part with the pirates got away from the rest of the boat's crew, and, 
after lying concealed some time at a farmhouse, hired a person to show him the road 
to Kirkwall, the principal place on the islands, about twelve miles distant from the bay 
where the ship lay at anchor. Here he applied to a magistrate, said he had been forced 
into the service, and begged that he might be entitled to the protection of the law, as 
the fear of death alone had induced him to be connected with the pirates. Having 
given information of what he knew of their irregular proceedings, the sheriff issued 
his precepts to the constables and other peace officers to call in the aid of the people 
to assist in bringing such villains to justice. About this juncture ten of Gow's sailors, 
who had likewise taken an involuntary part with the pirates, seized the long-boat and, 
having made the mainland of Scotland, coasted the country till they arrived at 
Edinburgh, where they were imprisoned on suspicion of being pirates.
	Notwithstanding these alarming circumstances, Gow was so careless of his 
own safety that he did not put immediately to sea, but resolved to plunder the houses 
of the gentlemen on the coast, to furnish himself with fresh provisions. In pursuance 
of this resolution he sent his boatswain and ten armed men to the house of Mr 
Honeyman, high sheriff of the county; and the master being absent, the servants 
opened the door without suspicion. Nine of the gang went into the house to search for 
treasure, while the tenth was left to guard the door. The sight of men thus armed 
occasioned much terror to Mrs Honeyman and her daughter, who shrieked with 
dreadful apprehensions for their personal safety; but the pirates, employed in the 
search for plunder, had no idea of molesting the ladies. They seized the linen, plate 
and other valuable articles, and then walked in triumph to their boat, compelling one 
of the servants to play before them on the bagpipes.
	They then sailed to an island called Calf Sound, an intention of robbing the 
house of Mr Fea, who had been an old schoolfellow with Gow. This house was the 
rather pitched upon as Gow supposed that Mr Fea could not have yet heard of the 
transactions at Mr Honeyman's; but in this he was mistaken. Mr Fea's house was 
situated near the seashore; he had only six servants at home when the pirates appeared 
off the coast, and these were by no means equal to a contest with the plunderers. The 
tide runs so high among these islands, and beats with such force against the rocks, that 
the navigation is frequently attended with great danger. Gow, who had not boats to 
assist him in an emergency, and was unskilled in the navigation of those seas, made a 
blunder in turning into the bay of Calf Sound; for, standing too near the point of a 
small island called the Calf, the vessel was in the utmost danger of being run on shore. 
This little island was merely a pasture for sheep belonging to Mr Fea, who had at that 
time six hundred feeding on it. Gow having cast his anchor too near the shore, so that 
the wind could not bring him off, sent a boat with a letter to Mr Fea, requesting that 
he would lend him another boat to assist him in heaving off the ship, by carrying out 
an anchor, and assuring him that he would not do the least injury to any individual.
	As Gow's messenger did not see Mr Fea's boat the latter gave him an evasive 
answer, and on the approach of night ordered his servants to sink his own boat and 
hide the sails and rigging.
	While they were obeying this order five of Gow's men came on shore in the 
boat and proceeded, doubly armed, towards Fea's house. Thereupon the latter 
advanced towards them with an assurance of friendship, and begged that they would 
not enter the house, for his wife was exceedingly ill; that the idea of their approach 
had greatly alarmed her, and that the sight of them might probably deprive her of life. 
The boatswain replied that they had no design to terrify Mrs Fea, or any other person, 
but that the most rigorous treatment must be expected if the use of the boat was 
denied them.
	Mr Fea represented how dangerous it would be for him to assist them, on 
account of the reports circulated to their discredit; but he offered to entertain them at 
an adjacent ale- house, and they accepted the invitation, as they observed that he had 
no company. While they were drinking, Mr Fea ordered his servants to destroy their 
boat, and when they had done so to call him hastily out of the company and inform 
him of it.
	These orders were exactly complied with; and when he had left the pirates he 
directed six men, well armed, to station themselves behind a hedge, and if they 
observed him to come alone with the boatswain instantly to seize him; but if he came 
with all the five desperadoes he would walk forward, so as to give them an 
opportunity of firing without wounding himself.
	After giving these orders Fea returned to the company, whom he invited to his 
house, on the promise of their behaving peaceably, and said he would make them 
heartily welcome. They all expressed a readiness to attend him, in the hope of getting 
the boat; but he told them he would rather have the boatswain's company only, and 
would afterwards send for his companions.
	This being agreed to, the boatswain set forward with two brace of pistols, 
walking with Mr Fea till they came to the hedge where his men were concealed. Here 
Mr Fea seized him by the collar, while the others took him into custody before he had 
time to make any defence. The boatswain called aloud for his men; but Mr Fea, 
forcing a handkerchief into his mouth, bound him hand and foot, and then left one of 
his own people to guard him, while he and the rest went back to the public-house.
	There being two doors to the house, some went to the one, and some to the 
other, and, rushing in at once, they made prisoners of the other four men before they 
had time to have recourse to their arms for defence.
	The five pirates, being thus in custody, were sent to an adjacent village and 
separately confined, and in the interim Mr Fea sent messengers round the island to 
acquaint the inhabitants with what had been done; to desire them to haul their boats on 
the beach, that the pirates should not swim to and steal them; and to request that no 
person would venture to row within reach of the pirates' guns. On the following day 
the wind shifted to the north-west and blew hard, on which the pirates conceived 
hopes of getting out to sea; but the person employed to cut the cable missing some of 
his strokes, the ship's way was checked, she turned round and, the cable parting, the 
vessel was driven on Calf Island.
	Reduced to this dilemma, without even a boat to assist in getting off the ship, 
Gow hung out a white flag, as an intimation that he was willing to treat on friendly 
terms but Mr Fea, having now little doubt of securing the pirates, wrote to Gow and 
told him he had been compelled to make prisoners of his men on account of their 
insolent behaviour. He likewise told him that the whole country was alarmed, and that 
the most probable chance of securing his own life would be by surrendering and 
becoming an evidence against his accomplices.
	Four armed men in an open boat carried this letter to Gow, who sent for 
answer that he would give goods to the value of a thousand pounds to be assisted in 
his escape; but if this should be refused, he would set fire to the ship, rather than 
become a prisoner. He even said that he would trust to the mercy of the waves, if Mr. 
Fea would indulge him with a boat.
	On reading this letter, Fea determined to persuade him to submit, and therefore 
took four men well armed, in a boat, and rowed towards the ship; but previously 
placed a man with a flag in his hand at the top of his house, to make such signals as 
might be proper to prevent his falling a sacrifice to any artifice of the pirates.
	The instructions given to the servant were, that he should wave the flag once, 
if he saw one of the pirates swim towards the shore; but if he beheld four or more of 
them, he should wave it constantly, till his master got out of danger. Mr. Fea, rowing 
forwards, spoke through a trumpet, asking Gow to come on shore, and talk with him, 
which the latter said he would. Hereupon Fea lay to, in waiting for him; but at this 
juncture he saw a man swimming from the ship, with a white flag in his hand, on 
which the man on the house waved his flag; but soon afterwards he was observed to 
wave it continually, on which Mr. Fea's boat retired, and those in her presently saw 
five more of the pirates swimming towards them; but they returned to the ship as soon 
as they saw the others were aware of the artifice.
	The first pirate, who carried the white flag, now retired to a corner of the 
island, and calling to Mr. Fea, told him that "the captain had sent him a bottle of 
brandy." Fea replied that he hoped to see Gow hanged, and that he was inclined to 
shoot the messenger for his insolence; on which the fellow decamped with great 
precipitation.
	Soon after this Gow wrote a most humble letter to Mrs. Fea, imploring her 
interference in his behalf; and though she had determined not to interest herself in his 
favour, yet he resolved to go on shore; and taking a white flag in his hand, he made 
signals for a parley; on which Mr. Fea sent some armed men to seize him living or 
dead.
	On their meeting, Gow insisted that one of the men should be left as a hostage; 
this circumstance being seen by Mr. Fea, from the windows of his house, he sailed 
over to the island, where he reprimanded his people for delivering the hostage; and 
likewise told Gow that he was his prisoner. Gow replied, that could not be, since a 
hostage had been delivered for him.
	To this Mr. Fea replied, that be had issued no orders for delivering the hostage, 
and that the man who had foolishly engaged himself as such, must submit to the 
consequence; but he advised Gow, for his own sake, to make signals, that the man 
might obtain his liberty. This Gow refused to do; but Fea made signals which 
deceived the pirates, two of whom came on shore with the man, and were instantly 
taken into custody. Gow was now disarmed of his sword, and made prisoner, after 
begging to be shot with his sword in his possession.
	The leader of the gang being thus secured, Mr. Fea had recourse to stratagem 
to get all the rest into his power. He now compelled Gow to make signals for some of 
them to come on shore, which they readily did, and were apprehended by men 
concealed to take them as they arrived.
	Fea now insinuated to Gow, that he would let him have a boat to escape, if he 
would send for his carpenter to repair it, and to bring with him two or three hands to 
assist him: Gow complied; the men came off, and were severally seized; but as there 
were other people still on board, Mr. Fea had recourse to the following contrivances 
to get them into his possession. He directed his own servants to provide hammers, 
nails, &c. and make a pretence of repairing the boat; and while this was doing, told 
Gow to send for his men, since he must have possession of the ship before he would 
deliver up the boat.
	The pirates, on receiving their late captain's orders to come on shore, were 
very doubtful how to act; but, after a short debate, and having no officers to command 
them, they shared what money they possessed, and coming on shore, were all taken 
into custody.
	Thus, by an equal exertion of courage, conduct and artifice did Mr Fea secure 
these dangerous men, twenty-eight in number, without a single man being killed or 
wounded, and with only the aid of a few countrymen: a force apparently very 
insufficient to the accomplishment of such a business. When all the prisoners were 
properly secured, Mr Fea sent an express to Edinburgh, requesting that proper persons 
might be sent to conduct them to that city.
	In the interim, Mr. Fea took an inventory of all the effects in the ship, to be 
appropriated as the government might direct.
	Six articles, of which the following are a copy, were found on board the ship, 
in Gow's handwriting. It is conjectured, that while they were entangled among the 
rocks of the Orkney Islands, these articles were hastily drawn up, and arose from their 
distressed situation.
	I. That every man shall obey his commander in all respects, as if the ship was 
his own, and as if he received monthly wages.
	II. That no man shall give, or dispose of, the ship's provisions; but every one 
shall have an equal share.
	III. That no man shall open, or declare to any person or persons, who they are, 
or what designs they are upon; and any persons so offending shall be punished with 
immediate death.
	IV. That no man shall go on shore till the ship is off the ground, and in 
readiness to put to sea.
	V. That every man shall keep his watch night and day; and at the hour of eight 
in the evening every one shall retire from gaming and drinking, in order to attend his 
respective station.
	VI. Every person who shall offend against any of these articles shall be 
punished with death, or in such other manner as the ship's company shall think proper.
	The express from Mr Fea being arrived at Edinburgh, another was forwarded 
to London, to learn the Royal pleasure respecting the disposal of the pirates; and the 
answer brought was, that the Lord Justice Clerk should immediately send them to 
London, in order to their being tried by a Court of Admiralty, to be held for that 
purpose. When these orders reached Edinburgh a guard of soldiers marched to fetch 
them to that city; and on their arrival they were put on board the Greyhound frigate, 
which immediately sailed for the Thames.
	On their arrival in the river a detachment of the guards from the Tower 
attended their landing, and conducted them to the Marshalsea Prison, where they once 
more saw Lieutenant Williams, who had been conveyed to England by the man-of-
war which received him from the Bristol captain at Lisbon. This Williams, though 
certain of coming to an ignominious end, took a malignant pleasure in seeing his 
companions in like circumstances of calamity. A commission was now made out for 
their trial; and soon after their commitment they underwent separate examinations 
before the judge of the Admiralty Court in Doctors' Commons, when five of them, 
who appeared to be less guilty than the rest, were admitted evidences against their 
accomplices. Being removed from the Marshalsea to Newgate, their trials came on at 
the Old Bailey, when Gow, Williams and six others were convicted, and received 
sentence of death; but the rest were acquitted, as it seemed evident that they had been 
compelled to take part with the pirates.
	The behaviour of Gow, from his first commitment, was reserved and morose. 
He considered himself as an assured victim to the justice of the laws, nor entertained 
any hope of being admitted an evidence, as Mr. Fea had hinted to him that he might 
be.
	When brought to trial he refused to plead, in consequence of which he was 
sentenced to be pressed to death in the usual manner. His reason for this refusal was, 
that he had an estate which he wished might descend to a relation, and which would 
have been the case had he died under the pressure.
	But when the proper officers were about to inflict this punishment, he begged 
to be taken again to the bar to plead, of which the judge being informed, humanely 
granted his request; and the consequence was that he was convicted, as above-
mentioned, on the same evidence as his accomplices.
	While under sentence of death, he was visited by some Presbyterian ministers, 
who laboured to convince him of the atrociousness of his crime; but he seemed deaf to 
all their admonitions and exhortations.
	Williams's depravity of mind exceeds all description. He seemed equally 
insensible to the hope of happiness, or the fear of torment in a future state. He 
boasted, to those who visited him, of his constantly advising Gow "to tie the prisoners 
back to back, and throw them into the sea," to prevent their giving evidence against 
them.
	Gow, Williams and six of their accomplices were executed together. A 
remarkable circumstance happened to Gow at the place of execution. His friends, 
anxious to put him out of his pain, pulled his legs so forcibly that the rope broke and 
he dropped down; on which he was again taken up to the gibbet, and when he was 
dead was hanged in chains on the banks of the Thames.


JEPHTHAH BIG 
Executed at Tyburn, Sept. 19, 1729, for sending a letter to extort money.

	This malefactor was a native of Spitalfields, and having a brother who was 
coachman to a gentleman of fortune, he conceived an idea of supplying his own 
extravagancies, by extorting money from his brother's master.
	Calling on one Peter Salter, he took him to an obscure public-house near the 
Minories, where he developed his scheme, saying he might obtain a hundred guineas 
by sending a threatening letter; but was at a loss to think what house the money 
should he sent to: at length he fixed on a public-house, called the Shoulder of Mutton, 
at Billingsgate, whither he directed Salter to go, and wait till a porter should bring a 
letter directed to John Harrison, which letter Salter was to carry to Big, at an alehouse 
on Fish-street Hill.
	Agreeable to this direction, Salter waited at the Shoulder of Mutton till a 
porter brought a letter, and spoke to the landlord and his son, who seemed surprised at 
reading the contents. Guilt is ever cowardly; and one of them going out, Salter 
imagined it was to call an officer to apprehend him; on which he slipped out of the 
house, and went to his companion on Fish-street Hill.
	These associates in roguery taking a walk to Moor-fields, Big said he was 
undaunted by this repulse, and that he would write such a letter as would make the 
gentleman tremble; and he did not doubt of success. In consequence of an agreement 
between the parties, another letter was sent, ordering the gentleman to send a hundred 
guineas, inclosed in a parcel, to the Black Boy in Goodman's-fields, directed to John 
Harrison.
	Salter went daily, and drank at this house, where he had hitherto been a 
stranger, in expectation of an answer, which he was to receive, guarding only against 
any artifice that might be used to apprehend him. While he was thus waiting, he read 
an advertisement in the newspaper, offering a reward for the incendiary.
	At this juncture a, porter brought a letter, which he gave the landlord, who 
having read it, the porter said; "I have a parcel for one Mr. Harrison; do you know 
such a gentleman?" The landlord inquired if any person present answered to that 
name; but Salter was too much on his guard to do so; and drinking his beer without 
any sign of fear, he went to an alehouse near Aldgate, where he met his accomplice 
and told him a scheme was laid to apprehend him.
	After some conference, they adjourned to a public-house near the residence of 
the gentleman to whom the threatening letters had been sent. Here Big sent for his 
brother, who attended, but said, as he was obliged to go out with his master, he could 
not stay with them. Big now observed that his brother had complained of the peevish 
disposition of his master, and asked if he did not intend to leave him. The brother 
replied, that his master had been very fretful for some days past: but added, "I have 
now found out the reason; for some vile rogue has sent a threatening letter, and swears 
he will murder him, if a sum of money is not sent to a public-house in Goodman's-
fields."
	When Big's brother was gone, he told Salter he would send another letter, 
whatever might be the consequence; but Salter persuaded him not to run the risk of a 
proceeding which must be followed by certain ruin.
	A few days after this, the porter who had carried the letter and seen Salter at 
both the public-houses, happened to meet him, and suspecting that he might be the 
incendiary, delivered him into the custody of a peace-officer, on which he accused 
Big as the principal, who was thereupon apprehended and committed to Newgate, and 
Salter admitted evidence for the crown.
	Big being tried at the Old Bailey, was sentenced to die; but, after conviction, 
he seemed to be of opinion that he had not been guilty of a capital offence in sending 
a letter to extort money. He was thought to be a Roman Catholic, since he refused the 
attendance of the Ordinary while he lay in Newgate.
	He was hanged at Tyburn, on the 19th of September, 1729, but was so ill at the 
place of execution, that he could not attend the devotions proper for men in his 
calamitous situation.


FRANCIS CHARTERIS 
Convicted of using violence to the person of Ann Bond.

	THE name of Charteris, during life, was a terror to female innocence; may, 
therefore, his fate, and the exposure of his villainy, act as their shield against the 
destructive machinations of profligate men, especially such as those upon whom the 
blind and fickle goddess, Fortune, may have unworthily heaped riches. The wealthy 
profligate, in order to gratify an inordinate passion, will promise, perjure, and pay, to 
any length, or to any amount — then, 'like a loathsome weed, cast you away.'
Be thus advis'd, ye young and fair, 
Let virtuous men engage your care. 
The rake and libertine despise; 
Their breath is poison — O be wise! 
Their arts and wiles turn quick away, 
And from fair Virtue's path ne'er stray.
	By the law of Egypt rapes were punished by removal of the offending parts. 
The Athenian laws compelled the ravisher of a virgin to marry her. It was long before 
this offence was punished capitally by the Roman law; but at length the Lex Julia 
inflicted the pains of death on the ravisher. The Jewish law also punished this crime 
with death; but, if a virgin was deflowered without force, the offender was obliged to 
pay a fine and marry the woman.
	By the 18th of Elizabeth, cap. 7, this offence was made felony without benefit 
of clergy.
	It is certainly of a very heinous nature, and, if tolerated, would be subversive 
of all order and morality; yet it may still be questioned how far it is either useful or 
politic to punish it with death; and it is worth considering whether, well knowing that 
it originates in the irregular and inordinate gratification of unruly appetite, the injury 
to society may not be repaired without destroying the offender.
	In most cases this injury. might be repaired by compelling, where it could he 
done with propriety, the criminal to marry the injured party; and it would be well for 
society if the same rule extended not only to all forcible violations of chastity, but 
even to instances of premeditated and systematic seduction.
	In cases, however, where marriage could not take place, on account of legal 
disability or refusal on the part of the woman, the criminal ought to be severely 
punished by pecuniary damages to the party injured, and by hard labour and 
confinement, or transportation for life.
	The execrable subject of this narrative was born at Amsfield, in Scotland, 
where he was heir to an estate which his ancestors had possessed above four hundred 
years; he was also related to some of the first families in the North by intermarriages 
with the nobility.
	Young Charteris, having received a liberal education, made choice of the 
profession of arms, and served first under the Duke of Marlborough, as an ensign of 
foot, but was soon advanced to the rank of cornet of dragoons: he appears, however, 
to have had other views than fighting when he embraced the life of a soldier.
	Being a most expert gamester, and of a disposition uncommonly avaricious, he 
made his knowledge of gambling subservient to his love of money; and, while the 
army was in winter-quarters, he stripped many of the officers of all their property by 
his skill at cards and dice. But he was as knavish as he was dexterous: and, when he 
had defrauded a brother-officer of all his money, he would lend him a sum at the 
moderate interest of a hundred per cent, taking an assignment of his commission as 
security for the payment of the debt.
	John, Duke of Argyle, and the Earl of Stair, were at this time young men in the 
army; and, being deter mined that the inconsiderate officers should not be thus ruined 
by the artifices of Charteris, they applied to the Earl of Orkney, who was also in the 
army then quartered at Brussels, representing the destruction that must ensue to young 
gentlemen in the military line, if Charteris was not stopped in his proceedings.
	The Earl of Orkney, anxious for the credit of the army in general, and his 
countrymen in particular, represented the state of the case to the Duke of 
Marlborough, who gave orders that Charteris should be put under arrest, and tried by 
court-martial. The court was composed of an equal number of English and Scotch 
officers, that Charteris might have no reason to say he was treated with partiality.
	After a candid hearing of the ease, the proofs of Charteris's villainy were so 
strong, that be was sentenced to return the money he had obtained by usurious 
interest, to be deprived of his commission, and to be drummed out of the regiment, his 
sword being first broken; which sentence was executed in its fullest extent.
	Thus disgraced, Charteris quitted Brussels, and, in the road between that place 
and Mecklin, he threw his breeches into a ditch, and then, buttoning his scarlet cloak 
below his knees, he went into an inn to take up his lodgings for the night.
	It is usual, in places where armies are quartered, for military officers to be 
treated with all possible respect; and this was the case with Charteris, who had every 
distinction shown him that the house could afford, and, after an elegant supper, was 
left to repose.
	Early in the morning he rang the bell violently, and, the landlord coming 
terrified into his room, he swore furiously that he had been robbed of his breeches, 
containing a diamond ring, a gold watch, and money to a considerable amount; and, 
having previously broken the window, he intimated that some person must have 
entered that way, and carried off his property; and he even insinuated that the landlord 
himself might have been the robber.
	It was in vain that the innkeeper solicited mercy in the most humiliating 
posture. Charteris threatened that be should be sent to Brussels, and suffer death, as an 
accessory to the felony.
	Terrified at the thought of approaching disgrace and danger, the landlord of 
the house sent for some friars of an adjacent convent, to whom he represented his 
calamitous situation, and they generously supplied him with a sum sufficient to 
reimburse Charteris for the loss he pretended to have sustained.
	Our unprincipled adventurer now proceeded through Holland, whence he 
embarked for Scotland, and had not been long in that kingdom before his servile 
submission, and his money, procured him another commission in a regiment of horse; 
and he was afterwards advanced to the rank of colonel.
	Amidst all his other avocations, the love of money was his ruling passion; for 
the acquirement whereof there was no crime of which he would not have been guilty.
	The Duke of Queensbury was at this time commissioner to the Parliament of 
Scotland, which was assembled at Edinburgh, to deliberate on the proposed union 
with England. Charteris having been invited to a party at cards with the Duchess of 
Queensbury, he contrived that her Grace should be placed in such a manner, near a 
large glass, that he could see all her cards; and he won three thousand pounds of her in 
consequence of this stratagem. One good, however, resulted from this circumstance: 
the Duke of Queensbury, incensed at the imposition, brought a bill into the House to 
prohibit gaming for above a certain sum; and this bill passed into a law.
	Our adventurer continued his depredations on the thoughtless till be had 
acquired considerable sums. When he had stripped young men of their ready cash at 
the gaming-tables, it was his practice, as before, to lend them money at an extravagant 
interest, for which he took their bonds to confess judgment, and the moment the bonds 
became due he failed not to take every legal advantage.
	By a continued rapacity of this kind he acquired several considerable estates in 
Scotland, and then removed to London, which, as it was the seat of greater 
dissipation, was a place better adapted to the exertion of his abilities.
	He now became a great lender of money on mortgages, always receiving a 
large premium, by which at length he became so rich as to purchase several estates in 
England, particularly in the county of Lancaster.
	Colonel Charteris was as infamous on account of his amours as for the 
unfeeling avarice of his disposition: his house was no better than a brothel, and no 
woman of modesty would live within his walls. He kept in pay some women of 
abandoned character, who, going to inns where the country waggons put up, used to 
prevail on harmless young girls to go to the colonel's house as servants; the 
consequence of which was, that their ruin soon followed, and they were turned out of 
doors, exposed to all the miseries consequent on poverty and a loss of reputation.
	His agents did not confine their operations to inns, but, wherever they found a 
handsome girl, they endeavoured to decoy her to the colonel's house; and, among the 
rest, Ann Bond fell a prey to his artifices. This young woman had lived in London, 
but, having quitted her service on account of illness, took lodgings at a private house, 
where she recovered her health, and was sitting at the door, when a woman addressed 
her, saying, she could help her to a place in the family of Colonel Harvey; for the 
character of Charteris was now become so notorious, that his agents did not venture to 
make use of his name.
	Bond being hired, the woman conducted her to the colonel's house, where she 
was three days before she was acquainted with his real name. Her master gave her 
money to redeem some clothes, which she had pledged to support her in her illness; 
and would have bought other clothes for her, but she refused to accept them.
	He now offered her a purse of gold, an annuity for life, and a house, if she 
would lie with him; but the virtuous girl resisted the temptation; declared she would 
not be guilty of so base an act; that she would discharge her duty as a servant, and that 
her master might dismiss her if her conduct did not please him.
	On the day following this circumstance she heard a gentleman asking for her 
master by the name of Charteris, which alarmed her fears still more, as she was not 
unapprized of his general character; wherefore she told the housekeeper that she must 
quit her service, as she was very ill.
	The housekeeper informing the colonel of this circumstance, he sent for the 
poor girl, and threatened that he would shoot her if she left his service. He likewise 
ordered the servants to keep the door fast, to prevent her making her escape; and, 
when he spoke of her, it was in the most contemptuous terms.
	On the following day he directed his clerk of the kitchen to send her into the 
parlour; and, on her attending him, he bade her stir the fire: while she was thus 
employed, he suddenly seized and committed violence on her, first stopping her 
mouth with his night-cap; and afterwards, on her saying that she would prosecute him, 
he beat her with a horsewhip, and called her by the most opprobrious names.
	On his opening the door the clerk of the kitchen appeared, to whom the 
colonel pretended that she had robbed him of thirty guineas, and directed him to turn 
her out of the house, which was accordingly done.
	Hereupon she went to a gentlewoman named Parsons, and, informing her of 
what had happened, asked her advice how to proceed. Mrs. Parsons recommended her 
to exhibit articles against him for the assault; but, when the matter came afterwards to 
he heard by the grand jury, they held that it was not an attempt, but an actual 
commission, of the fact; and a bill was found accordingly.
	When the colonel was committed to Newgate he was loaded with heavy 
fetters; but he soon purchased a lighter pair, and paid for the use of a room in the 
prison, and for a man to attend him.
	Colonel Charteris had been married to the daughter of Sir Alexander Swinton, 
of Scotland, who bore him one daughter, afterwards married to the Earl of Wemys; 
and the earl, happening to be in London at the time of the above-mentioned 
transaction, procured a writ of habeas corpus, in consequence of which the colonel 
was admitted to bail.
	When the trial came on every art was used to traduce the character of the 
prosecutrix, with a view to destroy the force of her evidence; but, happily, her 
character was so fair, and there was so little reason to think that she had any sinister 
view in the prosecution, that every artifice failed; and, after a long trial, in which the 
facts were proved to the satisfaction of the jury, a verdict of guilty was given against 
the colonel, who received sentence to be executed in the accustomed manner.
	On this occasion Charteris was not a little obliged to his son-in-law, Lord 
Wemys, who caused the Lord President Forbes to come from Scotland, to plead the 
cause before the privy council; and an estate of 300L. per annum for life was assigned 
to the president for this service.
	At length the king consented to grant the colonel a pardon, on his settling a 
handsome annuity on the prosecutrix.
	Colonel Charteris was tried at the Old Bailey on the 25th of February, 1730.
	After his narrow escape from a fate which he had so well deserved he retired 
to Edinburgh, where he lived about two years, and then died in a miserable manner, a 
victim to his own irregular course of life.
	He was buried in the family vault, in the churchyard of the Grey Friars of 
Edinburgh; but his vices had rendered him so detestable, that it was with some 
difficulty he was committed to the gave; for the mob almost tore the coffin in pieces, 
and committed a variety of irregularities, in honest contempt of such an abandoned 
character.
	Soon after Charteris was convicted a fine mezzotinto print of him was 
published, representing him standing at the bar of the Old Bailey, with his thumbs 
tied; and under the print was the following inscription:
Blood!—must a colonel, with a lord's estate, 
Be thus obnoxious to a scoundrel's fate? 
Brought to the bar, and sentenc'd from the bench, 
Only for ravishing a country wench?
Note: At Exeter, on the 5th of October, 1753, an unworthy minister of the Holy 
Gospel, the Reverend Peter Vine, was hanged for committing a crime of this nature.


SIR SIMON CLARKE, BART., AND LIEUTENANT 
ROBERT ARNOTT 
Convicted as Highwaymen in 1731, but afterwards reprieved

	SIR SIMON CLARKE and Lieutenant Robert Arnott were tried and convicted 
of a highway robbery at an assize held at Winchester, but the influence exerted on 
their behalf almost smothered the promulgation of the trial. The Gentleman's 
Magazine for the month of March, 1731, contains the following information; and as 
we have met with it in no other periodical work of that time, for, in fact, few such are 
now in preservation, we give it without further comment:
"Came on at Winchester, the trials of Sir Simon Clarke, Bart., and Lieutenant Robert 
Arnott, who were convicted of a robbery on the highway. A numerous concourse of 
gentry were present. Sir Simon made a most pathetic and moving speech, which had 
such an effect, that there was scarce a dry eye in the court. The High Sheriff and 
Grand Jury, considering the antiquity, worth and dignity of Sir Simon's ancestors, the 
services they had done their king and country, together with the youth and melancholy 
circumstances of that unhappy gentleman, agreed to address his Majesty in their 
behalf; upon which a reprieve sine die, which implies for ever, was granted them."


ROBERT IRWIN 
Executed at Tyburn, in the year 1731, for Murder.

	In the fate of this man we have another instance of the tormenting impulse that 
impels murderers, who have escaped the punishment which awaits such as shed 
innocent blood, to return, as it were involuntarily, to make atonement for the horrid 
crime.
	This hoary sinner was, at the time of his committing the murder in question, a 
soldier in the second regiment of foot guards. On the evening of the fatal deed, he had 
been drinking Geneva with a comrade of the name of John Briggins, after which they 
went together to a gaming. house, called the Phoenix, in the Hay-market, where Irwin 
had some time held the office of door-keeper. [Note: Soldiers in the guards, for long 
and faithful services, are often indulged with leave of absence from duty, in order to 
allow them to earn a little addition to their pay, which, alone, but ill supplies the 
comforts to old age.] Ringing the bell, one Piercy, who had succeeded Irwin as door-
keeper, opened a wicket; but seeing who it was, said, he had orders not to let him in, 
as he had already been turned out for breeding quarrels and disturbances. Enraged at 
this language from the man who had supplanted him, he drew his bayonet, pushed it 
through the wicket, into the very heart of Piercy, and then made his escape. Hearing 
the next morning that the door-keeper of the Phœnix had been murdered, he 
determined to desert his regiment, which he immediately put in practice, and fled to 
Ireland, where he remained long undiscovered among his relations, and might, for the 
remainder of his wretched life, have remained thus concealed, had his mind been 
undisturbed; but his situation grew irksome, and nobody could dissuade him from 
returning to London. As a reason for so doing, he pretended, that from his long 
services in the army, he would, on application be made an out-pensioner of Chelsea 
hospital, and fancied the murder would be forgotten. He had not, however, been many 
days in London, before he was met by one John Roberts, who caused him to be 
apprehended. He was tried at the Old Bailey, for the murder of Piercy, near five years 
after the commission of the crime, when his old comrade Briggins, appeared, and 
swore that he saw Irwin give the fatal blow. He was found guilty, and executed at 
Tyburn, where he confessed the fact.


WILLIAM SMITH 
A notorious horse-stealer, executed at Chelmsford, April 13, 1731

	In the former part of the last century, horse-stealing was a very common theft. 
Thieves could then dispose of their stolen booty with much more facility than at 
present; the laws being better maintained and carried into execution than formerly.
	The subject of the present enquiry was not only a horse but a cattle-stealer of 
every description. Smith was born in Cambridge, bred a clothier, had been a soldier, 
then degraded to the post of footman to a private family; and from that lazy, saucy 
kind of life became connected with horse-stealers. Owing to his person, not yet known 
in the scenes of their depredations, he for some time acted as the receiver of the gang. 
He returned some of the stolen property for the reward offered, cut out or altered the 
marks of others, and drove the remainder to a distance for sale. From a rich farmer in 
Essex, he stole four fine large colts, and gave them to a colonel in the French service, 
hoping to be rewarded by a commission in his regiment; but Monsieur, though he 
liked the young horses, despised the thief; and Smith found that he had been 
outwitted. In revenge, he defrauded a farmer of six horses, pretending to purchase 
them.
	Becoming now known in Essex, he changed his depredations to Surrey, and 
soon cheated a farmer's widow of two cows. Having next stolen a horse and a mare, 
he was about to drive the whole off for sale, when, on the 27th of May, 1731, he was 
apprehended. The cows were were found yoked together, and tied to the horses tails 
and he was in the very act of cutting off the ears of the former, in order to deface 
them, having already altered the marks of the horses.
	He was tried for the offences committed in Essex, at Chelmsford, and found 
guilty of felony, in horse-stealing. In the interim between his condemnation and 
execution, he gave out that he could inform persons how to recover their property of 
which he had robbed them, and cheated many out of sums of money by false tales, 
and other deceitful acts; and the produce of this shocking depravity he wasted in 
drinking and gaming, which shameful practice he continued to the day of his 
execution. He suffered at Chelmsford, along with Thomas Willer; another horse-
stealer, on the 18th of August, 1731.
	At the next assize for the same county another horse-stealer was convicted and 
executed. This man's name was John Doe, against whom thirty-nine bills of 
indictment were found by the grand jury. He belonged to a numerous gang of 
depredators, who stole cattle of every description, and drove them to Smithfield 
market, in London, where he had the effrontery to sell them.


ROBERT HALLAM 
Executed for murdering his wife, February 14th, 1732

	Robert Hallam was a native of London, and intended by his parents for a 
maritime life, in preparation for which they had him instructed in navigation, and then 
apprenticed him to the captain of a trading vessel. He served his time with fidelity, 
acquired the character of an able seaman, and afterwards went on board several 
vessels as a mate, and was held in great reputation.
	On his return to London he married a young woman, who being averse to his 
going again to sea, he purchased two of the Gravesend wherries, and continued to get 
his living on the Thames nine years.
	His family being increased by several children, he took a public house, which 
was chiefly attended to by his wife, while he still pursued his business as a proprietor 
of the Gravesend boats.
	The taking an alehouse was an unfortunate circumstance for Hallam; for the 
house being frequented by the lowest of the people, and his wife being addicted to 
drinking, the place was a perpetual scene of riot and confusion.
	Hallam, returning from his business one evening, found his wife intoxicated: 
being irritated by this circumstance, he expressed his sentiments with great freedom; 
and she replying with some warmth, he beat her so as to leave evident marks of 
resentment on her face.
	Hallam's son now told his father that a waterman who lodged in the house 
frequently slept with his mother; and some persons present likewise hinting that this 
was probable, from certain familiarities they had observed between the woman and 
the waterman, Hallam charged his wife with being unfaithful to his bed, and she 
confessed that she had been so; on which he beat her in a more severe manner than 
before.
	Not long after this he came home late at night, and knocked at the door;. but, 
no one coming to let him in, he procured a ladder to get in at the window; when his 
wife appeared, and admitted him. On his asking the reason why she did not sooner 
open the door, she said she had been asleep, and did not hear him; but she afterwards 
confessed that she had a man with her, and had let him out at a back window before 
she opened the door to her husband.
	The infidelity of Hallam's wife tempted him to equal indulgence of his 
irregular passions: he had illicit connexions with several women, and, in particular, 
seduced the wife of a waterman, which broke the husband's heart, and he died in 
consequence of the affair.
	On a particular night Hallam came home very much in liquor, and went to bed, 
desiring his wife to undress herself, and come to bed likewise. She sat, partly 
undressed, on the side of the bed, as if afraid to go in; while he became quite enraged 
at her paying no regard to what he said. At length she ran downstairs, and he followed 
her, and locked the street-door to prevent her going out. On this she ran up into the 
dining-room, whither he likewise followed her, and struck her several times. He then 
went into another room for his cane, and she locked him in.
	Enraged at this, he broke open the door, and, seizing her in his arms, threw her 
out of the window, with her head foremost, and her back to the ground, so that, on her 
falling, her back was broken, her skull fractured, and she instantly expired. A person 
passing just before she fell heard her cry out "Murder! for God's sake! for Christ's 
sake! for our family's sake! for our children's sake, don't murder me, don't throw me 
out of the window!"
	We give the above circumstances us what were sworn to on the trial, in 
consequence of which the jury found Hallam guilty, and he received sentence of 
death: but the prisoner denied the fact, insisting that she threw herself out of the 
window before he got into the room; and he persisted in avowing his innocence to the 
last hour of his life. He was executed at Tyburn, February 14, 1732.


JOHN HEWIT AND ROSAMUND ODERENSHAW 
Murderers, executed March 29, 1732

	THOUGH adultery is, by holy writ, denounced as a crime heinous to God; and 
though we have daily instances of the shocking enormities to which it leads the 
unguarded; yet virtue and modesty are constantly outraged by the commission of this 
sin with impunity. No wonder, then at the mischief arising from this vice, when our 
very princes, who are bound by every tie to hand down to the meanest members of 
society examples worthy of emulation, seem regardless of that commandment of God, 
which says, "Thou shalt not commit adultery."
	The murder perpetrated in the present case, was the result of an adulterous 
connection. John Hewit was a butcher and a married man, at Derby, and Rosamond 
Oderenshaw, a servant to the landlady of the Crown public-house, at Nun's green, a 
widow, to whose inordinate desires she fell a victim, being made the instrument of 
murdering the wife of Hewit. From the confessions of these malefactors, it appeared 
that Hewit had criminal knowledge of both the landlady and her servant woman. The 
former of these abandoned women, in order to secure her paramour to herself, by 
marrying him, determined on the murder of Mrs Hewit. To this horrid end, the 
landlady procured some poisons and mixed it in a pancake, which, through promises 
of reward, she prevailed upon the servant to give to Hannah Hewit, who, little 
suspicious, eat heartily thereof, until she was seized with a pain in her stomach, and, 
vomiting a part of the contents in the yard, a pig that eat of it soon died, and the 
unfortunate woman expired in excruciating torments, at the end of three hours. While 
the devoted victim eat the poisoned food, the hardened landlady appeared to be 
composedly ironing some clothes in the parlour, yet the instigator of the foul deed 
escaped; while the husband, who was proved to have been accessory to the crime, and 
the servant alone, met their just punishment. The condemned wicked woman, a short 
time previous to her execution, confessed that, through the persuasion of her mistress, 
she had some weeks before put poison into the broth of Mrs. Hewit, but not in a 
sufficient quantity to produce the intended effect; and that she had borne a bastard 
child, which she murdered, and buried the body in a certain spot, which she described; 
digging the ground, the bones of a child, apparently seven months old, were 
accordingly found.
	This miserable man and woman provided themselves with a shroud each, in 
which they walked to the gallows; where they died penitent, and confessed their guilt, 
on March 29, 1732.
	About this period, Faulkner's Journal, the best periodical publication Ireland 
ever produced, contained a note of a murder committed under the most unnatural and 
cruel circumstances, but we do not find it in any criminal catalogue whatever. Too 
short for a narrative of itself and unwilling to avoid handing it with others of a similar 
shade of darkness, as a warning to society against the commission of sins, we have 
here inserted it, as being nearly a similar case, in chronological order.
	"The assizes at Ennis, in. Ireland, for the year 1731, brought to light a still 
more shocking murder, if one can be more heinous than another. A cruel and 
unnatural woman, named Mary Meddun, was convicted of the wilful murder of her 
husband and her son, by blows on their temples, when asleep, with a hatchet, of which 
they both immediately expired. What rendered this wretch more odious to the people 
attending her execution, was a firm belief that she had murdered a former husband."

	JONATHAN HAWKINS was born and bred in the parish of Mark, near the 
city of Wells, in Somersetshire, of honest and industrious parents, who educated him 
in the principles of religion; but, being poor, gave him little or no learning. His father 
was a husbandman, and brought up his son Jonathan in his own occupation, whereby 
he acquired a sufficient livelihood and maintenance. He spent all the time of his youth 
soberly, and in the fear of God, constantly attending at Divine service. He was not 
addicted to lying, swearing, blaspheming, hard drinking or keeping any ill company; 
but detestably shunned and abhorred all those enormous vices and lewd courses. 
When he arrived at man's estate he married, and led a sober and regular life during the 
limited time of the matrimonial bonds. But after his wife's death he began to swerve 
from his former course of life, and gradually betook himself to commit several petty 
crimes.
	Among the rest of his friends and acquaintances he had contracted a mutual 
friendship with one George Gase, who resided in the same parish, and was Jonathan's 
brother-in-law. It seems that Jonathan, having occasion for a certain sum of money, 
applied to his brother-in-law, who supplied him with the sum requested, and for the 
security thereof received Jonathan's bond. The appointed time of payment being partly 
expired, he studied by what means he might free himself from the payment thereof, 
and concluded to procure the bond into his custody, or at least to deprive his brother-
in-law of any advantage thereby. Monday, the 17th of January, 1732, was the day on 
which he had prefixed to officiate and determine his intended villainy; when, entering 
the house of his brother-in-law, and finding no one therein save the old man and his 
daughter, Mary Gase, he embraced the opportunity, and put his wicked design in 
execution, by barbarously murdering them both (the one being nearly eighty years of 
age and the other about thirty), and afterwards firing the house, which doubtless was 
to consume the dead bodies, that so his villainy might be cloaked, and he pass 
unsuspected. As soon as he had completed this horrid act he retired to a neighbour's 
house, and there played at cards, with as little seeming regret or outward concern as 
though nothing had befallen him. But in the middle of their diversion they were 
instantly interrupted, and the scene immediately changed, occasioned by one of the 
people looking out, and crying: "Fire! Fire!" which sudden disaster alarming them, 
they all showed a forward and voluntary diligence in going to quench the fire except 
Jonathan, who on being required to assist them therein answered in the negative. The 
major part of the parish were gathered together before the force of the conflagration 
became unquenchable, so that they entered the house; where, to their great surprise 
(mirabile dictu!), they found the bodies of the old man (Jonathan's brother-in-law) and 
his daughter lying prostrate on the ground, weltering in their blood, with their throats 
cut from car to ear. By this time all the inhabitants were in a confusion and uproar, 
and knew not who to charge with the fact. In this consternation they remained for 
some time, till, Jonathan being asked for the key of the door, he replied: "It is in that 
hedge yonder" (pointing to a box-hedge), where they found it accordingly. They had 
now just grounds for suspicion and, perceiving his countenance to change, they 
charged him with murdering the people, and carried him to the place where the bodies 
lay, to touch them. When he had done this, his colour alternately changed; and being 
taxed with the murder he confessed all. And when it was demanded why he set the 
house on fire, he answered that he did it to burn the bond which he had given his 
brother-in-law. He was seized and carried before a justice, who committed him to 
Ilchester jail.
	After about two months' imprisonment Jonathan was conveyed from Ilchester 
to Taunton, in order to receive his trial. He pleaded guilty to the indictment, and 
acknowledged all that was deposed against him in court, and accordingly received 
sentence of death. He was executed on the 14th day of April, 1732, being in the thirty-
fourth year of his age, on a very high gibbet, erected on a large common, adjoining to 
the said parish, called Markmoor, and afterwards taken down and hanged in chains in 
the same place.


JOHN WALLER, alias TREVOR, 
Pilloried for perjury, and pelted to death by the populace, 13th June, 1732

  
Waller in the Pillory

	THE pillory is an engine mode of wood, to punish offenders, by exposing 
them to public view, and rendering them infamous. There is a statute of the pillory 51 
Henry III.; and by statute it is appointed for bakers, forestallers, and those who use 
false weights, perjury, forgery, &c. Lords of Leets are to have a pillory and tumbrel or 
it will be the cause of forfeiture of the leet; and a village may be bound by 
proscription to provide a pillory, &c. The name is derived from two Greek words, 
signifying 'to look through a door;' because one standing on the pillory puts his head, 
as it were, through a door.
	This profligate wretch, Waller, to robbery added the still greater sin of 
accusing the innocent, in order to receive the reward in certain cases attending 
conviction. The abominable dealer in human blood was tried at the Old Bailey for 
robbing, on the highway, one John Edglin, and afterwards, under the name of John 
Trevor, giving a false evidence against the said John Edglin, whereby his life might 
have become forfeited to the abused laws of the country. On the latter charge he was 
found guilty.
	It appeared, on this memorable trial, that Waller made it a practice to go the 
circuits as regularly as the judges and counsel, and to swear robberies against such as 
he deemed fit objects for his purpose, from no other motive than to obtain the reward 
given by each county for the apprehension and conviction of criminals for highway 
robberies and other offences therein committed.
	The sentence of the Court was, that he should pay a fine of twenty marks, and 
be imprisoned for the term of two years, and at the expiration thereof to find good and 
sufficient security for his good behaviour during the remainder of his life; that he do 
stand twice in and upon the pillory, bareheaded, with his crime written in large 
characters; and that he do also stand twice before the pillory, likewise bareheaded, one 
hour each time.
	On Tuesday, the 13th of June, 1732, this wicked man was put in the pillory, 
pursuant to his sentence, at the Seven Dials, in London; where, so great was the 
indignation of the populace, that they pelted him to death and the day after the 
coroner's inquest gave a verdict, 'Wilful murder by persons unknown.'


ELY HATTON 
Murderer, executed at Gloucester, August, 1732

	IN the account given of the case of this man, which has not been republished, 
or commented upon, since the time of his conviction, we find no interested cause for 
perpetrating the horrid crime.
	Ely Hatton was indicted at the assizes held at Gloucester, in August, 1732,for 
the wilful murder of Thomas Turberville, a carpenter. It was given in evidence, that 
on the 29th of April preceding, the deceased was found in his work-shop, with his 
brains dashed out, and his scull chopped in pieces with a broad axe, which lay near his 
body, covered with blood. Suspicion falling upon Hatton, he was apprehended, having 
made no effort to evade justice. The proof against him was little more than 
circumstantial. It appeared, in., evidence, that when the prisoner, was apprehended, he 
wore a shirt and pair of stockings, the property of the deceased; his coat was stained 
with blood, and many other circumstances were adduced, which left no doubts in the 
minds of the jury. The accused acknowledged that he had been in company with the 
deceased, on the evening of his death, that he went with him to a certain eminence 
near the town, to view some deer, and there they parted, that the shirt he had on, when 
apprehended, was his brother's; but this was a falsehood, and alone sufficient to fix 
guilt upon him. He called one witness in his behalf, who served only to tend to his 
conviction; for this witness declared, that he verily believed him guilty of the murder, 
The prisoner's defence also varied from account on his examination before a justice of 
peace, when he declared that the shirt in question belonged to his father.
	As no farther light was thrown upon the circumstances attending the murder of 
Turberville, it may be fairly presumed, notwithstanding the proof was not positive, 
that Hatton justly underwent the sentence of the law.
	The editor, however, recollects a story, but he cannot state the names of the 
parties, where an innocent man suffered in France, on a charge of murder, and which 
will, at all events, caution jurymen, when sitting on the life or death of a fellow-
creature, to be extremely guarded in giving their verdict of guilty upon circumstantial 
evidence alone. A gentleman was found murdered in his own house, and by his own 
sword. Some persons, coming to the house just after the barbarous deed had been 
committed, were shocked at seeing his servant man, in great consternation running 
out, with a bloody sword in his hand. So great was his agitation, that he gave an 
incoherent account of the transaction, and was secured. A surgeon was sent for, who 
found the master dead, and comparing the wound with the sword, declared that the 
weapon, or one exactly similar, caused his death. This, with the proof that there had 
been quarrels between the deceased and the prisoner, was the evidence given on the 
trial; and he was found guilty, and executed. Some years afterwards, a late neighbour 
of the murdered man lay on his death-bed, and when his confessor came to 
administer, what Catholics calls, the extreme unction,* he confessed that having had a 
dispute with him, he entered his house privately, and in revenge, killed him, as 
already has been described.
[*Note: This ceremony of the Catholic faith is thus performed. A priest, when 
summoned for that purpose, forms a procession, consisting of an oblong canopy of 
cloth, borne by four of the inferior clergy, under which he walks preceded by a boy 
bare-headed, tinkling a little bell; at the sound of which passengers prepare to pay it 
due respect. They kneel down as it passes them, cross their foreheads, and touch their 
breasts, repeating a prayer, Arrived at the dying person's abode, the priest receives 
their confessions, and then, for a small gratuity, absolves them of their sins, and 
declares, that their souls will be received in heaven. A happy religion, for those who 
can have faith in such superstition!!]


ELEANOR BEARE 
(A very curious and wicked case.)

	IN our dreadful catalogue of crimes, committed by man upon his fellow-
creatures, none is attended with more pernicious consequences to society than that 
which we now, and with much reluctance, are about to describe. The hope that this 
relation will cause every female to reflect with detestation on a wretch who could 
make such murderous practices a kind of business alone determines us to give a place 
to the case of this abandoned woman.
	On the 15th of August, 1732, Eleanor Beare, wife of Ebenezer Beare, of the 
town of Derby, labourer, was tried before a most crowded court, for procuring 
abortion in women. We forbear following the reporter of this trial through the 
evidence adduced against the prisoner; let it therefore suffice to quote the speech of 
the counsel for the prosecution on opening the case, which was as follows:
	"Gentlemen of the Jury,
	"You have heard the indictment read, and may observe that this 
misdemeanour, for which the prisoner stands indicted, is of a most shocking nature. 
To destroy the fruit in the womb, carries something in it so contrary to the natural 
tenderness of the female sex, that I am amazed however any woman should arrive at 
such a degree of impiety and cruelty, as to attempt it in such a manner as the prisoner 
has done. It has really something so shocking in it, that I cannot well display the 
nature of the crime to you, but must leave it to the evidence. It is cruel and barbarous 
to the last degree and attended with the greatest danger to whoever it is practised 
upon."
	It was proved that this dangerous woman had not only procured abortion in 
different women, but even persuaded a man named Nicholas Wilson, upon having a 
quarrel with his wife, to poison her; and for this purpose gave him a deadly powder, 
which the man, more humane, instead of administering, dug a hole in the earth, and 
buried it.
	The learned judge before whom she was tried was greatly moved in summing 
up the evidence, and giving charge to the jury. He declared that he never met with a 
case so barbarous and unnatural. She was sentenced to close imprisonment for the 
term of three years, and to stand in and upon the pillory, on the two next market days 
of the town of Derby.
	Pursuant to this sentence, she was exposed in the pillory three days afterwards, 
being the next market-day, when the populace impressed their indignation, by pelting 
her with rotten eggs, and any filth they could collect; and she might with her life have 
expiated her crimes, had she not, in struggling, disengaged herself, and jumped among 
the crowd, from whose fury the Sheriff's officers, with great difficulty, rescued her. 
The next week she was again brought out of prison, and again pilloried. As soon as 
she mounted the platform, she kneeled down and begged mercy of the still outrageous 
mob. The executioner finding, from her struggling, some difficulty in getting her head 
through the hole of the pillory, pulled off her head-dress, and therein found a large 
pewter plate, beat out so as to fit her head, which he threw among the, spectators. As 
soon as she was fixed, a shower of eggs, potatoes, turnips, &c. assailed her front every 
direction; and it was thought she would not be taken down alive. Having expended all 
the ammunition of the above description, stones were thrown, which wounded her to 
such a degree,, that her blood streamed down the pillory.. This somewhat, appeased 
the resentment shewn against her, and she was returned to gaol a shocking spectacle 
to behold.
	This remarkable case, with those immediately preceding, viz —- Hatton's 
Waller's, Hewit's, Smith's, Irwin's, and Clarke's, were never before regularly reported.


JOSEPH POWIS 
Strolling player turned housebreaker, executed 9th October, 1732

  
The sexton frightened by Powis

	JOSEPH Powis was a native of St. Martin's in the Fields; and his father dying 
while he was an infant, his mother married a smith in St. Martin's Lane, who was 
remarkable for his ingenuity.
	The father-in-law going to Harfleur, in Normandy, with many other skilful 
artists, to be concerned in an iron manufactory, took Powis with him when he was 
only eight years of age.
	They had not been long here before the father-in-law received a letter, 
advising him of the death of his wife; on which he left the boy to the care of an 
Englishman, and came to London in order to settle his affairs, but soon returned to 
Normandy.
	The scheme in which they had embarked failing, they came back to England, 
and the man, marrying a second wife, took a shop in Chancery Lane, London, and 
sent young Powis to school, where he made such progress, that a little time gave hope 
of his becoming a good Latin scholar.
	But he had not been long at school before his father-in-law took him home, to 
instruct him in his own business; and hence his misfortunes appear to have arisen; for 
such was his attachment to literature, that, when he was sent of an errand, he 
constantly loitered away his time reading at the stall of some bookseller.
	When he had been about four years with his father, two lads of his 
acquaintance persuaded him to take a stroll into the country, and they wandered 
through the villages adjacent to London for about a week, in a condition almost 
starving, sometimes begging food to relieve the extremities of hunger, and finally 
compelled by distress to return to town.
	The father-in-law of Powis received him kindly, forgave his fault, and he 
continued about a year longer with him; but, having read a number of plays, he had 
imbibed such romantic notions as disqualified him for business.
	Inspired with an idea of going on the stage, he offered his services to Mr. 
Rich, then manager of Covent Garden Theatre; but, having repeated some parts of the 
tragedy of Julius Caesar, Rich told him he was disqualified for the stage, and advised 
him to attend to his trade.
	Soon after this Powis a second time quitted his father-in-law, and rambled 
through the country some days; but returning on a Sunday, in the absence of the 
family, he broke open a chest, and, taking out his best clothes, again decamped.
	Nothing being missed except the boy's clothes, it was easily judged who must 
be the thief; wherefore the father-in-law went with a constable in search of the youth, 
whom he took before a magistrate, in the hope of making him sensible of his folly.
	The justice threatening to commit him unless he 'made a proper submission, he 
promised to go home and do so; but, dropping his father-in-law in the street, he went 
to an acquaintance, to whom he communicated his situation, and asked his advice how 
to act. His friend advised him to go home, and discharge his duty; but this not suiting 
his inclination, and it being now the time of Bartholomew Fair, he engaged with one 
Miller to act a part in a farce exhibited at Smithfield.
	His next adventure was the going to Dorking, in Surrey, with one Button, a 
strolling player, by whom he was taught to expect great things; but Button, having 
previously affronted the inhabitants, met with no encouragement; on which they 
proceeded to Horsham, in Sussex, where they were equally unsuccessful.
	Powis now slept in a hay-loft, near the kitchen of an inn, and, being almost 
starved, he used to get in at the window and steal the victuals while the family were in 
bed. He likewise stole a new pair of shoes belonging to the landlord; but the latter, 
soon discovering the thief, took the shoes from him, and gave him an old pair instead.
	About this time Button took Powis's clothes from him, and gave him others 
that were little better than rags.
	Having left this town, they put up at an inn, where the landlord obliged the 
company to sleep in the hay loft, admitting none but the manager to come within the 
house. At night Powis crept into the kitchen, devoured the remains of a cold pie, and 
stole a pair of boots and a pair of stockings, with which he retreated into the hay-loft. 
He continued to steal provisions several nights, till the landlord and Button watched, 
with loaded guns, in expectation of the thief, who, however, came not that night.
	Powis, having obtained a few halfpence by one of his petty thefts, stole out 
from the hay-loft to drink at a public house; but the other landlord, being there, knew 
the boots to be his; on which our unfortunate adventurer hastily retreated to his loft, 
where he expected to lie secure; but the landlord, Button, and others, following him, 
seized him, and took him into the kitchen for examination. He readily confessed that 
he had stolen the victuals; on which he was delivered into the custody of two 
countrymen to guard him till the next day, when it was proposed to take him before a 
magistrate.
	The family having retired to bed, Powis pretended to fall fast asleep; on which 
one of his guards said, 'How the poor fellow rests, notwithstanding his misfortunes;' to 
which the other said, 'Let me sleep an hour, and then I will watch while you sleep.'
	In a few minutes both the men were asleep; on which Powis, thinking to 
escape, attempted to put on the boots; but, making some noise, the landlord heard 
him, and, coming downstairs, Powis affected to slumber as before. The landlord 
awakened the guardians, and bade them take more care of their prisoner; which 
having promised to do, they soon fell asleep again.
	Our adventurer now took the boots in his hand, and, getting out of the inn-
yard, ran with the utmost expedition till he got out of the town, and then drawing on 
the boots, he proceeded on his journey to London. However, he missed his way, and, 
getting on a common, knew not how to proceed; but going into a cow-house, in which 
was a quantity of flax, he lay down to rest. In the morning the owner of the flax found 
him, and inquiring what business he had there, Powis said that, being intoxicated, he 
had lost his way: on which the other directed him into the right road, and our hero 
hastened forward, in the apprehension of being pursued.
	Towards evening be arrived near Dorking, but did not enter the town till it was 
nearly dark. As he was going through the street he heard a door open; and, turning 
round, a woman, who had a candle in her hand, called him; and, on his demanding 
what she wanted, she said to another woman, 'Sure enough it is he.'
	This woman, who had washed the players' linen, said that two men had been in 
pursuit of him; and that his best way would be to avoid the high road, and get to 
London some other way with all possible expedition.
	Powis immediately took this advice, and, quitting the turnpike-road, got to a 
farm-house, where he stole some books and other trifles, ate some provisions, and 
then proceeded towards London, stopping at Stockwell, at a house kept by the mother 
of his father-in-law's wife. All this happened in the night; but, knowing the place, he 
went into the back yard, and lay down to sleep on some straw.
	Observing several threshers come to work in the morning, he concealed 
himself under the straw till night, when he crept out, went to a public house, drank 
some beer, and returned to his former lodging.
	Inspired by the liquor he had drank, he began to sing, which drawing some 
people round him, they conducted him into the house.
	His mother-in-law, happening to be there on a visit, spoke with great kindness 
to him, and advised him to remain there till she had communicated the affair to her 
husband.
	In a few days the father-in-law came to him, and expressed his readiness to 
take him home, if he would but attend his business, and decline his present vagrant 
course of life. This he readily agreed to do, and continued steady during the winter; 
but on the approach of summer he again left his friends, and rambled about near a 
month, subsisting on the casual bounty of his acquaintance.
	Falling into company with Joseph Paterson, whom he had known among the 
strolling players, Paterson engaged him to perform a part in the tragedy of 'The Earls 
of Essex,' at Windmill Hill, near Moorfields, which was then the place of resort for the 
lower class of spouters in and near London.
	The part of Lord Burleigh being assigned to Powis, and it being intimated in 
the printed bills that this part was to be performed by 'A young gentleman, being his 
first appearance on the stage,' the curiosity of the public was somewhat excited, so 
that there was a full house. Unfortunately, Lord Burleigh was dressed in the shabbiest 
manner; and, being little better than a compound of rags and dirt, it was with some 
difficulty the minister of state went through his part, amidst the laughter and ridicule 
of the spectators.
	Returning home through Ludgate Street, after the play, he saw a gentleman 
who said he had dropped three guineas, but had picked up one of them. Powis, 
happening to find the other two, kept one for himself, and gave the other to the owner, 
who, not knowing that he had retained one, insisted on his drinking a glass of wine, 
and thanked him for his civility.
	Being stopped one night in Chancery Lane by a violent shower of rain, he 
climbed over a gate, and got under the shelter of a pent-house belonging to the Six 
Clerks' Office, where he remained till morning, when the clerks came to their 
business, and he was then afraid to appear, lest he should be taken for a thief from the 
shabbiness of his dress.
	Leaning against a plastered wall, part of it broke; but, as the place he stood in 
was very dark, no one observed it; on which he resolved to profit by the accident; in 
consequence of this, he, at night, made the breach wider, and got into the office, 
whence he stole six guineas, and about fifty shillings in silver.
	Having spent this money, he determined to join his old companions on 
Windmill Hill; and, in his way thither, he observed a fellow pick a countryman's 
pocket of a bag of money in Smithfield; and a cry of 'Stop thief!' being immediately 
circulated, the pickpocket dropped the bag, which Powis took up unobserved, and, 
retiring to a public house, examined its contents, which he found to amount to above 
fifty pounds.
	Having put the money in his pocket, he threw away the bag, and retired to his 
lodgings. This money, a greater sum than he had ever before possessed, was soon 
spent in extravagance, and he was again reduced to great extremities.
	Thus distressed, he got into the area of a coffee-house in Chancery Lane, and 
attempted to force the kitchen window but, not succeeding, he secreted himself in the 
coal-cellar till the following evening, when he got into the house, and hid himself in a 
hole behind the chimney.
	When the family was gone to rest, he stole some silver spoons, and about three 
shillings' worth of half pence from the bar, and, having now fasted thirty hours, he ate 
and drank heartily; but, hearing a person come downstairs, he pulled off his shoes, 
and, retiring hastily, got into a hole where broken glass was kept, by which his feet 
were cut in a shocking manner.
	It happened to be only the maid-servant who came downstairs; and, going into 
the kitchen, Powis put on his shoes, and ran through the coffee-room into the street.
	Being again reduced, he broke into the Chancery Office, where be stole about 
four pounds ten shillings, which being spent, he looked out for a fresh supply. Going 
to St. Dunstan's Church, at the time of morning prayers, he hid himself in the gallery 
till night, and then stole some of the prayer-books, which he proposed to have carried 
off the next morning, when the sexton appeared, who, being more terrified than the 
thief, ran to procure the assistance of another man; but in the mean time Powis bad so 
secreted himself that they could not find him after a search of two hours; they 
therefore at length gave it up, concluding that he had got out through one of the 
windows. However, he remained in the church all that day, and at the hour of prayer 
next morning went off with as many books as produced him a guinea.
	On the following night he visited an acquaintance in Ram Alley, Fleet Street, 
where he observed a woman deposit some goods in a room, the door of which she 
fastened with a padlock. On this be concealed himself in the cellar till towards 
morning, when he opened the padlock with a crooked nail, and stole two gold rings 
and a guinea, being baulked in his expectation of a much more valuable prize.
	One of the prayer-books which he had stolen from St. Dunstan's Church he 
sold to a bookseller in the Strand; and, while the lady who had lost it was inquiring at 
the bookseller's if such a book had fallen into his hands, Powis happened to stop to 
speak with a gentleman at the door; on which the bookseller said, 'There is the man 
who sold it me!' and the lady replied, 'He is a thief, and has stolen it!'
	The bookseller, calling Powis into his shop, asked if he had sold him that 
book, which he acknowledged; and, being desired to recollect how he had obtained it, 
he said he could not; on which the bookseller threatened to have him committed to 
prison; but the lady, now earnestly looking at him, asked if his name was Powis. He 
said it was; on which she burst into tears, and said, 'I am sorry for you, and for your 
poor father; you are the cause of all his unhappiness.' The bookseller, happening 
likewise to know Powis's father, delivered the book to the lady, and permitted the 
young thief to depart, on promise to pay for it on the following day: but the day of 
payment never came.
	A few nights after this he climbed up the sign-post belonging to a pastry-cook 
in Fleet Street, and got in at a chamber-window, whence he descended into the shop; 
but, not finding any money in the till, stole only two or three old books, and filled his 
pockets with tarts, with which he decamped.
	Calling some days afterwards at the same shop to buy a tart, he found the 
people of the house entertaining themselves with the idea of the disappointment the 
thief had met with: and a lady who lodged in the house produced her gold watch, 
saying she supposed that had been the object of his search.
	This circumstance encouraged him to make another attempt; wherefore, on the 
following night, he again ascended the sign-post, and got in at the window; but 
hearing a person coming downstairs without shoes, he got back to the sign-post, 
descended, and ran off. He was instantly pursued, but escaped through the darkness of 
the night.
	Chagrined at this disappointment, he sauntered into the fields, and lay down 
under a hay-rick. He slumbered awhile; but, being distressed in mind, he imagined he 
heard a voice crying, 'Run, run, fly for your life; for you are pursued, and if you are 
taken you will be hanged.' He started with wild affright, and large drops of sweat ran 
down his face, occasioned by the agitation of his mind.
	Finding that he had only been disturbed by a dream, he again lay down; but 
the stings of his conscience continuing to goad him, he dreamt that a person came to 
him, saying, 'Young man, you must go away from hence; for, were I to suffer you to 
remain here, I should expect a judgment to fall on me: so go away, or I will fetch a 
constable, who shall oblige you to go.' Being again terrified, he walked round the hay-
rick, calling out 'Who is there?' but receiving no answer, he lay down once more, and 
dreamt that his father-in-law stood by him, and spoke as follows:— 'O son! will you 
never take warning till justice overtakes you? The time will come when you will wish, 
but too late, that you had been warned by me.'
	Unable now to sleep, through the agonies of his mind, he wandered about till 
morning, and had formed a resolution of returning to his father-in-law; but as he was 
going to him he met an old acquaintance, who paid him a debt of a few shillings; and, 
going to drink with him, Powis soon forgot the virtuous resolutions he bad formed.
	On parting from this acquaintance he went to the house of another, where he 
slept five hours; and then, being extremely hungry, went to a public house, where he 
supped, and spent all his money, except eightpence.
	Thus reduced, he resolved to make a fresh attempt on the Chancery Office, for 
which purpose he broke through the wall, but found no booty.
	In the mean time his father-in-law exerted his utmost endeavours to find him, 
to consult his safety; and, having met with him, told him it would be imprudent for 
him to stay longer in London, as people began to be suspicious of him: wherefore he 
advised him to go to Cambridge, and work as a journeyman with a smith of his 
acquaintance.
	Young Powis consenting, the father bought him new clothes, furnished him 
with some good books, and gave him money to proceed on his journey. He now left 
the old gentleman; but soon afterwards meeting with six strolling players, one of 
whom he had formerly known, they sat down to drinking; at which they continued till 
all Powis's money was spent, and then he sold his new clothes.
	Our young adventurer now became so hardened in guilt that there appeared no 
prospect of his reformation. One Sunday morning early he attempted to break open 
the house of a baker in Chancery Lane; but the family being alarmed, he was obliged 
to decamp without his booty, though not without being known. This affair coming to 
the knowledge of the father, he commissioned some friends to tell the boy, if they 
should meet him, that he was still ready to receive him with kindness, if he would 
mend his conduct.
	Powis, being now very much distressed, applied to his still generous relation, 
who advised him to go to the West Indies, as the most effectual method of being out 
of danger; and he promised to furnish him with necessaries for the voyage.
	Accepting the offer, Powis was properly fitted out, and sent on board a ship in 
the river, where he was confined in the bold, to prevent his escaping. In a day or two 
afterwards he was allowed the liberty of the ship; but most of the seamen now going 
on shore to take leave of their friends, he resolved to seize the opportunity of making 
his escape, and of taking some thing of value with him.
	Waiting till it was night, he broke open a chest belonging to a passenger, and, 
having stolen a handsome suit of clothes, he took the opportunity of the people on 
watch going to call others to relieve them; and, dropping down the side of the ship, 
got into a boat; but, having only a single oar, he was unable to steer her;, and, after 
striving a considerable time, was obliged to let her drive; the consequence of which 
was, that she ran on shore below Woolwich.
	Quitting the boat, he set off towards London; but near Deptford he met with 
two men, who asked him to sell his wig; on which he went to a public house with 
them, where they told him that a friend of theirs had been robbed of such a wig, and 
they suspected him to be the robber. Powis saw through the artifice, and, calling the 
landlord, desired that a constable might be sent for to take the villains into custody; 
but the men immediately threw down their reckoning, and ran off in the utmost haste.
	Our adventurer, proceeding to London, changed his clothes, and took to his 
former practice of housebreaking; in which, however, he was remarkably 
unsuccessful. Strolling one night to the house where he had formerly been at 
Stockwell, he got in at the window, and stole a bottle of brandy, a groat coat, and 
some other articles; but the family being alarmed, he was pursued and taken.
	As be was known to the people of the house, they threatened to convey him to 
the ship; but be expressed so much dread at the consequence, that they conducted him 
to his father-in-law, whose humanity once more induced him to receive the returning 
prodigal with kindness.
	Powis now lived regularly at home about nine weeks, when, having received 
about a guinea as Christmas-box money, he got into company, and spent the whole; 
after which he renewed his former practices.
	Having concealed himself under some hay in a stable in Chancery Lane, be 
broke into a boarding-school adjoining to it, whence he stole some books and a 
quantity of linen: and, soon after this, he broke into the house of an attorney, and, 
getting into a garret, struck a light; but some of the family being alarmed, there was an 
outcry of 'Thieves!' A man ascending a ladder being observed by Powis, he attempted 
to break through the tiling; but, failing in this, the other cried 'There is the thief!' 
Terrified by these words, he got into a gutter, whence he dropped down to a 
carpenter's yard adjoining, but could get no farther.
	While he was in this situation, the carpenter, going into the yard with a candle, 
took him into custody, and lodged him in the roundhouse; but on the following day 
his father-in-law exerted himself so effectually, that the offence was forgiven, and he 
was once more taken home to the house of this ever-indulgent friend.
	After he had been three months at home, the father in-law was employed to do 
some business for Mr. Williams, a Welsh gentleman of fortune, who having brought 
his lady to London to lie in, she died in child-bed; and it was determined that she 
should be buried in Wales. Hereupon Powis's father-in-law was sent for to examine all 
the locks, &c. that the effects might be safe in the absence of Mr. Williams.
	Our youth, being employed as a journeyman in this business, found a box of 
linen that was too full, on which he took out some articles. In removing the linen he 
found a small box, remarkably heavy, which, on examination, appeared to contain 
diamonds, jewels, rings, a gold watch, and other articles, to the amount of more than 
200L., all which he stole, and put the box in its place. This being done, he called the 
maid to see that all was safe, and delivered her the key of the larger box.
	Being possessed of this booty, Powis consulted an acquaintance as to the 
method of disposing of it, who advised him to melt the gold, and throw the jewels into 
the Thames, This being agreed upon, the acquaintance kept the jewels; and the gold 
being sold for eleven guineas, Powis had seven of them, which he soon squandered 
away.
	About a fortnight after the effects were stolen Powis was apprehended on 
suspicion of the robbery, and committed to Newgate; and, being tried at the next 
sessions, was sentenced to be transported for seven years; the jury having given a 
verdict that he was guilty of stealing to the value of thirty-nine shillings.
	He lay in Newgate a considerable time; till at length his father-in-law, after 
repeated entreaties, and a promise of a total reformation of manners, made such 
interest, that he was burnt in the hand, and set at large.
	Yet again was this ungrateful boy taken under his parent's roof, where he 
continued about seven months; when, meeting with one of his dissolute companions, 
he spent all his money, and was then afraid to return home.
	He now refrained some time from acts of theft; and, taking lodgings in an alley 
in Fleet Street, subsisted by borrowing money of his acquaintance. Soon afterwards, 
however, he broke open a trunk at his lodgings, and stole some linen, which he 
pawned for five shillings and sixpence.
	On the next day the landlord charged him with the robbery; but, not intending 
to prosecute him, was content with recovering his linen from the pawnbrokers, and 
took Powis's word for making good the deficient money.
	In less than a week after the adjustment of this affair our young, but hardened, 
villain broke open the coffee-house in Chancery Lane which we have already 
mentioned, and stole a few articles, which produced him about thirty shillings: and 
soon afterwards he broke into the Chancery Office, where be stole two books, which 
he sold for half a crown.
	On the following evening he went again to the office, and hid himself under 
the staircase; but, being heard to cough by a man who had been left to watch, be was 
taken into custody, and conveyed to a tavern in the neighbourhood, where his father-
in-law attended, and pleaded so forcibly in his behalf, that he was permitted to go 
home with him for the night.
	On the following day some gentlemen came to examine him, when he denied 
the commission of a variety of crimes with which he had been charged; but the 
gentlemen, having consented to his escape for this time, advised him not to appear 
again in that neighbourhood, as the Masters in Chancery had given strict orders for 
prosecuting him.
	After receiving some good advice from his father-in-law, he was 
recommended to work with a smith in Milford Lane, in the Strand: but Powis had a 
brother who called upon him a few days afterwards, and told him that a warrant was 
issued to apprehend him for robbing the Chancery, which obliged him to abscond.
	Strolling one evening in the Spa Fields, near Islington, some constables 
apprehended him as a vagrant, and lodged him, with several others, in New Prison; 
and on the following day most of the prisoners were discharged by a magistrate, and 
Powis was ordered to be set at liberty; but, not having money to pay his fees, he was 
taken back to the prison, where he remained a few days longer, and was then set at 
liberty by the charity of a gentleman, who bade him 'thank God, and take care never to 
get into trouble again.'
	In a short time after his discharge he broke into the Earl of Peterborough's 
house at Chelsea, and stole some trifling articles from the kitchen, which he sold for 
four shillings; and on the following night he robbed another house in the same 
neighbourhood of some effects, which he sold for ten shillings.
	This trifling sum being soon spent, he broke open a house in Lincoln's Inn 
Fields, where he got a considerable quantity of money; and, to prevent persons who 
knew him from suspecting that be was the thief, he forged a letter, as coming from his 
grandfather in Yorkshire, purporting that he had sent him such a sum.
	In a short time afterwards, at a kind of ball given by one of his companions to 
celebrate his birthday, Powis fell in love with a girl who made one of the company.
	The girl paying no attention to his addresses, Powis waited on her mother, and, 
after some conversation with her, was permitted to pay his personal respects to the 
daughter, to whom he pretended that his grandfather in Yorkshire would leave him a 
large sum of money; and, in proof of what he said, he showed her some counterfeit 
letters, appearing to have the postmark on them.
	The girl made no objection to him as a husband; but said it would be prudent 
in him to visit his grandfather, and ask his consent to the match, which would 
contribute to her peace of mind. On this he left her, and broke open a house that 
evening, whence he stole a few things, which he sold for fifteen shillings, and, calling 
on her the next day, took his leave, as if preparing for his journey.
	His plan was to commit some robbery by which he might obtain a 
considerable sum, and then, concealing himself for some time, return to his mistress, 
and pretend that his grandfather had given him the money.
	Going to see 'The Beggars' Opera,' he was greatly shocked at the appearance 
of Macheath on the stage in fetters, and could not forbear reflecting what might he his 
own future fate; yet about a week afterwards he broke open a cook's shop, and stole 
some articles, the sale of which produced him a guinea.
	On the following day he called at Newgate, treated the prisoners to the amount 
of seven shillings, and, on his quitting the prison, met two girls whom he knew; and 
with them he went to Hampstead, where he treated them to the amount of twelve 
shillings and sixpence; so that only eighteen pence remained of his last ill-gotten 
guinea.
	On the following day Powis went to the Black Raven, in Fetter Lane, where he 
observed the landlord put some gold into a drawer, of which be determined, if 
possible, to possess himself. About midnight he went away, having first stolen the pin 
that fastened the cellar-window.
	Returning at two in the morning, he got into the cellar, and attempted to open 
the door of the tap room; but, failing in this, he was about to return by the way he had 
entered, when a watchman coming by, and seeing the window open, alarmed the 
family. Powis now escaped into a carpenter's yard, and hid himself: but the landlord 
coming down, and several persons attending, be was apprehended; not, however, till 
one person had run a sword through his leg, and another struck him a blow on the 
head that almost deprived him of his senses; circumstances of severity which could 
not be justified, as he made no resistance.
	The offender was lodged in the Compter for the present, and, being removed 
to Newgate, was brought to his trial at the Old Bailey, convicted of the burglary, and 
received sentence of death. The jury, considering the cruelty with which he had been 
treated, recommended him to mercy: however, the royal favour was not extended to 
him, as he had before been sentenced to transportation.
	When brought up to receive sentence, be begged to be represented as an object 
worthy of the royal lenity; but was told not to expect such indulgence. He likewise 
wrote to his sweetheart to exert her influence, which she promised, but could do 
nothing to serve him.
	He was hanged at Tyburn on the 9th of October, 1732, along with William 
Shelton, at the age of twenty-two years, after admonishing the spectators to take 
warning by his fatal end, and expressing the utmost detestation of the irregularities of 
his life.
	The case of this malefactor will afford a very striking lesson to youth. In the 
former part of his life we see the miserable situation of a strolling player; and surely 
the distresses he encountered will be deemed enough to terrify thoughtless young 
men, who are fond of what is called spouting, from engaging in this vagrant course of 
life.
	The terrors of Powis's conscience when be lay down to sleep under the hay-
rick show that there is no peace to the wicked. One self-approving hour, the 
consequence of having discharged our duty, must afford more solid satisfaction than 
whole months spent in that riot and debauchery which may be purchased with ill-
gotten wealth.
	Nothing, surely, can be equal to the goodness with which Powis was treated by 
his father-in-law. His kindness appears to have been almost without example, and 
what could scarcely have been expected even from a real parent.
	This offender, then, sinned against all advice, all warning, all indulgence: but 
we trust his fate will have a forcible effect on young people who may read this 
narrative. We hope it will, in a particular manner, teach them the necessity of duty to 
their parents; and that the only way to be happy in advanced life is to be virtuous and 
religious while they are young.


WILLIAM SHELTON 
Executed at Tyburn, October 9, 1732, for highway robbery.

	WILLIAM SHELTON was born of respectable parents near Cheshunt in 
Hertfordshire, and received a liberal education in the learned languages. At a proper 
age he was apprenticed to an apothecary at Enfield; but his master applied to his 
father to take him back at the end of two years, as his conduct was so irregular that he 
did not choose any further connection with him.
	In consequence hereof he was placed with an apothecary at Stoke Newington; 
and, though he still kept gay company, he served six years with a fair character.
	About this time he became violently enamoured of his mistress's sister, who 
was by no means insensible to his addresses. She lived in the family; but no person 
suspected their intimacy, till the mistress accidentally heard her sister freely represent 
to Shelton the disagreeable consequence that must arise from keeping bad company 
and late hours.
	Shelton's master and his wife both disapproved of the intended match, on 
account of his keeping too much gay company; and his own parents objected to it 
from the same reason, wishing him to acquire greater steadiness of mind before he 
married.
	When his seven years were complete, he took leave of the young lady with 
professions of lasting love; and his father having supplied him with money, he 
engaged in business, and was for some time greatly successful; but his immoderate 
attachment to pleasure lost him much of his business and many of his friends.
	He had not been long in trade before he became enamoured of a young lady, 
daughter of a widow in his neighbourhood; and having made an acquaintance with 
her, unknown to her mother, he conveyed her out of a back window of the house, and 
married her at the Fleet. So soon had he forgot his vows to the former lady!
	The father of the bride having been a citizen of London, her fortune had been 
deposited in the hands of the chamberlain, who readily paid it to the husband.
	Shelton was still in considerable business; but his attachment to company was 
such that his expenses exceeded his income; so that he grew daily poorer; and his 
father dying about this time, left all his fortune to his widow, for her life; so that 
Shelton had nothing to expect till after the death of his mother.
	He now made acquaintance with some people of abandoned character, and 
took to a habit of gaming, by which his circumstances became still more embarrassed, 
and he was obliged to decline business after he had followed it only two years.
	Thus distressed, he entered as surgeon on board a ship bound to Antigua, and 
was received with such singular tokens of respect by the inhabitants of the island, that 
he resolved to settle there as a surgeon, and write to England for his wife to come over 
to him; but an unfortunate circumstance prevented the carrying of this scheme into 
execution.
	In the island of Antigua it is customary to exercise the militia weekly, when 
the officers on duty treat their brethren in rotation, and invite what company they 
please. Mr. Shelton being invited by Colonel Ker, the latter gave a generous treat, and 
urged his friends to drink freely. On the approach of night, some of them would have 
gone home; but the colonel prevailed on them to stay till the next day, hinting that it 
might be dangerous to meet some negroes who had quitted the plantation.
	Shelton agreed, among, others, to stay: but he had not been long in bed, when 
the liquor he had drank occasioned the most excruciating pain in his bowels. The next 
morning he took some medicines to abate the pain, and the end was answered for the 
present; but he determined to embark for England, as he thought he felt the symptoms 
of an approaching consumption.
	Hereupon he sailed for his native country, and arrived to the surprise of his 
friends, who had been taught to expect that he would continue in Antigua. They, 
however, advised him to settle at Buntingford, in Hertfordshire, where there was a 
vacancy occasioned by the death or an apothecary. Shelton, having inquired into the 
affair, and finding no prospect worth his notice, his wife's mother persuaded him to 
take a house at Brassin, a village near Buntingford, intimating that she would live 
with him, and be at the expense of housekeeping. This proposal was accepted; but 
when the leases were drawn, the old lady refused to execute them, so that Shelton was 
obliged to abandon his agreeable prospect, in a way that appeared not very reputable 
to himself.
	Distressed in mind, and not knowing how to support himself, he determined to 
commence highwayman; and having hired a horse, and furnished himself with pistols, 
he rode to Finchley Common; but after looking out some hours, and meeting with no 
booty there, he returned towards London, in his way to which he took about thirty 
shillings from four ladies, whom he stopped in a coach; and he obtained three 
shillings and sixpence from a gentleman he met on the road.
	He now put on a mask; and, thus disguised, robbed the passengers in three 
stage-coaches on Epping Forest of their watches and money: Some persons on 
horseback immediately pursued him, and were very near him at Waltham Abbey, but 
taking a different road, he went round by Cheshunt, and escaped to London, where he, 
the next day, heard that his pursuers had galloped after him to Enfield.
	The watches he sold to a Jew, and having spent the money, he rode out to 
Hounslow Heath, where he demanded a gentleman's money, and, after some 
hesitation on the part of the latter, robbed him of thirty-two guineas and some silver. 
This done, he crossed the Thames to Richmond, where he dined, and afterwards 
stopped two ladies, in a coach, on Putney Common, but got no booty from them, as 
they had just before been robbed by another highwayman.
	On the same evening he robbed a Quaker of nine pounds; and, early on the 
following morning, he stopped the Northampton stage, and robbed the passengers of 
twenty-seven pounds. The reason for these rapid robberies was, that he had a debt to 
discharge which he had contracted at the gaming table, which being done, he appeared 
among his former companions as before.
	Soon after this he rode towards Chiswick, in the hope of meeting a colonel in 
the army but as the gentleman knew him, he was apprehensive, of being recollected 
by his voice, though he wore a mask. The colonel seeing a man masked coming 
forward, produced a pistol, and on the other coming up, fired at him, and grazed the 
skin of his horse's shoulder. Shelton now fired, and wounded the colonel's horse, on 
which the colonel discharged his other pistol, but without effect. Hereupon the 
highwayman demanded his money, which having received, to the amount of about 
50l., he took a circuit round the country, and came into London at night.
	On the week following this robbery, he obtained a booty of ten guineas, some 
silver, and two gold watches, on Finchley Common; but, being pursued by some 
gentlemen on horseback, he concealed himself on Enfield Chace, and having eluded 
his pursuers, he rode to London, but in his way robbed a gentleman and lady of 
between thirty and forty shillings, on Muswell Hill.
	On the following evening he took a ride, but did not rob any person; but; on 
his return through Islington, he heard somebody cry out, "Stop the highwayman!" On 
which he rode hastily up a lane, where his horse had nearly stuck fast in a slough; but, 
getting through it, he stopped in a field, and saw his pursuers waiting in expectation of 
him. He, therefore, made a circle, and got down Goswell-street, to the end of Old-
street, where he again heard the cry of, "A highwayman!" on which he rode to Dog-
House-Bar, and escaped by the way of Moorfields.
	Soon after this he rode to Enfield Chace, and putting on a mask, robbed one of 
the northern stages, while the driver was watering his horses at a pond. Some men 
who were playing at skittles seeing this robbery, surrounded his horse; but, on his 
firing a pistol, they ran away, and he pursued his journey to London.
	Having one day committed a robbery on the Hertford road, he was returning to 
town, when he overtook two farmers, who had been drinking at an alehouse till they 
were valiant, and were wishing to meet Mr. Shelton, whom they would certainly take: 
and they wondered how people could permit him to proceed unmolested. On which 
Shelton presented his pistol, and they delivered their money, with every sign of fear; 
the money was but trifling, which he returned, laughing at them for their assumed 
courage
	His next robbery was on Finchley common, where he took several watches, 
and sixteen pounds, from the company in the Northampton stage; and the name of 
Shelton was now become so eminent, that many other robbers courted his 
acquaintance; among whom were two men who had formed a design of robbing the 
turnpike-man on Stamford Hill, but had not resolution to carry their plan into 
execution.
	This design was no sooner mentioned to Shelton, than he agreed to be 
concerned: whereupon they went on foot from London at ten o'clock at night; but 
before they reached the spot, Shelton's companions relented, and would go no farther; 
on which they came to town, in their way to which they robbed a gentleman of a few 
shillings; but Shelton determined to have no farther connection with these people.
	His next robbery was on two gentlemen in a chaise, both of them armed with 
pistols, in the road from Hounslow, from whom he took 16l. and soon after this, being 
destitute of cash, and determined to make a bold attempt, he robbed several coaches 
one evening, and acquired booty of 90l. exclusive of rings and watches.
	In consequence of these repeated robberies, a proclamation was issued for 
taking Shelton into custody, wherein was given a minute description of his person; on 
which he concealed himself some time in Herefordshire; but he had not long been 
there, before a person who recollected him informed a neighbouring magistrate, on 
which he was taken into custody, and conveyed to London.
	He was tried at the next sessions at the Old Bailey, for several robberies in 
Middlesex, and being convicted, he was sentenced to die.
	While in prison he affected great gaiety of disposition, and was fond of 
entertaining his visitors with the history of his exploits. At times indeed, he would be 
more serious; but he soon recurred to his former volatility.
	On the arrival of the warrant for his execution, he seemed greatly agitated, and 
it was remarked that he shed some tears; but having recourse to the bottle, he 
dissipated those ideas that had given him uneasiness. At the place of execution he 
refused to perform the customary devotions.


ISAAC AND THOMAS HALLAM 
Murderers and Highwaymen, hanged in Lincolnshire, 20th of February, 
1733, upon the Spot where they committed their Crime

	ISAAC AND THOMAS HALLAM were brothers, who had long, with too 
much success, carried on a series of daring robberies, and perpetrated cruel murders, 
insomuch that Government offered a reward for their apprehension. They were at 
length taken, and charged with the murder of William Wright, a youth of only 
eighteen years of age, who was found in a post-chaise at Faldingworth Gate, near 
Market Rasen, in Lincolnshire, with his head almost severed from his body, covered 
over with the seat-cloth, and his pockets rifled. In consequence of the proclamation, 
extraordinary search was made after these desperate depredators, but they baffled 
their pursuers nearly a month. At length they were taken into custody, and committed 
to the jail of the city of Lincoln.
	Among their various outrages, they, in mere wantonness, forced a post-boy to 
blow his horn, then told him he had sounded his own death-peal, and immediately cut 
his throat, as well as that of his horse, and the bodies of the man and the beast were 
next morning found close together. From this detestable barbarity, the post-boys of 
Lincoln mustered with horns on their entrance into Lincoln, and greeted them with 
their loudest blasts; whereupon, now stung with remorse, one of them was observed to 
weep.
	They were convicted of the murders of William Wright and Thomas Gardner; 
and afterwards confessed that they committed, in company with each other, sixty-
three robberies and one murder, exclusive of that for which they were condemned to 
die. Yet did these shocking offenders attempt to evade their punishment. They 
procured a case-knife, which they notched like a saw, in order to cut off their irons; 
and then, with a spike-nail, they began digging through the wall of their prison; but 
were detected. In passing to the place of execution of Isaac, which was the spot where 
they had murdered the post-boy, this unfortunate brother fell into violent agonies and 
perturbation of mind. At the gallows, there being no clergyman to attend them, he 
called to one of the spectators to assist him in his devotions, which the good man 
readily complied with, and he prayed with much fervency. Thomas was ordered to be 
carried farther, to the place where they had murdered Mr Wright, but on his seeing his 
brother turned off, and struggling with life, he shrieked out in a dreadful manner. He 
then was drawn to Faldingworth Gate, where he died in dreadful agonies of mind. 
This execution took place on the 20th of February, 1733.


SARAH MALCOLM 
Executed for the Murder of a Wealthy Old Lady in the Inns of Court, 7th of 
March, 1733

  
The Execution of Sarah Malcolm

	THIS unhappy young woman, who at the period of her death was only twenty-
two years of age, was born of respectable parents, in the county of Durham, in the 
year 1711; but her father having, through his extravagance, spent the whole of the 
property which he possessed, she was at length compelled to resort to what is 
commonly called servitude, for the means of subsistence. In this condition for several 
years she conducted herself extremely well; but at length, being employed at the 
Black Horse, a low public-house in Boswell Court, near Temple Bar, which had been 
constantly the notorious resort of persons of bad character, she formed connections of 
no very creditable class, by whom she was led on to her ruin. Having at length quitted 
the Black Horse she was recommended as a laundress to take charge of chambers in 
the Inns of Court; and amongst those for whom she there worked was a Mrs Lydia 
Duncomb, a lady nearly eighty years of age, who occupied a set of chambers in the 
Temple; Elizabeth Harrison, aged sixty, and Ann Price, aged seventeen, living with 
her in the capacity of servants. This lady being reputed to be very rich, a scheme was 
formed by Sarah Malcolm of robbing her chambers; her object being, it was supposed, 
by the acquisition of wealth, to make herself a fitting match for a young man named 
Alexander, who she hoped would marry her.
	The night of Saturday, 3rd of February, 1733, was fixed upon by her for the 
commission of the robbery, and Martha Tracy, a woman of light character, her 
paramour, Alexander, and his brother, were to be her assistants in the execution of the 
project. Malcolm, by means of her acquaintance with the chambers, obtained 
possession of the keys of the outer door in the course of the day, and at night the 
robbery was effected, but with it the murder also of Mrs Duncomb and her servants 
Harrison and Price. On the Sunday morning some surprise was excited on its being 
observed that none of Mrs Duncomb's family was to be seen; and at length, as the day 
advanced, great alarm was exhibited, and suspicions were entertained that all was not 
right. Mrs Love, Mrs Rhymer and Mrs Oliphant, friends of Mrs Duncomb, assembled 
in the afternoon at the door of her chambers, in obedience to an invitation which they 
had received to dinner; but being unable to gain admittance by knocking, they at 
length determined to force an entrance. One of the windows was resorted to for this 
purpose, to which access was obtained from a neighbouring set of chambers; and then, 
on Mrs Oliphant going into Mrs Duncomb's bedroom, the old lady was found there 
strangled, while her servant Harrison was discovered in an adjoining apartment also 
strangled, and the girl Price was seen lying on her bed with her throat cut from ear to 
ear. The news of this diabolical crime soon became published through the 
neighbourhood; and on the chambers of the deceased being examined it was found 
that they had been stripped of all the valuables which could be easily carried away, 
consisting of money, silver and plate, and other articles of a similar description. In the 
course of the day some circumstances transpired tending to fix the suspicions of the 
police upon the woman Malcolm; and, upon her lodgings being searched, a silver 
tankard, the handle of which was covered with blood, was found concealed in a close-
stool. She was in consequence taken into custody, and having undergone an 
examination on the following day, before the magistrates, she was committed to 
Newgate. Upon her entering the jail she was searched by Johnson, one of the 
turnkeys, who took from her a considerable sum of money in gold and silver coin, and 
she admitted to him that it was Mrs Duncomb's. "But," added she, "I'll make you a 
present of it if you will say nothing of the matter." The jailer took possession of the 
money, but produced it to his superior officers, acquainting them with the 
conversation which had passed.
	In the course of the subsequent imprisonment of the unhappy woman she 
frequently conversed with Johnson upon the subject of the murder, and admitted that 
she had arranged the robbery, although she declared that she had nothing to do with 
putting Mrs Duncomb and her servants to death. She asserted that two men and a 
woman were concerned with her, and that she watched on the stairs while they entered 
the chambers. At her trial, when called on for her defence, she made a similar 
declaration, and stated that Tracy and the two Alexanders were her companions; but 
she still persisted in her allegation of her ignorance of the murder until it was 
discovered by Mrs Oliphant on the day after it was committed. A verdict of guilty 
was, however, returned, and the wretched woman was ordered for execution.
	After her conviction she evinced the most sincere penitence, but still persisted 
in her refusal to confess herself guilty of the whole crime with which she was 
charged. Upon the bellman coming to her in the customary manner she attended 
anxiously to what he said, and at the conclusion of his address threw him a shilling to 
buy wine.
	On the morning of execution, 7th of March, 1733, she appeared more 
composed than she had been for some time past, and seemed to join in prayers with 
the ordinary, and another gentleman who attended, with much sincerity. When in the 
cart she wrung her hands and wept most bitterly.
	At the place of execution, near Fetter Lane, she behaved with the utmost 
devoutness and resignation to the Divine will; but when the ordinary, in his prayers, 
recommended her soul to God she fainted, and with much difficulty recovered her 
senses. On the cart driving off she turned towards the Temple, crying out, "Oh, my 
mistress, my mistress! I wish I could see her!" and then, casting her eyes towards 
heaven, called upon Christ to receive her soul.


WILLIAM ALCOCK 
Who first abandoned, and then murdered, his wife. Executed at 
Northampton, March 9, 1733.

	This unnatural and cruel man was an inhabitant of the town of Bourn, in 
Lincolnshire. He had been married only two years, when he left his wife, who was 
afflicted with the palsy, giving out that the cause of absence was in consequence of 
having found her in bed with another man. He travelled to Colchester, married again, 
and set-up his business, that of a miller, in, which he was successful. He employed a 
man of the name of Peck, as his assistant, but upon some words arising between them, 
Alcock discharged him, without suffering him to complete the job he had in hand. 
Peck replied, "I'll do as good a job for you; for I have heard you have a wife in 
Lincolnshire, and I'll travel the kingdom over, till I find her, and send her to you." 
Upon this he instantly set out, and bent his course in order to fulfil his threat. He 
enquired at every town he came to in Lincolnshire, until he actually found Mrs. 
Alcock. In effecting this, he spent nearly two years; and to defray his expenses, he 
occasionally stopped for a few days to work: and when his wages were expended in 
his travels, he worked again; thus persevering until he had accomplished his 
determined purpose. The parish officers of Bourn, who had the maintenance of the 
deserted woman to provide, received Peck's information, and despatched two of the 
parishioners to Colchester, with whom Alcock entered into a compromise, on the 
following conditions: to pay down twenty pounds, and within a month thirty pounds 
more; and to fetch away his wife from Bourn. He accordingly arrived there on the 22d 
of August, 1732, on a good horse, and a new pillion for his wife to ride on behind 
him. He, however, tried every means to induce the officers to keep her, offering a 
yearly sum sufficient for that purpose, and observed that, "she was so disagreeable to 
him, that he would rather be hanged, than take her again."
	Finding his offers all rejected, he set off with her on the 24th, and on the next 
day the body of the unfortunate woman was discovered in a ditch under a willow-tree, 
near Pilsgate, in the parish of Barnack, in Northamptonshire, and about eight miles 
from Bourn. It appeared that she had been strangled with a short cord, which but just 
met about her neck; and the pillion was found a little distance from her body. The 
murderer immediately proceeded to Colchester; and on the 28th was apprehended by 
officers from Bourn, and the next day fully committed to gaol.
	Though convicted on the clearest evidence, yet this obdurate man, even to the 
last moment of his existence, denied the justice of his sentence; and his behaviour, 
daring the short interval allowed prisoners to make their peace with God, evinced the 
most shocking depravity. He constantly refused the consolations of devotion, and paid 
no attention to the warnings of a clergyman, who at length desisted from farther 
exhortations, On the morning of his execution, he drank to intoxication; yet, on 
coming out of the prison, he sent for a pint of wine; which being refused him by the 
sheriff, he would not get into the cart which waited to convey him to execution, until 
the money given for that purpose was returned to him. On the road to the gallows he 
sung part of the old song of Robin Hood, adding to each verse, the chorus of derry 
down, &c. At intervals he swore, kicked, and spurned, at any person who touched the 
cart. When tied up to the fatal tree, he kicked off his shoes, to avoid a well known 
proverb; and being told by a person in the cart with him, and who wished, thus late, to 
reclaim him, that he had much better read and repent, than thus vilely swear and sing, 
he struck the book out of this humane man's hands, damned the spectators, and called 
for wine. During the singing of psalms, and reading of prayers, this monster was 
employed in talking and nodding to his acquaintance; telling some to remember him; 
others to drink to his good journey; and with his last words, he inveighed against the 
injustice of his case.
	He was hanged at Northampton, amid the groans and detestation of many 
thousand spectators.


WILLIAM GORDON 
Highwayman, on whose body, after execution, an experiment was made to 
bring him to life

	THIS malefactor was brought up to the business of a butcher; but for twenty 
years previous to his execution, had been a reputed highwayman. He was tried at 
Chelmsford for a desperate attack and robbery on Epping-forest, but escaped 
conviction by proving an alibi. He brought a number of evidences to prove that he 
was in Ireland when this robbery was committed.
	William Gordon was convicted at the Old Bailey, of a highway robbery on Mr. 
Peters, under-treasurer. of the Temple, between Knightsbridge and Hyde-park corner, 
whom he robbed of his hat, wig, watch, and a gold ring; and, being at the time in a 
state of intoxication, he was soon apprehended, and had no other plea to offer, but that 
he was drunk.
	What rendered this criminal's case sufficiently remarkable to find a place in 
these volumes, was a report circulated that he had cut his throat, just before he was 
carried out to execution, and that a surgeon sewed it up. The cause of this report was 
as follows:
	Mr. Chovot, a surgeon, having, by frequent experiments on dogs, discovered, 
that opening the windpipe, would prevent the fatal consequences of being hanged by 
the neck, communicated it to Gordon, who consented to the experiment being made 
on him. Accordingly, pretending to take his last leave of him, the surgeon secretly 
made an incision in his windpipe; and the effect this produced on the malefactor was, 
that when he stopt his mouth, nostrils, and ears, air sufficient to prolong life, issued 
from the cavity. When he was hanged, he was observed to retain life, after the others 
executed with him were dead. His body, after hanging three quarters of an hour, was 
cut down, and carried to a house in Edgware road., where Chovot was in attendance, 
who immediately opened a vein, which bled freely, and soon after the culprit opened 
his mouth and groaned. He, however, died; but it was the opinion of those present at 
the experiment, that had he been cut down only five minutes. sooner, life would have 
returned. He suffered along with James Ward and William Keys, for a highway, and 
with William Norman, for a street robbery, on the 27th of April, 1733.
	A month after the execution of Gordon, John Davis, who had frequently 
robbed in company with him, was brought to execution on the same tree from which 
Gordon was hanged. Davis feigned himself sick, and entreated the sheriff that he 
might not be tied in the cart on his road to Tyburn, and which was humanely granted. 
When the executioner was fastening the rope round the neck of John Jones, another 
malefactor to be then executed, Davis jumped out of the cart, made his way through 
the astonished spectators, and ran over two fields; but being knocked down by a 
countryman; he was brought back, tied up, and hanged. He confessed having 
committed various daring robberies, along with the notorious old offender Gordon.
	[Note: Alibi: This is a common and dangerous defence, yet it seldom succeeds, 
from the facility with which the accused can suborn men, hardened like themselves in 
scenes of iniquity, to swear the prisoner, at the time when the robbery had been stated 
to have been committed, was elsewhere. Too often, however, have prosecutors erred 
in the identity of the persons by whom they had been plundered; in which case, 
nothing short of a. well substantiated alibi can impeach their evidence.
	The writer of this article, excited by the case of two unfortunate young men, 
paid his half-crown (a most disgraceful practice) for a seat in the gallery of the Old 
Bailey, in order to witness their trial, and to view the effects of an alibi, which he 
heard would be set up against the evidence of a gentleman of title, and filling a high 
situation in the law. The prosecutor, in this case, was Sir Thomas Davenport; and the 
accused, — Smith, who kept the Assembly Rooms, at Kentish Town, near London, at 
the time of his apprehension; and — Brown, the son of a widow, the landlady of a 
reputable public-house, in Chapel-street, Bedford-row.
	In the year 1785, these innocent young men were brought to the bar of that 
awful tribunal, in heavy irons, charged with robbing on the highway, Sir Thomas and 
Lady Davenport. Sir Thomas, his head covered with his legal wig, on the top of which 
was the black patch of the King's Serjeants of the Court of Common Pleas, swore, that 
on a certain evening, a few weeks before, at about twilight, on the Uxbridge road, the 
prisoners at the bar, one of them mounted on a brown and the other on a grey horse, 
stopped his carriage, in which were his lady and himself, and putting them in fear of 
their lives, presented pistols, and demanded his money, which he immediately gave 
them. Mr. Garrow, then a young counsel, acting in behalf of the prisoners, with much 
diffidence to the learned Serjeant, cross-examined Sir Thomas, observing, that human 
nature was liable to mistake objects injuring them, especially at the time he was 
robbed, and wished him to be positive as to the identity of the prisoners. The witness, 
upon this, turned round, and fully viewed them, saying, "As far as a man can swear to 
another, the prisoners at the bar robbed me, as I have described."
	Lady Davenport was next called, and she also swore to the prisoners. Then 
came forward the coachman and footman of Sir Thomas, who corroborated the 
evidence of their master and mistress.
	Two horses, of the colour described to have been rode by the highwaymen, 
were brought to the court yard of the Old Bailey, and sworn to be the same, according 
to the best of the belief of the witnesses, on which the prisoners were mounted.
	This was the evidence on the part of the crown, a case so strong, that every 
casual spectator supposed it would justly warrant the jury in finding the accused 
guilty. Being called upon for their defence, they handed up a written statement of their 
case, the import of which was, that on the evening of the supposed robbery, they were 
at their respective homes. To substantiate this plea, a number of respectable 
inhabitants of Kentish-town deposed, that the day of the robbery sworn to, was the 
anniversary dinner of a club, of which they were members, held at the house of the 
prisoner Smith; that be was attending upon them from the time of dinner until 
midnight, and never out of their club-room a single half hour at a time. Four or five 
had already sworn to this, adducing the strongest circumstances to corroborate their 
testimony, and many more were behind, ready to do the same, when the court 
interposed, by observing that the alibi, respecting Smith, was clearly substantiated. In 
behalf of Brown proof was also adduced, that he was, on the same evening, serving in 
his mother's barroom.
	Judge Heath, in summing up the case, observed, that had Sir Thomas remained 
in court, he would himself have been convinced, that he was mistaken in the identity 
of the prisoners. No imputation, however, could be, thrown upon the evidence farther, 
than that all of them were too positive. Sir Thomas, doubtless convinced they were the 
men who robbed him, was followed by his lady and their servants; and when we are 
told that Smith and Brown were intimate friends, being both publicans, and that they 
had sometimes rode out together on horses similar to those sworn to, and which were 
actually their own property, there is some reason to excuse the mistake; but it should 
be a most serious caution to prosecutors of men, charged with a crime which affects 
life, in giving their evidence of the identity of the persons accused.
	These young men had borne irreproachable characters, and the miseries 
entailed upon them in this world, arising from their being thus innocently arraigned, is 
the most melancholy part of this note. Smith sunk into despondency, and soon died. 
Brown, also stung with shame, left his aged mother, and went abroad. Had they borne 
up against their misfortune, a very few years, their minds might have been fully set at 
ease; for the robbers of Sir Thomas Davenport were convicted of another offence, and 
in the cells of Newgate, confessed that they, mounted on the same coloured horses, 
were the men who robbed him!!!


CAPTAIN JOHN PORTEOUS 
Convicted of murder, but murdered by the mob

  
Porteous lynched by a mob

	Few cases have excited more attention than that of Captain Porteous, who was 
convicted of murder and sentenced to death but who having rendered himself 
obnoxious to the people, was dragged out of prison, and killed by an enraged mob. 
The magistrates of Edinburgh, the town in which the riot took place, were fined for 
neglect of their duty, and rendered incapable of acting again in any judicial capacity, 
and the royal proclamation was issued, in which a large reward was offered for the 
apprehension of the murderers, but from such an immense mob as that which seized 
Porteous, it was impossible to select any individuals.
	John Porteous was born of indigent parents, near the city Edinburgh, who 
bound him apprentice to a tailor, with who after the expiration of his apprenticeship, 
he worked as journeyman.
	Porteous was soon noticed by several reputable gentlemen, as young man of 
good address and fine accomplishments, and one whom they entertained a desire to 
serve.
	It happened at this time, that a gentleman who had been lord provost of 
Edinburgh, growing tired of his mistress, wished to disengage himself from her in a 
genteel manner: and knowing Porteous to be very poor he proposed his taking her off 
his hands by making her his wife. When the proposition was first made to the lady she 
rejected in with much disdain, thinking it a great degradation to match with 
journeyman tailor; but on the gentleman's promising her a fortune of five hundred 
pounds, she consented, and they were married accordingly. Porteous now commenced 
master, and met with good success for some time; but being much addicted to 
company, he neglected his business; by which means he lost many of his customers. 
His wife, in consequence, was obliged to apply to her old friend the provost, to make 
some other provision for them.
	In Edinburgh there are three companies of men, of twenty-five each, who are 
employed to keep the peace, and take up all offenders, whom they keep in custody till 
examined by a magistrate. An officer is appointed to each of these companies, whom 
they style captain, with a salary of L.80 a year, and a suit of scarlet uniform, which in 
that part of the world is reckoned very honourable.
	A vacancy happening by the death of one of these captains, the provost 
immediately appointed his friend Porteous to fill up the place; who being now 
advanced to honour, forgot all his former politeness, for which he was so much 
esteemed when a tradesman; and assumed all the consequence of a man in authority.
	If a riot happened in the city, Porteous was generally made choice of by the 
magistrates to suppress it, he being a man of resolute spirit and unacquainted with 
fear. On these occasions he would generally exceed the bounds of his commission, 
and would treat the delinquents with the utmost cruelty, by knocking them down with 
his musket, and frequently breaking legs and arms.
	If sent to quell a disturbance in a house of ill fame, notwithstanding he was a 
most abandoned debauchee himself, he would take pleasure in exposing the characters 
of all those he found there, thereby destroying the peace of many families: he would 
treat the unhappy prostitutes with the greatest inhumanity, and even drag them to a 
prison, though many of them had been reduced by himself.
	Amongst the many instances of cruelty he committed, we shall mention the 
following, because it procured him the universal hatred of the people in that city: A 
vacancy happening in the lectureship of a neighbouring church, two young gentlemen 
were candidates; and having each an equal number of votes, the dispute was referred 
to the presbytery; who declared in favour of Dawson. The other candidate, Mr 
Wotherspoon, appealed to the synod, who reversed the order of the presbytery. As the 
parishioners were much exasperated, and a tumult being apprehended at the church on 
the day Mr Wotherspoon was to preach his first sermon, Porteous was ordered there to 
keep the peace, but finding, on his arrival, Mr. Dawson had got possession of the 
pulpit, he went up the steps without the least ceremony, seized him by the collar, and 
dragged him down like a thief. In consequence of the wounds he received at this time, 
Mr D. died a few weeks after.
	Mr Wotherspoon coming in at the time of the affray, Mr. Dawson's friends 
were so enraged, that they immediately fell on him, whom they beat in such a terrible 
manner, that he also died about the same time as Mr Dawson.
Thus the lives of two amiable young gentlemen were sacrificed to the brutality of this 
inhuman monster. Many men, women, and children, were also much wounded in the 
affray; yet this wretch escaped unpunished: no notice being taken of the many 
instances of his barbarity.
	Nothing gave more pleasure to this fellow than his being employed to quell 
riots, which, to the disgrace of the magistrates he was too much encouraged in. On 
these occasions he never wanted an opportunity of exercising his savage disposition. 
Smuggling was so much practised in Scotland at that time, that no laws could restrain 
it. The smugglers assembled in large bodies, so that the revenue officers could not 
attack them without endangering their lives.
	The most active person in striving to suppress these unlawful practices was Mr 
Stark, collector for the county of Fife, who being informed that one Andrew Wilson 
had a large quantity of contraband goods at his house, persuaded a number of men to 
accompany him; and they seized the goods, and safely lodged them (as they thought) 
in the Custom-House, but Wilson being man of enterprising spirit, went in company 
with one Robertson, and some more of his gang, to the Custom-House, when breaking 
open the doors, they recovered their goods, which they brought off in carts, in 
defiance of all opposition.
	Mr Stark hearing that such a daring insult had been committed, dispatched an 
account thereof to the Barons of the Exchequer who immediately applying to the Lord 
Justice Clark, his lordship issued his warrant to the sheriff of Fife, commanding him 
to assemble all the people in his jurisdiction to seize the delinquents and replace the 
goods. In consequence of the above order, many were apprehended, but all discharged 
again for want of evidence, except Wilson and Robertson, who were both found guilty 
and sentenced to die.
	A custom prevailed in Scotland at that time, of taking the condemned 
criminals to church every Sunday, under the care of three or four of the city guards. 
The above two criminals were accordingly taken to one of the churches on the Sunday 
before they were to suffer; when, just getting within the door, Wilson (though 
handcuffed) assisted in his companion's escape, by seizing hold of one soldier with his 
teeth, and keeping the others from turning upon him, while he cried out to Robertson 
to run.
	Robertson accordingly took to his heels, and the streets being crowded with 
people going to church, he passed uninterrupted, and got out of one of the city gates 
just as they were going to shut it: a custom constantly observed during divine service. 
The city being now alarmed, Porteous was immediately dispatched in search of him, 
but all in vain, as Robertson met with a friend who knocked off his handcuffs, and 
procured him a horse; and the same evening got on board a vessel at Dunbar, which 
landed him safe in Holland.
	He was living in the year 1756, and kept a public-house with great credit, near 
the bridge at Rotterdam.
	On the following Wednesday a temporary gallows was erected in the grass-
market, for the execution of Wilson, who was ordered to be conducted there by fifty 
men, under the command of Porteous.
	Porteous being apprehensive that an attempt would be made to rescue the 
prisoner, represented to the provost the necessity there was for soldiers to be drawn up 
ready to preserve the peace. On which five companies of the Welsh fusiliers, 
commanded by a major, were ordered to be in readiness in the lawn-market, near the 
place of execution.
	No disturbance arising, the prisoner finished his devotions, ascended the 
ladder, was turned off, and continued hanging the usual time; at the expiration of 
which, the hangman going up the ladder to cut him down, a stone struck him on the 
nose, and caused it to bleed. This stone was immediately followed by many others, at 
which Porteous was so much exasperated, that he instantly called out to his men 'Fire 
and be damned'; discharging his own piece at the same time, and shooting a young 
man, who was apprentice to a confectioner, dead on the spot.
	Some of the soldiers more humanely fired over the heads of the people; but 
unfortunately killed two or three who were looking out at the windows. Others of the 
soldiers wantonly fired amongst the feet of the mob, by which many were so disabled 
as to be afterwards obliged to suffer amputation.
	Porteous now endeavoured to draw off his men, as the mob grew exceedingly 
outrageous, throwing stones with everything else they could lay their hands on, and 
continuing to press on the soldiers; on which Porteous, with two of his men, turned 
about and fired, killing three more of the people, which amounted to nine in the whole 
that were left dead upon the spot; and many wounded.
	A serjeant was sent by the major of the Welsh fusiliers to inquire into the 
cause of the disturbance, but the mob was so outrageous that he could gain no 
intelligence. Porteous, being assisted by the Welsh fusiliers, at last conducted his men 
to the guard, when, being sent for by the provost, he passed a long examination, and 
was committed to prison in order to take his trial for murder.
	On the 6th of July, 1736, the trial came on before the lords of the justiciary, 
previous to which Porteous made a judicial confession that the people were killed as 
mentioned in the indictments; but pleaded self-defence. His counsel then stated the 
following point of law to be determined by the judges, previous to the jury being 
charged with the prisoner: 'Whether a military officer with soldiers under his 
command, who fires, or orders his men to fire, when assaulted by the populace, is not 
acting consistently with the nature of self-defence, according to the laws of civilised 
nations?'
	The counsel being ordered to plead to the question by the court, they 
pronounced, as their opinion, 'That if it was proved that Captain Porteous either fired 
a gun, or caused one or more to be fired, by which any person or persons was or were 
killed, and if the said firing happened without orders from a magistrate properly 
authorised, then it would be murder in the eye of the law.'
	Thus the question being decided against him, and the jury impanelled, forty-
four witnesses were examined for and against the prosecution.
	The prisoner being now called on for his defence, his counsel insisted that the 
magistrates had ordered him to support the execution of Wilson, and repel force by 
force, being apprehensive of a rescue; that powder and ball had been given them for 
the said purpose, with orders to load their pieces.
	They insisted also, that he only meant to intimidate the people by threats, and 
actually knocked down one of his own men for presenting his piece; that finding the 
men would not obey orders, he drew off as many as he could; that he afterwards heard 
a firing in the rear, contrary to his orders. That in order to know who had fired he 
would not suffer their pieces to be cleaned till properly inspected, and that he never 
attempted to escape, though he had the greatest opportunity, and might have effected 
it with the utmost ease.
	They farther insisted, that admitting some excesses had been committed, it 
could not amount to murder, as he was in the lawful discharge of his duty, and that it 
could not be supposed to be done with premeditated malice.
	In answer to this the counsel for the crown argued, that the trust reposed in the 
prisoner ceased when the execution was over; that he was then no longer an officer 
employed for that purpose for which the fire-arms had been loaded, and that the 
reading the riot act only could justify their firing, in case a rescue had actually been 
attempted.
	The prisoner's counsel replied, that the magistrates, whose duty it was to have 
read the act, had deserted the soldiery, and took refuge in a house for their own 
security, and that it was hard for men to suffer themselves to be knocked on the head 
when they had lawful weapons put into their hands to defend themselves.
	The charge being delivered to the jury, they retired for a considerable time, 
when they brought him in guilty, and he received sentence of death.
	The king being then at Hanover, and much interest being made to save the 
prisoner, the queen, by the advice of her council, granted a respite till his Majesty's 
return to England. The respite was only procured one week before his sentence was to 
be put in execution, of which, when the populace were informed, such a scheme of 
revenge was meditated as is perhaps unprecedented.
	On the 7th of September, 1736, between nine and ten in the evening, a large 
body of men entered the city of Edinburgh, and seized the arms belonging to the 
guard; they then patrolled the streets, crying out, 'All those who dare avenge innocent 
blood, let them come here.' They then shut the gates and placed guards at each.
	The main body of the mob, all disguised, marched in the mean time to the 
prison; when finding some difficulty in breaking open the doors with hammers, they 
immediately set fire to it; taking great care that the flames should not spread beyond 
their proper bounds. The outer door was hardly consumed before they rushed in, and, 
ordering the keeper to open the door of the captain's apartment, cried out, 'Where is 
the villain, Porteous?' He replied, 'Here I am, what do you want with me?' To which 
they answered, that they meant to hang him in the Grass Market, the place where he 
had shed so much innocent blood.
	His expostulations were all in vain, they seized him by the legs and arms, and 
dragged him instantly to the place of execution.
	On their arrival, they broke open a shop to find a rope suitable to their 
purpose, which they immediately fixed round his neck, then throwing the other end 
over a dyer's pole, hoisted him up; when he, endeavouring to save himself, fixed his 
hands between the halter and his neck, which being observed by some of the mob, one 
of them struck him with an axe, which obliging him to quit his hold, they soon put an 
end to his life.
	When they were satisfied he was dead they immediately dispersed to their 
several habitations, unmolested themselves, and without molesting anyone else.
	Such was the fate of Captain John Porteous, a man possessed of qualifications 
which, had they been properly applied, might have rendered him an honourable and 
useful servant of his country. His undaunted spirit and invincible courage would have 
done honour to the greatest hero of antiquity. But being advanced to power, he 
became intoxicated with pride, and instead of being the admiration of his fellow 
citizens, he was detested and hated by all who knew him. The fate of this unhappy 
man, it is hoped, will he a caution to those who are in power not to abuse it; but, by a 
humane as well as diligent discharge of their duty, to render themselves worthy 
members of society.


JOHN COLLINS 
Executed for murdering Jane Upcot, and exposing her head on a spike, 1737

	THIS man of blood lived in a village called Harledown, near Exeter, and was 
by trade a thatcher. He had kept company with a young woman named Jane Upcot, 
and who received his addresses, which appeared to be honourably offered. The 
account of the circumstances which led to the shocking catastrophe we have to relate 
does not disclose the motive for which the devil worked him up to put to death the 
object of his love. It was proved that on the 16th of May, 1737, the villain murdered 
this Jane Upcot. He afterwards, not glutted with shedding her blood, actually cut off 
the head from the body, tore out the heart, and stuck them on a spar-hook, with which 
he had killed her; and then, fixing the instrument near the decollated body, left the 
horrid spectacle to the view of the passing traveller!!!
	Nature sickens at the recital — let us therefore pass to some less inhuman 
malefactor: this man deserved a severer death than the gallows.
	He was executed at Exeter, in the year 1737.


THOMAS CARR, AN ATTORNEY , AND ELIZABETH 
ADAMS 
Executed at Tyburn, 18th of January, 1738, for Robbery

	THOMAS CARR, when he committed the robbery for which he suffered, was 
an attorney-at-law, of eminence in the Temple, and Elizabeth Adams a woman with 
whom he cohabited. He had been many years vestry clerk of the parish of St Paul, 
Covent Garden, a very respectable office. On the 15th of October, 1737, they were 
indicted at the Old Bailey, for robbing William Quarrington of ninety-three guineas 
and a diamond ring at the Angel and Crown tavern, near Temple Bar, upon which 
they were found guilty, and sentence of death passed on them. Carr endeavoured to 
obtain the Royal mercy, but the Privy Council replied that "a flagrant breach of the 
law was greatly aggravated in being committed by a man professing the law."
	On the 18th of January, 1738, thirteen miserable beings were carried from 
Newgate to Tyburn, there to suffer death for different offences; and among them were 
Carr and Adams, each in a mourning-coach. They both received the Sacrament on the 
Sunday preceding; and then, and at the place of execution, denied the fact for which 
they suffered. They were both remarkably composed for people in their dreadful 
situation, and just as the cart began to draw away they kissed each other, joined hands, 
and thus were launched into eternity.


WILLIAM UDALL 
A Profligate Apprentice, who turned Highwayman. Executed at Tyburn, 14th 
of March, 1738

	THE father of this reprobate was an eminent distiller in Clerkenwell, London. 
He gave his son a good education, and bound him apprentice to a watchmaker, in 
Leadenhall Street, where he was idle, but soon learned from some abandoned 
journeymen the trick of scraping gold from the inside of watch-cases, which he sold, 
and then squandered away his ill-gotten pelf. His master died before he was detected, 
and he was turned over to another, whom he offended before he had served a quarter 
of a year. He then went to live with one Mr Stanbridge, of Clerkenwell, who engaged 
to procure him his freedom at the expiration of the term for which he was originally 
apprenticed.
	He had not been long in the service of Stanbridge before he connected himself 
with a number of young pickpockets, with whom he used to go out of an evening and 
steal watches, swords, hats and anything they could lay their hands on, which they 
deposited with one Williams, in Hanging Sword Alley, Fleet Street, who disposed of 
the effects and shared the booty with the young thieves.
	Udall's father was apprised of his living in an irregular manner, but had no 
idea that he had proceeded to such lengths as to become a robber. However, to reclaim 
him from his evil courses, he took a house for him, and put him into business in a very 
reputable way.
	One of Udall's companions was a youth named Raby, who, having served his 
time to a barber, his friends likewise put into business, and for some months the 
young fellows appeared to attend the duties of their respective professions; but they 
had not quitted their old connections, for they used to go almost every night to Drury 
Lane, to a house of ill-fame, which was kept by a woman named Bird. In this place 
they associated with several young fellows of abandoned character. At length they 
agreed to commence as highwaymen, and, in consequence thereof, committed a 
number of robberies in and near Epping Forest and Finchley Common, one of which 
was attended with a circumstance of unusual barbarity.
	These associates in wickedness, having stopped the St Albans coach, robbed 
the passengers of about five pounds, and immediately put spurs to their horses; but 
they had not ridden far before Udall said that a lady in the coach had a remarkably 
fine ring on her finger. On this Raby rode back, and, the lady being unwilling to part 
with the ring, the remorseless villain drew a knife and cut off her finger for the sake of 
the paltry prize. This horrid action being perpetrated, they rode to Hampstead, and 
having robbed some other people the same evening they hastened to Drury Lane, 
where they divided the spoil.
	On one occasion Udall and two of his accomplices, named Baker and Wager, 
stopped a coach on the road to Uxbridge. A guard being behind the coach, with a 
blunderbuss, Baker threatened him with instant death if he did not throw it away, and 
the man obeyed. Wager and Udall guarded the coachman and postilion, while Baker 
robbed the company; but this was no sooner done than the guard produced a horse-
pistol, with which he fired at Udall, and brought him to the ground; on which Baker 
shot the guard, so that he instantly expired.
	Udall was conveyed to a farmhouse near Uxbridge by his accomplices, and lay 
there six weeks before he recovered; but soon afterwards they killed the person who 
guarded another coach as it was going over Turnham Green.
	Only a short time after the commission of this atrocious crime Udall knocked 
down a young woman in Fenchurch Street, whom he robbed of a cloak, a 
handkerchief and her pocket, which contained only a few halfpence.
	Not long after this adventure, Udall and some of his associates robbed a 
physician in the Strand, for which they were all of them apprehended; but Udall 
became an evidence against his accomplices, by which he escaped the fate which he 
had so frequently merited.
	He and an accomplice named Man then committed several robberies in the 
neighbourhood of Epping Forest, and Udall, having one night left his horse at a 
public-house in the Forest, went to Man's lodgings in an absolute state of intoxication. 
While he was in this situation Man went out and locked the door, on pretence of care 
that the men from the Marshalsea should not apprehend his companion; but he 
immediately delivered himself into custody and gave the key to the runners, who, 
entering the house, seized Udall, in bed, and conveyed them both to their former 
apartments.
	Man now seriously reflected on his situation, and being apprehensive that he 
might be seen by some person who would charge him with a capital offence he 
begged to be conducted to a magistrate, before whom he was admitted an evidence 
against his companion, on a charge of his having committed several robberies on the 
highway.
	Hereupon Udall was committed to Newgate, and being tried at the next 
sessions at the Old Bailey he was convicted, principally on the evidence of Man, and 
received sentence of death. He was hanged at Tyburn, on 14th of March, 1738.


JOHN TOON AND EDWARD BLASTOCK 
Executed at Tyburn, May 20, 1738, for highway robbery.

	The parents of John Toon were respectable inhabitants of Shoreditch, who 
having bestowed on him a liberal education, apprenticed him, to a capital ironmonger, 
who had married his sister; but not being happy in this situation, his father sent him to 
sea at the expiration of three years. After two voyages to Barbadoes, he grew tired of 
the life of a seaman, which he quitted to live with his uncle, who was a carman, and in 
whose service he behaved so unexceptionably, that on the death of the uncle; which 
happened soon afterwards, he took possession of four hundred pounds, which his 
relation had bequeathed him, as the reward of his good conduct.
	Soon after becoming possessed of this money, he married the sister of Edward 
Blastock, and began to live in a most extravagant manner. When he had dissipated 
half his little fortune, Blastock proposed that they should go into Yorkshire, and 
embark in public business. This proposal being accepted; they took an inn in 
Sheffield, the place of Blastock's birth; but both of the landlords being better 
calculated to spend than to get money, Toon soon found his circumstances 
embarrassed.
	Thus situated, he reflected on Blastock for advising him to take the inn; and 
the other recriminated; by recounting the faults of Toon. In consequence of this 
dissention, Blastock brought, his wife to London, whither Toon and his wife soon 
followed, after selling off their effects.
	Toon, who was totally reduced, met his own elder brother one day in 
Cheapside. This brother, who was a dyer in Shoreditch, took little notice of the other, 
but as Toon imagined he was going out for the day, he went to his house, and met 
with his wife, who entreated him to stay dinner; to which he consented, and in the 
mean time he went to see the men at work, and finding one among them of genteel 
appearance, whom he learnt was his brothers book-keeper, he became extremely 
enraged that his brother should employ. a stranger in this station in preference to 
himself, at a time that he was in circumstances of distress.
	In this agitation of mind he returned into the house, and: whilst his sister-in-
law was gone into another room, he stole a small quantity of silver-plate, and 
decamped: and having soon spent the produce of this theft, he determined on the 
dangerous and fatal resource of the highway.
	His first expedition was to Epping. Forest, where he waited along time in 
expectation of a booty; and at length observing a coach come from Lord Castlemain's 
seat, he used the most dreadful imprecations to compel the coach-man to stop, and 
robbed two ladies of near three pounds, with a girdle-buckle, and an etwee-case.
	He now imagined that he had got a valuable prize: but he, at length pawned 
the buckle and etwee for twelve shillings; finding that the latter was base metal; 
though he had mistaken it for gold, and the former was set with crystal stones instead 
of diamonds, as they had appeared to his eye.
	He soon spent his ill-gotten treasure, and going again on the highway, stopped 
and robbed several persons, among whom was a gentleman named Currier, who 
earnestly exhorted him to decline his present course of life, not only from the 
immorality, but the danger of it. The robber thanked the gentleman for his advice; but 
said that he had no occasion for it, as he was sufficiently apprized, of his danger, but 
he must have his money, on pain of instant death; and having robbed him of three 
guineas, he decamped with the utmost expedition
	One of his next robberies was on Epping Forest, where he dispossessed a 
gentleman of his money and a gold watch; which he left in the hands of a receiver of 
stolen goods, to dispose of to the best advantage, but the watch being of value, and in 
high estimation with the Owner, he advertised it, with a reward of eight guineas, on 
which the receiver delivered it, and took the money, but gave Toon only seven of 
them, pretending that was all he could obtain.
	Toon not having read the advertisement, was ignorant of the trick that had 
been put upon him; but being some days afterwards upon Epping Forest, and having 
in vain waited some time for a booty he went to the Green Man by Lord Castlemain's 
house, where he heard one, of his lordship's footmen recounting the particulars of the 
robbery, and saying that the watch had been recovered on giving eight guineas for it.
	This circumstance determined Toon never to lodge any of his future booties in 
the hand of this man. But. it will now be proper to say something of the other 
malefactor, whose story makes part of this narrative.
	EDWARD BLASTOCK was a native of Sheffield, in Yorkshire, and was 
apprenticed in London to a peruke-maker in the temple; and his master dying when he 
had served about five years, his mistress declined trade; and gave the young fellow his 
indentures, on the representation of the gentlemen of the law, that they wished him, 
rather than any other, to succeed her late husband.
	But the rent of the house being high, Blastock was afraid to enter on business 
so early in life, as he, was at that time only eighteen years of age: on which he took 
two rooms in White Friars, where he began to practise in his business, and met with 
great success.
	Coming by this means into the possession of money before he knew the value 
of it, he attached himself to the fashionable pleasures of the town, by which he soon 
incurred more debts than he could discharge; and consequently was obliged to decline 
business, and have recourse to the wretched life of a strolling player; refusing to 
accept of a good situation which was offered him by a gentleman of the Temple.
	Soon afterwards Blastock married, had several children, and being reduced to 
great distress, went into Yorkshire with Toon, as has been already mentioned. On his 
return from Yorkshire, he again engaged himself as a strolling player and after some 
time, casually meeting with Toon, the latter represented the advantages to be made by 
the life of a highwayman, and wished him to embark in that business; which he 
declined on the double score of its danger and immorality.
	Not long after this refusal Blastock was seized with an indisposition, which 
threatened his life, and confined him so long that his wife was obliged to pawn almost 
all her effects for his support; and being visited by Toon during his illness, the latter 
again wished him to commence highwayman.
	Blastock had no sooner recovered his health than, depressed by want, he 
yielded to the dangerous solicitation, and went with his accomplice to Epping Forest, 
where they stopped the chariot of a gentleman, whom they robbed of a few shillings 
and a pocket-piece, and then came to London.
	On the following day, they went again towards the forest; but, in crossing 
Hackney Marsh, Toon's horse sunk in a slough, where he continued for so long a time 
that they found it impossible to achieve any profitable adventure for that night.
	Thus disappointed, they returned to London, and on the 27th of February 
following set out on another expedition, which proved to be their last of the kind. 
While Toon was loading his pistols, he was prepossessed with the idea that his fate 
was speedily approaching; nevertheless he resolved to run every hazard: on which 
they rode as far as Muswell Hill, where they stopped a gentleman named Seabroke, 
and demanded his money.
	The gentleman gave them eighteen shillings, saying it was all he had, and 
adding, "God bless you, gentlemen, you are welcome to it." Toon then demanded his 
watch, which Mr. Seabroke delivered, expressing himself again in the same words. 
This robbery being committed, they galloped hard towards Highgate, and their horses 
being almost. tired, Blastock, stung with the guilt of his conscience, looked frequently 
behind him, in apprehension that he was pursued; and so strong was the terror of 
conscience, "which makes cowards of us all," that both of them agreed to quit their 
horses, and make their escape.
	They now ran through a farm-yard, and taking the back road which leads from 
Highgate to Hampstead, they got to London on foot; and Blastock now declared his 
determination never to embark in such another project, while he congratulated himself 
on his narrow escape.
	They now took a solemn oath, that, if either of them should he apprehended, 
neither would impeach the other; and the watch obtained in the last robbery being sold 
for two guineas, Blastock received his share, and went to join a company of strolling 
players at Chatham.
	The stolen watch being advertised, the purchaser carried it to Mr. Seabroke, 
telling him that he knew Toon, and would assist in taking him into custody; the 
consequence of which was, that the offender was lodged in Newgate on the same day.
	Toon kept his oath in declining to give any information against his 
accomplice; but Blastock having agreed to go with the players to a greater distance 
from London than Chatham, returned to town to bid his wife and children adieu. 
When he arrived, which was about midnight, his wife and her sister were in bed: and 
the former having opened the door, he was informed that Toon was in custody, and 
advised to seek his safety by an immediate: flight.
	This advice, however, he did not take; and in the morning, Toon's wife desired 
he would stay while she visited her husband, declaring that she would not mention his 
having returned to London.
	On her return from this visit, she wept much, and expressed her wishes for the 
approach of night, that he might retire in safety. In the evening, while supper was 
providing, she went out, under pretence of a visit to her husband, but instead thereof, 
she went to Toon's brother, who taking her before a magistrate; some peace-officers 
were sent to take Blastock into custody:
	Mrs. Toon directed the officers to the room where Blastock was, in company 
with two men of his acquaintance, who were advising him on the emergency of his 
affairs. Blastock, suspecting some foul play, concealed himself in a closet; and when 
the officers came in, they first seized one, and then the other of the persons present; 
but were soon convinced that neither of them was the party they were in search of.
	On this the officers made a stricter search, and finding Blastock in the closet, 
took him into custody. Having taken leave of his wife and children, they carried him 
before a magistrate, who asked him if he had not a worse coat than that which he then 
wore. Blastock owned that he had, and actually sent for it; and it was kept to be 
produced in evidence against him.
	While the officers were conducting him to Newgate, in a coach, they told him 
that Mrs. Toon had given the information against him; at which he was so shocked, 
that it was some time before he could recover his recollection, being absolutely 
insensible when he was lodged in prison.
These malefactors being tried at the next sessions at the Old Bailey, were capitally 
convicted, and received sentence of death; and, after conviction, were confined in the 
same cell: but being unhappy together, from their mutual recriminations of each other, 
the keeper caused them to be separated.
	Toon behaved more penitently than malefactors usually do; and Blastock 
exhibited an uncommon instance of unfeigned penitence and contrition. They 
embraced each other at the place of their death, and Blastock delivered the following 
speech to the surrounding multitude:
	"Dear Friends,
	"I do not come here to excuse myself, although I have been first led into the 
crime for which suffer, and then basely betrayed; no, I am sensible of my guilt, nor 
should I have made the world acquainted with this barbarous treatment that I have met 
with, even from a near relation, had it not been with a view of preventing the ruin of 
many young persons.
	"Let my fate be an example to them, and never let any man in trade think 
himself above his business, nor despise the offers of those who would serve him. Let 
them purchase wisdom at my cost, and never let slip any opportunity that bids fair to 
be of the least advantage to them, for experience tells me, that had I done as I now 
advise you, I had never come to this end.
	"The next thing never to trust your life in the hands of a near relation; for 
money makes those who pretend to be your nearest friends; your most bitter enemies. 
Never be persuaded to do any thing you may be sorry for afterwards, nor believe the 
most solemn Oaths, for there is no truth in imprecations; rather take a man's word; for 
those that will swear will lie: Not but that that I believe there are some in the world, 
with, who would suffer the worst of deaths, rather than betray the trust reposed in 
them.
	"What, I have here declared; as I am a dying man, I protest before God is true; 
and here; before God and the world, I freely forgive those who betrayed me, and die 
in peace with all mankind.
	"I implore the forgiveness of that God who has promised pardon and 
forgiveness to all those who sincerely repent; and I hope I have done my best 
endeavours, while in prison, to make my peace with a justly offended God. I hope the 
moment I leave this troublesome world, my soul will be received into eternal 
happiness, through the merits of Jesus Christ.
	"I conclude with my prayers for the welfare of my poor unhappy wife and 
children, who are now reduced to misery; and taking a long farewell of the world, I 
commit my spirit into the hands of him who gave me being."


JOSEPH JOHNSON 
Pickpocket and "Esquire," who swindled many Farmers and was executed at 
Tyburn, 19th of July, 1738, at the Age of Sixty

	This hoary-headed sinner, who was both a pick-pocket and a swindler, was 
permitted to proceed in his career of villainy for a longer time than any who have 
fallen under notice. There is no species of robbery which he did not commit, or in 
which habitual practice had not made him a proficient.
	His parents lived in the Old Jewry, and, being very poor people, his education 
was totally neglected. He kept bad company almost from his infancy, and becoming a 
pickpocket while yet a child, he continued that practice till he was above twenty years 
of age. He then took to a new mode of fraud. He used to meet porters and errand-boys 
in the streets and, by a variety of false pretences, get possession of the goods entrusted 
to their care. For one of these offences he was taken into custody, and tried at the Old 
Bailey, where he was acquitted in defect of evidence.
	Having thus obtained his liberty, he had recourse to his former practices, till, 
being apprehended for stealing a sword, he was tried and convicted at the Old Bailey, 
and sentenced to seven years' transportation.
	It happened that one of his fellow-convicts was possessed of a stolen bank-
note, which was changed, as is presumed, with the captain of the vessel, who had a 
gratuity for their liberty; for when they arrived in America they were set at large, and 
took lodgings at New York, where they lived some time in an expensive manner; and 
the captain, on his return to England, stopped at Rotterdam, where he offered the 
stolen note to a banker; on which he was lodged in prison, and did not obtain his 
liberty without considerable difficulty.
	Johnson and his associate, having quitted New York, embarked for Holland, 
whence they came to England, where they assumed the dress and appearance of 
people of fashion, and frequented all the places of public diversion. Thus disguised, 
Johnson used to mix with the crowd and steal watches, etc., which his accomplice 
carried off unsuspected.
	In the summer-time, when London was thin of company, Johnson and his 
companion used to ride through the country, the former appearing as a gentleman of 
fortune and the latter as his servant. On their arrival at an inn they inquired of the 
landlord into the circumstances of the farmers in the neighbourhood, and when they 
had learned the name and residence of one who was rich, with such other particulars 
as might forward their plan, the "servant" was dispatched to tell the farmer that the 
"Esquire" would be glad to speak with him at the inn; and he was commissioned to 
hint that his master's property in the public funds was very considerable.
	This bait generally succeeded: the farmer hastened to the inn, where he found 
the "Esquire" in an elegant undress; who, after the first compliments, informed him 
that he was come down to purchase a valuable estate in the neighbourhood, which he 
thought so well worth the buying that he had agreed to pay part of the money that day; 
but not having sufficient cash in his possession he had sent for the farmer to lend him 
part of the sum, and assured him that he should be no loser by granting the favour. To 
make sure of his prey, he had always some counterfeit jewels in his possession, which 
he used to deposit in the farmer's hands, to be taken up when the money was repaid; 
and, by artifices of this kind, Johnson and his associate acquired large sums of money; 
the former not only changing his name, but disguising his person so that detection was 
almost impossible.
	This practice he continued for a succession of years, and in one of his 
expeditions of this kind got possession of a thousand pounds, with which he escaped 
unsuspected. In order to avoid detection he took a small house in Southwark, where 
he used to live in the most obscure manner, not even permitting his servant-maid to 
open the window lest he should be discovered.
	Thus he continued committing these kinds of frauds, and living in retirement 
on the profits arising from them, till he reached the age of sixty years; when, though 
he was poor, he was afraid to make fresh excursions to the country, but thought of 
exercising his talents in London.
	Thereupon he picked the pockets of several persons of as many watches as 
produced money enough to furnish him with an elegant suit of clothes, in which he 
went to a public ball, where he walked a minuet with the kept mistress of a nobleman, 
who invited him to drink tea with her on the following day.
	He accepted the invitation, when she informed him that she had another 
engagement to a ball, and should think herself extremely honoured by his company. 
He readily agreed to the proposal; but, while in company, he picked the pocket of Mr 
Pye, a merchant's clerk, of a pocket- book, containing bank-notes to the amount of 
five hundred pounds.
	Pye had no idea of his loss till the following day, when he should have 
accounted with his employer. When the discovery was made, immediate notice was 
sent to the bank to stop payment of the notes; and Johnson was actually changing one 
of them, to the amount of fifty pounds, when the messenger came thither. Thereupon 
he was taken into custody, and being tried at the next sessions at the Old Bailey, for 
privately stealing, was capitally convicted; and this offence being without the benefit 
of clergy, he was sentenced to death.
	His behaviour after condemnation was consistent with his former character; he 
expressed neither remorse nor repentance, but seemed perfectly sensible to the awful 
fate which awaited hem. He was hanged at Tyburn, on the 19th of July, 1738, without 
making any confession of his crimes, and refusing to join in the customary devotions 
on such an awful occasion, though a sinner of above sixty years of age


WILLIAM NEWINGTON 
A Writer, who forged a Draft for One Hundred and Twenty Pounds and was 
executed at Tyburn on 26th of August, 1738

	THIS unhappy young man was a native of Chichester, in Sussex, and was the 
son of reputable parents, who, having given him a good education, placed him with 
Mr Cave, an attorney of that town, with whom he served his clerkship; and then, 
coming to London, lived as a hackney-writer with Mr Studley, in Nicholas Lane, 
Lombard Street, for about two years and a half.
	But Newington being of a volatile disposition, and much disposed to the 
keeping of company and irregular hours, Mr Studley discharged him from his service; 
on which he went to live with Mr Leaver, a scrivener, in Friday Street, with whom he 
continued between two and three years, and served him with a degree of fidelity that 
met with the highest approbation.
	This service he quitted about a year before he was convicted of the offence 
which cost him his life; and in the interval lived in a gay manner, without having any 
visible means of support, and paid his addresses to a young lady of very handsome 
fortune, to whom he would soon have been married. It is presumed that, being 
distressed for money to support his expensive way of life, and to carry on his amour, 
he was tempted to commit forgery, which, by an Act of Parliament then recently 
passed, had been made a capital offence.
	He went to Child's coffee-house, in St Paul's Churchyard, where he drew a 
draft on the house of Child & Company, bankers, in Fleet Street, in the following 
words: —
SIR FRANCIS CHILD AND COMP. 
Pray pay to Sir Rowland Hill, Bart., or order, the sum of one hundred and twenty 
pounds, and place it to the account of your humble servant, 
THOMAS HILL 
To SIR FRA. CHILD AND COMP. 
TEMPLE BAR.
	The draft he dispatched by a porter, but was so agitated by his fears while he 
wrote it that he forgot to put any date to it; otherwise, as Mr Thomas Hill kept cash 
with the bankers, and as the forgery was admirably executed, the draft would have 
been paid; but, at the instant that the porter was about to put his endorsement on it, 
one of the clerks said he might go about his business, for that they did not believe the 
draft was a good one. The porter returned to the coffee-house without the draft, which 
the bankers' clerks had refused to deliver him but on his return he found that the 
gentleman was gone. At the expiration of two hours the bankers' clerks came to 
Child's coffee-house and inquired for the person who had made the draft; but he was 
not to be found, for in the absence of the porter he had inquired for the Faculty Office 
in Doctors' Commons, saying he had some business at that place and would return in 
half-an-hour.
	About two or three hours afterwards the porter's son told him that a gentleman 
wanted him at the Horn and Feathers, in Carter Lane, where he went, and told 
Newington that the bankers had refused to pay the note. "Very well," said he, stay 
here till I go and put on my shoes, and I will go with you and rectify the mistake."
	When the porter had waited nearly three hours, and his employer did not 
return, he began to suspect that the draft was forged, and some hours afterwards, 
calling in at the Fountain ale-house in Cheapside, he saw Newington; on which he 
went and fetched a constable, who took him into custody, and lodged him in the 
compter.
	Being tried at the next sessions at the Old Bailey, he was capitally convicted, 
notwithstanding nine gentlemen appeared to give him an excellent character; but 
character has little weight where evidence is positive and the crime is capital. When 
called down to receive sentence of death he delivered the following address:-
	"May it please your Lordship: This my most melancholy case was occasioned 
by the alone inconsiderate rashness of my inexperienced years. The intent of fraud is, 
without doubt, most strongly and most positively found against me; but I assure your 
Lordship I was not in want; nor did I ever think of such a thing in the whole course of 
my life till within a few minutes of the execution of this rash deed. "I hope your 
Lordship has some regard for the gentlemen who have so generously appeared in my 
behalf; and as this is the first fact, though of so deep a dye, my youth and past conduct 
may, I hope in some measure, move your Lordship's pity, compassion and generous 
assistance."
	After conviction, Newington flattered himself that he should escape the utmost 
ignominy of the law through the intercession of his friends; but when the warrant for 
execution, in which his name was included, was brought to Newgate, he appeared to 
be greatly shocked; but recollecting and composing himself he said: "God's will be 
done." But immediately bursting into tears, he lamented the misery which his mother 
would naturally endure when she should be acquainted with the wretched fate of her 
unfortunate son.
	The dreadful tidings being conveyed to his mother, she left Chichester with an 
aching heart; and it was a week after her arrival in London before she could acquire a 
sufficient degree of spirits to visit the unfortunate cause of her grief. At length she 
repaired to the gloomy mansion; but when she saw her son fettered with chains it was 
with the utmost difficulty that she could be kept from fainting. She hung round his 
neck, while he dropped on his knees and implored her blessing and forgiveness; and 
so truly mournful was the spectacle that even the jailers, accustomed as they are to 
scenes of horror, shed tears at the sight. He was executed at Tyburn, on the 26th of 
August, 1738.


JOHN TOTTERDALE 
Executed at Tyburn, October 5, 1738, for the murder of his wife.

	IN the history of this man's crime, we have again to present a cruel and 
premeditated murder of a good wife. On this strangely unnatural deed, we have 
already expatiated; and therefore, can only repeat our wonder and abhorrence of men 
taking away that life which was a comfort to their own.
	This malefactor, who was a native of North Currey, in Somersetshire, after 
having been employed in the business of agriculture, came to London about the time 
that he had arrived at the years of maturity, and lived in several families as a servant, 
maintaining always a respectable character.
	Having saved some money in service, he married, and took a public-house in 
the parish of St. John, Westminster, where he perpetrated the murder which cost him 
his life.
	Coming home one evening somewhat intoxicated, he sat down to drink with 
two women who were in a room with his wife. Mrs. Totterdale quitting the room, her 
husband soon followed her, with a knife and fork in his hand; soon after which, the 
cry of murder was heard; when Daniel Brown, who lodged in the house, running up 
stairs, saw Totterdale stamp on his wife two or three times as she lay on the floor.
	On this, Brown seized the knife and fork which Totterdale still held in his 
hand, and having got the woman into another room, she locked it, and he persuaded 
the husband to go down stairs.
	Soon afterwards, Totterdale's passion increasing, he procured a key, with 
which he opened the door, when his wife was sitting at the foot of a bed, with the 
curtains drawn to hide her: so that he did not at first observe where she was; on which, 
Brown waved his hand, intimating that she should retire; but she did not, being either 
afraid, or unable to move; and the husband discovering her, a few words passed 
between them, when he kicked her, caught hold of her feet, dragged her off the bed, 
and threw her down about seven of the stairs, where she lay senseless.
	Terrified at this sight, Brown ran into his own room, where he staid three or 
four minutes, and then going down the stairs, found that Totterdale had dragged his 
wife into a room, and fastened the door; but Brown heard her say, "For Christ's sake 
Johnny! Johnny, for Christ's sake don't kill me!" Mr. Brown then went out, but found 
the woman dead when he returned, at the end of about an hour and a half.
	The husband was now taken into custody, and the body of the deceased being 
examined by a surgeon, he found that nine of her ribs were broke, and that her right 
arm was stabbed in the joint, to the depth of four inches.
	Totterdale being committed to the Gatehouse, was visited by his wife's sister, 
who said to him, "O John! John ! how could you be so barbarous as to murder your 
poor wife?" In answer to which, he said, "The devil overpowered me; I was pushed on 
by the devil, both to begin and finish the deed — I cannot recall or undo what I have 
done; but I wish I could bring back my poor, unhappy, unprepared wife from the 
grave again."
	Some of his acquaintance asked him why he did not attempt to make his 
escape after he had committed the murder, he replied that he had an intention of so 
doing, but as he was going out of the room, he imagined be heard a voice saying, 
"John, John, stay — What have you done? You cannot go off" which supposed words 
deprived him of all possibility of effecting, his escape.
	Being brought to his trial at the Old Bailey, the evidence against him was so 
clear, that the jury did not hesitate to find him guilty, in consequence of which he was 
sentenced to die.
	After conviction, he declared that he had no fear of the disgraceful death that 
awaited him, and that he would willingly suffer any degree of torture, as an 
atonement, for the crime of which he had been guilty.
	On being told that his name was included in the warrant for execution, he 
replied, "The Lord's will be done; I am ready to die, I am willing to die; only I beg of 
God that I may not (though I deserve it) die an eternal death: and though I am cut off 
from this world for my heinous offences, yet I hope it is not impossible that I should 
live for ever in a better state. I have been guilty of the unnatural murder of my poor 
wife: the Lord be more merciful to me than I was to her, or else I perish." He added, 
that he hoped those who had received injuries from him would forgive him; as he 
freely forgave those by whom he had been injured.
	Totterdale found a generous friend in Mr, Paul, a brewer, who had served him 
with beer while in trade: for when in prison, he supplied him with the necessaries of 
life. He likewise provided for his two children, and took care to see the unhappy man 
buried by the side of his wife, agreeable to an earnest request he made in a letter 
written the day before his execution.
	The behaviour of this wretched man, after conviction, and at the place of his 
death, was decent, devout, and resigned in a high degree. He appeared to be a sincere 
penitent; and admonished others not to indulge that violence of passion which ended 
in his destruction.


GEORGE PRICE 
Sentenced to Death for murdering his Wife, but died of Jail Fever, 22nd of 
October, 1738

  
Price murdering his wife on Hounslow Heath

	THIS malefactor was a native of Hay, in Brecknockshire, where he lived as a 
servant to a widow lady. Having lived in this station seven years, he repaired to 
London, and became acquainted with Mary Chambers, servant at a public-house at 
Hampstead, whom he married at the expiration of a fortnight from his first paying his 
addresses to her; but Mr Brown, his master, disapproving of the match, dismissed 
Price from his service. Soon after this he took his wife into Brecknockshire, and 
imposed her on his relations as the daughter of a military officer, who would become 
entitled to a large fortune. He was treated in the most friendly manner by his relations; 
and the young couple returning to London, the wife went to lodge at Hampstead, 
while Price engaged in the service of a gentleman in New Broad Street.
	Mrs Price, being delivered of twins, desired her husband to buy some 
medicine to make the children sleep, which he procured; and on the children dying 
soon afterwards a report was circulated that he had poisoned them; but this 
circumstance he denied to the last moment of his life. Price now paid his addresses to 
other women, and conceiving his wife as an obstacle between him and his wishes he 
formed the infernal resolution of murdering her. He told her that he had procured the 
place of a nursery-maid for her in the neighbourhood of Putney, and that he would 
attend her thither that very day. He then directed her to meet him at the Woolpack, in 
Monkwell Street. Accordingly she went home and dressed herself (having borrowed 
some clothes of her landlady) and met her husband, who put her in a chaise, and drove 
her out of town towards Hounslow. When he came on Hounslow Heath it was nearly 
ten o'clock at night; when he suddenly stopped the chaise and threw the lash of the 
whip round his wife's neck; but drawing it too hastily he made a violent mark on her 
chin; immediately finding his mistake, he placed it lower, on which she exclaimed: 
"My dear! my dear! For God's sake — if this is your love, I will never trust you 
more." Immediately on her pronouncing these words, which were her last, he pulled 
the ends of the whip with great force; but, the violence of his passion abating, he let 
go before she was quite dead; yet, resolving to accomplish the horrid deed, he once 
more put the thong of the whip about her neck, and pulled it with such violence that it 
broke; but not till the poor woman was dead.
	Having stripped the body, he left it almost under a gibbet where some 
malefactors hung in chains, having first disfigured it to such a degree that he 
presumed it could not be known. He brought the clothes to London, some of which he 
cut in pieces, and dropped in different streets; but knowing that the others were 
borrowed of the landlady he sent them to her, a circumstance that materially conduced 
to his conviction.
	He reached London about one o'clock in the morning, and being interrogated 
why he came at such an unseasonable hour, he said that the Margate hoy had been 
detained in the river by contrary winds.
	On the following day the servants and other people made so many inquiries 
respecting his wife that, terrified at the idea of being taken into custody, he 
immediately fled to Portsmouth, with a view to entering on board a ship; but no vessel 
was then ready to sail.
	While he was drinking at an ale-house in Portsmouth he heard the bellman 
crying him as a murderer, with such an exact description of him that he was 
apprehensive of being seized, and observing a window which opened to the water he 
jumped out, and swam for his life. Having gained the shore, he travelled all night, till 
he reached a farmhouse, where he slept on some straw in the barn.
	On the following day he crossed the country towards Oxford, where he 
endeavoured to get into service, and would have been engaged by a physician, but 
happening to read a newspaper in which he was advertised he immediately decamped 
from Oxford, and travelled into Wales. Having stopped at a village a few miles from 
Hay, at the house of a shoemaker, to whom his brother was apprenticed, the latter 
obtained his master's permission to accompany his brother home; and while they were 
on their walk the malefactor recounted the particulars of the murder which had 
obliged him to seek his safety in flight. The brother commiserated his condition; and, 
leaving him at a small distance from their father's house, went in and found the old 
gentleman reading an advertisement describing the murderer. The younger son 
bursting into tears, the father said he hoped his brother was not come; to which the 
youth replied: "Yes, he is at the door; but being afraid that some of the neighbours 
were in the house he would not come in till he had your permission." The offender on 
being introduced fell on his knees, and earnestly besought his father's blessing; to 
which the aged parent said: "Ah! George, I wish God may bless you, and what I have 
heard concerning you may be false." The son said: "It is false; but let me have a 
private room; make no words; I have done no harm; let me have a room to myself."
	Being accommodated agreeable to his request, he produced half-a-crown, 
begging that his brother would buy a lancet, as he was resolved to put a period to his 
miserable existence; but the brother declined to in any way aid in the commission of 
the crime of suicide; and the father, after exerting every argument to prevent his 
thinking of such a violation of the laws of God, concealed him for two days.
	It happened that the neighbours observed a fire in a room where none had been 
for a considerable time before, and a report was propagated that Price was secreted in 
the house of his father; whereupon he thought it prudent to abscond in the night; and 
having reached Gloucester he went to an inn and procured the place of an ostler. 
During his residence at Gloucester two of the sons of the lady with whom he had first 
lived as a servant happened to be at a school in that city, and Price behaved to them 
with so much civility that they wrote to their mother describing his conduct; in reply 
to which she informed them that he had killed his wife, and desired them not to hold 
any correspondence with him.
	The young gentlemen mentioning this circumstance, one of Price's fellow-
servants said to him: "You are the man that murdered your wife on Hounslow Heath. I 
will not betray you, but if you stay longer you will certainly be taken into custody."
	Stung by the reflections of his own conscience, and agitated by the fear of 
momentary detection, Price knew not how to act; but at length he resolved to come to 
London and surrender to justice; and calling on his former master, and being 
apprehended, he was committed to Newgate. At the following sessions at the Old 
Bailey he was brought to his trial, and convicted. He was sentenced to death, but died 
of the jail fever in Newgate, before the law could be executed on him, on the 22nd of 
October, 1738.


JOHN RICHARDSON AND RICHARD COYLE 
Pirates, hanged at Execution Dock, 25th January, 1738

  
Richardson and Coyle attacking Captain Hartley in his cabin

	THE crime of piracy is generally accompanied by murder. Richardson, to both 
these crimes, added that of swindling. His memory will with justice be particularly 
execrated by our female readers; for it will be found that, through the most 
consummate hypocrisy, he succeeded in seducing, and then abandoning, several of 
their sex.
	John Richardson was an American, having been born in the city of New York, 
where he went to school till he was fourteen years old: he was then put under the care 
of his brother, who was a cooper; but, not liking that business, he sailed on board a 
merchant ship, commanded by his namesake, Captain Richardson.
	After one voyage, he served five years to a carpenter; but having made an 
illicit connexion with his master's daughter, who became pregnant, he quitted his 
service, and entered on board a ship bound to Jamaica; on his arrival there he was 
impressed, put on board a man of war, and brought to England.
	The ship's crew being paid at Chatham, he came to London, took lodgings in 
Horsleydown, and spent all his money. On this he entered as boatswain on board a 
vessel bound to the Baltic; but, being weary of his situation, he soon quitted that 
station, having first concerted and executed the following scheme of fraud.
	Knowing that there was a merchant in the country with whom the captain had 
dealings, be went to a tavern, and wrote a letter, as from the captain, desiring that the 
merchant would send him a hundred rix-dollars. This letter he carried himself, and 
received the money from the merchant, who said he had more at the captain's service 
if it was wanted.
	Being possessed of this sum, he, the next day, embarked on board a Dutch 
vessel bound to Amsterdam; and soon after his arrival connected himself with a 
woman whose husband had sailed as mate of a Dutch East India ship. With this 
woman ho cohabited about eight months, when she told him that it would be 
necessary for him to decamp, as she daily expected her husband to return from his 
voyage.
	Richardson agreed to depart, but first determined to rob her; and, having 
persuaded her to go to the play, he took her to a tavern afterwards, where he plied her 
with liquor till she was perfectly intoxicated. This being done, he attended her home, 
and, having got her to bed and found her fast asleep, ho took the keys out of her 
pocket, and, unlocking the warehouse, stole India goods to the amount of two hundred 
pounds, which he conveyed to a lodging he had taken to receive them. Re then 
replaced the keys; but, finding some that were smaller, he with those opened her 
drawers, and took out sixty pounds. Some years afterwards be saw this woman at 
Amsterdam, but she made no complaint of the robbery; by which it may reasonably be 
supposed that she was afraid her husband might suspect her former illicit connexion.
	Having put his stolen goods on board one of the Rotterdam boats, he departed 
for that place, where he found the captain of a vessel bound to New England, with 
whom he sailed at the expiration of four days.
	On their arrival at Boston, Richardson went to settle about fifty miles up the 
country, in expectation that the property be possessed might procure him a wife of 
some fortune. Having taken his lodgings at a farmer's, he deposited his goods in a 
kind of warehouse.
	It being now near the Christmas holy-days, many of the country people 
solicited that he would keep the festival with them. These offers were so numerous, 
that he scarce knew bow to determine; but at length accepted the invitation of a Mr. 
Brown, to which he was influenced by his having three daughters, and four maid-
servants, all of them very agreeable young women.
	Richardson made presents of India handkerchiefs to all the girls, and so far 
ingratiated himself into their favour that in a short time all of them were pregnant. But 
before this circumstance was discovered there happened to he a wedding, to which the 
daughter of a justice of the peace was invited as a brides-maid, and Richardson as a 
brides-man.
	Our adventurer, soon becoming intimate with the young lady, persuaded her to 
go and see his lodgings and warehouse, and offered to make her a present of any piece 
of goods which she might deem worth her acceptance. At length she fixed on a piece 
of chintz, and carried it home with her.
	Two days afterwards Richardson wrote to her; and, her answer being such as 
flattered his wishes, be likewise wrote to her father, requesting permission to pay his 
addresses to the daughter. The old gentleman readily admitted his visits, and, at the 
end of three months, gave his consent that the young people should be united in 
wedlock.
	As there were no licenses for marriage in that country, it was the uniform 
custom to publish the bans three successive Sundays in the church. On the first day no 
objection was made; but on the second Sunday all the girls from the house where he 
had spent his Christmas made their appearance to forbid the bans, each of them 
declaring that she was with child by the intended husband.
	Hereupon Richardson slipped out of the church, leaving the people astonished 
at the singularity of the circumstance; but he had reason to suppose that it would not 
be long before he should hear from the father of the young lady, whom he had already 
seduced.
	Accordingly, in a few days be received a letter from the old gentleman, 
begging that he would decline his visits, as his conduct furnished a subject of 
conversation for the whole country; and with his request Richardson very cheerfully 
complied; but in about four months he was sent for, when the justice offered him 
300L. currency, to take his daughter as a wife. He seemed to hesitate at first; but at 
length consenting, the young lady and he went to a village at the distance of forty 
miles, where the bans were regularly published, and the marriage took place, before 
the other parties were apprised of it.
	However, in a little time after the wedding, he was arrested by the friends of 
the girls whom he had debauched, in order to compel him to give security for the 
maintenance of the future children; on which his father-in-law engaged that he should 
not abscond, and paid him his wife's fortune.
	Having thus possessed himself of the money, and being sick of his new 
connexion, be told his wife and her relations that, not being fond of a country life, he 
would go to New York and build him a ship, and would return at the expiration of 
three months. The family, having no suspicion of his intentions, took leave of him 
with every mark of affection; but he never went near them any more.
	Having previously sent his effects to Boston, he went to that place, where he 
soon spent his money amongst the worst kind of company, and, no person being 
willing to trust him, was reduced to great distress. It now became necessary that he 
should work for his bread; and, being tolerably well skilled in ship-building, he got 
employment under a master-builder, who was a Quaker, and who treated him with the 
greatest indulgence.
	The Quaker was an elderly man, who bad a young wife, with whom 
Richardson wished to be better acquainted: he therefore one day quitted his work and 
went home to the house; but he had but just arrived there when he was followed by 
the old man, who came in search of him, and found him talking to his wife. The 
Quaker asked him what business he had there, and why be did not keep at his work. 
Richardson replied that he only came home for an auger: to which the Quaker said, 
'Ah! friend John, I do not much like thee; my wife knows nothing of thy tools, and I 
fear thou hadst some evil thoughts in thy head.'
	Hereupon Richardson went back to his work without making any reply, but 
soon afterwards demanded his wages. The Quaker hesitated to pay him, hinting that 
he was apprehensive his wife had paid him already; on which Richardson said he 
would sue him for the debt, and desired him to consider that, if he made such an 
excuse in open court, he would be disgraced through the country.
	On this the Quaker paid his demand, but absolutely forbade him ever to come 
within his house again; Richardson promising to obey, and intending to have 
complied with the injunction.
	About eight days afterwards, the old gentleman, having some business up the 
country to purchase timber, desired his young wife to accompany him, to prevent any 
ill consequences that might arise in his absence. To avoid this journey, the lady 
feigned indisposition, and took to her bed.
	The husband had not been long gone before Richardson, meeting the maid-
servant in the street, asked after the health of her mistress, who, the girl said, wanted 
to see him; and he promised to wait upon her about nine in the evening.
	Punctual to his engagement he attended the lady, and renewed his visits to her 
till the return of her husband was apprehended, when he broke open a chest, stole 
about seventy pounds, and immediately agreed with Captain Jones for his passage to 
Philadelphia.
	When he arrived at the last-mentioned place, he took lodgings at the house of a 
widow who had two daughters; and, paying his addresses to the mother, he was so 
successful, that for four months, while he continued there, he acted as if be had been 
master of the house.
	After this intimacy with the mother had continued some time, he became 
attached to one of the daughters; and on a Sunday, when the rest of the family were 
absent, found an opportunity of being alone with her; but the mother, returning at this 
juncture, interrupted their conversation, and expressed her anger in the most violent 
terms.
	Nor was this all, for when she was alone with the offender she severely 
reproached him; but be made his peace by pretending an uncommon attachment to 
her; yet within a month she found him taking equal freedoms with her second 
daughter. Upon this the mother became outrageous, and told him that the consequence 
of his connexion with the other girl was, that she was already pregnant. Richardson 
now quarrelled in his turn, and told her that if her daughter was breeding she must 
procure her a husband, for he would have nothing to do with her.
	At length, when the old woman's passions were in some degree calmed, he 
represented to her the impossibility of his marrying both her daughters; but said that, 
if she could procure a husband for one of them, he would take the other.
	The old lady soon procured a young man to marry one of her daughters, and 
then constantly teazed Richardson to wed the other, which he steadily refused to do 
unless she would advance him a sum of money. She hesitated for some time; but at 
length said she would give him a hundred pounds, and half her plate; on which he 
consented, and the marriage was solemnized; but he had no sooner possessed himself 
of this little fortune than he embarked on board a ship bound for South Carolina.
	Within a month after his arrival in this colony he became acquainted with one 
Captain Roberts, with whom he sailed as mate and carpenter to Jamaica, and during 
the voyage was treated in the most friendly manner. The business in Jamaica being 
dispatched, they returned to Carolina.
	The owner of the ship living at some distance up the country, and the winter 
advancing, the captain fixed on Richardson as a proper person to sleep on board and 
take care of the vessel. This he did for some time, till about a week before Christmas, 
when he was invited to an entertainment to be given on occasion of the birth-day of 
his owner's only daughter.
	A moderate share of skill in singing and dancing recommended Richardson to 
the notice of the company, and in particular to that of the young lady, by which he 
hoped to profit on a future occasion.
	In the following month it happened that a wedding was to be celebrated at the 
house of a friend of the owner, on which occasion Richardson was sent for; and when 
he appeared the young lady welcomed him wishing that he would oblige the company 
with a dance; to which be replied, that he should he happy to oblige the company in 
general, and her in particular.
	Richardson, having been a partner with the young lady during the dancing at 
the wedding, begged leave to conduct her home; and, when the ceremonies of the 
wedding were ended, he had the honour to attend her to her abode. When they had got 
into the midst of a thick wood he pretended to be ill, and said he must get off his horse 
and sit down on the ground. She likewise dismounted, and they walked together under 
the shade of a chestnut-tree, where they remained till the approach of evening, when 
he conducted her home, after having received very convincing proofs of her kindness.
	Going to his ship for that night, he went to her father's house on the following 
day, and found an opportunity of speaking to her, when he entreated her to admit of 
his occasional visits; but she said there were so many negro servants about the house 
that it would be impossible. On this he said he would conduct her to the ship when the 
family were asleep; and the girl foolishly consenting to this proposal, the intrigue was 
carried on for a fortnight, when she became so apprehensive of a discovery that she 
would go no longer.
	But the lovers being uneasy asunder, they bribed an old female negro, who 
constantly let Richardson into the young lady's chamber when the rest of the family 
were retired to rest.
	At length the mother discovered that her daughter was with child, and charged 
her to declare who was the father, on which she confessed that it was Richardson. The 
mother acquainting her husband with the circumstance, the old gentleman sent for 
Richardson to supper, and, after rallying him on his prowess, told him that he must 
marry and support his daughter. Richardson said it was out of his power to support 
her; but the father promising his assistance, the marriage took place.
	Soon afterwards the old gentleman gave his son-in-law the ship, and a good 
cargo, as a marriage portion, and Richardson embarked on a trading voyage to 
Barbadoes; but he had not been many days at sea when a violent storm arose, in which 
he lost his vessel and cargo, and he and his crew were obliged to take to the boat to 
save their lives.
	After driving some days at sea, they were taken up by a vessel which carried 
them to St. Kitt's, where Richardson soon met with a Captain Jones, who told him that 
one of his wives had died of a broken heart. This circumstance, added to that of the 
loss of his ship, drove him distracted; so that he was confined to his chamber for four 
months.
	On his recovery he went mate with the captain who had carried him to St. 
Kitt's; but, quitting this station in about five months, he sailed to Antigua, where a 
young gentleman, who happened to be in company with Richardson, was so delighted 
with his skill in dancing a hornpipe, that be invited him to his father's house, where he 
was entertained for a fortnight with the utmost hospitality.
	One day, as he was rambling with the young gentleman to take a view of some 
of the plantations, Richardson stopped on a sudden, and, putting his hand to his 
pocket, pretended to have lost his purse, containing twenty pistoles. The young 
gentleman told him there was more money in Antigua. 'True,' said Richard son, 'but I 
am a stranger here; I am a Creolian from Meovis.' On this the other asked, 'Do you 
belong to the Richardsons at Meovis I know their character well.'
	Our adventurer, aware that the governor of Meovis was named Richardson, 
had the confidence to declare that be was his son; on which the other exclaimed, 'You 
his son, and want money in Antigua! No, no; only draw a bill upon your father, and I 
will engage that mine shall help you to the money.'
	The project of raising cash in this manner delighted Richardson; and the young 
gentleman's father was no sooner acquainted with the pretended circumstance than he 
expressed a willingness to supply him with a hundred pistoles, on which he drew a 
bill on his supposed father for the above-mentioned sum, and received the money.
	About a week afterwards be wrote a letter to his imputed father, informing him 
how generously he bad been treated by his friends in Antigua, and subscribing himself 
his 'dutiful son.' This letter he intrusted to the care of a person in whom he could 
confide, with strict orders not to deliver it; and, when as much time had elapsed as 
might warrant the expectation of an answer, he employed the mate of a ship to write a 
letter to the old gentleman, as from his supposed father, thanking him for his civilities 
to his son.
	The gentleman was greatly pleased at the receipt of this letter, which be said 
contained more compliments than his conduct had deserved; and be told Richardson 
that be might have any farther sum of money that be wanted. On this our adventurer, 
who was determined to take every advantage of the credulity of his new acquaintance, 
drew another bill for a hundred pistoles, and soon afterwards decamped.
	He now embarked on board a vessel bound to Jamaica, and, on his arrival at 
Port Royal, purchased a variety of goods of a Jew merchant; which, with other goods 
that the Jew gave him credit for, he shipped on board a trader to Carthagena, where be 
disposed of them: but he never went back to discharge his debt to the Jew.
	From Carthagena he sailed to Vera Cruz, and thence to England, where he 
took lodgings with one Thomas Ballard, who kept a public house at Chatham. Now it 
happened that Ballard had a brother, who, having gone abroad many years before, had 
never been heard of. Richardson bearing a great resemblance to this brother, the 
publican conceived a strong idea that he was the same, and asked if his name was not 
Ballard. At first be answered in the negative; but finding the warm prepossession of 
the other, and expecting to make some advantage of his credulity, he at length 
acknowledged that he was his brother.
	Richardson now lived in a sumptuous manner, and without any expense; and 
Ballard was never more uneasy than when any one doubted of the reality of the 
relationship. At length Ballard told Richardson that their two sisters were living at 
Sittingbourne, and persuaded him to go on a visit to them, to which Richardson 
readily agreed: the two sisters had no recollection of this man; however, Ballard 
having persuaded them that he was the real brother who had been so long absent, 
great rejoicings were made on account of his safe arrival in his native country.
	After a week of festivity it became necessary for Ballard to return to his 
business at Chatham: but the sisters, unwilling to part with their newly found brother, 
persuaded him to remain awhile at Sittingbourne, and told him that their mother, who 
had been extremely fond of him, had left him twenty pounds, and the mare on which 
she used to ride; and in a short time he received the legacies.
	During his residence with his presumptive sisters be became acquainted with 
Anne and Sarah Knolding, and, finding that their relations were deceased, and that 
Anne was left guardian to her sister, be paid his addresses to the former, who was 
weak enough to trust him with her money, bonds, writings, and the deeds of her 
estate. Hereupon be immediately went to Chatham, where he mortgaged the estate for 
three hundred pounds, and thence went to Gravesend, where he shipped himself on 
hoard a vessel bound for Venice.
	On his arrival at that place he hired a house, and lived unemployed till be had 
spent the greater part of his money; when he sold off his effects and went to Ancona, 
where he became acquainted with Captain Benjamin Hartley, who had come thither 
with a lading of pilchards, and on board whose ship was Richard Coyle, the other 
offender mentioned in this narrative.
	Captain Hartley being in want of a carpenter, Richardson agreed to serve him 
in that capacity; and the ship sailed on a voyage to Turkey where the captain took in a 
lading of corn, and then sailed for Leghorn. On the first night of this voyage, Coyle, 
who was chief mate, came on deck to Richardson, and asked him if he would he 
concerned in a secret plot to murder the captain and seize the vessel. Richardson at 
first hesitated; but he at length agreed to take his share in the villainy.
	The plan being concerted, they went to the captain's cabin about midnight, 
with an intention of murdering him; but, getting from them, he ran up the shrouds, 
whither he was followed by Richardson and a seaman named Larson. The captain 
descended too quick for them, and as soon as be gained the deck Coyle attempted to 
shoot him with a blunderbuss, which missing fire, Mr. Hartley wrested it from his 
hands, and threw it into the sea.
	This being done, Coyle and some others of the sailors heaved the captain 
overboard; but, as be hung by the ship's side, Coyle gave him several blows which 
rather stunned him; as, however, he did not let go his hold, Richardson seized an axe, 
with which he struck him so forcibly that be dropped into the sea.
	Coyle now assumed the command of the ship, and, Richardson being 
appointed mate, they sailed towards the island of Malta, where they intended to have 
refitted; but some of the crew objecting to putting in there, they agreed to go to 
Minorca. When they came opposite Cape Cona, on the coast of Barbary, the weather 
became so foul that they were compelled to lie-to for several days, after which they 
determined to sail for Foviniano, an island under the dominion of Spain.
	Arriving at this place, they sent on shore for water and fresh provisions; but as 
they had come from Turkey, and could not produce letters of health, it was not 
possible for them to procure what they wanted.
	It had been a practice with the pirates to keep watch alternately, in company 
with some boys who were on board; but during the night, while they lay at anchor off 
this place, two of the men destined to watch fell asleep: on which two of the boys 
hauled up a boat and went ashore, where they informed the governor of what had 
passed on hoard.
	One of the parties who should have watched being awaked, he ran and called 
Richardson, whom he informed that the boys were gone; on which Richardson said it 
was time for them to be gone likewise; they therefore hauled up the long-boat without 
loss of time, and, putting on board her such things as would be immediately 
necessary, set sail, in the hope of making their escape.
	In the interim the governor sent down a party of soldiers to take care of the 
ship, and prevent the escape of the pirates; but, it being quite dark, they could not 
discern the vessel, though she lay very near the shore: but, when they heard the 
motion of the oars, they fired at the pirates, who all escaped unwounded.
	Steering towards Tunis, they stopped at a small island called Maritime, where 
they diverted themselves with killing rabbits: for, though the place is apparently little 
more than a barren rock, yet it so abounds with these animals that a man may easily 
kill a thousand in a day.
	Leaving this place, they stopped twelve miles short of Tunis, where 
Richardson was apprehended, and carried before the governor, who asking whence he 
came, he told him he was master of a vessel, which having been lost off the coast of 
Sardinia, be was necessitated to take to his long-boat, and had been driven thither by 
distress of weather.
	This story being credited, the governor seemed con erned for the fate of him 
and his companions, and recommended them to the house of an Italian, where they 
might be accommodated; sending, in the mean time, to the English consul, to inform 
him that his countrymen were in distress.
	When they had been about a fortnight at this place Richardson sold the long-
boat, and, having divided the produce among his companions, he went to Tunis to be 
examined by the English consul, to whom he told the same story that he had 
previously told the governor: on which the consul ordered him to make a formal 
protest thereof, for the benefit of the owners and their own security.
	Hereupon the consul supplied him with money, which he shared with his 
companions. Coyle kept himself continually drunk with the money he had received, 
and, during his intoxication, spoke so freely of their transactions, that he was taken 
into custody by order of the consul, and sent to England; and Richardson would have 
also been apprehended, but, being upon his guard, and learning what had happened to 
his companion, he embarked on board a ship bound for Tripoli, where he arrived in 
safety.
	At this place he drew a bill on an English merchant of Leghorn, by which he 
obtained twenty pounds, and then embarked for the island of Malta; he sailed from 
thence to Saragossa, in the island of Sicily, whence going to Messina, he was known 
by a gentleman who bad lived at Ancona, and who, remembering his engagement in 
the service of Captain Hartley, bad him apprehended on suspicion of the murder.
	He remained in prison at Messina nine months: on which be wrote a petition to 
the King of Naples, setting forth that he had been a servant to his father, and praying 
the royal orders for his release. In consequence of this petition the governor of 
Messina was commanded to set him at liberty; on which be travelled to Rome, and 
thence to Civita Vecchia, where he hoped to get employment on board the Pope's 
gallies in consequence of having turned Roman Catholic.
	While he was at Civita Vecchia be became known to Captain Blomet, who 
invited bin, with other company, on board his ship: when the company was gone, the 
captain showed him a letter, in which he was described as one of the murderers of 
Captain Hartley. Richardson denied the charge; but the captain calling down some 
hands, be was put in irons, and sent to Leghorn, whence be was transmitted to Lisbon: 
here he remained three months, and being then put on board the packet-boat, and 
brought to Falmouth, be was conveyed to London. Richardson was lodged first in the 
Marshalsea, but afterwards removed to Newgate; and, being tried at the Old Bailey, 
received sentence of death, along with Coyle, for the murder of Captain Hartley.
	Richard Coyle was a native of Devonshire, and born near Exeter. His parents 
having given him such an education as was proper to qualify him for a maritime life, 
be was apprenticed to the master of a trading vessel, and served his time with 
reputation to himself and satisfaction to his employer.
	When his time was expired, he made several voyages in ships of war, and 
likewise served on board various merchantmen; he had also been master of a ship for 
seventeen years, generally sailing from, and returning to, the port of London. In these 
commands he maintained a good character; but, meeting with misfortunes, he was 
reduced to serve as mate in different ships; and at length sailed with Captain Hartley, 
bound to the Levant, when he became acquainted with Richardson, as already related.
	After conviction Coyle acknowledged the equity of the sentence against him 
and, in some letters to his friends, confessed his penitence for the crime of which he 
had been guilty, and his readiness to yield his life as an atonement for his offences.
	With respect to Richardson, he seemed regardless of the dreadful fate that 
awaited him; and, having lived a life of vice and dissipation, appeared altogether 
indifferent to the manner in which that life should end.
	The above-mentioned malefactors were hanged at Execution Dock on the 25th 
of January, 1738.
	With regard to Coyle, we do not hear that he had been guilty of any notorious 
crime but that for which he died; but the life of Richardson was such a continued 
scene of irregularity, deception, and fraud, as is almost unequalled. His treachery to 
the many unhappy women of whom he pretended to be enamoured was, alone, 
deserving of the fate which finally fell to his lot.


GEORGE MANLEY 
Executed at Wicklow, in Ireland, in August, 1738, for murder.

	WE have no particulars, either of the life of this criminal, or the circumstances 
attending the horrid crime for which he was executed. We have, indeed, found a note, 
briefly naming the case of George Manley, but evidently inserted for the purpose of 
introducing a singular speech, made by him to the spectators, at the place of 
execution, which evinces strong natural abilities, and a knowledge of mankind, 
seldom found in criminals of his description. As we have never met with a dying 
speech so satirical and severe upon the general turpitude of mankind, we readily 
present it to our readers. Be it said, that this man was hardened, fearless, or mad; we 
exclaim with Shakespeare, "If this be madness, there is method in it."
	George Manley, having arrived at the place of execution, behaved in a strange 
and undaunted manner, addressing the spectators thus:
	"My Friends,
	"You assemble to see — What? — A man take a leap into the abyss of death. 
Look, and you shall see me go, with as much courage as Curtius, when he leapt into 
the gulf to save his country from destruction. What then will will you see of me!—
You say, that no man without virtue can be courageous. You see, I am courageous. 
You'll say, I have killed a man. — Marlborough killed his thousands, and Alexander 
his millions: Marlborough and Alexander, and many others who have done the like, 
are famous in history for Great Men. But I killed one solitary man. — Aye, that's the 
case. — One solitary man. I'm a little murderer, and must be hanged. Marlborough 
and Alexander plundered countries — They were Great Men. I ran in debt with the 
ale-wife, I must be hanged.
	"Now, my friends, I have drawn a parallel between two of the greatest men 
that ever lived, and myself; but these were men of former days. Now I'll speak a word 
of some of the present days: How many men were lost in Italy and upon the Rhine, 
during the last war, for settling a king in Poland? Both sides could not be in the right; 
they are Great Men; but I killed a solitary man, I'm a little fellow. The King of Spain 
takes our ships, plunders our merchants, kills and tortures our men; but what of all 
that? What he does is good; he's a Great Man, he is clothed in purple, his instruments 
of murder are bright and shining, mine was, but a rusty gun; and so much for 
comparison.
	"Now, I would fain know, what authority there is in Scripture for a rich man to 
murder, to plunder, to torture, and ravage whole countries; and what law it is, that 
condemns a poor man to death for killing a solitary man, or for stealing a solitary 
sheep to feed his family. But bring the matter closer to our own country: What is the 
difference between running in a poor man's debt, and by the power of gold, or any 
other privilege, preventing him from. obtaining his right; and clapping a pistol to a 
man's breast, and taking from him his purse? Yet the one shall thereby obtain a coach, 
and honours, and titles, &c. The other — What? — A cart and a rope.
	"From what I have said, my brethren, you may, perhaps, imagine I am 
hardened; but believe me, I am fully convinced of my follies, and acknowledge the 
just judgment of God has overtaken me: I have no hopes, but from the merits of my 
Redeemer, who I hope will have mercy on me, as he knows that murder was far from 
my heart, and what I did was through rage and passion, being provoked thereto by the 
deceased.
	Take warning, my dear comrades: Think! O think! what I would now give, 
that I had lived another life."


RICHARD TURPIN 
A famous Highway Robber, who shot dead one of his own Comrades and 
was executed at York on 7th of April, 1739

  
Dick Turpin in his Cave in Epping Forest
	This notorious character was for a long time the dread of travellers on the 
Essex road, on account of the daring robberies which he daily committed; was also a 
noted house-breaker, and was for a considerable time remarkably successful in his 
desperate course, but was at length brought to an ignominious end, in consequence of 
circumstances which, in themselves, may appear trifling. He was apprehended in 
consequence of shooting a fowl, and his brother refusing to pay sixpence for the 
postage of his letter occasioned his conviction.
	He was the son of a farmer at Thackstead in Essex; and, having received a 
common school education, was apprenticed to a butcher in Whitechapel; but was 
distinguished from his early youth for the impropriety of his behaviour, and the 
brutality of his manners. On the expiration of his apprenticeship, he married a young 
woman of East Ham, in Essex, named Palmer: but he had not been long married 
before he took to the practice of stealing his neighbours' cattle, which he used to kill 
and cut up for sale.
	Having stolen two oxen belonging to Mr. Giles, of Plaistow, he drove them to 
his own house; but two of Giles's servants, suspecting who was the robber, went to 
Turpin's where they saw two beasts of such size as had been lost: but as the hides 
were stripped from them, it was impossible to say that they were the same: but 
learning that Turpin used to dispose of his hides at Waltham-Abbey, they went thither, 
and saw the hides of the individual beasts that had been stolen.
	No doubt now remaining who was the robber, a warrant was procured for the 
apprehension of Turpin; but, learning that the peace-officers were in search of him, he 
made his escape from the back window of his house, at the very moment that the 
others were entering at the door.
	Having retreated to a place of security, he found means to inform his wife 
where he was concealed; on which she furnished him with money, with which he 
travelled into the hundreds of Essex, where he joined a gang of smugglers, with whom 
he was for some time successful; till a set of the Custom house officers, by one 
successful stroke, deprived him of all his ill-acquired gains.
	Thrown out of this kind of business, he connected himself with a gang of deer-
stealers, the principal part of whose depredations were committed on Epping Forest, 
and the parks in its neighbourhood: but this business not succeeding to the expectation 
of the robbers, they determined to commence house-breakers.
	Their plan was to fix on houses that they presumed contained any valuable 
property; and, while one of them knocked at the door, the others were to rush in, and 
seize whatever they might deem worthy of their notice.
	The first attack of this kind was at the house of Mr. Strype, an old man who 
kept a chandler's shop at Watford, whom they robbed of all the money in his 
possession, but did not offer him any personal abuse.
	Turpin now acquainted his associates that there was an old woman at 
Loughton, who was in possession of seven or eight hundred pounds; whereupon they 
agreed to rob her; and when they came to the door, one of them knocked, and the rest 
forcing their way into the house, tied handkerchiefs over the eyes of the old woman 
and her maid.
	This being done, Turpin demanded what money was in the house; and the 
owner hesitating to tell him, he threatened to set her on the fire if she did not make an 
immediate discovery. Still, however, she declined to give the desired information; on 
which the villains actually placed her on the fire, where she sat till the tormenting 
pains compelled her to discover her hidden treasure; so that the robbers possessed 
themselves of above 400l. and decamped with the booty.
  
Dick Turpin placing an old woman on the fire, to compel the discovery of her 
treasure
	Some little time after this they agreed to rob the house of a farmer near 
Barking; and knocking at the door, the people declined to open it; on which they 
broke it open; and having bound the farmer, his wife, his son-in-law, and the servant 
maid, they robbed the house of above 700l.; which delighted Turpin so much that he 
exclaimed, "Aye, this will do if it would always be so!" and the robbers retired with 
their prize, which amounted to above 80l. for each of them.
	This desperate gang, now flushed with success, determined to attack the house 
of Mr. Mason, the keeper of Epping Forest; and the time was affixed when the plan 
was to be carried into execution; but Turpin having gone to London, to spend his 
share of the former booty, intoxicated himself to such a degree, that he totally forgot 
the appointment.
	Nevertheless, the rest of the gang resolved, that the absence of their 
companion should not frustrate the proposed design; and having taken a solemn oath 
to break every article of furniture in Mason's house, they set out on their expedition.
	Having gained admission, they beat and kicked the unhappy man with great 
severity. Finding an old man sifting by the fire-side they permitted him to remain 
uninjured; and Mr. Mason's daughter escaped their fury, by running out of the house, 
and taking shelter in a hog-sty.
	After ransacking the lower part of the house, and doing much mischief, they 
went up stairs, where they broke every thing that fell in their way, and among the rest 
a china punchbowl, from which dropped one hundred and twenty guineas, which they 
made prey of, and effected their escape. They now went to London, in search of 
Turpin, with whom they shared the booty, though he had not taken an active part in 
the execution of the villainy.
	On the 11th of January, 1735, Turpin and five of his companions went to the 
house of Mr. Saunders, a rich farmer at Charlton in Kent, between seven and eight in 
the evening, and having knocked at the door, asked if Mr. Saunders was at home. 
Being answered in the affirmative, they rushed into the house, and found Mr. 
Saunders, with his wife and friends, playing at cards in the parlour. They told the 
company that they should remain uninjured, if they made no disturbance. Having 
made prize of a silver snuff-box which lay on the table a part of the gang stood guard 
over the rest of the company, while the others attended Mr. Saunders through the 
house, and breaking open his escritoires and closets, stole about 100l. exclusive of 
plate.
	During these transactions the servant maid ran up stairs, barring the door of 
her room, and called out, "Thieves!" with a view of alarming the neighbourhood; but 
the robbers broke open the door of her room, secured her, and then robbed the house 
of all the valuable property they had not before taken. Finding some minced-pies, and 
some bottles of wine, they sat down. to regale themselves; and meeting with a bottle 
of brandy, they compelled each of the company to drink a glass of it.
	Mrs. Saunders fainting through terror, they administered some drops in water 
to her, and recovered her to the use of her senses. Having staid in the house a 
considerable time, they packed up their booty and departed, having first declared, that 
if any of the family gave the least alarm within two hours, or advertised the marks of 
the stolen plate, they would return and murder them at a future time.
	The division of the plunder having taken place, they, on the 18th of the same 
month, went to the house of Mr. Sheldon, near Croydon, in Surrey, where they arrived 
about seven in the evening. Having got into the yard, they perceived a light in the 
stable, and going into it, found the coachman attending his horses. Having 
immediately bound him, they quitted the stable, and meeting Mr. Sheldon in the yard, 
they seized him, and compelling him to conduct them into the house, they stole eleven 
guineas, with the jewels, plate, and other things of value, to a large amount. Having 
committed this robbery, they returned Mr. Sheldon two guineas, and apologized for 
their conduct.
	This being done, they hastened to the Black Horse, in the Broad-way, 
Westminster, where they concerted the robbery of Mr. Lawrence, of Edgware, near 
Stanmore, in Middlesex, for which place they set out on the 4th of February, and 
arrived at a public-house in that village, about five o'clock in the evening. From this 
place they went to Mr. Lawrence's house, where they arrived about seven o'clock, just 
as he had discharged some people who had worked for him.
	Having quitted their horses at the outer gate, one of the robbers going 
forwards, found a boy who had lust returned from folding his sheep; the rest of the 
gang following, a pistol was presented and instant destruction threatened if he made 
any noise. They then took off his garters, and tied his hands, and told him to direct 
them to the door, and when they knocked, to answer, and bid the servants open it, in 
which case they would not hurt him; but when the boy came to the door he was so 
terrified that he could not speak; on which one of the gang knocked, and a man 
servant, imagining it was one of the neighbours, opened the door, whereupon they all 
rushed in, armed with pistols.
	Having seized Mr. Lawrence and his servant, they threw a cloth over their 
faces, and taking the boy into another room, demanded what fire-arms were in the 
house; to which he replied, only an old gun, which they broke in pieces. They then 
bound Mr. Lawrence and his man, and made them sit by the boy; and Turpin 
searching the old gentleman, took from him a guinea, a Portugal piece, and some 
silver; but not being satisfied with this booty, they forced him to conduct them up 
stairs, where they broke open a closet, and stole some money and plate: but that not 
being sufficient to satisfy them, they threatened to murder Mr. Lawrence, each of 
them destining him to a different death, as the savageness of his own nature prompted 
him. At length one of them took a kettle of water from the fire, and threw it over him; 
but it providentially happened not to be hot enough to scald him.
	In the interim, the maidservant who was churning butter in the dairy, hearing a 
noise in the house, apprehended some mischief; on which she blew out her candle to 
screen herself; but being found in the course of their search, one of the miscreants 
compelled her to go up stairs, where he gratified his brutal passion by force. They 
then robbed the house of all the valuable effects they could find, locked the family in 
the parlour, threw the key in the garden, and took their ill-gotten plunder to London.
	The particulars of this atrocious robbery being represented to the king, a 
proclamation was issued for the apprehension of the offenders, promising a pardon to 
any one of them who would impeach his accomplices; and a reward of 50l. was 
offered, to be paid on conviction. This, however, had no effect; the robbers continued 
their depredations as before; and, flushed with the success they had met with, seemed 
to bid defiance to the laws.
	On the 7th of February, six of them assembled at the White Bear Inn, in 
Drury-lane, where they agreed to rob the house of Mr. Francis, a farmer near Mary-le-
bone. Arriving at the place, they found a servant in the cow-house, whom they bound 
fast, and threatened to murder, if he was not perfectly silent. This being done, they led 
him into the stable, where finding another of the servants, they bound him in the same 
manner.
	In the interim Mr. Francis happening to come home, they presented their 
pistols to his breast, and threatened instant destruction to him, if he made the least 
noise or opposition. Having bound the master in the stable with his servants, they 
rushed into the house, tied Mrs. Francis, her daughter, and the maidservant, and beat 
them in a most cruel manner. One of the thieves stood as a sentry while the rest rifled 
the house, in which they found a silver tankard, a medal of Charles the First, a gold 
watch, several gold rings, a considerable sum of money, and a variety of valuable 
linen and other effects, which they conveyed to London.
	Hereupon a reward of 100l. was offered for the apprehension of the offenders: 
in consequence of which two of them were taken into custody, tried, convicted on the 
evidence of an accomplice, and hanged in chains: and the whole gang being dispersed, 
Turpin went into the country to renew his depredations on the public.
	On a journey towards Cambridge, he met a man genteelly dressed, and well 
mounted: and expecting a good booty, he presented a pistol to the supposed 
gentleman, and demanded his money. The party thus stopped happened to be one 
King, a famous highwayman, who knew Turpin; and when the latter threatened 
destruction if he did not deliver his money, King burst into a fit of laughter, and said, 
"What, dog eat dog? — Come, come, brother Turpin; if you don't know me, I know 
you, and shall be glad of your company."
	These brethren in iniquity soon struck the bargain, and immediately entering 
on business, committed a number of robberies; till at length they were so well known, 
that no public-house would receive them as guests. Thus situated they fixed on a spot 
between the King's-Oak and the Loughton Road, on Epping Forest, where they made 
a cave, which was large enough to receive them and their horses.
	This cave was inclosed within a sort of thicket of bushes and brambles, 
through which they could look and see passengers on the road, while themselves 
remained unobserved.
	From this station they used to issue, and robbed such a number of persons, that 
at length the very pedlars who travelled the road, carried fire-arms for their defence: 
and, while they were in this retreat, Turpin's wife used to supply them with 
necessaries, and frequently remained in the cave during the night.
	Having taken a ride as far as Bungay, in Suffolk, they observed two young 
women receive fourteen pounds for corn, on which Turpin resolved to rob them of the 
money. King objected, saying it was a pity to rob such pretty girls: but Turpin was 
obstinate, and obtained the booty.
	Upon their return home on the following day, they stopped a Mr. Bradele, of 
London, who was riding in his chariot with his children. The gentleman, seeing only 
one robber, was pre paring to make resistance, when King called to Turpin to hold the 
horses. They took from the gentleman his watch, money, and an old mourning ring; 
but returned the latter, as he declared that its intrinsic value was trifling, yet he was 
very unwilling to part with it.
	Finding that they readily parted with the ring, he asked them what he must 
give for the watch: on which King said to Turpin, "What say ye, Jack? — Here seems 
to be a good honest fellow; shall we let him have the watch?" — Turpin replied, "Do 
as you please;" on which King said to the gentleman, "You must pay six guineas for 
it: we never sell for more, though the watch should be worth six and thirty." The 
gentleman promised that the money should be left at the Dial, in Birchin-lane.
	On the 4th of May, 1737, Turpin was guilty of murder, which arose from the 
following circumstance: A reward of 1001. having been offered for apprehending 
him, one Thomas Morris, a servant of Mr. Thompson, one of the keepers of Epping 
Forest, accompanied by a higgler, set out in order to apprehend him. Turpin seeing 
them approach near his dwelling, Mr. Thompson's man having a gun, he mistook 
them for poachers; on which he said, there were no hares near that thicket: "No, (said 
Morris) but I have found a Turpin;" and presenting his gun required him to surrender.

  
Dick Turpin shooting Thoimas Morris

	Hereupon Turpin spoke to him, as in a friendly manner, and gradually 
retreated at the same time, till having seized his own gun, he shot him dead on the 
spot, and the higgler ran off with the utmost precipitation.
	This murder being represented to the Secretary of State, the following 
proclamation was issued by government, which we give a place to, from its describing 
the person of this notorious depredator.
	"It having been represented to the King, that Richard Turpin did, on 
Wednesday, the 4th of May last, barbarously murder Thomas Morris, servant to 
Henry Thompson, one of the keepers of Epping Forest, and commit other notorious 
felonies and robberies, near London, his Majesty is pleased to promise his most 
gracious pardon to any of his accomplices, and a reward of 200l. to any person or 
persons that shall discover him, so that he may be apprehended and convicted. Turpin 
was born at Thackstead, in Essex, is about thirty, by trade a butcher, about five feet 
nine inches high, very much marked with the small-pox, his cheek-bones broad, his 
face thinner towards the bottom; his visage short, pretty upright, and broad about the 
shoulders."
	Turpin, to avoid the proclamation, went further into the country in search of 
his old companion King: and in the mean time sent a letter to his wife, to meet him at 
a public-house at Hertford. The woman attended according to this direction; and her 
husband coming into the house soon after she arrived, a butcher, to whom he owed 
five pounds, happened to see him; on which he said, "Come, Dick, I know you have 
money now; and if you will pay me, it will be of great service."
	Turpin told him that his wife was in the next room; that she had money, and 
that he should he paid immediately; but while the butcher was hinting to some of his 
acquaintance, that the person present was Turpin, and that they might take him into 
custody after he had received his debt, the highwayman made his escape through a 
window, and rode off with great expedition.
	Turpin having found King, and a man named Potter, who had lately connected 
himself with them, they set off towards London, in the dusk of the evening; but when 
they came near the Green Man, on Epping Forest, they overtook a Mr. Major, who 
riding on a very fine horse, and Turpin's beast being jaded he obliged the rider to 
dismount, and exchange horses.
	The robbers now pursued their journey towards London, and Mr. Major going 
to the Green Man, gave an account of the affair; on which it was conjectured that 
Turpin had been the robber, and that the horse which he exchanged must have been 
stolen.
	It was on a Saturday evening that this robbery was committed; but Mr. Major 
being advised to print hand-bills immediately, notice was given to the landlord of the 
Green Man, that such a horse as Mr. Major had lost, had been left at the Red Lion, in 
Whitechapel. The landlord going thither, determined to wait till some person came for 
it; and, at about eleven at night, King's brother came to pay for the horse, and take him 
away: on which he was immediately seized, and conducted into the house.
	Being asked what right he had to the horse, he said he had bought it; but the 
landlord examining a whip which he had in his hand, found a button at the end of the 
handle half broken off, and the name of Major on the remaining half. Hereupon he 
was given into the custody of a constable; but as it was not supposed that he was the 
actual robber, he was told, that he should have his liberty, if he would discover his 
employer.
	Hereupon he said, that a stout man, in a white duffel coat, was waiting for the 
horse in Red Lion-street; on which the company going thither, saw King, who drew a 
pistol attempted to fire it, but it flashed in the pan; he then endeavoured to draw out 
another pistol, but he could not, as it got entangled in his pocket.
	At this time Turpin was watching at a small distance and riding towards the 
spot, King cried out, "Shoot him, or we are taken;" on which Turpin fired, and shot 
his companion, who called out, "Dick, you have killed me;" which the other hearing, 
rode off at full speed.
	King lived a week after this affair, and gave information that Turpin might be 
found at a house near Hackney-marsh; and, on inquiry, it was discovered that Turpin 
had been there on the night that he rode off, lamenting that he had killed King, who 
was his most faithful associate.
	For a considerable time did Turpin skulk about the forest, having been 
deprived of his retreat in the cave since he shot the servant of Mr. Thompson. On the 
examination of this cave there were found two shirts, two pairs of stockings, a piece 
of ham, and a part of a bottle of wine.
	Some vain attempts were made to take this notorious offender into custody; 
and among the rest, the huntsman of a gentleman in the neighbourhood went in search 
of him with blood-hounds. Turpin perceiving them, and recollecting that King Charles 
II. evaded his pursuers under covert of the friendly branches of the oak, mounted one 
of those trees under which the hounds passed, to his inexpressible terror, so that he 
determined to make a retreat into Yorkshire.
	Going first to Long Sutton, in Lincolnshire, he stole some horses, for which he 
was taken into custody, but he escaped from the constable as he was conducting him 
before a magistrate, and hastened to Welton, in Yorkshire, where he went by the name 
of John Palmer, and assumed the character of a gentleman.
	He now frequently went into Lincolnshire, where he stole horses, which he 
brought into Yorkshire, and either sold or exchanged them.
	He often accompanied the neighbouring gentlemen on their parties of hunting 
and shooting; and one evening, on a return from an expedition of the latter kind, he 
wantonly shot a cock belonging to his landlord. On this Mr. Hall, a neighbour, said, 
"You have done wrong in shooting your landlord's cock;" to which Turpin replied, 
that if he would stay while he loaded his gun, he would shoot him also.
	Irritated by this insult, Mr. Hall informed the landlord of what had passed; and 
application being made to some magistrates, a warrant was granted for the 
apprehension of the offender, who being taken into custody, and carried before a 
bench of justices, then assembled at the quarter-sessions, at Beverley, they demanded 
security for his good behaviour, which he being unable, or unwilling to give, was 
committed to Bridewell.
	On inquiry it appeared that he made frequent journeys into Lincolnshire, and 
on his return always abounded in money, and was likewise in possession of several 
horses; so that it was conjectured he was a horse-stealer and highwayman.
	On this the magistrates went to him on the following day, and demanded who 
he was, where he lived, and what was his employment? He replied in substance, "that 
about two years ago he had lived at Long Sutton, in Lincolnshire, and was by trade a 
butcher, but that having contracted several debts, for sheep that proved rotten, he was 
obliged to abscond, and come to live in Yorkshire."
	The magistrates not being satisfied with this tale, commissioned the clerk of 
the peace to write into Lincolnshire, to make the necessary inquiries respecting the 
supposed John Palmer. The letter was carried by a special messenger, who brought an 
answer from the magistrate in the neighbourhood, importing that John Palmer was 
well known, though he had never carried on trade there: that he had been accused of 
sheep-stealing for which he had been in custody but had made his escape from the 
peace officers: and that there were several informations lodged against him for horse-
stealing.
	Hereupon the magistrates thought it prudent to remove him to York Castle, 
where he had not been more than a month, when two persons from Lincolnshire came 
and claimed a mare and foal, and likewise a horse, which he had stolen in that county.
	After he had been about four month in prison, he wrote the following letter to 
his brother in Essex:
"Dear Brother, 
York, Feb. 6, 1739. 
	"I am sorry to acquaint you, that I am now under confinement in York Castle, 
for horse-stealing. If I could procure an evidence from London to give me a character, 
that would go a great way towards my being acquitted. I had not been long in this 
county before my being apprehended, so that it would pass off the readier. For 
Heaven's sake dear brother, do not neglect me; you will know what I mean, when I 
say, 
I am yours, 
"JOHN PALMER."
	This letter being returned, unopened, to the Post-Office in Essex, because the 
brother would not pay the postage of it, was accidentally seen by Mr. Smith, a school-
master, who having taught Turpin to write, immediately knew his hand, on which he 
carried the letter to a magistrate, who broke it open; by which it was discovered that 
the supposed John Palmer was the real Richard Turpin.
	Hereupon the magistrates of Essex dispatched Mr. Smith to York, who 
immediately selected him from all the other prisoners in the castle. This Mr. Smith, 
and another gentle man, afterwards proved his identity on his trial.
	On the rumour that the noted Turpin was a prisoner in York Castle, persons 
flocked from all parts of the country to take a view of him, and debates ran very high 
whether he was the real person or not. Among others who visited him, was a young 
fellow who pretended to know the famous Turpin, and having regarded him a 
considerable time with looks of great attention, he told the keeper he would bet him 
half a guinea that he was not Turpin; on which the prisoner, whispering the keeper, 
said, "Lay him the wager, and I'll go your halves."
	When this notorious malefactor was brought to trial, he was convicted on two 
indictments, and received sentence of death.
	After conviction he wrote to his father, imploring him to intercede with a 
gentleman and lady of rank to make interest that his sentence might be remitted; and 
that he might be transported. The father did what was in his power: but the notoriety 
of his character was such, that no persons would exert themselves in his favour.
	This man lived in the most gay and thoughtless manner after conviction, 
regardless of all considerations of futurity, and affecting to make a jest of the dreadful 
fate that awaited him.
	Not many days before his execution, he purchased a new fustian frock and a 
pair of pumps, in order to wear them at the time of his death: and, on the day before, 
he hired five poor men, at ten shillings each, to follow the cart as mourners: and he 
gave hatbands and gloves to several other persons: and he also left a ring, and some 
other articles, to a married woman in Lincolnshire, with whom he had been 
acquainted.
	On the morning of his death he was put into a cart, and being followed by his 
mourners, as above-mentioned, he was drawn to the place of execution, in his way to 
which he bowed to the spectators with an air of the most astonishing indifference and 
intrepidity.
	When he came to the fatal tree, he ascended the ladder; when his right leg 
trembling, he stamped it down with an air of assumed courage, as if he was ashamed 
of discovering any signs of fear, Having conversed with the executioner about half an 
hour, he threw himself off the ladder, and expired in a few minutes.
	The spectators of the execution were affected at his fate, as he was 
distinguished by the comeliness of his appearance. The corpse was brought to the 
Blue Boar, in Castle-Gate, York, where it remained till the next morning, when it was 
interred in the church-yard of St. George's parish, with an inscription on the coffin, 
with the initials of his name, and his age. The grave was dug remarkably deep, but 
notwithstanding the people who acted as mourners took such measures as they 
thought would secure the body: it was carried off about three o'clock on the following 
morning; the populace, however, got intimation whither it was conveyed, and found it 
in a garden belonging to one of the surgeons of the city.
	Having got possession of it they laid it on a board, and carried it through the 
streets in a kind of triumphal manner, they then filled the coffin with unslacked lime, 
and buried it in the grave where it had been before deposited.


DAVID ROBERTS 
Executed for high treason, in diminishing the gold coin of the realm, April 3, 
1739.

	This malefactor, who was a native of Chepstow, in Monmouthshire, was 
apprenticed to a joiner; but quitting his master's service, he worked some time as a 
journeyman at the Devizes, in Wiltshire, where he married a wife with a fortune of 
three hundred pounds.
	His wife dying in childbed, he remained at the Devizes a considerable time, 
during which he dissipated all his wife's fortune, except about forty pounds, with 
which he came to London, and took lodgings with a widow, who kept a public-house. 
Roberts soon became so intimate with the widow, that she told him it was necessary 
he should marry her. He embraced the proposal, imagining that it would procure him 
a decent establishment in life; but being frequently arrested for debts contracted by his 
wife previous to the marriage, he sold the household furniture to a broker, and left her 
to provide for herself.
	He now engaged in partnership with his brother, a carpenter in Southwark, and 
saved a considerable sum of money. He next embarked in business for himself, and 
obtained a large share of credit, but, when his debts became due, he took lodgings 
within the rules of the King's Bench, in order to evade their payment.
	Even while in this situation he undertook a piece of work by which he made 
three hundred pounds profit; and might have gained more, but that he quarrelled with 
his employer. At this period, one Sarah Bristow, who had been transported for a 
felony, returned after the expiration of a year, and becoming acquainted with Roberts, 
lived with him as his wife for a considerable time. She went with him to Bristol, 
where he rented an inn, which he furnished on credit: but one of his London creditors 
getting notice of his retreat, arrested him, and Roberts standing trial, cast him on some 
informality in the Writ, he, however, thought it imprudent to remain, and shipping his 
effects for London, he and Mrs. Bristow came to town, and lodged again within the 
rules of the Bench.
	Notwithstanding his situation, he took an inn at Coventry, but was observed by 
a timber-merchant named Smith, to whom he owed fifty-five pounds. Mr. Smith 
finding that Roberts had taken the house, arrested him for the above sum. Roberts 
found means to compromise this affair; but his other creditors learning whither he had 
retired, it became necessary to conceal himself.
	Roberts, thinking it would be unsafe to remain in Coventry, commissioned 
Mrs. Bristow to purchase such goods as she could get on credit, with a view to carry 
them off to some place where they were not known.
	He now came to London, leaving Mrs. Bristow to send the goods by a 
waggon; but some of the creditors, having intelligence of what was intended, attached 
them.
	Mrs. Bristow wrote to Roberts, giving a short account of what had happened; 
on which he sent one Carter to obtain a full information: but not hearing from him as 
he expected, Roberts set out for Coventry, notwithstanding the risk to which he 
exposed himself.
	On his arrival he found the house nearly stripped, and Mrs. Bristow and Carter 
in a high degree of intimacy. However, he did not stay long to examine into the state 
of affairs, being advised to retire to London, with all expedition.
	Roberts now moved the Court of King's Bench for a rule against his creditors, 
to shew cause why they had attached his goods, and the Court recommending an 
arbitration, it was awarded that Roberts should receive one hundred and thirty pounds, 
and give his creditors a bill of sale for the lease and effects: on his receiving this sum, 
Carter applied to him to borrow twenty pounds, with which he said he could acquire a 
fortune, by purchasing a liquid that would dissolve gold, but Roberts would not lend 
him the money; Carter, however, found means to raise it, and took to the practice of 
diminishing the coin, in which he was so successful that he soon abounded in cash. 
Roberts became very anxious to know the secret, but the other refusing to discover it, 
he determined on a practice equally dishonest and dangerous, which was that of filing 
gold. When he had filed off as much dust as was worth ten pounds, Mrs. Bristow stole 
the box and sold the contents; after this he employed a person at half-a-crown a day to 
sell the filings, but, not agreeing together, he determined to act for himself; and, 
having sold a quantity of dust to a refiner, went to a public-house near Hicks's Hall, 
kept by a Mr. Rogers, whom he asked to give him a bank-note for some gold. Rogers, 
on feeling the guineas, found that some of the dust stuck to his fingers; on which he 
said, "What have we got here? The fellow who filed these guineas ought to be hanged 
for doing his business in so clumsy a manner." Without saying more, he stepped out, 
and procured a constable, who took Roberts into custody; but after detaining him six 
hours, discharged him on his own authority.
	Roberts prosecuted the publican and constable for false imprisonment; but 
failed in the suit, and an evidence in his behalf was committed on a charge of perjury, 
while the publican was bound to prosecute Roberts, who lodged privately at Islington.
	While he was in this retreat, and forming a design to go to Lisbon, Mrs. 
Bristow brought him a newspaper, in which his person was described; whereupon 
they went together to Chatham, and thence to Ramsgate, where they met Mrs. 
Bristow's brother, who was likewise included in the advertisement, and they all went 
on board a vessel bound for Calais, but quarrelling among themselves, the captain 
gave orders that they should be landed at Dover. Provoked by this, Roberts threw the 
captain into the sea, and if the boat had not been sent to take him up, he must 
infallibly have been drowned. The captain was no sooner on board than Roberts took 
the helm, and steered the vessel to her port; where Mrs. Bristow's brother making the 
custom-house officers acquainted with Roberts's character, his boxes were searched, 
and the implements for filing money found; but he escaped in the mean time to 
Dunkirk, whence, to avoid pursuit, he went to Ostend, and sending for Mrs. Bristow, 
they embarked for England, and took lodgings near the Strand.
	Roberts could not detach himself from the pursuit of filing money; and took a 
house at Bath, where he used to work at his occupation during the night,
	Going to a chemist's shop to purchase a liquid, he saw a person who knew 
him, on which he went home, and told Mrs Bristow that he was apprehensive of being 
taken into custody. Some officers came almost immediately and conveyed him before 
a justice of peace, who sent notice to London of his being in custody.
	When brought to his trial at the Old Bailey, he was convicted on the fullest 
evidence, and received sentence of death. Till the arrival of the warrant for his 
execution he scarcely mentioned any circumstances respecting his conduct; but was 
afterwards more explicit.
	On the night before his execution, he acknowledged that he had murdered his 
first wife during her lying-in.
	The second wife went to visit him in prison; but he declined seeing her, 
alleging that her company would only disturb him in his preparations for that awful 
state on which he was about to enter. The rest of his conduct was highly becoming his 
melancholy situation.


ABRAHAM WELLS 
Executed at Tyburn, May 30, 1739, for horse-stealing.

	ALL the accounts which we found of this criminal agree that he was such a 
dunce, when a boy, that though he had the chance of a common school education, he 
could not be taught even to read and write; and as a man, he was idle and extravagant. 
He was the son of an honest man, a carpenter at Enfield, who bound him to a butcher, 
at his native place, where he engaged in business for himself, and sold considerable 
quantities of meat by wholesale, at the London markets. He paid his addresses to a 
widow of some fortune, whom he married; but she prudently reserved a part of her 
property to her own use.
	When Wells had been married some time, he became so uneasy that his wife 
opposed his extravagance, that, being unhappy at home, he kept bad company, though 
it was some years before he committed the crime for which he lost his life.
	A man being indicted at the Old Bailey for horse-stealing, Wells became an 
evidence in his favour, but his testimony was of such a nature, that he was committed 
to Newgate for perjury, and not released till he had suffered six months' 
imprisonment, and paid a fine.
	He had now repeated quarrels with his wife and her relations; in consequence 
of which he neglected his business, so that he lost the greater part of his customers. 
Thus distressed in mind and circumstances, he stole a horse from a field near 
Edmonton, which he took to Smithfield Market, and offered for sale; but the owner of 
the horse having repaired to London before him, had him taken into custody on the 
spot, and carried before a magistrate, who committed him to prison.
	Previous to his trial he caused some of his relations to be served with 
subpoenas, to give evidence respecting him, and among the rest two of his wife's 
brothers; but these men instead of endeavouring to alleviate his distress, represented 
him to the court as a man of abandoned character, who had long since deserved the 
severest sentence of the law: nay, so virulent was their malice, that they told the court 
the circumstance of his having been committed for perjury, as above-mentioned. This 
conduct was justly censured by the judges, who represented the cruelty of their 
endeavouring to injure a man whom they were called in to serve: and observed that 
with regard to the perjury, he had already suffered the sentence of the law, so that it 
had no reference to the case in hand.
	The evidence against him being clear and positive, conviction followed of 
course, and he received sentence of death.
	After conviction he spoke with the utmost bitterness of reproach, respecting 
the conduct of his wife and relations; and though the former repeatedly went to 
Newgate, he constantly refused to see her, till within a few days of his death, when the 
approaching horror of his fate seemed to have made such an impression on his mind, 
that he consented to receive her visit.
	On their first meeting they wrung their hands in an agony of grief, but floods 
of tears coming to their relief, their affliction in some degree subsided: and when they 
mutually recriminated on each other; the wife abused the husband for ruining his 
family; and he said that she had been the occasion of his present misfortunes.
	On her next visit he again censured her conduct; on which she charged him 
with having associated with another woman; but this he solemnly denied, on the word 
of a dying man; and averred that the affair had no foundation but in the jealousy of her 
own disposition. The Ordinary of Newgate now interposed, and represented to Mrs. 
Wells the extreme impropriety of censuring a man in her husband's unhappy 
circumstances.
	On the day before his death his mind was agitated to such a degree, that it was 
thought he might be guilty of suicide, on which a man was engaged to be with him, to 
prevent the dreadful consequences: but his mind soon became more composed, and he 
employed himself in exercises of devotion.
	When he arrived at the fatal tree, he lamented the errors of his past life in the 
most affecting manner: but even, at that solemn period he could not help reflecting on 
his wife's relations, who, he said, had promoted his ruin.


JAMES CALDCLOUGH 
Executed for Robbery, July 2nd 1739.

	THE city of Durham gave birth to this offender, who was the son of people of 
fair character: they, having given him a decent education, put him apprentice to a 
shoemaker, with whom he lived about three years, till, having contracted a habit of 
idleness, and being attached to bad company, he quitted his master, and enlisted in the 
second regiment of foot-guards.
	He had not been long in London before he became acquainted with a fellow 
named Thomas, who offered to put him into an easy way of getting money; and 
Caldclough, listening to his invitation, dined with Thomas and some of his associates, 
on a Sunday, at a public house; and afterwards attended them to Newington Green, 
where they continued drinking for some time, and at the approach of evening set out 
towards London, with a view of robbing such persons as they might meet.
	As they crossed the fields towards Hoxton, they stopped a gentleman, whom 
they robbed of a watch and some silver, and, tying him to a gate, they retired to a 
public house in Brick Lane, Old Street, where they spent the night in riot and 
drunkenness.
	Caldclough being a young fellow of genteel appearance, and remarkable spirit, 
his accomplices advised him to commence highwayman; but, none of them having 
money to purchase horses and other necessaries to equip them in a genteel manner, it 
was determined that two of the gang should commit a robbery which might put them 
in a way of committing others.
	With this view they went into Kent and stole two horses, which they placed at 
a livery-stable near Moorfields; after which the gang went in a body to Welling, in 
Hertfordshire, where they broke open a house, and stole about fourteen pounds in 
money, and some other valuables, which furnished them with clothes and the other 
requisites for their intended expedition.
	Thus provided, they rode to Enfield Chase, where they robbed the passengers 
in a stage-coach of their watches and money; and soon afterwards stopped another 
coach in the road to Epping Forest, from which they got a large booty, and divided it 
at their place of meeting in Brick Lane, Old Street, spending the night in licentious 
revelry.
	But a short time had passed after this robbery when Caldclough and one of his 
companions rode to Epping Forest; and, having stopped a coach in which were two 
gentlemen and a young lady, a servant that was behind the coach would have attacked 
the robbers, but that the gentlemen desired him to desist, that the young lady might 
not be terrified. The gentlemen then gave the robbers their money, apologizing for the 
smallness of the sum, and saying that they should have been welcome to more had it 
been in their possession.
	As they were riding towards London, after committing this robbery, they 
quitted their horses, and fastened them to a tree, in order to rob the Woodford stage-
coach, which they observed to be full of passengers; but the coachman, suspecting 
their intent, drove off with such expedition that they could not overtake him.
	Disappointed in this attempt, they rode towards Wanstead, where they saw 
another coach, the passengers in which they intended to have robbed; but, as a number 
of butchers from London rode close behind the carriage, they thought propel to desist 
from so dangerous an attempt.
	Thus disappointed of the expected booty, Caldclough and Thomas, on the 
following day, which was Sunday, rode to Stamford Hill, where they robbed three 
persons of their watches, and about four pounds in cash. Flushed with this success, 
they determined to put every person they should meet under contribution; in 
consequence of which they robbed seven persons more before they reached London, 
from whom they obtained about ten guineas, with which they retired to the old place 
of resort in Brick Lane.
	Soon after this they rode to Finchley Common, where meeting with only 
empty carriages, they were returning to London, when they met the Barnet coach near 
Islington, and robbed the company of about fifteen shillings. On the following day 
they collected six shillings and sixpence from another of the Barnet coaches, and nine 
shillings from the Highgate stage, on their return to town; and this was the whole of 
the poor booty they obtained this day, at the imminent risk of their lives.
	A few days afterwards Caldclough and another of the gang stopped a person of 
very decent appearance near Hackney, and demanded his money; but the gentleman, 
bursting into tears, said he was in circumstances of distress, and possessed only 
eighteen-pence; on which, instead of robbing him, they made him a present of half a 
crown; a proof that sentiments of humanity may not be utterly banished even from the 
breast of a thief. On their return to town they robbed a man of fourteen shillings, and 
then went to their old place of retreat.
	On the day after this transaction they went to the Red Lion alehouse, in 
Aldersgate Street, where having drank all day, and being unable to pay the reckoning, 
they called for more liquor, and then quitted the house, saying that they would soon 
return. Going immediately towards Islington, they met a gentleman, to whom they 
said that they wanted a small sum to pay their reckoning. On this the gentleman called 
out 'Thieves!' and made all possible resistance; notwithstanding which they robbed 
him of a gold watch, which they carried to town and pawned, and then, going to the 
alehouse, defrayed the expenses of the day.
	In a little time after this one of the gang sold the two horses which had been 
stolen as before mentioned, and appropriated the money to his own use; after which 
he went into the country, and spent some time with his relations; but, finding it 
difficult to abstain from his old practices, he wrote to Caldclough, desiring he would 
meet him at St. Albans, where it was probable a good booty might be obtained.
	Caldclough obeyed the summons; and, on his arrival, found that the scheme 
was to rob the pack-horses belonging to the Coventry carrier. [The usual mode of 
conveying goods from one part of the kingdom to another was, formerly, by means of 
packhorses; but this has given place to road-waggons and canals.] The man drinking 
at a house near St. Albans, and permitting the horses to go forward, Caldclough and 
his accomplice, who had hidden themselves behind a hedge, rushed out and stopped 
the horses; and, having robbed the packages to the amount of fifty pounds, carried 
their booty to London, where they disposed of it.
	Having dissipated in extravagance the money acquired by this robbery, they 
went into Hertfordshire, to rob a gentleman whom they had learnt was possessed of a 
considerable sum. Getting into the yard near midnight, the owner of the house 
demanded what business they had there; to which they replied, 'Only to go through 
the yard;' whereupon the gentleman fired a gun, which, though it was loaded with 
powder only, terrified them so, that they decamped without committing the intended 
robbery.
	Caldclough, and one of his accomplices named Robinson, being reduced to 
circumstances of distress, determined to make depredations on the road between 
London and Kensington. While they were looking out for prey, two gentlemen, named 
Swafford and Banks, were observed on the road behind them; but Mr. Swafford being 
at some distance before his companion, Caldclough and Robinson, who were provided 
with hangers, robbed him of some silver; but not till they had first wounded him in a 
manner shocking to relate — they cut his nose almost from his face, and left him 
weltering in his blood.
	Soon afterwards Mr. Banks came up, whom they robbed of five guineas, and 
then, hurrying towards Kensington, went over the fields to Chelsea, where they took a 
boat, and crossed the Thames; and, walking to Lambeth, took another boat, which 
carried them to Westminster.
	In the mean time Mr. Banks, who had missed his. friend, proceeded to 
Kensington, where he made inquiry for him; but, finding that he had not reached that 
place, he was apprehensive that he might have been murdered; and, going back with a 
gentleman in search of him, they found him in the condition already described.
	Mr. Swafford was immediately removed to the house of a surgeon, where 
proper care being taken of him, he recovered his health, after a long series of diligent 
attendance; but his wounds were of such a kind as totally to disfigure the features of 
his face, his nose having been cut so as to hang over his mouth.
	The villains were taken into custody on the very day after the perpetration of 
this horrid deed, when Robinson being admitted an evidence against his accomplice, 
he was brought to trial at the next sessions, convicted, and received sentence of death.
	After conviction Caldclough seemed to entertain no hopes of a pardon; but, 
appropriating all his time to contrition for the vices of his past life, prepared for 
futurity with all the zeal of one who appeared to be a sincere penitent.
	He was executed at Tyburn, July 2, 1739, and made the following speech to 
the surrounding multitude: —
	'I humbly beg that all you young men whom I leave behind me would take 
warning in time, and avoid bad houses as well as bad company. Remember my dying 
words, lest some of you come to the same end, which I pray God you never may. 
What I am now going to suffer is the just punishment for my crimes; for, although I 
did not commit murder, yet I look upon myself equally guilty, as the poor gentleman 
must have died had he not met with assistance.
	'Were I able to make satisfaction to those whom I have wronged, I would do it; 
but, alas! I cannot, and therefore I pray that they will forgive me. I hope my life will 
be at least some satisfaction, as I have nothing besides to give: and, as I die in charity 
with all mankind, may the Lord Jesus receive my soul!'
	In the case of this malefactor, as in that of many others, we have a striking 
instance how extremely penitent a man may be when his penitence can avail nothing 
to the injured party. We hope that those who read narratives of this kind will reflect 
that the true way to be happy is never to he guilty of such crimes as will lay them 
under the necessity of such ineffectual repentance.


THOMAS LYMPUS 
Executed near Wells, in Somersetshire, 21st of September 1739, for robbing 
the Mail.

  
Lympus Robbing the Post-boy

	FROM serving as a messenger some years to the General Post Office, this man 
formed the dangerous resolution of robbing the mails. At that time the vast property in 
circulation by means of the post was not, as at present, secured from being plundered 
by any lurking thief upon the road.
	On the 21st of February, 1738, this public plunderer began his depredations by 
stopping the post-boy bringing the Bath and Bristol mails, about seven o'clock in the 
evening, at the end of Sunning Lane, two miles north of Reading, in Berkshire.
	For the apprehension of the robber the Postmaster-General offered a reward of 
two hundred pounds, over and above the reward by Act of Parliament for 
apprehending highwaymen; or if any accomplice in the said robbery should make a 
discovery of the person who committed the fact, such accomplice should be entitled to 
the reward of two hundred pounds, and also receive his Majesty's most gracious 
pardon. The advertisement described the robber to be a middle-sized man, wearing a 
great riding-coat, with a white velvet or plush cape.
	No sooner had Lympus rifled the bags of their most valuable contents than he 
determined upon attempting to make his escape to France. For this purpose he 
hastened to the nearest seaport, and actually landed there, but not before the officers 
of justice got information of his flight. They pursued him to France, and demanded 
him to be delivered up to them as a national robber; but on flying to the sanctuary of 
the Church, and declaring himself a Roman Catholic, he received protection, and for a 
while evaded the official laws of his own country. There is ever to be found in such as 
fly for a heinous crime, after some time passed abroad in safety, a desire to return, 
which in vain they struggle to suppress. So it was in some measure with T. Lympus, 
who could not rest with his booty in France, but returned in a short time for further 
plunder, and immediately committed another mail robbery, for which he was 
apprehended and brought to trial.
	It appeared by the evidence of the post-boy that he was stopped by the 
prisoner on horseback between the towns of Crewkerne and Sherborne, who 
compelled him to dismount, then bound him hand and foot, and rode off with the 
mail, containing twenty-four bags, from as many post towns.
	Having taken out the bank-notes, he again contemplated an escape to France, 
and for that purpose again embarked; but the winds were no longer propitious to his 
hopes, for the vessel was driven back, and obliged to put into Dartmouth. Here he 
offered one of the stolen notes in payment, endorsed by one Follet, of Topsham, and it 
being described in the account of the robbery he was suspected of being the robber. 
Apprehending himself to be in danger he immediately decamped, making the best of 
his way towards Kingsbridge; but he was pursued by seven men, who took him on a 
warrant being granted for that purpose. He was convicted of this robbery, and after 
much equivocation, confessed, since sentence of death, having robbed the Bristol mail 
a little more than a year before, and impeached one Patrick, a dealer in hops, as his 
accomplice.
	He was executed on the top of Dunkit Hill, within a mile of Wells, in 
Somersetshire, Sept. 21, 1739, and affected to die professing the religion he had 
adopted in France.
	The security now given to our mail-coaches rendering an open attempt on 
them impracticable, unless sustained by a whole band of robbers, recourse has been 
frequently had to artifice in order to get possession of the mail. One of these tricks 
was thus played off with success.
	It was customary to deposit the mail-bags at a private house in Castle Street, 
Reading, near to which the horses belonging to the mail were changed. The guard 
announced the approach of the mail to the inn, by sounding his horn, and, whilst the 
horses were putting to, he went to the receiving-house to exchange his bags. A horn 
was sounded in the street, quite late in the evening of the 26th of January, 1806, and 
soon after a man called for the downward bag, which was delivered to him, as usual, 
out of a window, and in return for which he gave a bag, which was afterwards found 
to contain shavings. The robbery was discovered soon after by the arrival of the mail, 
but not till the villains had effected their escape.


THOMAS BARKWITH 
An accomplished Scholar and Linguist, who was executed at Tyburn 1st of 
December, 1739, for Robbery

	THIS unfortunate young gentleman was the descendant of a respectable family 
in the Isle of Ely. At a very early period of life he was observed to possess a strength 
of understanding greatly beyond what could be expected at his years, and this 
determined his father to add to such extraordinary gifts of nature the advantages of a 
liberal education; nor was the necessary attention omitted to impress upon his mind a 
just idea of the principles of religion and the absolute necessity of practical virtue.
	Before the young gentleman had arrived at his fourteenth year he attained to a 
great proficiency in the Greek, Latin, French and Italian languages, and he afforded an 
indisputable proof of the depth of his penetration and the brilliancy of his fancy in the 
production of a variety of poetical and prose essays. His figure was pleasing, and 
improved by a graceful deportment; his manner of address was insinuating, and he 
excelled in the art of conversation. Soon after he had passed his fourteenth year he 
received an invitation to visit an aunt residing in the metropolis. He had not been 
many days at this lady's house before he became conspicuous throughout the whole 
circle of her acquaintance equally on the score of his mental powers and personal 
qualifications; and he was dissuaded by his friends from returning into the country, it 
being their unanimous opinion that London was, of all others, the place where 
opportunities would be most likely to occur which the youth might improve to the 
advancement of his fortune. A short time after his arrival in the metropolis he pro- 
cured a recommendation to a Master in Chancery of high reputation and extensive 
practice; and this gentleman appointed him to the superintendence of that department 
of his business which related to money matters. In this office he acquitted himself 
entirely to the satisfaction of his employer, who considered him as a youth in whom 
he might safely repose an unlimited confidence. He possessed the particular esteem of 
all those who had the happiness of his acquaintance; and it was their common opinion 
that his fine talents and great capacity for business could not fail to introduce him to 
some considerable station in life. The gentleman in whose service Barkwith had 
engaged, being under the necessity of going into Wales on some business respecting 
an estate there, commissioned Barkwith to receive the rents of a number of houses in 
London. In the neighbourhood of the solicitor lived a young lady of whom Barkwith 
had for some time been passionately enamoured, and immediately upon the departure 
of the former for Wales he determined to avail himself of the first opportunity of 
making a declaration of honourable love.
	Though the young lady did not mean to unite herself in marriage with Mr 
Barkwith, yet she encouraged his addresses; and to this disingenuous conduct is to be 
attributed the fatal reverse of his fortune from the most flattering prospect of acquiring 
a respectable situation in the world to the dreadful event of suffering an ignominious 
death at Tyburn.
	So entirely was his attention engrossed by the object of his love that his 
master's most important business was wholly neglected, and he appeared to have no 
object in view but that of ingratiating himself in the esteem of his mistress; to gratify 
whose extravagance and vanity he engaged in expenses greatly disproportioned to his 
income, by making her valuable presents and accompanying her to the theatres, balls, 
assemblies and other places of public entertainment.
	Upon the return of the solicitor he found the affairs which he had entrusted to 
Barkwith in a very embarrassed situation, and upon searching into the cause of this 
unexpected and alarming circumstance it was discovered that the infatuated youth had 
embezzled a considerable sum. The gentleman, having made a particular inquiry into 
the conduct of Barkwith, received such information as left but little hopes of his 
reformation; and therefore he, though reluctantly, yielded to the dictates of prudence, 
and resolved to employ him no longer.
	Barkwith now hired chambers, in order to transact law business on his own 
account; but as he had not been admitted an attorney he was under the necessity of 
acting under the sanction of another person's name; whence it may be concluded that 
his practice was not very extensive. He might, however, by a proper attention to his 
business, and a moderate economy in his expenses, have retrieved his affairs in a short 
time; but, unhappily, his intercourse with the young lady was still continued, and he 
thought no sacrifice too great for convincing her of the ardour of his affection.
	He resided at his chambers about six months, when his creditors became 
exceedingly importunate for him immediately to discharge their several demands. His 
necessities were so pressing as to drive him almost to desperation. He took horse on 
the morning of the 13th of November, pretending that he was going to Denham, in 
Buckinghamshire, in order to transact some important business in relation to an estate 
which was to devolve to a young lady, then in her minority. It is not now known 
whether he went to Denham; but about four o'clock in the afternoon he stopped a 
coach upon Hounslow Heath, and robbed a gentleman who was in the vehicle of a 
sum in silver not amounting to twenty shillings.
	In a short time a horseman came up, who was informed by the coachman that 
his master had been robbed by Barkwith, who was yet in sight. The horseman 
immediately rode to an adjacent farmhouse, where he procured pistols, and persuaded 
a person to accompany him in search of the highwayman, who after a long chase 
surrendered, saying to the people who surrounded him that he was a gentleman 
heavily oppressed with misfortunes, and supplicating in the most pathetic terms that 
they would favour his escape; but his entreaties had no effect.
	He was promptly secured during the night; and the next morning conducted 
before a magistrate for examination. He war ordered to London, where he was re-
examined, and then committed to Newgate.
	He was tried at the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey, and condemned to 
suffer death. He was conveyed to Tyburn on the 21st of December, 1739.


EDWARD JOINES 
Executed for the murder of his wife, December 21, 1739.

	ALTHOUGH nothing can be offered in extenuation for the horrid crime of 
murder, yet provocation, and passion, fermenting a sudden madness, have, sometimes 
precipitated men to do an act, which has plunged them into an abyss of mental misery. 
Contemplating such effects, we are willing to make some allowance for the 
commission of this murder. Had not the perpetrator been goaded by the unbridled 
tongue of his wife, abetted by that of his daughter-in-law,— and what domestic 
torments can be greater? we may conclude, that both might have lived the course of 
nature. This case should warn the matron not to irritate her husband; and should he, 
unhappily, break the bonds of prudence, we beseech her to recur alone to conciliation. 
Hard, indeed, is that man's heart who, in his cooler moments, will not listen to the soft 
remonstrances of a virtuous woman.
	The parents of Edward Joines were respectable housekeepers in Ratcliffe-
highway, who, being desirous that the boy should be qualified for business, placed 
him under the direction of a master of a day-school in Goodman's fields, where he 
continued a regular attendance about five years, but without gaining any considerable 
improvement.
	Soon after he had completed his fourteenth year, he was removed from the 
school, and his father informed him, that he was endeavouring to find some reputable 
tradesman who would take him as an apprentice: but the youth expressed an aversion 
to any occupation, but that of a gardener. Finding that he had conceived a strong 
prepossession in favour of this business, they bound him to a gardener in Stepney, 
whom he served, in an industrious and regular manner, for the space of seven years; 
and he, for some time afterwards, continued with the same master in the capacity of a 
journeyman, his parents being so reduced, through misfortunes, that they could not 
supply him with money to carry on business on his own account.
	A short time after the expiration of his apprenticeship, he married a milk-
woman, by whom he had seven children in the course of twenty years, during which 
time he lived in an amicable manner with his wife, earning a tolerable subsistence by 
honest industry. His children all died in their infancy, and upon the decease of his 
wife he procured employment at Bromley; and that he might lose but little time in 
going to, and returning from, his work, he hired a lodging at the lower end of Poplar, 
in a house kept by a widow, with whom he, in a few days, contracted a criminal 
familiarity. They had lived together about a twelvemonth, jointly defraying the 
household expenses, when she, more frequently than usual, gave way to the natural 
violence of her temper, threatening that he should not continue in the house unless he 
would marry her: which he consented to do, and, adjourning to the Fleet, the 
ceremony was performed.
	After their marriage their disagreements became, more frequent and violent; 
and upon the wife's daughter leaving her service, and coming to reside with them, she 
united with her mother in pursuing every measure that could tend to render the life of 
Joines insupportably miserable. On his return from work, one evening, a 
disagreement; as usual, took place, and being aggravated by her abusive language, he 
pushed her from him, and falling against the grate, her arm was much scorched, in 
consequence of this she swore the peace against him; but when they appeared before 
the magistrate who had granted the warrant for the apprehension of Joines, they were 
advised to compromise their disagreement, to which they mutually agreed.
	By an accidental fall, Mrs. Joines broke her hand, about a month after the 
above affair; but timely application being made to a surgeon, she, in a short time, had 
every reason to expect a perfect and speedy recovery.
	Joines being at a public-house, on a Sunday afternoon, the landlord observed 
his daughter-in-law carrying a pot of porter from another ale-house, and mentioned 
the circumstance to him, adding that the girl had been served with a like quantity at 
his house but a short time before. Being intoxicated, Joines took fire at what the 
publican had imprudently said, and immediately went towards the house, which was 
on the opposite side of the street, with an intention of preventing his wife from 
drinking the liquor. He struck the pot out of her hand, and then seizing the arm that 
had been broke, twisted it till the bone again separated.
	The fracture was again reduced; but such unfavourable symptoms appeared, 
that an amputation was judged necessary for preserving the life of the patient. In a 
short time afterwards, however, she was supposed to be in a fair way of recovery; and 
calling one day at the gardens where her husband was employed, she told his fellow-
labourers that she had great hopes of her arm being speedily cured, adding, that she 
was then able to move her fingers with but very little difficulty.
	The hopes of this unfortunate woman were falsely grounded: for on the 
following day she was so ill, that her life was judged to be very precarious. She sent 
for Joines from his work: and upon his coming to her bedside, he asked, if she had any 
accusation to allege against him; upon which, shaking her head, she said, she would 
forgive him, and hoped the world would do so too. She expired the next night, and in 
the morning he gave some directions respecting the funeral, and then went to work in 
the gardens as usual, not entertaining the least suspicion that he should be accused as 
the cause of his wife's death; but upon his return in the evening be was apprehended 
on suspicion of murder.
	An inquest being summoned to inquire whether the woman was murdered, or 
died according to the course of nature, it appeared in evidence, that her death was 
occasioned by the second fracture of her arm; the jury, therefore, brought in a verdict 
of wilful murder against Joines, who was, in consequence, committed to Newgate in 
order for trial.
	At the ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey, Joines was arraigned on an 
indictment for the wilful murder of his wife. In the course of the trial it appeared, that 
the prisoner had frequently forced the deceased into the street, at late hours of the 
night, without regard to her being without clothes, or the severity of the weather. The 
surgeon who attended her deposed, that a gangrene appeared on her arm, in 
consequence of its being broke the second time, which was indisputably the cause of 
her death.
	Near three months had elapsed from the time of her arm being first broke, to 
that of her decease; but not more than ten days had passed from the second fracture to 
the consequent mortification. The law expresses that if a person, violently wounded, 
dies within twelve calendar months, the offender causing such wound, or wounds, 
shall he deemed guilty of a capital felony. As it was evident that his wife died in 
consequence of his cruelty, within the time limited by law, Joines was pronounced to 
be guilty of murder, and sentenced to suffer death.
	During the confinement of Joines in Newgate, he did not appear to entertain a 
proper sense of his guilt. As his wife did not die immediately after the fracture of her 
arm, it was with difficulty he could be persuaded that the jury had done him justice in 
finding him guilty of murder. He had but a very imperfect notion of the principles of 
religion; but the ordinary of the prison took great pains to inspire him with a just sense 
of his duty towards his Creator. Though he was distressed for all the necessaries of 
life during the greatest part of his confinement, his daughter-in-law, who had taken 
possession of his house and effects, neglected either to visit him, or afford him any 
kind of assistance; and he was violently enraged against the young woman, on 
account of this behaviour. Joines suffered along with Thomas Barkwith.


MARY YOUNG ALIAS JENNY DIVER 
The Head of a Gang of Thieves of every Description. Executed at Tyburn, 
18th of March, 1740

	We have seldom heard of any more skilled in the various arts of imposition 
and robbery, than Mary Young. Her depredations, executed with undaunted courage, 
and artful deception, are surpassed by none which we have, as yet, met with.
	Mary Young was born in the north of Ireland; her parents were in indigent 
circumstances; and dying while she was in a state of infancy, she had no recollection 
of them.
	At about ten years of age she was taken into the family of an old 
gentlewoman, who had known her father and mother, and who caused her to be 
instructed in reading, writing, and needle-work; and in the latter she attained to a 
proficiency unusual to girls of her age.
	Soon after she had arrived to her fifteenth year, a young man, servant to a 
gentleman who lived in the neighbourhood, made pretensions of love to her; but the 
old lady being apprized of his views, declared that she would not consent to their 
marriage, and positively forbade him to repeat his visits at her house.
	Notwithstanding the great care and tenderness with which she was treated, 
Mary formed the resolution of deserting her generous benefactor, and of directing her 
course towards the metropolis of England; and the only obstacle to this design was, 
the want of money towards her support till she could follow some honest means of 
earning a subsistence.
	She had no strong prepossession in favour of the young man, who had made a 
declaration of love to her; but she, determining to make his passion subservient to the 
purpose she had conceived, promised to marry him on condition of his taking her to 
London. He joyfully embraced this proposal, and immediately engaged for a passage 
in a vessel bound for Liverpool.
	A short time before the vessel was to sail, the young man robbed his master of 
a gold watch and eighty guineas, and then joined the companion of his flight, who was 
already on board the ship, vainly imagining that his infamously acquired booty would 
contribute to the happiness he should enjoy with his expected bride. The ship arrived 
at the destined port in two days; and Mary being indisposed, in consequence of her 
voyage, her companion hired a lodging in the least-frequented part of the town, where 
they lived a short time in the character of man and wife.
	Mary being restored to health, they agreed for a passage in a wagon that was 
to set out for London in a few days. On the day preceding that fixed for their 
departure they accidentally called at a public-house, and the man being observed by a 
messenger dispatched in pursuit of him from Ireland, he was immediately taken into 
custody. He being committed to prison, Mary sent him all his clothes and part of the 
money she had received from him, and the next day took her place in the wagon for 
London. In a short time her companion was sent to Ireland, where he was tried, and 
condemned to suffer death; but his sentence was changed to that of transportation.
	Soon after her arrival in London, Mary contracted an acquaintance with one of 
her countrywomen, named Anne Murphy, by whom she was invited to partake of a 
lodging in Long Acre. Here she endeavoured to obtain a livelihood by her needle, but 
not being able to procure sufficient employment, her situation in a little time became 
truly deplorable.
	Murphy intimated to her that she could introduce her to a mode of life that 
would prove exceedingly lucrative; adding, that the most profound secrecy was 
required. In the evening Murphy introduced her to a number of men and women, 
assembled in a kind of club, near St Giles's. These people gained their living by 
cutting off women's pockets and stealing watches, etc., from men in the avenues of 
the theatres, and at other places of public resort; and on the recommendation of 
Murphy they admitted Mary a member of the society.
	After Mary's admission they dispersed, in order to pursue their illegal 
occupation, and the booty obtained that night consisted of eighty pounds in cash and a 
valuable gold watch. As Mary was not yet acquainted with the art of thieving, she was 
not admitted to an equal share of the night's produce; but it was agreed that she should 
have ten guineas. She now regularly applied two hours every day in qualifying herself 
for an expert thief, by attending to the instructions of experienced practitioners; and in 
a short time she was distinguished as the most ingenious and successful adventurer of 
the whole gang.
	A young fellow of genteel appearance, who was a member of the club, was 
singled out by Mary as the partner of her bed; and the cohabited for a considerable 
time as husband and wife.
	In a few months our heroine became so expert in her profession as to acquire 
great consequence among her associates, who distinguished her by the appellation of 
"Jenny Diver" — on account, as we conceive, of her remarkable dexterity, and by that 
name we shall call her in the succeeding pages of this narrative.
	Jenny, accompanied by one of her female accomplices, joined the crowd at the 
entrance of a place of worship in the Old Jewry, where a popular divine was to 
preach, and observing a young gentleman with a diamond ring on his finger she held 
out her hand, which he kindly received in order to assist her; and at this juncture she 
contrived to get possession of the ring without the knowledge of the owner; after 
which she slipped behind her companion and heard the gentleman say that as there 
was no probability of gaining admittance he would return. Upon his leaving the 
meeting he missed his ring, and mentioned his loss to the persons who were near him, 
adding that he suspected it to be stolen by a woman whom he had endeavoured to 
assist in the crowd; but as the thief was unknown she escaped.
	The above robbery was considered as such an extraordinary proof of Jenny's 
superior address that her associates determined to allow her an equal share of all their 
booties, even though she was not present when they were obtained. A short time after 
the above exploit she procured a pair of false hands and arms to be made, and 
concealing her real ones under her clothes she repaired on a Sunday evening to the 
place of worship above mentioned in a sedan-chair, one of the gang going before to 
procure a seat among the more genteel part of the congregation, and another attending 
in the character of a footman.
	Jenny being seated between two elderly ladies, each of whom had a gold 
watch by her side, she conducted herself with seeming great devotion; but when the 
service was nearly concluded she seized the opportunity, when the ladies were 
standing up, of stealing their watches, which she delivered to an accomplice in an 
adjoining pew. Flushed with the success of this adventure, our heroine determined to 
pursue her good fortune; and as another sermon was to be preached the same evening 
she adjourned to an adjacent public-house, and, having entirely changed her dress, she 
returned to the meeting, where she had not remained long before she picked a 
gentleman's pocket of a gold watch, with which she escaped unsuspected.
	Her accomplices also were industrious and successful for, on a division of the 
booty obtained this evening, they each received thirty guineas. Jenny had now 
obtained an ascendancy over the whole gang, who, conscious of her superior skill in 
the arts of thieving, came to a resolution of yielding an exact obedience to her 
directions.
	Jenny, again assumed the appearance of a pregnant woman, and, attended by 
an accomplice, as a footman, went towards St James's Park on a day when the King 
was going to the House of Lords, and there being a great number of persons between 
the Park and Spring Gardens she purposely slipped down, and was instantly 
surrounded by many of both sexes, who were emulous to afford her assistance; but, 
affecting to be in violent pain, she intimated to them that she was desirous of 
remaining on the ground till she should be somewhat recovered. As she expected, the 
crowd in- creased, and her pretended footman and a female accomplice were so 
industrious as to obtain two diamond girdle-buckles, a gold watch, a gold snuff-box 
and two purses, containing together upwards of forty guineas.
	Two of the gang being confined to their lodgings by illness, Jenny and the man 
with whom she cohabited generally went in company in search of adventures. They 
went together to Burr Street, Wapping, and, observing a genteel house, the man, who 
acted as Jenny's footman, knocked at the door, and saying that his mistress was on a 
sudden taken extremely ill, begged she might be admitted. This was readily complied 
with, and, while the mistress of the house and her maid-servant were gone upstairs for 
such things as they imagined would afford relief to the supposed sick woman, she 
opened a drawer and stole sixty guineas; and after this, while the mistress was holding 
a smelling-bottle to her nose, she picked her pocket of a purse, which, however, did 
not contain money to any considerable amount. In the meantime the pretended 
footman, who had been ordered into the kitchen, stole six silver tablespoons, a 
pepper-box and a salt-cellar. Jenny, pretending to be some- what recovered, expressed 
the most grateful acknowledgements to the lady, and, saying she was the wife of a 
capital merchant in Thames Street, invited her in the most pressing terms to dinner on 
an appointed day, and then went away in a hackney-coach, which by her order had 
been called to the door by her pretended servant.
	She practised a variety of felonies of a similar nature different parts of the 
metropolis and its environs; but the particulars of the above transactions being 
inserted in the news papers, people were so effectually cautioned, that our adventurer 
was under the necessity of employing her invention upon the discovery of other 
methods of committing depredations on the public.
	The parties whose illness we have mentioned being recovered, it was resolved 
that the whole gang should go to Bristol, in search of adventures during the fair, 
which is held in that city every summer; but being unacquainted with the place, they 
deemed it good policy to admit into their society a man who had long subsisted there 
by villainous practices.
	Being arrived at the place of destination, Jenny and Anne Murphy assumed the 
characters of merchant's wives, the new member and another of the gang appeared as 
country traders, and our heroine's favourite retained his former character of footman. 
They took lodgings at different inns, and agreed that, if any of them should be 
apprehended, the others should endeavour to procure their release by appearing to 
their characters, and representing them as people of reputation in London. They had 
arrived to such a proficiency in their illegal occupation, that they were almost certain 
of accomplishing every scheme they suggested; and when it was inconvenient to 
make use of words, they were able to convey their meaning to each other by winks, 
nods, and other intimations.
	Being one day in the fair, they observed a west country clothier giving a sum 
of money to his servant, and heard him direct the man to deposit it in a bureau. They 
followed the servant, and one of them fell down before him, expecting that he would 
also fall, and that, as there was a great crowd, the money might be easily secured. 
Though the man fell into the channel, they were not able to obtain their expected 
booty, and therefore they had recourse to the following stratagem: One of the gang 
asked whether his master had not lately ordered him to carry home a sum of money; 
to which the other replied in the affirmative. The sharper then told him he must return 
to his master who had purchased some goods, and waited to pay for them.
	The countryman followed him to Jenny's lodging, and being introduced to her, 
she desired him to be seated, saying, his master was gone on some business in the 
neighbourhood, but had left orders for him to wait till his return. She urged him to 
drink a glass of wine, but the poor fellow repeatedly declined her offers with awkward 
simplicity; the pretended footman having taught him to believe her a woman of great 
wealth and consequence. However, her encouraging solicitations conquered his 
bashfulness, and he drank till he became intoxicated. Being conducted into another 
apartment he was soon fast locked in the arms of sleep, and while in that situation he 
was robbed of the money he had received from his master, which proved to be 100l.
	They were no sooner in possession of the cash than they discharged the 
demand of the inn-keeper, and set out in the first stage for London.
	Our heroine now hired a real footman, and her favourite, who had long acted 
in that character, assumed the appearance of a gentleman. She hired lodgings in the 
neighbourhood of Covent-garden, that she might more conveniently attend the 
theatres. She proposed to her associates to reserve a tenth part of the general produce 
for the support of such of the gang as might, through illness, be rendered incapable of 
following their iniquitous occupations: and to this they readily assented.
	Jenny dressed herself in an elegant manner, and went to the theatre one 
evening when the king was to be present; and during the performance she attracted the 
particular attention of a young gentleman of fortune from Yorkshire, who declared, in 
the most passionate terms, that she had made an absolute conquest of his heart, and 
earnestly solicited the favour of attending her home. She at first declined a 
compliance, saying she was newly married, and that the appearance of a stranger 
might alarm her husband. At length she yielded to his entreaty, and they went together 
in a hackney-coach, which set the young gentleman down in the neighbourhood where 
Jenny lodged, after he had obtained an appointment to visit her in a few days, when 
she said her husband would be out of town.
	Upon Jenny's joining her companions, she informed them that while she 
remained at the play-house, she was only able to steal a gold snuff-box; and they 
appeared to be much dissatisfied on account of her ill success: but their good humour 
re turned upon learning the circumstances of the adventure with the young gentleman, 
which they had no doubt would prove exceedingly profitable.
	The day of appointment being arrived, two of the gang appeared equipped in 
elegant liveries, and Anne Murphy appeared as waiting-maid. The gentleman came in 
the evening, having a gold-headed cane in his hand, a sword with a gold hilt by his 
side, and wearing a gold watch in his pocket, and a diamond ring on his finger.
	Being introduced to her bed-chamber, she contrived to steal her lover's ring; 
and he had not been many minutes undressed before Anne Murphy rapped at the door, 
which being opened, she said, with an appearance of the utmost consternation, that 
her master was returned from the country. Jenny, affecting to be under a violent 
agitation of spirits, desired the gentleman to cover himself entirely with the bed-
clothes, saying she would convey his apparel into another room, so that if her husband 
came there, nothing would appear to awaken his suspicion: adding that, under 
pretence of indisposition, she would prevail upon her husband to sleep in another bed, 
and then return to the arms of her lover.
	The clothes being removed, a consultation was held, when it was agreed by the 
gang that they should immediately pack up all their moveables, and decamp with their 
booty, which, exclusive of the cane, watch, sword, and ring, amounted to an hundred 
guineas.
	The amorous youth waited in a state of the utmost impatience till the morning, 
when he rang the bell, and brought the people of the house to the chamber-door, but 
they could not gain admittance, as the fair fugitive had turned the lock, and taken 
away the key; when the door was forced open the gentleman represented in what 
manner he had been treated; but the people of the house were deaf to his 
expostulations, and threatened to circulate the adventure throughout the town, unless 
he would indemnify them for the loss they had sustained. Rather than hazard the 
exposure of his character, he agreed to discharge the debt Jenny had contracted; and 
dispatched a messenger for clothes and money, that he might take leave of a house of 
which he had sufficient reason to regret having been an inhabitant.
	Our heroine's share of the produce of the above adventure amounted to 70l. 
This infamous association was now become so notorious a pest to society, that they 
judged it necessary to leave the metropolis where they were apprehensive that they 
could not long remain concealed from justice. They practised a variety of stratagems 
with great success in different parts of the country: but, upon revisiting London, Jenny 
was committed to Newgate, on a charge of having picked a gentleman's pocket: for 
which she was sentenced to transportation.
	She remained in the above prison nearly four months, during which time she 
employed a considerable sum in the purchase of stolen effects. When she went on 
board the transport vessel she shipped a quantity of goods, nearly sufficient to load a 
wagon. The property she possessed ensured her great respect, and every possible 
convenience and accommodation during the voyage; and on her arrival in Virginia she 
disposed of her goods, and for some time lived in great splendour and elegance.
	She soon found that America was a country where she could expect but little 
emolument from the practices she had so successfully followed in England; and 
therefore she employed every art that she was mistress of to ingratiate herself in the 
esteem of a young gentleman who was preparing to embark on board a vessel bound 
for the Port of London. He became much enamoured of her, and brought her to 
England; but while the ship lay at Gravesend she robbed him of all the property she 
could get into her possession, and, pretending an indisposition, intimated a desire of 
going on shore, in which her admirer acquiesced: but she was no sooner on land than 
she made a precipitate retreat.
	She now travelled through several parts of the country, and by her usual 
wicked practices obtained many considerable sums. At length she returned to London, 
but was not able to find her former accomplices.
	She now frequented the Royal Exchange, the theatres, London Bridge and 
other places of public resort, and committed innumerable depredations on the public. 
Being detected in picking a gentleman's pocket upon London Bridge, she was taken 
before a magistrate, to whom she declared that her name was Jane Webb, and by that 
appellation she was committed to Newgate. She was arraigned for privately stealing, 
and pronounced guilty. The property being valued at less than one shilling, she was 
sentenced to transportation.
	A twelvemonth had not elapsed before she returned from transportation a 
second time, and on her arrival in London she renewed her former practices. A lady 
going from Sherborne Lane to Walbrooke was accosted by a man, who took her hand 
as if to assist her in crossing some planks that were placed over the channel for the 
convenience of passengers; but he squeezed her fingers with so much force as to give 
her great pain, and in the meantime Jenny picked her pocket of thirteen shillings and a 
penny. The gentlewoman, conscious of being robbed, seized the thief by the gown, 
and she was immediately conducted to the compter. She was examined the next day 
by the Lord Mayor, who committed her to Newgate in order for trial, and at the 
ensuing sessions at the Old Bailey she was tried on an indictment for privately 
stealing, and the jury brought in the verdict, "Guilty;" in consequence of which she 
received sentence of death.
	After conviction she seemed sincerely to repent of the course of iniquity in 
which she had so long persisted, punctually attending prayers in the chapel, and 
employing great part of her time in private devotions. The day preceding that on 
which she was executed, she sent for the woman who nursed her thud, then about 
three years old, and after informing her that there was a person who would pay for the 
infant's maintenance, earnestly entreated that it might be carefully instructed in the 
duties of religion, and guarded from all temptations to wickedness, and then, after 
acknowledging that she had long been a daring offender against the laws, both of God 
and man, she entreated the woman to pray for the salvation of her soul; she then took 
her leave, apparently deeply impressed with the sentiments of contrition.
	On the following morning she appeared to be in a serene state of mind: but 
being brought into the press-yard, the executioner approached to put the halter about 
her, when her fortitude abated: but in a short time her spirits were again tolerably 
composed.
	She was conveyed to Tyburn in a mourning-coach, being attended by a 
clergyman, to whom she declared her firm belief in all the principles of the Protestant 
religion; and at the place of execution she employed a considerable time in fervent 
prayer. Her remains were, by her particular desire, interred in St. Pancras church-yard.
	We should always allow due force to the advice of our friends; and if the 
conduct that is recommended to us points to happiness, what folly is it to neglect it, in 
order to gratify an inclination, the indulgence of which will yield but a temporary 
gratification, and may prove the source of lasting sorrow.


CHARLES DREW 
Parricide, executed at St. Edmondsbury, 9th April, 1740

	This culprit was the son of the man he murdered, and who was the owner of 
good property at Long Melford, in Suffolk; for the possession of which, to support, 
like George Barnwell, an extravagant wanton, he committed the foul deed for which 
he was executed.
	Mr. Drew, senior, was an attorney; yet of so unaccountable a disposition, that 
he wholly neglected his son's education, having quarrelled with and lived separate 
from his wife. There were five daughters and the unhappy one who murdered him, 
and to all he appears to have conducted himself with the most culpable reserve and 
unfriendliness.
	When Charles arrived at years of maturity he became acquainted with one 
Elizabeth Boyer, who submitted to his solicitations, but was a woman of so much art, 
that most people thought be would marry her; and, when she urged him to it, he said, 
'Betsey, let us stay a little longer; it will be worse for us both if I do it now, for my 
father will certainly disinherit me:' to which she replied, 'I wish somebody would 
shoot the old dog.'
	This discourse was heard to pass between them in the month of January, 1740, 
and Mr. Drew was found murdered in his house on the first of February following. On 
inquiry into the affair, it was suspected that Mr. Drew was shot with a gun which had 
been lent to his son by Mrs. Boyer; and, though no prosecution was commenced 
against her, there was every reason to imagine that she bad been the chief instigator to 
the atrocious crime.
	Charles, having been to the Chelmsford assizes, fell into company with some 
smugglers, among whom was one Humphreys, a hardened villain, whom he invited to 
meet him at Mrs. Boyer's lodgings. They accordingly met; when Drew promised to 
settle two hundred pounds a year on him if he would murder his father; and gave him 
likewise at the time a considerable sum of money. Humphreys hesitated some time; 
but, at length consenting to the horrid proposal, they went together towards the house, 
having a gun loaded with slugs, about eleven at night on the 31st of January. It was 
agreed that young Drew should stand at a distance, while Humphreys was to knock at 
the door, ask for the old man, and then shoot him; but Humphreys' courage failing 
him when he came near the spot, he threw down the gun, saying he would have no 
concern in the murder. On this young Drew commanded him to keep silence, on pain 
of death; and, taking up the gun, went to the door, and, when his father opened it, shot 
him dead on the spot.
	Having committed this horrid parricide, he said to Humphreys, 'The job is 
done;' on which Humphreys went to Dunmow, in Essex, where he had appointed to 
meet some smugglers that night, and after that travelled to London.
	Young Drew, going to London, made application for the king's pardon to any 
one except him who had actually murdered his father; in consequence of which an 
advertisement to that purpose was inserted in the London Gazette, signed by the 
secretary of state; and another advertisement followed it, in which Drew himself 
offered a reward of a hundred pounds on conviction of the murderer. This procedure 
appears evidently to have been intended to take off all suspicion from himself, though 
he meant not to fix it on Humphreys.
	This latter, being apprehended on suspicion, gave such an indifferent account 
of the transaction, that he was ordered to be kept in custody: and while he was in 
prison Drew sent him twenty pounds, with the promise of a hundred more. After he 
was committed the suspicion of his guilt grew stronger, and was corroborated by 
several informations.
	This gave Drew great uneasiness; he took the utmost pains to suppress all 
farther informations, and even to destroy the credibility of those already made. He 
publicly declared that Humphreys was not the man who shot his father, and threatened 
to prosecute the officer who apprehended him.
	Drew now resided in London, where he changed his name to that of Roberts, 
and corresponded with Humphreys, who had assumed the name of John Smith. Some 
letters falling into the bands of Timothy Drew, Esq. a namesake only, he went to 
London in search of the murderer; and, after repeated inquiries, was told that ho 
lodged in Shire Lane, whither he went, and asked for him by the name of Roberts. The 
people of the house said they had no lodgers; but the gentleman, who had a 
magistrate's warrant for apprehending the offender, insisted on searching the house: 
the search, however, was made in vain.
	On this he went to several bagnios, and at length to a house in Leicester Fields, 
where he inquired for Mr. Roberts. Drew had given orders that he should be denied, 
for the landlord said that all the gentlemen who had lodged there the preceding night 
were gone; but Mr. Timothy Drew, observing him whisper one of the waiters, 
suspected the truth of this declaration, and, calling for a pint of wine, asked the waiter 
to drink with him. After some conversation he raised his voice, and in a positive 
manner declared that he knew Mr. Roberts was in the house, but that his real name 
was Charles Drew, and that he had murdered his father; then he threatened to have all 
the people in the house apprehended for concealing a murderer. This authoritative 
manner induced the waiter to confess that the gentleman was in the house. Hereupon 
he was conducted to the mansion of Justice de Veil; and, after an examination of 
above six hours, was committed to Newgate under a strong guard.
	During his residence in the prison he gave Jonathan Keate, the turnkey, a bond 
of half his fortune, on the condition of permitting him to escape, and accompanying 
him to France; and, for his farther security, he executed a bond for the payment of a 
thousand pounds. The turnkey seemed to comply, and the time was fixed on for their 
departure; but the man having informed Mr. Akerman, the keeper, of the progress of 
the affair, Drew was removed into the old condemned hole, where a guard was placed 
over him night and day.
	On the approach of the assizes Humphreys being admitted an evidence, Drew 
was convicted after a trial of several hours.
	After conviction be seemed not to have a proper sense of the enormity of the 
crime of which he had been guilty, and would have attributed it to his father's ill 
treatment of him. He said that his father denied him necessary money for his 
expenses; and that his having refused to make over an estate to him was the first 
instigation to his committing the horrid crime.
	He was visited by his sisters, who carefully avoided reflecting on him; and did 
all in their power to console him in his unhappy situation.
	He was hanged near St. Edmund's-bury, on the 9th of April, 1740, amidst the 
greatest crowd of spectators that were almost ever assembled on such a melancholy 
occasion in that part of the country.
	He seemed to part with life with evident signs of reluctance, begging the 
clergyman who attended him to continue the devotions to the last possible moment.
	This man suffered in the twenty-fifth year of his age.
	The crime of murder is in itself so horrid, that it requires no aggravation; but 
that of parricide is of the worst species of murder, The destruction of those from 
whom, under God, we have immediately derived our being, has something in it so 
shocking to humanity, that one would think it impossible it should ever be committed.
	By the Lex Pompeia of the Romans parricides were ordained to be put into a 
sack, with a dog, a cock, a viper, and an ape, and thrown into the sea, thus to perish by 
the most cruel of all tortures. The Egyptians also put such delinquents to death in the 
most horrible manner. They gradually mangled their body and limbs, and, when 
almost every limb was dislocated or broken, they placed the criminal, writhing and 
screeching with pain, upon thorns, where he was burnt alive! In China impiety to 
parents was considered a crime similar in atrocity to treason and rebellion, for which 
criminals were sentenced to be cut in ten thousand pieces! By the ancient Jewish law 
it was also death for children to curse or strike their parents: in fine, every nation 
punished the parricide in the most exemplary manner.


ELIZABETH AND MARY BRANCH 
Mother and Daughter, executed at Ivelchester on the 3rd of May, 1740, for 
murdering a Girl

  
Elizabeth and Mary Branch beating their servant to death

	THESE cruel women were born at Philips Norton, in Somersetshire. The 
mother was distinguished from her childhood by the cruelty of her disposition. She 
married a farmer, named Branch, but the husband soon found what an unfortunate 
choice he had made; for his wife no sooner came into possession of her matrimonial 
power than she began to exercise her tyranny on her servants, whom she treated with 
undeserved and unaccountable cruelty, frequently denying them the common 
necessaries of life, and sometimes turning them out of doors at night in the midst of 
winter; but their wages in these cases were sent them by Mr Branch, who was as 
remarkable for his humanity and justice as his wife for the opposite qualities. Mary 
Branch, the daughter, was an exact resemblance of her mother in every part of her 
diabolical temper.
	Mr Branch dying, and leaving an estate of about three hundred pounds a year, 
he was no sooner buried than all the servants quitted the family, determined not to live 
with so tyrannical a mistress; and her character became so notorious that she could 
obtain no servants but poor creatures who were put out by the parish, or casual 
vagrants who strolled the country.
	It is needless to mention the particulars of the cruelties of this inhuman mother 
and daughter to their other servants, at whom they used to throw plates, knives and 
forks on any offence, real or supposed; we shall therefore proceed to an account of 
their trial and execution for the murder of Jane Buttersworth, a poor girl, who had 
been placed with them by the parish officers.
	At the assizes held at Taunton, in Somersetshire, in March, 1740, Elizabeth 
Branch and Mary, her daughter, were indicted for the wilful murder of Jane 
Buttersworth; when the principal evidence against them was in substance as follows: 
Ann Somers, the dairymaid, deposed that the deceased, having been sent for some 
yeast, and staying longer than was necessary, excused herself to her old mistress on 
her return by telling a lie; on which the daughter struck her violently on the head with 
her fist, and pinched her ears. Then both of them threw her on the ground, and the 
daughter knelt on her neck, while the mother whipped her with twigs till the blood ran 
on the ground, and the daughter, taking off one of the girl's shoes, beat her with it in a 
cruel manner. The deceased cried for mercy, and after some struggle ran into the 
parlour, where they followed her and beat her with broomsticks till she fell down 
senseless; after which the daughter threw a pail of water on her, and used her with 
other circumstances of cruelty too gross to mention. Somers now went out to milk her 
cows, and on her return, at the expiration of half-an-hour, found her mistress sitting by 
the fire and the girl lying dead on the floor; but she observed that a clean cap had been 
put on her head since she went out, and that the blood had run through it. At night the 
body was privately buried.
	This transaction, added to the character of the mistress, having raised a 
suspicion in the neighbourhood, a warrant was issued by the coroner to take up the 
body, and an inquest being made into the cause of the girl's death, Mr Salmon, a 
surgeon, declared that she had received several wounds, almost any one of which 
would have proved mortal. The jury found both prisoners guilty, and they were 
sentenced to die. As the country people were violently enraged against them, they 
were conducted to the place of execution between three and four in the morning, 
attended only by the jailer and about half-a-dozen people, lest they should have been 
torn in pieces.
	When they came to the spot, it was found that the gibbet had been cut down; 
on which a carpenter was sent for, who immediately put up another, and mother and 
daughter were executed before six o'clock, to the disappointment of the country to 
witness the death of two such unworthy wretches.


WILLIAM CREAK 
Mail robber: Executed, much lamented, on Bagshot-heath, and his body 
hung in chains, where he committed the robbery.

	THIS is another particular case, which we do not find. any reporters who have 
gone before us to have noted.
	We have already observed, that this species of public robbery, was formerly, 
though never pardoned after conviction, very common. It is now a matter of surprise, 
to reflect that such vast property, as always has been remitted by post-letters, should 
have been so insecurely guarded in their conveyance. A lad with the mail behind him, 
often carried thousands of pounds through lonely roads, in the dead hour of night. 
Hence, where there could be no resistance, every lurking cowardly thief, was able to 
take the mail at his pleasure; but happily, the disposal of the plunder seldom failed of 
leading to a discovery of the perpetrator.
	When the unfortunate man, who is the subject of the present report, was 
tempted to swerve from the paths of honesty, in robbing the mail, he was a linen-
draper of good repute, at Henley-upon-Thames. He married the sister of one Kitson, a 
maltster of the same town, by whom, it appears, he was seduced to commit the 
robbery; and who then, having received a part of the plunder, basely impeached, and 
brought him to an ignominious death. We say basely, though the public received 
benefit from the information of Kitson, yet cannot we divest ourselves of detestation 
of such individual treachery.
	In consequence of this information, a warrant was issued for the apprehension 
of Creak, who had repaired to London with the remainder of the bank-notes, in order 
to pass them away. After considerable search, he was apprehended in the borough of 
Southwark; in the very, act of putting off some of the stolen notes, for payment of 
linens, and when he found that he was apprehended he stuffed the remainder into his 
mouth, and actually swallowed them before they could be recovered.
	He was indicted at the Assizes held at Kingston, for the county of Surry, in the 
month of August, 1740, and convicted of robbing the Western and Portsmouth mails.
	This man, though his offence was of so heinous a nature, may claim some 
compassion from the feeling reader. He had a large family, bore an excellent character 
among his neighbours, and his credit was still good with his merchants in London.
	Unsuspicious of others, he had given credit to a considerable amount, and was 
deceived in promises of payment. It also appeared that this was the only piece of 
iniquity, in which he had been concerned.


WILLIAM DUELL 
Executed for Murder and came to Life again while being prepared for 
Dissection in Surgeons' Hall, 24th of November, 1740

	WILLIAM DUELL was convicted of occasioning the death of Sarah Griffin, 
at Acton, by robbing and ill-treating her. Having suffered, 24th of November, 1740, at 
Tyburn, with Thomas Clock, William Meers, Margery Stanton and Eleanor Munoman 
(who had been convicted of several burglaries and felonies), his body was brought to 
Surgeons' Hall to be anatomised; but after it was stripped and laid on the board, and 
one of the servants was washing it, in order to be cut, he perceived life in him, and 
found his breath to come quicker and quicker, on which a surgeon took some ounces 
of blood from him; in two hours he was able to sit up in his chair, and in the evening 
was again committed to Newgate, and his sentence, which might be again inflicted, 
was changed to transportation.


GILBERT LANGLEY 
Transported for robbing a man of three farthings, December, 1740

	GILBERT LANGLEY was born of Roman Catholic parents in London, where 
his father was an eminent goldsmith, and who sent his son to the seat of his 
grandfather in Derbyshire when he was only three years of age.
	Having continued in this situation four years, his mother's anxiety induced her 
to fetch him home; soon after which he was entered in the school of the Charterhouse, 
where he became a tolerably good classical scholar.
	The father now wished to send his son abroad for farther education, and that 
he might not fail of being brought up a strict Catholic: this was warmly opposed by 
the mother, through tenderness to her child; but her death left the father to act as he 
pleased.
	The prior of the Benedictine convent at Douay being in London, Langley's 
father agreed for his board and education, and committed him to the care of his new 
guardians with whom he proceeded to Dover, sailed for Calais, and, having travelled 
thence to St. Omers, on the 1o1 lowing day reached Douay, where young Langley was 
examined by the prior and fellows of the college, and admitted of the school.
	At the end of three years he became a tolerable master of the French language, 
exclusive of his other literary acquirements so that, at the Christmas following, he was 
chosen king of the class, which is a distinction bestowed on the best of the scholars, 
whose business it is to regulate the public entertainments of the school.
	It was the custom at Douay for officers to attend at the gates of the town, to 
detect any persons bringing in contraband liquors, because the merchants of the place 
paid a large duty on them, which duty was annually farmed by the highest bidder.
	During the Christmas holidays Langley and three of his schoolfellows quitted 
the town, to purchase a small quantity of brandy at an under price; but being observed 
by a soldier, who saw their bottles filled, he informed the officers of the affair; the 
consequence of which was that the young gentlemen were stopped, and the liquor 
found hid under their cassocks. They offered money for their release; but it was 
refused, and they were conducted to the house of the farmer-general.
	At the instant of their arrival two Franciscan friars, seeing them, said it was 
illegal to take students before the civil magistrates, because the superior of their own 
college was accountable for their conduct.
	Hereupon they were taken home to the prior; and the Farmer-general making 
his demand of the customary fine, the prior thought it extravagant, and refused to pay 
it: but at length the matter was settled by arbitration.
	In the Catholic colleges the students lived in a very meagre manner during the 
season of Lent having little to subsist on but bread and sour wine; a circumstance that 
frequently tempted them to supply their wants by acts of irregularity. However, if 
English students, out of their own money, could procure animal food, they might 
dress it; the servants of the college pretending not to see the impiety.
	At this season Langley and five of his companions, oppressed by the calls of 
hunger, determined to make an attack on the kitchen; but, at the instant they had 
forced open the door, they were overheard by the servants, the consequence of which 
was that many furious blows were exchanged by the contending parties.
	On the following day the delinquents were summoned to attend the prior, who 
was so incensed at this outrage against the good order of the society, that he declared 
they should be expelled as soon as a consistory of the monks could be held.
	But, when the consistory assembled, they resolved to pardon all the offenders, 
on acknowledging their faults, and promising not to renew them, except one, named 
Brown, who had twice knocked down the shoemaker of the college because he had 
called out to alarm the prior.
	The young gentlemen, chagrined at losing their associate, determined to be 
revenged on some one at least of the servants who had given evidence against them; 
and, after revolving many schemes, they determined that the man who lighted the fires 
should be the object of their vengeance, because he had struck several of them during 
the rencounter.
	This being resolved on, they disguised themselves, and went to a wood-house 
adjacent to the college; and, being previously provided with rods, they waited till the 
man came with his wheelbarrow to fetch wood, when one of them, going behind him, 
threw a cloak over his head, which being immediately tied round his neck, the rest 
stripped him, and flogged him in the most severe manner; while he called for 
assistance, but in vain, our heroes having taken previous care to shut the door of time 
wood-house.
	The flagellation was just ended when the bell rung for the students to attend 
their evening exercise; on which they left the unhappy victim of their revenge, and 
repaired to the public hall.
	In the mean time the poor sufferer ran into the cloisters, exclaiming 'Le diable! 
Le diable!' as if he really thought the devil had tormented him: and hence he ran to the 
kitchen, where he recounted the adventure to his fellow-servants, who dressed his 
wounds, carried him to bed, and gave him something to nourish him.
	A suspicion arising that the students had been the authors of this calamity to 
the poor fellow, the servants communicated the circumstances of it to the prior, who 
promised his endeavours to find out and punish the delinquents, and with this view 
went into the hall with a look at once penetrating and indignant: but the young 
gentlemen having bound themselves to secrecy by an oath, no discovery could be 
made.
	Young Langley having distinguished himself by his attention to literature for 
the space of two years, the monks began to consider him as one who would make a 
valuable acquisition to their society, for which reason they treated him with singular 
respect, and at length prevailed upon him to agree to enter into the fraternity if his 
father's consent could be obtained.
	As Langley was in no want of money, he frequently went into the town, to 
habituate himself to the manners of the people, and to observe their customs. One day, 
being a holiday, he, and one of his school-fellows named Meynel, asked the prior 
permission to walk on the ramparts; which being denied, they went out without leave, 
and, repairing to a tavern, drank wine till they were intoxicated.
	In this condition they went to the ramparts, where, having been for some time 
the laughing-stock of the company, they went home to bed. Being missed at evening 
prayers, some of the other students apologized for their absence by saying they were 
ill, and the excuse was very readily admitted: but in a few days afterwards a 
gentleman called on the prior, and told him what a ridiculous figure his students had 
made on the ramparts.
	Incensed at this violation of their duty, the prior sent for them to his chamber, 
and gave orders that they should be flogged with great severity. This indignity had 
such an effect on the mind of Langley that he grew reserved and morose, and would 
have declined all his studies, but that one of the monks, called Father Howard, 
restored him to good humour by his indulgent treatment, and persuaded him to pay his 
usual attention to literature.
	Father Howard's considerate conduct had such an effect on Langley, that he 
spent the greater part of his time with that gentleman, who instructed him in the 
principles of logic, and was about to initiate him in those of philosophy, when his 
father wrote a letter requiring him to return to his native country.
	The society being unwilling to lose one who they thought would become a 
valuable member, the prior wrote to England, requesting that the youth might be 
permitted to complete his education; but the father insisted on his return.
	Hereupon the young gentleman left the college, and, proceeding by the way of 
St. Omers, reached Calais in two days. As the wind was contrary, it was some days 
longer before the company embarked for England, when, instead of putting into 
Dover, the vessel came round to the Thames, and the passengers were landed at 
Gravesend.
	Langley, having spent all his money at Calais, now affected an air of 
unconcern, saying that he had no English money in his possession, from his having 
been so long abroad; on which one of the company lent him money, and on the 
following day he arrived at his father's house in London.
	When he had reposed himself some days after his travel, the father desired him 
to make choice of some profession; on which he mentioned his inclination to study 
physic or law; but the old gentlemnan, who had no good opinion of either of these 
professions, persuaded him to follow his own trade of a goldsmnith.
	For the present, however, he was placed at an academy in Chancery Lane, that 
he might be instructed in those branches of knowledge requisite for a tradesman; but, 
becoming acquainted with some young gentlemen of the law, he found that his 
father's allowance of pocket-money was insufficient for his use; and, being unwilling 
that his new acquaintance should think he was deficient in cash, he purloined small 
sums from a drawer in his father's shop; and, when he did not find any money there, 
stole some pieces of broken gold, which he disposed of to the Jews.
	Mr. Langley having sent his son with some plate to the house of a gentleman 
in Grosvenor Square, the youth saw a very beautiful woman go into a shop opposite a 
public house; on which he went into the latter, and, inquiring after her, found she had 
gone to her own lodgings. This ascertained, he delivered his plate, and formed a 
resolution of visiting the lady on the Sunday following.
	When the Sunday came the old gentleman went out to smoke his pipe, as the 
son imagined, at an adjacent public house; and in the mean time the son stole seven 
guineas from three different bags, that his father might not discover the robbery, and 
immediately repaired to the lodgings of the lady whom he had seen.
	From her lodgings they went to a tavern, where they continued till the 
following day, having no idea of detection: but it happened that Mr. Langley, senior, 
instead of going to the public house as usual, had watched the son to the tavern above 
mentioned.
	On the following day the father interrogated the youth respecting his conduct, 
and particularly asked where he had been the day before. The young fellow said he 
had been at church, where he met with some acquaintance, who prevailed on him to 
go to the tavern.
	The father, knowing the falsehood of his tale, corrected his son in a severe 
manner, and forbade him to dine at his table till his conduct should be reformed. Thus 
obliged to associate with the servants, young Langley became soon too intimate with 
the kitchen-maid, and robbed his father to buy such things as he thought would be 
acceptable to her.
	Among other things he purchased her a pair of shoes laced with gold, which he 
was presenting to her in the parlour at the very moment that his father knocked at the 
door. The girl instantly quitted the room; and the old gentleman interrogating the son 
respecting the shoes, the latter averred that a lady, who said she had bought them in 
the neighbourhood, desired leave to deposit them at their house till the following day.
	After this the father permitted the son to dine with him as usual; but it was not 
long before he caught him in too intimate a connexion with the maid-servant in the 
kitchen; on which the girl was dismissed from her service, and Mr. Langley 
threatened to disinherit his son unless he would reform his conduct.
	A middle-aged woman of grave appearance was now hired as a servant; but 
the evil complained of was far from being cured, as an intimacy between her and the 
young gentleman was soon discovered by the father.
	It was not long after the servant-girl above mentioned had been discharged 
before she swore herself pregnant by the son, on which he was taken into custody by a 
warrant; the consequence of which was that the father paid fifteen pounds to 
compromise the affair, after which he received the son to his favour, and forgave all 
the errors of his former conduct.
	The death of the old gentleman put his son in possession of a considerable 
fortune, exclusive of a good settled trade; and for the first year he applied himself so 
closely to business, that he made a net profit of seven hundred pounds: but he did not 
long continue this course of industry; for, having formerly made connexions with 
women of ill fame, particularly in the purlieus of Drury Lane, be now renewed his 
visits to those wretched victims to, and punishers of, the vices of men.
	A man of genteel appearance, named Gray, having ordered plate of Langley to 
the amount of a hundred pounds, invited him to a tavern to drink. In the course of the 
conversation the stranger said he had dealt with his late father, and would introduce 
him to a lady who had thirty thousand pounds to her fortune. This was only a scheme 
to defraud Langley, who delivered the plate, and took a draft for the money on a 
vintner in Bartholomew Close; but, when he went to demand payment, the vintner 
was removed.
	On the following day the vintner's wife went to Langley, and informed him 
that Gray had defrauded her husband of four hundred and fifty pounds; and Langley, 
being of a humane disposition, interested himself so far in behalf of the unfortunate 
man, that a letter of license for three years was granted him by his creditors.
	Langley now took out an action against Gray, but was not able to find him; 
when one day he was accosted by a man in Fleet Street, who asked him to step into a 
public house, and he would tell him where he should meet with the defrauder. 
Langley complying with the proposal, the stranger said he would produce Gray within 
an hour if the other would give him a guinea; which being done, the stranger went out, 
but returned no more.
	Exasperated by this circumstance, which seems to have been a contrivance of 
one of Gray's accomplices, Mr. Langley employed an attorney, who soon found the 
delinquent, against whom an action was taken out, in consequence of which be was 
confined several years in the Marshalsea.
	Langley now became a sportsman on the turf at Newmarket, under the 
instruction of a vintner in Holborn, whose niece entered into his service, but soon fell 
a victim to his unbounded passion for the sex.
	Langley becoming acquainted with some young fellows in the Temple, three 
of them, and four women of the town, went with him to Greenwich, where they gave 
the ladies the slip, and took a boat to London; but the women, pursuing them, 
overtook them in the river, and, attempting to board their boat, afforded great 
diversion to the spectators: our adventurers' watermen, however, rowing hard, they 
reached the Temple, and concealed themselves in one of the chambers a few minutes 
before the ladies landed.
	Soon after this Langley made another excursion to Greenwich to visit a lady 
and gentleman, who, having a remarkably handsome servant-maid, our adventurer 
found means to seduce her; the consequence of which was that she became pregnant, 
and made repeated applications to him for support: whereupon he gave her a 
considerable sum of money, and heard no more of her from that period.
	Thus living in a continual round of dissipation, his friends recommended 
matrimony us the most likely step to reclaim him; in consequence of which he 
married a young lady named Brown, with a handsome fortune.
	He had not been long married before he determined to borrow all the cash and 
jewels he could, and decamp with the property. As he had the reputation of being in 
ample circumstances, be found no difficulty in getting credit for many articles of 
value, with which he and his wife embarked for Holland; and, in the mean time, his 
creditors took out a commission of bankruptcy against him.
	When Langley came to Rotterdam he applied to the States-General for 
protection, in apprehension of being pursued by his creditors; but the States not being 
then sitting, the creditors made application to Lord Chesterfield, then ambassador at 
the Hague, which frustrated his intention.
	In the interim his creditors found out his lodgings in a village near Rotterdam; 
but be eluded their search, leaving his wife, with four hundred pounds, in the care of a 
friend; and not even telling her the place of his retreat, to prevent any possibility of a 
discovery.
	After skulking from place to place, he went back to Rotterdam, and 
surrendered to his creditors; but found that his wife was gone with an English captain 
to Antwerp. On his arrival in England he was examined before the commissioners, 
and treated with the customary lenity.
	After his affairs were adjusted he sailed to Barbadoes, where he soon 
contracted so many debts that be was glad to take his passage to Port Royal, in 
Jamaica; and soon after his arrival there he went to visit a planter at some distance, 
who would have engaged him as his clerk.
	Langley told the planter that he owed twenty dollars at Port Royal, for which 
he had left his chest as a security. The gentleman instantly giving him the money to 
redeem it, he went to Port Royal, assumed the name of Englefield, embarked on board 
a man of war as midshipmen, and came to England, where the ship was paid off at the 
expiration of six mouths.
	On his arrival in London he sent for a man who had formerly lived with his 
father, from whom he learnt that his creditors had not made any dividend under the 
bankruptcy, and were engaged in a lawsuit respecting a part of the property. This 
faithful old servant of his father told him that his wife had retired to the north of 
England; and, giving him money, recommended it to him to lodge privately in 
Southwark.
	This advice he followed, and kept himself retired for some time; but, passing 
through Cheapside, he was arrested, and conducted to the Poultry Compter, where he 
continued many months, during which he was supported by the benevolence of the 
old servant above mentioned. While in the Compter he made some very bad 
connexions; and, being concerned with some of the prisoners in an attempt to escape, 
he was removed to Newgate, as a place of greater security.
	While in this prison he fell ill of a disorder which threatened his life; 
whereupon his friends discharged the debt for which he had been arrested, and 
removed him to lodgings, where he soon recovered his health.
	Shortly afterwards he got recommended to a captain in the Levant trade, with 
whom he was to have sailed; but an unhappy attachment to a woman of ill fame 
prevented his being ready to make the voyage.
	Langley's friends were chagrined at this fresh instance of his imprudence; and 
soon afterwards he was arrested, and carried to a spunging-house, where he attempted 
to despatch himself by a halter; but the rope breaking, he escaped with life. The bailiff 
and his wife happening to be now absent, and only two maid-servants in the house, 
Langley made them both drunk, and, effecting his escape, crossed the water into the 
Borough, where be worked some time with a colour-grinder.
	Disgusted at a life attended by so much labour, he contracted with the captain 
of a Jamaica ship, who took him to that island on the condition of selling him as a 
slave, and, on his arrival, sold him to Colonel Hill, who employed him to educate his 
children: but Langley, soon running from his employer, went on board a ship bound to 
England: being impressed on his arrival in the Downs, he was put on board a man of 
war, and carried round to Plymouth.
	Langley and another man, deserting from the ship, strolled to London, and 
took up their residence in a twopenny lodging hut, as Langley now found no friends to 
support him, he contracted with one of those persons called crimps, who used to agree 
with unhappy people to go as slaves to the colonies. His contract now was to sail to 
Pennsylvania; but, while the ship lay in the Thames, he and a weaver from Spitalfields 
made their escape, and, travelling to Canterbury, passed themselves as Protestant 
refugees.
	Going hence to Dover, they embarked for Calais; and, after some weeks' 
residence in that place, Langley sailed to Lisbon, where he remained only a short time 
before he contracted debts which obliged him to seek another residence, and he went 
to Malaga, in Spain.
	His poverty was now extreme; and, while be sat melancholy one day by the 
sea-side, some priests asked him from what country he came. He answered, in Latin, 
'From England.'
	Hereupon they conducted him to a convent, relieved his distresses, and then 
began to instruct him in the principles of the Roman Catholic religion. Langley 
disguised his sentiments, and, after being apparently made a convert, was 
recommended as a page to a Spanish lady of distinction.
	In this situation he continued several months; but, having an affair of gallantry 
with the niece to the old lady, he was compelled to make a precipitate retreat from a 
window, and shelter himself in the house of an Irish tailor; who procured a passage 
for him to Gibraltar in the first ship that sailed.
	On his arrival at Gibraltar he would have entered into the army; but being 
refused, because he was not tall enough, his distress compelled him to work as a 
labourer in repairing the barracks. He soon quitted this business, and officiated as a 
waiter in the tennis-court belonging to the garrison; but, it being intimated to the 
governor that he was a spy, he was lodged in a dungeon, where he remained more 
than a fortnight.
	On obtaining his discharge he embarked on board a Spanish vessel bound to 
Barbary with corn: and, on his return to Spain, applied to the monks of a convent, who 
charitably relieved him; and the prior agreed to take him a voyage to Santa Cruz. 
Having, however, no great prospect of pecuniary advantage in this way of life, he 
went to Oratava, where some English merchants contributed to his support; but be 
soon sailed to Genoa, as he could get no settled employ at Oratava.
	From Genoa the vessel sailed to Cadiz; and Langley, being now appointed 
steward to the captain, in the course of his reading some letters found one directed to 
Messrs. Ryan and Mannock; and, having been a schoolfellow with Mr. Mannock, he 
requested the captain's permission to go on shore, and was received by him in the 
most friendly manner: he offered to serve him in any way within his power, when 
Langley said that what he wished was a discharge from his present situation.
	Hereupon Mannock wrote to the captain, desiring him to pay the steward, and 
discharge him; but this being refused, Langley took a lodging, to which he was 
recommended by his friend, who desired he would dine daily at his table till he 
procured a passage for England. He likewise gave him money and clothes, so as to 
enable him to appear in the character of a gentleman.
	Langley behaved with great regularity for some time; out the season of a 
carnival advancing, he got into company with a woman of ill fame, with whom he 
spent the evening; and, on his return, was robbed of his hat, wig, and a book which he 
bad borrowed of his friend.
	On the following day Mr. Mannock saw the book lying at a shop for sale, 
which chagrined him so much that he asked Langley for it, who thereupon 
acknowledged the whole affair; and Mr. Mannock supposing the woman was privy to 
the robbery, he took out a warrant against her; by which he recovered his book, which 
he greatly esteemed.
	This matter being adjusted, Langley, by the help of his friend, procured a 
passage for England; but just when be was going to embark he met with a woman, 
who detained him till the ship had sailed; on which he took a boat, and passed over to 
St. Lucar, where he went on board an English vessel, which brought him to his native 
country.
	On his arrival in London he found that his creditors, under the bankruptcy, had 
received ten shillings in the pound, which gave him reason to hope that he should 
have a sum of money returned to him, with which he proposed to engage in a small 
way of business; and in that view applied to his wife's mother for her assistance, and 
also to inform him where he might find his wife; but she positively refused to comply 
with either request.
	Langley now gave himself up to despair, associated with the worst of 
company, and, though he had some money left him at this juncture, he dissipated the 
whole in the most extravagant manner.
	He now made an acquaintance with one Hill, a young fellow who was in 
similar circumstances; and, having agreed to go to Paris together, they walked as far 
as Dover; but, on their arrival, finding that an embargo had been laid on all vessels in 
the port, they determined to return to London.
	Being now destitute of cash, they demanded a man's money on the highway; 
but, on his saying he had not any, they searched him, and took from him three 
farthings, which they threw away almost as soon as they had got it for this offence 
they were apprehended on the same day, and, being tried at the next assizes for Kent, 
were capitally convicted; but the sentence was changed to transportation for seven 
years.
	Langley was transported in the month of December, 1740.
	This man appears to have fallen the victim of unrestrained appetite and an 
aversion to honest industry. That his heart was not wholly depraved we may 
charitably infer from his treatment of the unfortunate vintner. But early vices grew up 
in him, until they (as is commonly the case) assumed the force of habits; and thus a 
life which might have been passed honourably and usefully, and by consequence 
happily, became overwhelmed with wretchedness and ultimate ignominy. It is to be 
regretted that his mother-in-law refused to befriend him on his last arrival in England. 
Had she done so, his sad experience might possibly have preserved him from future 
dishonesty and shame.


CAPTAIN SAMUEL GOODERE, A FRATRICIDE; 
MATTHEW MAHONY AND CHARLES WHITE 
Executed for the Murder of Sir John Dinely Goodere, Bart., at the Hot 
Wells, Bristol, 20th of April, 1741

	SIR JOHN DINELY GOODERE succeeded his father, Sir Edward, in the 
possession of an estate of three thousand pounds a year, situated near Evesham, in 
Worcestershire. His brother, Samuel, was bred to the sea, and at length was advanced 
to the rank of captain of a man-of-war.
	Sir John married the daughter of a merchant and received twenty thousand 
pounds as a marriage portion. But mutual unhappiness was the consequence of this 
connection, for the husband was brutal in his manners, and the wife perhaps not 
strictly observant of the sacred vow she had taken: for she was too frequently visited 
by Sir Robert Jasen; and, after recriminations between the married pair, Sir John 
brought an action in the Court of Common Pleas for criminal conversation, and five 
hundred pounds' damages were awarded by the jury.
	Sir John's next step was to indict his lady for a conspiracy, and, a conviction 
following, she was fined and imprisoned a year in the King's Bench. He likewise 
petitioned for a divorce; but, the matter being heard in the House of Lords, his petition 
was thrown out.
	Sir John having no children, Captain Samuel Goodere formed very sanguine 
expectations of possessing the estate; but finding that the brother had docked the 
entail in favour of his sister's children, the Captain sought the most diabolical means 
of revenge for the supposed injury.
	While the Captain's vessel lay in the port of Bristol, Sir John went to that city 
on business; and being engaged to dine with an attorney, named Smith, the Captain 
prevailed on the latter to permit him to make one of their company, under pretence of 
being reconciled to his brother. Mr Smith consented, and used his good offices to 
accommodate the difference, and a sincere reconciliation appeared to have taken 
place.
	This visit was made on the 10th of January, 1741, and the Captain, having 
previously concerted his measures, brought some sailors on shore with him, and left 
them at a public-house, in waiting to seize the baronet in the evening. Accordingly, 
when the company broke up, the Captain attended his brother through the streets, and 
when they came opposite the public-house the seamen ran out, seized Sir John, and 
conveyed him to a boat that had been appointed to wait for his reception. As soon as 
the victim was in the boat he said to his brother: "I know you have an intention to 
murder me, and if you are ready to do it, let me beg that it be done here without giving 
yourself the trouble to take me on board." To which the Captain said: "No, brother; I 
am going to prevent your rotting on land; but, however, I would have you make your 
peace with God this night."
	Being put on board, Sir John appealed to the seamen for help; but the Captain 
put a stop to any efforts they might have made to assist him, by saying he was a 
lunatic, and brought on board to prevent his committing an act of suicide.
	White and Mahony now conveyed him to the purser's cabin, which the Captain 
guarded with a drawn sword, while the other villains attempted to strangle him with a 
handkerchief which they found in his pocket, the wretched victim crying out 
"Murder!" and beseeching them not to kill him, and offering all he possessed as a 
compensation for his life.
	As they could not strangle him with the handkerchief the Captain gave them a 
cord; with which Mahony dispatched him, while White held his hands and trod on his 
stomach. The Captain now retired to his cabin, and on the murder being committed 
the perpetrators of it went to him and told him "the job was done"; on which he gave 
them money, and bade them seek their safety in flight.
	The attorney with whom the brothers had dined having heard of the 
commission of a murder, and knowing of the former animosity of the Captain to his 
brother, immediately conjectured who it was that had fallen a sacrifice; on which he 
went to the Mayor of Bristol, who issued his warrant to the water-bailiff, who, going 
on board, found that the lieutenant and cooper had prudently confined the Captain to 
his cabin.
	The offender, being brought on shore, was committed to Newgate, and 
Mahony and White, being taken a few hours afterwards, were lodged in the same 
prison. At the sessions held at Bristol on the 26th of March 1741, these offenders were 
brought to trial, and, being convicted on the fullest evidence, received sentence of 
death. They were hanged near the Hot Wells, Bristol, on the 20th of April, 1741, 
within view of the place where the ship lay when the murder was committed.


CAPTAIN HENRY SMYTHEE 
Executed at Dorchester, April 12, 1741, for the murder or the female whom 
he had seduced.

	No sooner had we resumed the pen, after putting the finishing stroke to the 
interesting account of Gilbert Langley; and while yet the innocent Nanette was 
tripping o'er our fancy; the case of a detested murderer of the female he had loved, 
obtrudes upon our notice. When the object of his lust, and the victim of his barbarity, 
fell into his snare, she was innocent, virtuous and beautiful, as Nanette. With the poet 
would we exclaim,
	
"Accurs'd be that man who rifles innocence and beauty,  
And then, like a detested weed, throws it away."
	Yet, after the commission of such crimes, men have breathed the air of 
heaven, while they deserved damnation; until the terribly offended laws of man have 
inflicted punishment on the wretches. Every circumstance that could aggravate, will 
be found in this shocking case. The murderer was a husband to another woman, and a 
father of children born in wedlock.
	Henry Smythee was brought up to a sea-faring life, and succeeded his father in 
the command of a large merchant ship, in a foreign trade. After he had made several 
voyages, a storm obliged him to put into the harbour of Pool in Dorsetshire, where he 
saw a young lady, the daughter of a merchant, to whom he paid his addresses, and was 
in a short time married. His wife's father dying soon after their marriage, Mr. Smythee 
declined going any longer to sea, engaged in the mercantile business, and employed 
his leisure hours in rural diversions.
	One day, when out with his gun, he wandered so far from home that he lost his 
way, and being very hungry, he strolled to a cottage kept by a poor widower, named 
Ralph Mew, who had an only daughter, equally distinguished by the elegance of her 
form, and the simplicity of her manners.
	Mr. Smythee requested the favour of some food; but the countryman 
suspecting that he meant to take some undue advantage of him, told him he might be 
supplied at a public-house a mile distant. Smythee, to convince the countryman that 
he was no impostor, shewed him a diamond-ring, a purse of gold, and his watch; on 
which he was asked to sit down; and Jane Mew the daughter, fried some bacon and 
eggs for him, while her father drew some of his best ale.
	After the repast, he recounted some of his adventures in foreign parts; but in 
the mean time regarded the daughter with an eye of desire, and being struck with her 
superior charms, resolved to get possession of her, if possible.
	On his quitting the house, the old man told him that if he came that way 
another time, he should be welcome to any thing in his cottage, except his daughter. 
On the-following day he went to the cottage, and gave the old man a tortoise-shell 
snuff-box, as a compliment for his hospitable behaviour the day before.
	The old cottager going out, Mr. Smythee paid his warmest addresses to the 
daughter, to whom he presented some jewels: but she no sooner judged of his design, 
than she said, "Is it thus, sir, you make returns for my father's hospitality, and my 
civility? And can you be such a wretch, as to think that my poverty will make me 
guilty of a dishonourable action?" Saying this, she rejected his presents with 
contempt; while he, struck with the force of what she had urged, remained some time 
speechless, and then attributed his conduct to the violence of his passion, and offered 
to make her all the satisfaction in his power, by marriage.
	The girl acquainting her father with what had passed, Mr. Smythee was 
permitted to pay his addresses in an honourable way: but such were his artifice and 
villainy, that his solemn vows of marriage soon prevailed over the too credulous girl; 
and her ruin was the consequence.
	When the father found that his daughter was pregnant, he died with grief, 
leaving the unhappy girl a prey to the pungent sorrows of her own mind. Distressed as 
she was, she wrote to her seducer, but as he took no notice of her letter, she went to 
Pool, and being directed to his house, the door was opened by Mrs. Smythee, who 
demanded her business, and said she was the wife of the person for whom she 
inquired. The poor girl was so shocked to find that Mr. Smythee had a wife, that it 
was with difficulty she was kept from fainting.
	When somewhat recovered, she said that she was with child by Mr. Smythee, 
who had seduced her under promise of marriage. Hereupon the wife censured her 
conduct with unreasonable severity, and threatened that she should be lodged in 
prison if she did not immediately quit the town.
	Leaving the house, the unhappy creature fainted in the street, and was soon 
surrounded by a number of females, who insulted her with every term of reproach.
When she recovered her senses, she went to a public-house, where she intended to 
have lodged; but the landlady threatening to send for the beadle, she was obliged to 
quit the house.
	In the interim Mr. Smythee came to his own house, and after being compelled 
to listen to the reproaches of his wife on the infidelity of his conduct, he went out, and 
desired a person to call on the young woman, and appoint her to meet him at a place 
without the town.
	The unfortunate girl met him accordingly; what passed between them it is 
impossible to know; but on the following day she was found with her throat cut, and a 
bloody knife laying by her. Smythee absconding, it was generally supposed that he 
had been the murderer; and, on his return to Pool, about a month afterwards, he was 
taken into custody, and lodged in the county gaol.
	In his defence at his trial, he urged that the reason of his absence from his 
family was a quarrel with his wife, in consequence of the unhappy discovery that had 
been made by the deceased: but as he could bring no proof of his being absent from 
the spot when the murder was committed, no doubt remained of his guilt, he was 
capitally convicted, and sentenced to die.
	After conviction, he was visited by several clergymen, who exerted 
themselves to impress him with a due sense of his awful situation. As his death 
advanced, he became still more resigned, acknowledged the many errors of his life, 
and confessed himself worthy to undergo the rigour of the law.
	He walked to the place of execution, amidst an immense surrounding 
multitude, and, having ascended the cart, addressed the populace, advising them to 
refrain from yielding to them first impulses of temptation, as they would wish to be 
preserved from the violation of the Divine laws. After the usual devotions, he drew 
his cap over his face, and saying, "To thee, O Lord, I resign my soul," he was 
launched into eternity.


JAMES HALL 
Hanged for Petit-Treason, in the Murder of his Master.

	THIS malefactor, according to the account given by himself, was descended of 
honest parents, of Wells in Hampshire, who gave him such an education as might 
qualify him for any ordinary rank of life.
	Being unwilling to remain in the country, be came to London, and lived some 
time with a corn-chandler; and after a continuation in this service, he married, and had 
several children; but not living happily with his wife, articles of separation were 
executed between them. After this he married another woman, by whom he had one 
child, and who visited him after his being in custody for the murder.
	At the sessions held at the Old Bailey, in August, 1741, he was indicted for the 
murder of John Penny, gentleman, and pleading guilty, received sentence of death.
	Mr Penny had chambers in Clement's Inn; and Hall had lived with him seven 
years before he committed the murder: nor had he formed any design of being guilty 
of the horrid deed till within about a month of its perpetration: but having kept more 
company than his circumstances could afford, he had involved himself in difficulties, 
which made him resolve to murder and rob his master.
	On the 7th of June, he intoxicated himself with liquor, and then determined to 
carry his design into execution. Mr Penny coming home between eleven and twelve at 
night, Hall assisted in undressing him in the dining-room; and while he was walking 
towards the bed, the villain followed him with a stick which he had concealed for the 
purpose, and struck him one blow with such force that he never spoke afterwards; and 
continued his blows on the head till he was apparently dead.
	Willing, however, to be certain of completing the horrid tragedy, and to avoid 
detection, he went into the dining room, and stripping himself naked, he took a small 
fruit knife belonging to his master, and returning to the chamber, cut his throat with it, 
holding his neck over the chamber-pot. Mr Penny bled very freely; for when the blood 
was mixed with a small quantity of water, it almost filled the pot five times; and three 
of the pots thus mixed the murderer threw into the sink, and two in the coal-hole. He 
then took his master's waistcoat, which was lined with duffel, and bound it round his 
neck, to suck up the remainder of the blood.
	This being done, he took the body on his shoulders, carried it to the necessary, 
and threw it in head foremost; and flying back immediately to the chambers, under the 
most dreadful apprehensions of mind, he took his master's coat, bloody shirt, the stick 
that he had knocked him down with, and some rags that he had used in wiping up the 
blood, and running a second time naked to the necessary-house, threw them in at a 
hole on the opposite side of it.
	The body being thus disposed of, he stole about thirty-six guineas from his 
master's pocket, and writing-desk; and such was the confusion of his mind, that he 
likewise took some franks, sealing-wax, and other articles for which he had no use: 
and then he employed the remainder of the night in washing and rubbing the rooms 
with cloths; but finding it no easy matter to get out the blood, he sent for the laundress 
in the morning to wash them again, telling her that his master's nose had bled over 
night.
	On the following day the guilty wretch strolled from place to place, unable to 
find rest for a moment any where; and all his thoughts being engaged in concealing 
the murder, which he hoped was effectually done, from the place in which he had 
secreted the body.
	On the Friday following he went to Mr Wooton, his master's nephew, on a 
pretence of enquiring for Mr Penny, who he said had quitted the chambers two days 
before, and gone somewhere by water; so that he was afraid some accident had 
happened to him.
	Mr Wooton was so particular in his enquiries after his uncle, that Hall was 
exceedingly terrified at his questions, and knew not what answer to make to them. 
After this the criminal went twice every day to Mr Wooton, to enquire after his 
master, for ten days; but lived all the while in a torment of mind that is not to be 
described.
	So wretched was he, that finding it impossible to sleep in the chambers, he got 
his wife to come and be with him: and they lay in Mr Penny's bed: but still sleep was 
a stranger to him.
	At length Mr Wooton had Hall taken into custody, on a violent suspicion that 
he had murdered his uncle. On his first examination before a magistrate, he steadily 
avowed his innocence: but being committed to Newgate he attempted an escape: this, 
however, was prevented; and a few days afterwards he confessed his guilt before 
some relations of the deceased.
	We have already mentioned that he pleaded guilty on his trial; and have now 
to add that, after sentence was passed on him, he was exceedingly contrite and 
penitent, and confessed his guilt in letters to his friends.
	On the day before his death he received the sacrament, with all apparent signs 
of that penitence which was necessary to prepare him for the dreadful scene that lay 
before him.
	He was hanged at the end of Catherine Street in the Strand, on the 15th of 
September, 1741, and his body afterwards hung in chains at Shepherd's Bush, three 
miles beyond Tyburn Turnpike, on the road to Acton.
	The following is a letter which this malefactor wrote to his wife, the night 
preceding his execution.
	Twelve o'clock Sunday night 
	My Dear, 
	I am very sorry we could not have the liberty of a little time by ourselves, 
when you came to take your leave of me; if we had, I should have thought of many 
more things to have said to you than I did; but then I fear it would have caused more 
grief at our parting. I am greatly concerned that I am obliged to leave you and my 
child, and much more in such a manner, as to give the world room to reflect upon you 
on my account; though none but the ignorant will, but rather pity your misfortunes, as 
being fully satisfied of your innocency in all respects relating to the crime for which I 
am in a few hours to suffer.
	I now heartily wish, not only for my own sake, but the injured persons, yours, 
and my child's, that I was as innocent as you are, but freely own I am not, nor possibly 
can be in this world; yet I humbly hope, and fully trust, through God's great mercy, 
and the merits of my blessed Saviour Jesus Christ, to be happy in the next.
	After I parted with you, I received the holy sacrament comfortably, which Mr 
Broughton was so good as to administer to me, who has also several times before 
taken a great deal of pains to instruct me, and so has some others of his acquaintance, 
by whose assistance, and my own endeavours, I hope God will pardon all my sins for 
Christ's sake, and admit me into his heavenly kingdom.
	My dear, some of my latest prayers will be to God to direct and prosper you 
and my child in all good ways, so long as he pleases to let you live here on earth; that 
afterwards he may receive you both to his mercies to all eternity. I hope I shall 
willingly submit to my fate, and die in peace with all men. This is now all the comfort 
I can give you in this world, who living was, and dying hope to remain, 
	Your loving and most affectionate husband, 
	JAMES HALL
	To all we have said on the subject of murder, little need be added on this 
occasion. Those who fail to be struck by a recital of this horrid tale, must have less 
humanity than we hope falls to the share of any of our readers.
	Instead, therefore, of making any remarks on this particular case, we will 
suppose it to be a sufficient comment on itself; and conclude with a prayer that we 
may all be delivered even from the temptation of spilling innocent blood!

THE END
 
 
 
 
THE NEWGATE CALENDAR
-2-
-1-
VOLUME 2
-2-
